BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by ITAR-TASS correspondents Viktor Demodenko, </F>
Mikhail Melnik] 
  [Text] Kiev, 26 Jun -- "Alliances based on ethnic identity 
are dangerous per se, for they inevitably engender nationalism, 
panslavism, and all that ensues from it," Ukraine's President 
Leonid Kravchuk told ITAR-TASS today, when asked about a 
possibility of creating a Slav union. "Both politicians and 
historians condemn it, knowing that that is where aggravated 
nationalism is rooted," he said. 
  Leonid Kravchuk also believes that this question is not 
quite 
specific in practical terms. "As for a union, one should then 
speak in terms of East Slavs, rather than Slavs. Otherwise, 
what should one do with Poland, Slovakia, Yugoslavia, or 
Bulgaria? Thus, the Slavs will be divided into Western Slavs 
and Eastern Slavs," he summed up. One should bear in mind that 
about 30 million Russians, Ukrainians, and Belarusians live 
beyond the borders of Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus. "The Slav 
Union will inevitably create problems for them." "By having such 
a union, we will split in two those states where Slavs and 
non-Slavs live." Kravchuk is convinced that "by this step we 
will begin dividing states of the former Soviet Union." He 
expressed the belief that this would be followed by creating 
Asian and other unions, and "then horrible confrontation will 
begin." 
  "One should not raise questions that are ready to be 
resolved 
today, neither theoretically nor practically. One should live 
and follow the chosen path: build independent states but not on 
the basis of ethnic identity," he said. "We are building a civil 
society in Ukraine and Russia is building the same society in 
its country. If we pursue a different policy a social explosion 
is possible. Russia is also not 100 percent a Slav state." 
  "I advocate economic relations, integration, and the use of 
the CIS in resolving issues that can be resolved by good will," 
Kravchuk said. In his opinion, one should not try and establish 
new structures and organizations immediately, he said. One 
should do everything to avoid confrontation between states and 
peoples, he said. 

