BFN 

<F P=106> ["rmc"-signed report: "FDP Blocks Ruehe's Bundeswehr Plan"] </F>
  [Text] Bonn -- The first attempt by a coalition working 
party to overcome the FDP [Free Democratic Party of Germany] 
blockade with respect to the plans of Defense Minister Volker 
Ruehe, Christian Democratic Union [CDU], for the Bundeswehr has 
failed. The coalition conflict has been postponed. 
  The working party held a meeting at the Defense Ministry's 
visitors mess yesterday morning. The members include the 
defense minister, the CDU's Friedrich Bohl, chief of the federal 
chancellery, Foreign Office Secretary Ursula Seiler-Albring of 
the FDP, and defense politicians from the coalition parties. 
  The group held a meeting to settle a dispute between the FDP 
and the CDU/CSU [Christian Social Union] about Ruehe's concept 
for the Bundeswehr. The concept envisages a reduction in forces 
from the current 370,000 to 340,000 and a reduction in the 
length of military service from 12 to 10 months. 
  The coalition was unable to settle the dispute yesterday. 
The next meeting is scheduled for 16 June. Results are 
expected before the summer Bundestag recess. It seems 
questionable whether the new Bundeswehr concept can be presented 
by the end of the current Bundestag term of office in the fall. 
In FDP circles, it is being said that the there are substantial 
differences on important points. The Liberals have criticized 
the fact that Ruehe's guidelines completely lack clarity on "the 
foreign policy and general policy implications" of troop 
reductions. That is why the FDP members of the working party 
have presented an 11-page catalogue of questions that are 
intended to provide the guidelines with a "solid and serious 
basis." They envisage a "further need for agreement." 
  The FDP is also opposed to the defense minister's intention 
to introduce a 12-month voluntary period of service alongside 
the 10-month period of military service. The move is said to be 
"half-hearted." The FDP believes that basic military service 
should be reduced to nine months. Conscripts should have the 
option of being "soldiers on a monthly basis" for up to 23 
months. In contrast to the CDU/CSU, the FDP insists that if 
basic military service is reduced, then alternative civilian 
service should be reduced to under 15 months. 
  The working party also failed to agree on which garrisons 
would be closed in the event that troop levels are reduced. 
Ruehe's plan envisages the closure of 50 bases. 

