have   undertaken a sweeping campaign against the Muslim 
Brotherhood (MB) evidently intended to win popular support for a 
continuing, but thus-far limited, crackdown against the group. 
Those liberal commentators and secular opposition parties who 
normally champion human rights have been relatively silent and 
evidently ambivalent on the crackdown, and the MB itself has been 
consciously restrained in an effort to avoid provoking further 
measures against it.  Although Cairo does not seem inclined for 
now to risk radicalizing the MB and its supporters with an all- 
out crackdown, it does appear inclined to find some means to oust 
the MB from leadership of the Lawyers' Syndicate--whose clash 
with police in May over the death in detention of an Islamist 
lawyer triggered the current crackdown. 


   Government, Media Curry Support for Moves Against Brotherhood 

Since police on 17 May forcefully broke up an attempt by 
demonstrators at the Lawyers Syndicate to march toward a nearby 
presidential palace to protest the death in detention of Islamist 
lawyer 'Abd-al-Harith Madani (Al-Akhbar, 18 May) (See Note 1), 
authorities have conducted a series of arrests and interrogations 
of known and alleged MB officials with the evident aim of 
intimidating the organization and tying them in the public eye to 
the widely rejected violent Islamic militants.  Although the 
government has consistently sought to keep the legally banned but 
generally tolerated MB off balance with periodic arrests of 
alleged members, the recent crackdown is striking because 
prominent MB officials have been targeted and anti-Brotherhood 
moves are taking place on several fronts simultaneously. 

--Two MB members of the Lawyers Syndicate Board of Directors, 
including the syndicate's treasurer--prominent Brotherhood figure 
Mukhtar Nuh--were among the lawyers arrested after the 17 May 
demonstration (MENA, 18 May).  They evidently remain in detention 
(MENA, 15 June). 

--On 29 May, authorities detained 10 MB figures, including 
Ibrahim al-Gharab Sharaf--described by the Socialist Labor Party 
(SLP) biweeky and MB mouthpiece as MB General Guide Hamid Abu-al- 
Nasr's personal secretary and by Al-Ahram as a member of the 
Guidance Bureau, the organization's top leadership.  Interior 
Minister Hasan al-Alfi announced that those detained were accused 
of "membership in an organization that seeks to disrupt the rule 
of law and influence the authorities, and possession of cassette 
recordings and printed materials calling for stirring up hatred 
of the regime" (Al-Ahram, 5 June).  The arrests were linked to 
the "Salsabil case" (Mena, 8 June; Al-Wafd, 1 June), which 
developed from a February 1992 security raid on the Salsabil 
computer company, an alleged MB front.  Officials have claimed 
that the Salsabil office contained computer diskettes and 
documents providing massive evidence of the MB's "extremist 
activities" (MENA, 14 March 1992). 

--MB General Guide Abu-al-Nasr was summoned for at least two 
sessions of questioning about leaflets bearing his signature that 
"advocated views and terms opposed to the regime"' (MENA, 5 June, 
6 June).  After Egyptian media published reports of his denials 
during the interrogation of any wrongdoing by him or his 
organization (MENA, 6 June), the government banned further media 
coverage of his questioning or the Salsabil case (MENA, 8 June). 

--Authorities recently prevented Shaykh Muhammad al-Ghazali, an 
Islamist preacher who has at times assisted government propaganda 
efforts against extremism but has a strong following among the MB 
and other Islamists and publishes a regular column in Al-Sha'b, from 
delivering an annual outdoor sermon on the occasion of the 'Id al- 
Adha holiday, marking the pilgrimage to Mecca.  (Al-Sha'b, 27 May). 
Suggesting government concern over how the public would view the 
act, al-Alfi subsequently received al-Ghazali in an evidently 
conciliatory meeting that was publicized in the media with no 
details of their conversation (MENA, 29 May). 

(Note 1) Interior Minister Hasan al-Alfi has sought to counter 
charges that Madani died as a result of torture by claiming that 
the lawyer died prior to interrogation from an acute asthma 
attack.  Moreover, he has stressed that Madani had been using his 
work as a cover for active collusion with the Islamic militants 
(MENA, 21 May). 
Criminalizing the MB 

President Mubarak, who has tended to be relatively restrained in 
his public references to the Brotherhood, helped lay the 
groundwork for the crackdown with statements that were unusually 
harsh in tone and content.  Suggesting the government may have 
anticipated the 17 May clash, Mubarak had attacked the group in 
an interview with the German weekly Der Spiegel that appeared the 
day before the clash.  According to Egyptian media, Mubarak told 
the magazine that the Brotherhood ""stands behind . . . and 
finances most of the activities of the terrorist groups in Egypt" 
(MENA 16 May) (See Note 2).  Earlier, in an attempt to justify 
the MB's exclusion from a planned "national dialogue" putatively 
including all "legitimate" political forces, Mubarak used a Labor 
Day speech to score the Brotherhood implicitly by asserting: 
"Dialogue is not meant to open back doors for illegitimate powers 
that mix religion with political activity to put themselves above 
the law, antagonize and fight the multiparty system until they 
monopolize the national arena, and pounce on the chance to rule, 
kill democracy, and let one view and one line of thinking do away 
with every thinker who dares oppose or discuss" (Cairo radio, 28 
April) (See Note 3). 

(Note 2) The text of the speech as published in Der Spiegel 
quoted him as charging the Brotherhood more vaguely with being 
"behind most of the activities of the religious troublemakers." 

(Note 3) Although Mubarak's public offensive against the 
Brotherhood may have been made with an eye to justifying concrete 
measures against the group, an earlier statement by Interior 
Minister Hasan al-Alfi suggests that the current crackdown was 
hastily undertaken.  Responding to a question at a 13 April press 
conference, al-Alfi seemingly absolved the organization of 
support for terrorism by distinguishing between the MB as "a 
propagator of religion only" and the Islamic militants as "the 
terrorist groups" (MENA, 13 April). 

   The Interior Ministry has backed up the security campaign with 
statements portraying the Brotherhood as an illegal organization, 
with at least some members engaged in violence.  In the most 
striking example, al-Alfi claimed in an interview with the 
Egyptian newspaper Al-Akhbar Al-Yawm that "The MB is an illegal 
organization, and the appearance of those belonging to it on the 
stage [during the protests over Madani's death] confirms that 
they have a role in terrorism." (21 May).  Subsequently, however, 
he appeared somewhat less sweeping in his claims, saying in 
response to a question at a conference of Egyptian and French 
businessmen that "certain acts and facts indicate that some MB 
members," including "more than 100 people," had "committed acts 
punishable by law" (MENA, 14 June). 

Anti-MB Media Campaign 

   Responding to the official signals conveyed through the arrests 
and interrogations of MB officials and the statements by Mubarak 
and al-Alfi--in addition to probable direct official 
encouragement to the semi-independent government-owned press--the 
media last month launched the most vigorous campaign against the 
Muslim Brotherhood observed in recent years (See Note 4). 
Reports, exposes, and editorial commentary have sought to tarnish 
the reputation of the group as a whole, in some cases accusing it 
implicitly or explicitly of ties to violence.  The rhetoric has 
included the consistent prefacing of references to the 
Brotherhood with adjectives indicating its illegal status. 
Among the most noteworthy illustrations of this media campaign: 

--The weekly news magazine Al-Musawwar has been publishing a 
sensationalist cover series on the transcripts of 14 documents 
alleged to have been seized from Salsabil and portrayed by the 
magazine as confirming allegations that the Brotherhood has a 
secret organization and international structure and is committed 
to overthrowing the regime (3 and 11 June).  The magazine also 
published photographs of parts of the documents, which Chief 
Editor Makram Muhammad Ahmad claimed the magazine's staff had 
been studying for six months (27 May).  The documents, as 
presented by Al-Musawwar, contain, inter alia: discussion of the 
importance of establishing an MB presence in the professional 
syndicates, student unions, and ""other establishments'"--claimed 
by the magazine to mean the police and military--on a local, 
national, and international level; a stress on the importance of 
establishing a ""balance between secrecy and publicity"" so as to 
elude the authorities while still enabling the building of 
grassroots support; guidance on dealing with security forces- 
-including the handling of interrogations and recommendations for 
the establishment of a liaison committee to win supporters among 
the authorities and monitor their intentions toward the group; 
and a complete breakdown of the structure of the various offices 
of the organization down to the governorate level and including 
names of MB officials nationwide.  The first part of the series 
was a heavily editorialized summary of the transcripts portraying 
them as proof that the Brotherhood's aims and means are 
subversive and illegitimate. 

--Chief editors of virtually all the main state-owned 
publications, as well as some commentators with close ties to the 
government broadened their criticism of the Lawyers Syndicate's 
handling of the Madani death by directly attacking the MB.  For 
example: Ibrahim Nafi', chief editor of the authoritative daily 
Al-Ahram, claimed that the "exploitation" of Madani's death by 
"one of the legally banned political groups" "illustrates the 
relationship between this dissolved group and other terrorist 
groups" (20 May); a column in Al-Ahram by writer Tharwat Abazah, 
deputy speaker of the parliament's nominal upper chamber, the 
Consultative Council, was entitled "the Armed Brothers," a play 
on the Arabic words for the Muslim Brothers.  Abazah claimed that 
the "Muslim Brothers, who are not Muslim  . . . , are the leaders 
of terrorism" (30 May). 

(Note 4) The media campaign against the Brotherhood, however, 
appears to be ebbing at least for now, amid the absence of any 
further developments in the Lawyers Syndicate, the ban on 
coverage of current legal cases against MB figures, and the lack 
of a strong Brotherhood reaction.  Of the major state-owned 
publications, only Al-Musawwar has continued to give prominence 
to the subject. 

Campaign to Oust MB From Syndicates 

   Supporting indications that the government will use the syndicate 
incidents as a pretext to move against MB control of the Lawyers 
syndicate--and possibly other syndicates--most of the recent 
media rhetoric has targeted specifically the MB role in the 
lawyers association (See Note 5).  Articles and commentaries have 
sought to tarnish the Brotherhood's reputation by highlighting 
allegations that the syndicate's MB-dominated board of directors 
has grossly misused its authority and syndicate funds in an 
effort to turn the professional union into a political arm of the 
Brotherhood.  For example, lengthy reports in Al-Ahram and Al- 
Musawwar accused the syndicate board, which Al-Musawwar 
repeatedly called "the Board of Brothers," of issuing the union's 
quota of permits to attend the annual pilgrimage to Mecca on the 
basis of MB affiliation; charged that the MB officials had 
tampered with the lists of union members in an effort to ensure 
the success of MB candidates in syndicate elections; and claimed 
that massive syndicate funds have been diverted to the radical 
Palestinian group Hamas and other MB causes, including exclusive 
MB Ramadan banquets and the recent protest activities (Al-Ahram, 
22 May; Al-Musawwar, 27 May).  Accordingly, Al-Musawwar's Makram 
Muhammad Ahmad asked if the lawyers, "after all that has happened 
can leave their syndicate under the full control of one trend 
that exploits" its facilities and ""its stature for the service of 
its goals." 

(Note 5) Even prior to the syndicate incidents there were 
indications that the government would seek new legislation aimed 
at the MB in the syndicates following the repeated postponement 
of various syndicate elections evidently because of officials' 
fears that MB candidates would fare well.  Parliament was 
reportedly already considering changes to a 1993 law that 
prescribes the appointment of a temporary board of directors for 
any syndicate failing to draw at least a third of its members to 
internal elections--changes that would address, inter alia, 
alleged MB tampering with election lists.  Since 17 May, at least 
one bill to reorganize the Lawyers Syndicate has reportedly been 
forwarded to the People's Assembly, leading to further 
speculation that the government will soon dissolve the current 
syndicate board (for example, Rose Al-Yusuf, 6 June; Al-Ahali, 8 
June). 


   Liberals, Leftists Largely Quiet, Ambivalent on Crackdown 

Those secular mainstream and opposition writers who are often 
critical of the government's handling of human rights and 
political liberties issues have been relatively silent on the 
current crackdown against the Muslim Brotherhood--including 
government efforts to portray the organization as a terrorist 
group and the arrests and interrogations of prominent MB members 
following protests over the death in detention of Islamist lawyer 
'Abd-al-Harith Madani.  These writers' low profile on the issue 
reflects wariness of--in some cases hostility to--the Islamists, 
despite evident ambivalence over the government's measures to 
counter them. 

--The most prominent liberal mainstream writers have not thus far 
been observed to address Cairo's recent measures against the MB. 
They include Mustafa Amin--a veteran journalist and daily columnist 
for Al-Akhbar, who writes almost weekly criticizing moves against 
democratic liberties and urging greater democracy and political 
pluralism--and Al-Ahram's independent-minded Managing Editor 
Salamah Ahmad Salamah--who, despite his position, has often 
criticized official strategy against the Islamists and had scored 
the government in a 14 May column for its handling of the Madani 
case. 

--There has been virtually no monitored authoritative reaction 
explicitly addressing the anti-MB crackdown from the liberal, 
centrist al-Wafd party, the Nasirites, or the leftist National 
Progressive Unionist Grouping (NPUG)--all of which, despite 
philosophical antipathy toward the Brotherhood, have periodically 
collaborated with it (See Note 1).  Several comments from the 
NPUG have all but openly supported the crackdown.  The English 
language weekly edition of Al-Ahram quoted NPUG Secretary-General 
Rif'at al-Sa'id--who has consistently been vocal in his distrust 
of the MB--as claiming that "the government has tolerated the 
Brotherhood for years because it considered it harmless, but was 
waking up to its 'danger'" (2-8 June).  In another interview with 
Al-Wafd, al-Sa'id was quoted as calling the MB an illegitimate 
organization, pointing to MB Deputy Guide Mustafa Mashhur as 
historically "one of the most prominent MB planners of violence" 
(1 June). 

   (Note 1) For example, leaders of all three parties joined with 
the MB and other groups in a statement setting out their position 
on the "national dialogue" called for by Mubarak last November 
(Al-Wafd, 7 December). 

Even coverage of the breakup of the 17 May demonstration over 
Madani's death and of related arrests was somewhat mixed, despite 
expressed concern over the human rights implications of the 
Madani case and even involvement by the three main secular 
opposition parties in syndicate activities organized to 
protest Madani's death (Al-Ahram Weekly, 12-18 May).  For 
example: 

--Al-Wafd featured a commentary by Chief Editor Jamal Badawi that 
criticized the government for mishandling the lawyers' protests 
and the Madani affair in general (19 May)--a line echoed by some 
columnists.  At the same time, the paper featured an article on 
the 23d that blamed the protesters and the authorities equally 
for the confrontation. 

--The NPUG weekly Al-Ahali's only monitored authoritative 
commentary following the confrontation was a column by Chief 
Editor Lutfi Wakid expressing concern over reports that Madani 
had confided knowledge to an independent parliamentary deputy of 
a foreign conspiracy to sustain the current violence between 
Islamic militants and the government (18 May).  Although one Al- 
Ahali columnist criticized the syndicate arrests (25 May), 
another offered justification, in effect, for the government's 
decision to put down the demonstration by force (1 June).  The 
latter column, by Mustafa Siyam, echoed government charges that 
Madani was working with the terrorist groups and attacked the 
Lawyers Syndicate for taking up the cause of someone "arrested 
for his political activity and not for his pure professional 
work."  He claimed that the would-be street marchers may well 
have included supporters of the Islamic militants who would have 
engaged in destruction of public property and thus presented a 
threat to public order.  The column attacked the role of 
Islamists in the syndicate, referring to them as "the Muslim 
Brothers and other terrorists." 

Ambivalence Over Crackdown's Cost 

At the same time, some from the secular mainstream and opposition 
have balanced their clear wariness of the MB with expressions of 
concern that the government's wideranging measures to counter the 
Islamists in general will come at too great a cost in political 
liberties and perhaps fuel sympathy for the Islamists: 

--Illustrating the ambivalence in these circles, leftist writer 
'Abd-al-Sattar al-Tawilah followed up implicit criticism of the 
crackdown in Al-Wafd with another commentary in Rose Al-Yusuf 
that appeared to applaud it--a reflection as well of the 
differing editorial slants of the two publications involved.  The 
first commentary observed that '"most of the intellectuals and 
supporters of democracy found themselves, in spite of themselves, 
in one trench with the lawyers," because the issues with which 
they were dealing--human rights, torture, etc.--were so important 
(24 May).  Referring to the "execution of Madani," al-Tawilah 
claimed "it is not true that the political Islamist trend must be 
treated with a heavy hand," adding that "the policy of heavy- 
handedness must be used carefully and [only] in cases of extreme 
necessity."  Commenting a week later in Rose Al-Yusuf on the 
syndicate incidents, al-Tawilah asserted that his magazine had 
warned "a number of times" in "the past two years" against the 
danger of "those so-called moderates" whose position on the 
Islamic militants "is considered in the final analysis collusion 
with and approval of terrorism."  He claimed that the Muslim 
Brothers "see in the extremist trend an extension of themselves 
and their mission" (30 May). 

--While avoiding comment on the crackdown against the 
Brotherhood, Al-Wafd Chief Editor Jamal Badawi addressed 
government efforts to restrict Islamists' activities in general 
by strongly criticizing the recent barring of Shaykh Muhammad al- 
Ghazali from delivering an annual outdoor sermon during the 'Id 
al-Adha holiday, saying that the ban appeared to be official 
vengeance for al-Ghazali's controversial court testimony last 
spring in which he claimed there was no known punishment in Islam 
for those who take the law in their own hands by killing 
apostates (24 May).  He claimed that "the government's behavior 
demonstrates its weakness and lack of confidence in dialogue" (See 
Note 2) 

--Al-Wafd and other commentators have criticized another element 
of the government's campaign to minimize the influence of 
Islamists--its pushing of previously unpublicized legislation 
through parliament on 30 May to replace the elections of 
university deans by the faculties with their appointment by the 
university presidents (Al-Akhbar, 31 May).  The measure followed 
widely criticized legislation passed last April replacing the 
election of village mayors with their appointment by the Interior 
Ministry.  Numerous Al-Wafd columns criticized the most recent 
legislation.  For example, Al-Wafd party official Nu'man Jum'ah 
called it "an aggression against democracy and the professors." 
Al-Akhbar columnist Mustafa Amin called the measure "a new strike 
against democracy," adding that "if this strange trend continues 
it will lead to the day when the deputies of the People's 
Assembly are appointed rather than elected" (1 June). 

(Note 2)  Badawi's reference to "dialogue" clearly connoted the 
"national dialogue," which at this point had yet to convene.  Al- 
Wafd withdrew from the committee subsequently formed to prepare 
for the dialogue after its first session, claiming the 
government's had formed the committee unilaterally and stacked it 
with ruling party officials (MENA, 1 June). 

Concern Over Syndicate Legislation 

Consistent with the ambivalence of the secular oppositionists, 
the principal secular parties have been relatively reserved in 
responding to widespread media indications of pending legislation 
to reconstitute the Lawyers Syndicate so as to diminish the MB 
role.  Al-Wafd, for example, has avoided the vocal campaign that 
preceded parliamentary consideration of the syndicates law of 
1993 (Al-Wafd, 21 November and 3 December 1992).  At the same 
time, there have been scattered appeals against any new 
legislation on the syndicates.  For example: 

--'Abd-al-Salam Rizq, a leftist member of the Lawyers Syndicate 
board of directors, warned in an Al-Ahali article that dissolving 
the current board, whether under a longstanding emergency law or 
through new legislation, would be "inappropriate," as it would 
"lead to extremely serious results" (8 June).  Subsequently, 
however, he appeared to focus solely on the need to avoid using 
the emergency law to dissolve the syndicate's board, saying that 
it would increase sympathy with the Islamists, who would be 
viewed as "martyrs of the emergency law."  Finally, he declared 
that "whoever seeks to dissolve" the board "must resort to the 
law without resorting to power or the use of dissolution options, 
even if the government has accumulated justifications for 
settling accounts with the Muslim Brotherhood." 

--A column on the "Syndicates" page of Al-Wafd expressed 
opposition to any new change in the law governing the Lawyers 
Syndicate or other attempts to dissolve the current board.  The 
page's editor claimed that "despite my differences with the 
members of the board, this campaign [against the syndicate 
board], which evidently goes back to instructions from on high, 
has produced opposite results," explaining that "the ordinary 
citizen sympathizes with the board and with the lawyers."  "If 
there is a decision to dissolve the board and change the law," he 
maintained, "the current board will be returned overwhelmingly'" 
(30 May). 

--In his Rose Al-Yusuf column accusing the Brotherhood of 
collusion with the extremists, Tawilah asserted that "'the 
shrinking of control by the Islamist trend in the professional 
syndicates must take place by way of political activation of all 
the other forces in those syndicates and not by way of new laws." 


   Defensive But Restrained, MB Seeks to Wait Out the Pressure 

While vociferously rebutting recent government allegations 
against it, the Muslim Brotherhood has made a point of 
demonstrating restraint in an evident effort to deprive 
authorities of any pretext to escalate the current crackdown. 

--Shortly after the 17 May arrest of demonstraters at the Lawyers 
Syndicate protesting the death in detention of Islamist lawyer 
'Abd-al-Harith Madani, An MB statement in Al-Sha'b--biweekly 
organ of the Socialist Labor Party and MB mouthpiece--sought to 
counter allegations that the group is committed to violence.  The 
statement repeated longstanding claims that the Brotherhood's 
""program for teaching the ways of God the Almighty and religion 
is a peaceful program,"' that the organization "has taken part in 
all aspects of life within the framework of the constitution and 
laws in force" and that it "is not and will not be a group 
advocating sedition and trouble and will not be the cause of 
revolution or clashes."  While asserting that future upheavals 
may occur because of "the absence of a response to the demands of 
the people," the "disregard for man's basic rights" and the lack 
of guarantees against election fraud, the statement was striking 
for its defensive tone (Al-Sha'b, 20 May). 

--MB Deputy General Guide Mustafa Mashhur used the MB's regular 
column in Al-Sha'b on 7 June to urge Muslim Brothers to exercise 
self-restraint in reacting to the government's offensive against 
the organization.  Proclaiming that "we carry out our activities 
with moderation and through the state's institutions," he urged 
MB followers "not to be provoked into an action that conflicts 
with the teachings of your God," adding that "the strong ones do 
not react emotionally but control themselves when they are 
angry." 

--Mashhur has gone so far as to claim, according to the English 
language weekly edition of Al-Ahram, that his organization "will 
not be involved in any escalation" of the confrontation with the 
government, "even if the government steps up its measures" (2-8 
June). 

Brotherhood officials have also used the secular opposition 
press and the relatively independent Rose Al-Yusuf--which often 
interview the Islamists regardless of their antipathy toward them-- 
to counter government charges that the organization supports 
violence and is otherwise engaged in illegal activities. 
In the past couple of weeks, the Nasirite weekly Al-'Arabi 
interviewed Abu-al-Nasr, while the centrist Liberal Al-Wafd and 
Rose Al-Yusuf carried interviews with Mashhur, and Al-Wafd 
carried an interview with MB spokesman Ma'mun al-Hudaybi, all of 
whom seized the proffered opportunity to defend the organization 
(Al-'Arabi and Rose Al-Yusuf, 30 May; Al-Wafd, 1 June, 25 May, 
respectively). 

Lawyers Syndicate Cautious 

Like the Brotherhood in general, the MB-dominated Lawyers 
syndicate board has been relatively low-key in its response to the 
arrests and continued detention of lawyers--including two MB 
officials on the syndicate board--that followed the security 
forces' breakup of the 17 May demonstration.  Al-'Arabi reported 
on 30 May that the Lawyers Syndicate had called on all its 
branches to hold meetings to discuss the situation following the 
abortive 17 May demonstration, but the syndicate has not been 
nearly as forceful as it was in its response to the announcement 
of Madani's death, which promptly triggered a 10 May protest at 
the syndicate and a 15 May lawyers' strike, as well as the 17 May 
demonstration (Al-Ahram Weekly 12-18 May). 

Moreover, Lawyers Syndicate Secretary-General Sayf-al-Islam Hasan 
al-Banna--a prominent MB official--has evidently sought to 
dissociate the Brotherhood from the more radical Islamist 
lawyers, who were accused of attacking security forces with rocks 
and bottles at the 17 May demonstration.  According to Al- 
Musawwar on 27 May, al-Banna met at at his request with 
Parliamentary speaker Fathi Surur in an evident attempt to fend 
off possible legislation to oust the Brotherhood from the Lawyers 
Syndicate through new legislation.  Al-Banna was cited by Al- 
Musawwar as saying that he had expressed disapproval of the 
slogans and signs carried by some of the more radical lawyers at 
the 17 May rally, over which he said the syndicate's board had 
"completely lost control."  The report quoted al-Banna as saying 
he intended to submit his own draft legislation to change the 
current law governing the Lawyers Syndicate but gave no details. 

Implications 

   The government probably has a combination of motives for 
initiating the current campaign against the Brotherhood, 
including an interest in diverting attention from the Madani case 
and justifying the Brotherhood's exclusion from the "national 
dialogue."  More important in the long term is the government's 
likely concern over growing MB assertiveness in recent months and 
wary anticipation of an MB attempt to enter candidates in 
parliamentary elections expected in late 1995 after the MB 
boycotted them in 1990.  Even if Cairo ultimately permits MB 
participation, a clampdown on the syndicates would deprive it of 
what has become an important political forum, and continued 
pressure from security authorities may force the organization 
into a lower profile election campaign. 

For now at least, the government appears inclined to keep up 
pressure on the Brotherhood while avoiding an all-out crackdown 
that could alienate many Egyptians, as it probes further measures 
to marginalize the organization through new legislation.  The 
apparent ebbing of the media campaign, together with al-Alfi's 
limiting of his most recent terrorism allegations to "some 
members of the MB"--presumably those arrested over the past two 
years in the Salsabil case--seems to point against any imminent 
sweeping move against the group as a whole.  In addition, the 
evident reconciliation meeting between Interior Minister al-Alfi 
and Shaykh al-Ghazali highlights apparent official wariness of 
offending large numbers of Egyptians who sympathize with the 
Islamist agenda.  At the same time, however, the current media 
campaign is preparing the public for any further moves that the 
government may ultimately adopt. 

The liberal mainstream and secular opposition parties' relatively 
tepid response thus far to the government crackdown against the 
Brotherhood suggests that expected legislative measures aimed at 
marginalizing the organization in the syndicates may not meet a 
tremendous or universal outpouring of indignation.  At the same 
time--given its longstanding emphasis on political pluralism and 
liberties--the Wafd will likely express a degree of opposition 
that may grow and find broad company in the liberal mainstream if 
the current campaign against the Islamists is significantly 
escalated or broadened. 

The Muslim Brotherhood, for its part, appears intent on patiently 
waiting out the current storm to see whether or not it will 
produce a markedly new political environment demanding new 
strategies and tactics.  If the environment is changed to the 
point where the MB can no longer function effectively, at least 
some elements of the organization will certainly turn to more 
radical activities. 

(AUTHOR: BROWN.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
NEAR EAST ANALYSIS BRANCH (703) 733-6094.)LRT 16/0559Z jun 

