Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Conor Cruise O'Brien: "These Days the Lion Only </F>
Whines"] 
  [Text] There will be a special relationship, of one kind 
or another, between Britain and the United States as long as 
there is an English language. But the relationship is in worse 
shape, politically speaking, in 1994 than at any time since Suez. 
  The damage is at its worst among the Democrats, and this is 
extremely serious, since they have majorities in both houses of 
Congress, as well as the presidency. But the Republicans don't 
have much use for Britain's present government, either, even 
though that government went to such extraordinary lengths to 
help George Bush in the presidential election of 1992, thus 
alienating the winner, Bill Clinton. But the Republicans of 
today don't want to know about George Bush anymore than about 
John Major. A Republican flier has just been issued in 
connection with this year's mid-term congressional elections. 
It carries pictures of three worthies: Ronald Reagan, Margaret 
Thatcher and Bob Dole. This is a reminder of how great the 
relationship once was, and now is not. 
  All Americans knew who Mrs Thatcher was. Most admired her, 
and all who could conceivably vote Republican not only admired 
her when she was prime minister but still admire her. That is 
why her picture is on that flier. 
  The Tories, when they ditched Mrs Thatcher, may possibly 
have 
been doing the right thing by their party, and for its fortunes 
in Britain. But they were throwing away a great asset in 
international relations, especially relations with America. And 
Britain acquired, in place of that asset, a liability. If 
Britain repudiated that marvellous Margaret Thatcher, well, 
there must be something wrong with Britain, mustn't there? 
  As for Mr Major, his name and image carry hardly any 
connotations here. But for those who do know something about 
him, the connotations are negative, consisting mainly of a vague 
impression that he is the guy who stabbed Mrs Thatcher in the 
back. 
  The deterioration shows in a number of ways. There is the 
decision to ignore British protests and sell aircraft with 
advanced radar to Argentina. That could not have happened under 
Mrs Thatcher. There is increasing talk of an emerging 
Franco-American leadership, especially over Bosnia. Britain is 
presented as dragging its feet over Bosnia. I believe Britain 
was right to oppose the drift towards military intervention. 
But for the present it is the French who are giving a lead in 
the direction favoured by popular opinion in America. 
  Then there is the small but revealing episode of Gerry Adams 
and his visa. First of all, Mr Adams would not have been 
granted an American visa while Mrs Thatcher was prime minister. 
Mrs Thatcher inspired fear, both in Washington and in Dublin. 
Mr Major inspires nothing in particular, in either capital. 
Since the Downing Street Declaration of 15 December, with its 
fatal concession of the Hume-Adams wording on 
self-determination, Albert Reynolds has been under the 
impression that he can get away with pretty well anything where 
the present British government is concerned, even getting an 
American visa for the political head of the Provisional IRA, 
while the IRA's "armed struggle" against Britain continues. 
  The granting of that visa was one symptom of a general 
deterioration in Anglo-American relations. But the consequences 
of granting the visa have accelerated the deterioration. This 
was not mainly a result of Gerry Adams' anti-British tirades on 
Larry King Live and elsewhere. These reached huge audiences but 
embarrassed his more respectable sponsors, who had bought the 
line that Mr Adams is now an earnest seeker after peace. There 
was consequently a certain revulsion against him in influential 
quarters. 
  But then Mr Major's government, by the form of its protest, 
compounded the damage already done. It is in general 
inadvisable for a government to protest publicly against 
something it has been unable to stop. This only advertises the 
inability in question. And this was all the worse because the 
inability was the result not of harsh fate but of sheer 
incompetence. 
  Mr Major could have nipped that visa in the bud. He should 
have known what Albert Reynolds was up to and made him stop. He 
should have called on Mr Reynolds to oppose -- as all previous 
Irish governments have done -- the granting of a visa to the 
president of Sinn Fein. He should have warned Mr Reynolds that 
if he failed to do so, he would be placing the future of the 
Anglo-Irish agreement in danger. Had Mr Major done that, Mr 
Reynolds would have advised Senators Daniel Patrick Moynihan and 
Edward Kennedy to withhold support from this year's visa 
application as from previous ones, and the visa would not have 
been granted. 
  Having failed to prevent what he could quietly have 
prevented, Mr Major then protested at the top of his voice: 
several decibels too loud to be of help to Anglo-American 
relations in their present frail condition. To send a formal 
protest to the British ambassador in Washington would have been 
enough. To carpet the American ambassador in London was far too 
flamboyant. It inevitably evoked the anti-British component 
always latent American nationalism. 
  The New York Times is rather less nationalistic than most 
Americans and is generally not anti-British. Yet its comment on 
the carpeting of the America ambassador was the nastiest I have 
seen in a respectable American newspaper in relation to an ally 
of the United States. The editorial appeared Saturday under the 
headline: "The Lion Whines About Mr Adams." The heading 
faithfully reflects the hostile and contemptuous tone of the 
whole editorial. 
  The argument was on First Amendment lines, as if this was a 
British attempt to impose censorship on the United States, 
instead of a protest against the granting of a visa to a known 
enemy of Britain and a spokesman for terrorism. But the tone of 
the editorial was unmistakably that of aroused American 
nationalism on an anti-British binge. Intellectually, the 
editorial is contemptible, but as a symptom of dangerous forces 
at work in unexpected places it must be taken seriously. 
  In general, there may not be a lot Mr Major can do about 
improving Anglo-American relations. But there is one not 
insignificant area in which he can do something. He can warn 
Dublin -- belatedly but still effectively -- that if it again 
lends itself to making trouble for Britain in the US, it will 
undermine the Anglo-Irish agreement through activities 
incompatible with the spirit of that agreement. Mr Reynolds 
would take such a warning seriously. 
  For the rest, Mr Major should reflect that he has now to 
mend 
his fences with a US administration which his government 
foolishly strove to prevent from ever coming into being. He has 
a lot to live down. President Clinton's hero is John F Kennedy, 
whose motto was: "Forgive your enemies, but remember their 
names." 

