CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Toru Nagai, Daiwa Research Institute: "Blast </F>
Furnace Industry To Have Hard Time Extricating Itself From 
Iron-Steel Recession: Will Be Pressed To Specialize in 
Profitable Varieties"] 
  [Text] The desperate struggle of the blast furnace 
industry, which had held the position of Japan's key industry, 
continues. It is certain that the five major companies will 
have their first ordinary loss in seven years. The situation is 
serious because of such things as a decline in demand for iron 
and steel and an offensive by electric furnaces. It is even 
possible that it will trod the same path as the U.S. blast 
furnace industry. 
<H5>  More Serious Than During the Strong Yen Recession </H5>
  It is estimated that Japan's total production of crude steel 
in FY93 will be about 96.6 million tons, 2.5 percent less than 
the previous year, falling below 100 million tons for two years 
in a row for the first time since since the oil shock. It is 
expected that a further decline in production volume will be 
unavoidable in FY94 as well, and the outlook is for it to fall 
to the 1970 level of 91 million tons, a decline of about 20 
percent from FY90, the most recent peak. 
  Under these circumstances, the slump in business results of 
the major blast furnace companies, which have led Japan's iron 
and steel industry, is striking. It is certain that the profit 
and loss of major blast furnace companies for the March 1994 
period will decline to the first real loss in seven years. 
Moreover, ordinary loss on a real base, not counting profits on 
securities sold, is expected to total 280 billion yen [Y] for 
the five major companies. Furthermore, because of a decline in 
sales volume and so on, it is very possible that the margin of 
loss will widen to top Y360 billion in the next period. 
  This is a level which rivals the period of the strong yen 
recession, which was called an "iron chill." One can say that 
we are encountering what is truly a second "iron chill." 
  By simple calculation, if this loss were to continue for the 
next five years, some of the major blast furnace companies would 
certainly fall into excessive debt. If it erred in its response, 
its management base would probably be lost, even if it were 
iron and steel companies which have long reigned as the essence 
of Japan's manufacturing industries. Practically speaking, the 
possibility that this scenario will become a reality is by no 
means slight. 
  This is because the conditions surrounding the present iron 
and steel industry are more serious than those during the 
strong yen recession. First of all, there can be cited the fact 
that there is already little room for rationalization at 
production sites. Much was adjusted considerably during the 
strong yen recession, so things have progressed to a stage where 
it will be impossible to make production more efficient unless 
there is some technological innovation. Furthermore, there is 
also the fact that such diversification sectors as 
semiconductors and leisure industries, in which a great deal of 
capital has been invested by the steel companies during the 
period of prosperity after 1987, have not yet produced 
conspicuous positive results, but, conversely, are weighing on 
them as burdens of large fixed expenses. And one can probably 
say that another reason is that, in both domestic and foreign 
demand, it is difficult to find a scenario for recovery of 
demand for steel products, because at a time when adjustment of 
stock is continuing under asset deflation, employment 
uncertainty has also become serious; so, for the time being, it 
is difficult to anticipate expansion of consumption or of plant 
and equipment investment. 
  In addition, difficult-to-handle structural problems have 
arisen which are more important than this kind of problem; they 
are the following three points: first, that a difference between 
foreign and domestic prices has become constant; second, a large 
gap exists between supply and demand; and third, the rise of 
electric furnaces. 
  These problems, which began to surface in the "iron chill," 
are becoming a new weight on major blast furnace companies. 
  In addition to having negated the benefit of cheap raw 
materials through its indirect effect--a decline in proceeds 
from export sales and a reduction in domestic production of cars 
and electrical machinery, which are major users of steel 
products--it is natural that the strong yen would put pressure 
on iron and steel industry earnings. 
  However, it is more important that the unjustified strength 
of the yen since the Plaza Accord is producing a long-term 
difference between foreign and domestic prices of steel 
materials. If one looks at Japanese and U.S. prices for steel 
materials converted at the market exchange rate, the average 
market for hot coil steel over the last five years has been 
about $560 per ton in Japan in contrast to $350 per ton in the 
United States, so Japan has constantly been about $220 higher 
per ton. 
  Because of such non-price competitiveness as delivery and 
stability and reliability of quality, which the blast furnace 
companies possess, users have continued to use domestic 
products up till now. But it is to be expected that this 
long-term difference between foreign and domestic prices is 
having a strong impact on the cost-competitiveness of the final 
product. 
  In fact, users, who are being forced to further reduce 
costs, 
have begun to study full-scale use of low-priced imported steel 
products. Already, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Ltd., Japan's 
largest shipbuilder, has decided that in FY94 it will double its 
previous rate of overseas procurement of materials. 
  It is becoming a situation where, despite being under the 
conditions of an "iron chill," no blast furnace company will be 
able to avoid price reductions to match overseas products, in 
order to go on securing their market share. 
  The second point, realization of a gap between supply and 
demand, is not only a problem of the blast furnace industry 
having a quantitative excess-supply capacity; it is probably 
also important that it is being forced to take another look at 
the strategy of improving the grade of steel products, which 
every company has pursued until now. 
  Production of products with high added value, particularly 
surface-treated steel plate, which are typical product types of 
major blast furnace companies, has continued to grow steadily 
since the oil shock, at the rate of seven percent a year. This 
is because development of the strategy to "shift from pursuing 
volume to enhancing quality," which all blast furnace companies 
adopted when, after 1975, national crude steel production 
clearly leveled off, suited the needs of users with a greater 
inclination toward higher grade. The companies all anticipated a 
further expansion of demand and advancement of the shift from 
products with low added value, so they have greatly increased 
and strengthened industrial facilities. 
  But now a movement has appeared in users and final consumers 
to review a change toward higher grade and higher quality that 
has gone too far. Practically speaking, it is difficult to 
discover a need to equip passenger cars, which in Japan are used 
an average of only nine years, with rustproof steel plate that 
can last as long as 30 years, so it can probably be said that 
the real situation is that companies are becoming oriented 
toward raising the grade within a range suited to needs. 
  The result is that, along with a decline in auto production, 
demand for surface-treated steel plate has declined by 13 
percent from its peak. On the other hand, many new facilities 
have been completed, so there are indications that current 
average operation capacity has fallen to about 60 percent. 
  This means that correction of earning power by enhancing 
quality, which has functioned effectively in past recessions, 
has run into a big barrier from both the user side and the 
supplier side. 
<H5>  "Attacking Electric Furnaces, Defending Blast Furnaces" </H5>
  The third item I pointed out, the problem of the rise of 
electric furnaces, is, to put it bluntly, that Tokyo Steel Mfg. 
Co., Ltd., the largest electric furnace company, began to 
produce hot coil steel plate, which was the stronghold of blast 
furnaces, for the first time in Japan. Beginning in 1992, Tokyo 
Steel sold hot coil steel plate at about Y45,000, more than 
Y10,000 per ton below the existing market price, and within 
about a year ended up winning approximately 30 percent of the 
3.5 million ton import market, which it had made its target. 
  As for quality, at present there remain areas where it is 
not 
up to that of blast furnace products. But one has to think 
that, sooner or later, blast furnace manufacturers will feel the 
spread of its influence. 
  Even before this, the proportion of national crude steel 
accounted for by electric steel was on an upward trend. But that 
was done in steel bars and H beams which, from the standpoint of 
blast furnaces, are low-value-added construction materials. For 
thin-plate varieties, a state of monopoly has continued as a 
revenue source for blast furnaces companies. 
  In other words, because it entered a product where it is 
possible to shake the foundations of blast furnaces in the 
future, Tokyo Steel can become an entity which also threatens 
the lifeline of blast furnaces. Here we can probably see a 
design for "attacking electric furnaces and defending blast 
furnaces." 
  But as long as we look at the most recent situation, the 
rollback by blast furnaces is striking. The situation is such 
that in production of H beams for the first half of FY93 the 
market share for blast furnace products rose for the first time 
in three years, recovering to 41 percent from 33 percent in 
FY87,. Furthermore, moves have been realized to check the 
remarkably fast-growing independent Tokyo Steel by attempting 
cooperation and expansion of business content of companies which 
are in their keiretsu: for example, Topi Industries, which is 
affiliated with Nippon Steel Corporation, is considering new 
entrance into steel bars; and Kawasaki Steel Corporation has 
decided to produce steel plate using electric steel manufactured 
by its keiretsu affiliate, Daiwa Steel. 
  As a major trend, there will probably be no change in the 
superiority of the electric furnace, which is gradually 
expanding the types of products that it can produce, and there 
is no doubt that in the future the segregation of niches for 
products on the basis of blast furnaces and electric furnaces 
will become more and more vague. 
  It can be said that each blast furnace company will have to 
change from a strategy of putting effort into high-value-added 
products to the direction of actively securing market share in 
all products, even at the sacrifice of immediate earnings. 
Consequently, it can probably be said that it will be impossible 
in the future for them to avoid a desperate war of strength or 
war of attrition, even as blast furnace companies. 
<H5>  The Downfall of U.S. Blast Furnaces </H5>
  Although there is a difference in degree, in the following 
points this situation closely resembles that of the U.S. iron 
and steel industry in the first half of the 1980's. 
  First, besides domestic demand for steel having declined 
because such manufacturing industries as autos were losing 
competitiveness as a result of a strong dollar and a change in 
user tastes, there was also an influx of relatively inexpensive 
imports, so a large drop in prices could not be avoided. 
  Because of that, in 1982 the amount of crude steel produced 
declined by 38 percent from the previous year, retreating to the 
level of 36 years before. With the rate of operation falling to 
the 40 percent level, and so on, every blast furnace company 
ended up having a big gap between supply and demand. 
  And U.S. electric furnace manufacturers, represented by 
Nucor, advanced rapidly, with overwhelming cost competitiveness 
as their weapon. They expanded their share from 28 percent in 
1981 to 40 percent in 1990, and so on. 
  The result was that U.S. blast furnace companies registered 
losses beginning in 1982, and really were unable to restore 
profits until 1987. Moreover, even with that, they did not 
firmly establish a profitable setup, but were forced to record 
losses again accompanying the fall in market conditions after 
1990. 
  This was in spite of the fact that during this time they 
strongly promoted the restructuring of business by abandoning 
production facilities totaling more than 40 million tons for the 
industry, and reducing employees by 250,000 (about 64 percent). 
  But now, against a background of enforcement of antidumping 
laws and a steady recovery of their own country's economy, in 
addition to these efforts at rationalization, U.S. steelmakers 
are steadily securing profits. There is also a strong 
possiblity that they will overtake Japan for the first time in 
15 years in the volume of crude steel produced in 1994. 
  It is probably natural that there are also areas that differ 
between the United States, where a decline in international 
competitiveness in the areas of quality and cost was becoming 
noticeable from the latter half of the 1970's, and that of 
present-day Japan. But it is probably worth pointing out that 
even in the United States, which has resolutely carried out a 
bold restructuring in this way, recovery really required 10 
years. 
  The biggest cause for recovery of the U.S. steel industry 
being delayed was that it was impossible to drastically 
increase international competitiveness by such things as plant 
and equipment investment. At a time of successive losses 
because of a decline in volume and in the market against the 
background of an influx of imports, the industry had to curtail 
investment in plant and equipment. 
  Moreover, with plant and equipment that has become obsolete, 
one naturally cannot attempt to enhance quality or improve 
production efficiency, and costs also become relatively higher. 
The result was that it had fallen into a vicious cycle of the 
market being conquered still further by imports, and business 
results becoming still more sluggish. Today stagnation of 
business results is becoming long-term this way even for Japan's 
steel industry, which has the world's top level of quality and 
equipment, so if constriction of plant and equipment investment 
continues, it could very well become a situation similar to that 
of the U.S. steel industry. 
  Therefore, the foundation of the structural reform which is 
being forced upon the blast furnace companies probably comes 
down to hastening reduction of costs by countermeasures which 
are drastic and not shackled by preconceived ideas, so as to 
restore price competitiveness soon. The stopgaps of 
diversification and change to high added value which have been 
carried out up to now and the strategies of each company to keep 
abreast of the industry cannot be drastic measures. 
<H5>  The Strategy That Remains </H5>
  In that case, where is the concrete strategy that major 
blast 
furnace companies should choose? In order to consider that, I 
first analyzed the cost structure of the major blast furnace 
companies, and tried a comparison with South Korea and Taiwan. I 
used South Korea and Taiwan in the comparison because, whether 
viewed geographically, qualitatively, or from import business 
results, they have begun to be the greatest competitors against 
Japanese products. 
  Please look at Table 1. It is a breakdown of costs viewed by 
total cost without taking into consideration differences in 
product composition. In the table, with FY92 real results as the 
base, for the sake of convenience I calculated $1 as 100 yen, 
750 won and NT$25 [new Taiwan dollars]. 


----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Table 1. Production Costs in Japan, South Korea and Taiwan                 | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|($/ton, $1,000/person, ton/person)                                         | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|                  |Japan             |South Korea       |Taiwan            | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Personnel costs   |133               |35                |71                | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|(unit personnel c-|(97.4)            |(29.8)            |(44.8)            | 
|ost)              |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|(per capita produ-|(730)             |(854)             |(633)             | 
|ction volume)     |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Depreciation costs|81                |87                |68                | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Research and deve-|15                |0                 |&gt;  5               | 
|lopment costs     |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Interest payment  |23                |13                |0                 | 
|burden            |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Maintenance and r-|183               |15                |1                 | 
|epair costs       |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Other fixed costs |16                |5                 |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Total fixed costs |435               |166               |150               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cost of raw mater-|140               |188               |128               | 
|ials              |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Cost of outside o-|143               |34                |96                | 
|rders, etc.       |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Total variable co-|283               |222               |224               | 
|sts               |                  |                  |                  | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Total of all costs|718               |388               |374               | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Note: Actual results for FY92 were converted at the rate of $1 equals 100  | 
|yen, 750 won, NT$25. For Japan it was the average for three companies, Nip-| 
|pon Steel Corporation, Kawasaki Steel Corporation, and Sumitomo Metal Indu-| 
|stries, Ltd., whose nonferrous metal departments are of relatively little  | 
|weight. For South Korea it was Pohang Steel, and for Taiwan it was China S-| 
|teel.                                                                      | 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  The production cost per ton of steel material in Japan is 
$718, 1.9 times as high as South Korea's $388 and Taiwan's $374. 
  When we divide this into fixed costs and variable costs, the 
main variable costs being the major raw materials of iron ore 
and coking coal, which are procured on the international market, 
and the the basic units used being about the same, a large 
difference has not arisen among Japan, South Korea and Taiwan. 
In contrast to this, in the fixed costs per ton, compared with 
South Korea's $166 and Taiwan's $150, Japan is $435, so it works 
out to be a gap of from 2.6 to 2.9 times. One can say that the 
cost differential among Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan springs 
from fixed costs. 
  Personnel costs can probably be listed first as a reason why 
Japan's fixed costs are high in comparison with South Korea and 
Taiwan. In addition to South Korea's annual unit cost for 
personnel being about $30,000, a level one-third that of Japan, 
South Korea is also superior in productivity judged by per 
capita production volume, with 854 tons to Japan's 730 tons. 
  Therefore the personnel cost per ton is $35 for South Korea 
and $133 for Japan, a multiple of 3.8. On the other hand, in 
Taiwan, although per capita productivity is 633 tons, below that 
of Japan, unit personnel cost is about $45,000, just half that 
of Japan, so personnel cost per ton comes out to be less than 
Japan after all. 
  In per ton cost of maintenance and repair also, it is 
estimated that Japan's burden (about $90) is greater than South 
Korea's $15 and Taiwan's $1. This is partly because the 
equipment in the iron and steel mills that South Korea and 
Taiwan possess is newer, so maintenance and repair are not too 
necessary, but I think what is behind it is, rather, that when 
Japan was promoting a change to high-value-added products, it 
thoroughly pursued greater efficiency in producing many 
varieties in small volume to respond to customer needs. 
  Furthermore, in the case of Japan, the burden of other fixed 
costs, product development and improvement costs, which are 
required for providing high value-added products, is also heavy. 
Therefore, in order to grasp international competitiveness in a 
more realistic manner by taking into consideration differences 
in product composition, we will make a comparison with hot coil 
plate as the benchmark. 
  The important thing for Japanese steelmakers is probably 
whether or not the production cost for hot coil plate, which 
holds the most central position among steel products, is low in 
comparison with the import price of products from South Korea 
and Taiwan. If Japanese products were to become high in 
comparison, the rationality of producing everything from 
pig-iron to rolling as an integrated company would end up being 
considerably diminished. 
  The production cost for hot coil plate estimated by the 
Daiwa 
Research Institute, taking a typical Japanese steel mill as the 
model, was a little over 51,000 yen per ton in FY92. It breaks 
down to 39,600 yen for costs at the factory stage and 11,400 yen 
for headquarters costs. On the other hand, the unit cost (on a 
domestic market base) for imported hot coil plate in the same 
period was 55,500 yen for South Korean products, so at that 
stage the cost for Japanese companies was less than the market. 
But the market has now fallen to the level of 50,000 yen to 
51,000 yen, so if blast furnace companies' production cost is 
also the same now, I think their international competitiveness 
is already in a fairly severe state. Therefore, what is probably 
demanded first of all in order to recover competitiveness is 
reducing the cost for hot coil plate. 
  However, in the next several years, of the employees who 
joined the companies in great numbers during the time of high 
growth, a combined total for the five companies of over 10,000 
will reach the mandatory retirement age. Because of that, there 
is a view that the cost for major blast furnace companies will 
be reduced naturally. And, even if losses were to also continue 
during that time, if they covered it by realizing the latent 
profit from land and securities, which is as much as 5.5 
trillion yen for the five companies, it would probably also be 
possible to again secure a certain amount of profit after that. 
It is the view that there is no need to stir up feelings of 
uneasiness uselessly. 
  But this does not go beyond the realm of temporary 
improvement of profits. Even if estimated on the high side, the 
cost-reduction effect anticipated from staff reduction would be 
about 3,000 yen per ton. If the structural problems cited 
previously grow more serious, I think it will no longer be 
possible to absorb them by that level of cost reduction. 
<H5>  White-Collar Staff Are the Target </H5>
  The first thing to be considered as an object for cutting 
the 
cost of hot coil plate is probably management-sector costs, 
which grew conspicuously after the strong yen recession. 
  It is estimated that the cost per ton for the indirect 
management sector, which is made up of headquarters costs and 
the portion of plant fixed costs that corresponds to management 
processes, rose 7,900 yen from FY85 to FY92. Because of that, 
the benefit of cheap raw materials was diminished greatly by the 
rise in the cost of the management sector, so total cost 
declined only a mere 1,300 yen. Compared with the 
direct-production sector, where the effect of rationalization 
has begun to appear, indirect management sector costs are rising 
rapidly, and are thought to be a great weight on earnings. 
  For cutting cost in the indirect-management sector, one can 
probably cite raising the productivity of so-called white-collar 
staff. All the blast furnace companies have already made clear 
in medium-range plans that they expect to reduce indirect-sector 
personnel by 15 to 20 percent by transfers and the like. 
  But in a situation in which excess staff has become a 
problem 
for the entire industry, it is difficult to imagine that many 
companies will be able to accept staff on temporary transfer. 
Furthermore, even if all the places to receive them were ready, 
in order to preserve the salary level of the staff on transfer, 
companies would have to carry the burden of paying the 
difference between the salary at the home company and at the 
company to which they transferred, so the reality is that one 
cannot hope for the rationalization effect that would appear to 
exist on the face of things. Herein lies the problem with 
putting staff reduction into effect through transfers. According 
to Daiwa Research Institute estimates, with no increase in the 
salary base as a premise, even by reducing indirect staff 20 
percent through transfers, it comes out that one could expect a 
cost-reduction effect of only a little under 500 yen per ton. 
  The effect of speeding reduction of the costs of product 
development and improvement would be greater. I think there is 
room for restudying whether excessive enhancement of quality and 
pursuit of scrupulous delivery have not developed into excess 
quality and high costs. It is probably fully possible to reduce 
various costs by reconsidering proper quality and production 
processes within limits not prejudicial to user needs. 
  In addition, reducing costs by reforming business practices 
is also conceivable as a drastic plan for improvement. The 
commission paid by blast furnace companies to trading companies 
for procuring raw materials and selling their products is 
estimated, in the case of Japan Steel Corporation, for example, 
to be at least 50 billion yen per year (a little over 2,000 yen 
per ton). Although difficult problems do exist because of 
historical circumstances, reducing costs by switching from this 
system of commissioning trading companies to one of managing 
things in-house is probably also worth studying. 
<H5>  There Will Also Be Industry Reorganization </H5>
  But, even if blast furnace companies recover price 
competitiveness soon, the environment will become still harsher 
over the medium term. The development of national production of 
crude steel has moved from a period of expansion (1954-1970) 
which coincided with a period of high growth, to a period of 
cycles (1971 to the present), in which production varies upward 
and downward from a core of 103-104 million tons, depending on 
the business cycle. In the future, the core level of the cycle 
is expected to drop to 90-95 million tons if the decline of 
domestic demand because of deindustrialization and enhanced 
quality continues. 
  If, in addition to domestic demand for iron and steel 
decreasing by 10 percent, the ratio of imports to apparent 
demand were to become 20 percent, as in the United States (FY92 
results were 8 percent), and the ratio for electric steel were, 
similarly, to exceed 40 percent (FY92 results were 32 percent), 
it would be a market reduction of a little less than 23 million 
tons for blast furnace manufacturers. 
  This corresponds approximately to the production scale of 
Japan Steel Corporation, the world's largest manufacturer of 
iron and steel, and means that three of Japan's typical 
large-scale iron and steel mills would become surplus. 
  At this point I will present, as a new management strategy, 
a 
tentative plan for industry reeingineering: the narrowing of 
product types through priority investment. At present, blast 
furnace companies are producing virtually every variety of steel 
product, and the problem of the large variety of goods produced 
is quite important as a factor in high costs. 
  The product lineup of every company closely resembles that 
of 
the others, so there are also many cases in which it invites 
excessive competition. Furthermore, in portfolio management, in 
which profitable products compensate for unprofitable sectors, 
one delays disposal of unprofitable products as a result, so it 
becomes impossible to make use of assets effectively. 
  Big cost reductions will probably be possible if companies 
narrow the types of items they produce, and specialize in 
products at which they are stronger. This rationalization 
effect will be accompanied by a reduction in the burden of plant 
and equipment investment and simplification of the management 
sector and also by effective asset utilization and an escape 
from excess competition, so I think it will surpass a simple 
increase in staff efficiency. 
  Sumitomo Metal Industries' plan for a buildup in seamless 
pipe, which was announced at the beginning of 1993, will 
probably be given great attention as pioneer in this line. At 
present, because of such things as the strong yen and a retreat 
in demand, seamless pipe has become typical of unprofitable 
products, which are recording an estimated yearly loss of 80-90 
billion yen for the industry as a whole. I think that this kind 
of buildup plan, in a situation in which earnings are sluggish, 
is clearly a strategy to shake off pursuit by competing 
companies. 
  Furthermore, the appearance of restructuring that transcends 
the framework of individual companies is also conceivable. To be 
precise, by extending the narrowing down of product types by 
each company, one can imagine, such things as swapping of 
product types between companies, a change to joint ownership of 
equipment and management sectors, and disposal of surplus plant 
and equipment which are generated at that time and, ultimately, 
mergers. 
  Particularly in regard to disposal of plant and equipment, 
there is a good possibility of early realization. At present 
each company's production setup is built on the assumption that 
national crude steel production estimated at 104-106 million 
tons is the optimum rate of operation. It is thought that they 
will be reviewed at a time when the production level is expected 
to decline over the medium term. That will probably also be 
similar for plant and equipment for surface treating. 
  On the other hand, so far as can be considered at present, 
there is little likelihood of mergers becoming a reality. Even 
if there were a merger, rationalization of the indirect sector 
would require considerable time, so it would probably be 
difficult for the benefit to appear soon. But there is a strong 
probability of business links being formed because of plant 
sites and product types. It has also been predicted that the 
industry will be concentrated into about three groups in the 
future. 
  In any case, we are in a situation in which, if the exchange 
level is not corrected in the direction of a weaker yen, no 
blast furnace company will be able to avoid a long-term slump 
and a drop in competitiveness unless there are a rapid rise in 
production efficiency and a great reduction in management costs. 
It can probably be said that Japan's blast furnace industry has 
an urgent need for the entire industry to adopt drastic measures 
which transcend preconceived ideas, beginning with major 
reductions in staff and curtailment of the management sector. 

