BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Disposing of Waste"] </F>
  [Text] Although it may not have been one of the more 
sensational events of the week, the inauguration on Monday of 
this country's first industrial waste treatment plant surely 
deserves some comment. 
  The truth is that for far too long too many companies in 
Indonesia have been reluctant to seriously consider the problem 
of waste treatment. 
  To address this problem, on the eve of the new plant's 
inauguration, the government issued a regulation requiring all 
manufacturing companies to neutralize their toxic and hazardous 
wastes. In the past, many industries were reported to have 
raised objections to precisely such a requirement on the basis 
of the argument that the process would add too heavily to their 
production costs and make their products less competitive. 
  Of course for companies operating on a small scale, such an 
argument may be true to a certain extent. After all, 
manufacturing firms have to cope with what economists refer to 
as the economy of scale. That is, the bigger the factory and 
its operations, the lighter the cost burden which the 
manufacturer has to bear relative to the volume of goods 
produced. Such an argument, therefore, seems valid, especially 
since small-scale industries comprise an important segment of 
this country's industrial sector. They not only provide a 
service to the society by turning out goods, but also by 
providing jobs to many thousands of people. 
  The significance of the Nambo Village waste treatment plant 
in this particular context is obviously that it helps bring down 
those additional production costs for small-scale enterprises by 
eliminating the need for them to own and operate their own waste 
treatment plants. 
  In the past, even larger industries were reported to have 
used this argument to object to any government regulation that 
would require them to treat their toxic wastes. Surely, 
however, the developments of the last several years have made it 
clear that such a rationale can no longer hold. Under the new 
world order that is now rapidly taking shape, even the trade and 
industrial sectors can no longer act as if they are unaffected 
by the spirit of environmental awareness that is now rapidly 
spreading across the globe. It is in their own interest that 
industrialists respect the principles of environmental soundness 
if they want to compete in the world market. 
  Thus, as President Suharto remarked on the occasion, the 
inauguration of the new U.S.$95 million plant is expected to 
make Indonesia's industrial products more competitive on 
international markets by meeting the criteria of environmental 
"cleanliness" that more and more countries around the world are 
setting for their imports. The new plant, located at Nambo 
Village in Bogor regency, is the first in Indonesia, as well as 
the biggest of its kind so far in Southeast Asia. A second 
plant for the treatment of industrial wastes is now reportedly 
being planned for construction near Surabaya, East Java's 
provincial capital, which has the second-largest concentration 
of industries in Indonesia. Similar plants are also being 
planned for Lhokseumawe in Aceh and for East Kalimantan. 
  Surely, as this country prepares itself for its take-off 
towards self-sustained growth and because the industrialization 
process is bound to accelerate in the years to come, the 
launching of the Nambo Village waste treatment is a laudable, 
albeit small, step towards ensuring that the process of 
development will not impair the sustained health of our 
environment. 

