BFN 

  [Text] How was the Tocantins ranch, where Latin America's 
largest cocaine shipment was discovered a few weeks ago, 
purchased? This question prompted the Brazilian Federal Police 
to conduct further investigations. Following these 
investigations, the possibility arose that Ciudad del Este was 
the Cali Cartel mafiosi's base of operations for laundering 
money. 
  An AP report datelined Rio de Janeiro notes that the 
unprecedented seizure of 7.5 metric tons of cocaine in early 
June allowed the discovery of a money laundering network of the 
Cali Cartel, a Colombian drug trafficking ring. 
  Police chief Antonio Borges reported that the criminal 
organization used bank accounts in New York, Paraguay, and 
Brazil to transfer money and invest in the Brazilian drug 
trafficking market for storing and exporting cocaine. 
<H5>  The Lebanese </H5>
  After the details of the seizure operation became available, 
Nasrat Mohamed Jamil, a Lebanese-Brazilian citizen who had 
established covert businesses in Ciudad del Este, became the 
main target in unraveling the mafia's tentacles. He had been 
living in Foz do Iguacu (where he was detained on the eve of the 
operation carried out in the aforementioned Brazilian state) 
after his separation two years ago from Vera Lucia Minikoski, 
who had filed a petition with the Parana State courts to divide 
their common property, demanding about $20 million. 
  According to Borges, Jamil was the drug trafficking ring's 
treasurer for the Cali Cartel's complicated money transfers in 
Brazil, where one of its lords, Vicente Wilson Rivera Ramos, had 
established himself. Rivera Ramos, along with another 11 people, 
was arrested for allegedly trafficking in cocaine to the United 
States. 
<H5>  Colombia-United States-Paraguay </H5>
  The police chief added that the drug money was remitted from 
Colombia to two banks in New York, and from New York to the Cali 
Cartel's base of financial operations in Ciudad del Este. The 
funds were withdrawn in cash and deposited in a bank in Foz do 
Iguacu, from where they were transferred to various accounts in 
various Brazilian cities under false names. 

