BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial by Hoseyn Shari'atmadari: "Which Fact?"] </F>
  [Text] On Friday, 1 April, His Eminence Ayatollah Yazdi, 
the esteemed head of the judiciary and the acting Friday imam of 
Tehran spoke about the Hajj issue in his Friday prayer sermons 
at Tehran University. There he stated some things that were 
"unfamiliar" to the pain-inured ears of his addressees. It was 
thought that his remarks were not "clear" because they were 
"brief." Therefore, it is necessary for him to answer questions 
about the ambiguities that his remarks on Friday raised in the 
minds of his friends and of his enemies, who are always lying in 
ambush with their spiteful analyses and commentaries. In taking 
advantage of the situation, Ayatollah Yazdi should give some 
clear explanations and thus remove all ambiguities. Some of the 
questions that have risen are: 
  A. The esteemed Friday prayer speaker, who is himself a 
high-ranking official, told the high-ranking officials of the 
country: "Bilateral or multilateral issues cannot be solved on a 
unilateral basis. One should never lose sight of this fact and 
solve the matter on a unilateral basis. Concerning the issue of 
hajj, one should accept that the problem is a bilateral 
problem..." 
  Ayatollah Yazdi has not given any explanation about the 
"unilateral solution" he considers to be illogical and also he 
did not say what he means by "bilateral and multilateral 
solutions." Does a bilateral solution mean that the Islamic 
Republic of Iran and the Saudi Government should consult each 
other and exchange views on solving the hajj issue? If that is 
it, then this is something that is done extensively every year, 
and reports concerning these talks are published in the mass 
media. Apparently, such bilateral consultations and talks 
cannot be what Ayatollah Yazdi meant, since in his sermon he 
told the worshipers "of course, you know that the responsible 
officials have been trying to have discussions -- they are 
discussing it...." Therefore, it seems that the "bilateral 
solution" that the head of the judiciary is proposing must be of 
another type. 
  Ayatollah Yazdi said in relation to this: "One should never 
lose sight of one fact that concerning the issue of hajj, one 
should accept that the problem is a bilateral problem." Again 
he does not explain what this "fact"(!) that one should "not 
lose sight of" is, or what the "problem" is which, according to 
him is "bilateral." What everyone knows, and which is extremely 
clear, is that performing the hajj is a definite right of all 
Muslims, and disavowing pagans is an indivisible part of the 
hajj. According to the imam and his successor, "a hajj without 
disavowal is not a hajj," and the Islamic Republic of Iran has 
always demanded and still demands this definite right. 
  Now, in order to remove all ambiguities, His Eminence 
Ayatollah Yazdi should answer the following questions: First of 
all, has the Islamic Republic of Iran asked for more than this 
from the Saudi Government? Secondly, are these two demands not 
the definite and natural rights of Muslims? If the answers to 
these questions are positive--which they are--then the next 
question is: What is the "fact" and the "problem" that the 
esteemed head of the judiciary is worried will be ignored? As 
everyone knows--something of which the Saudi rulers have 
repeatedly stated and that Ayatollah Yazdi is also clearly 
aware--the Saudis' "problem" is the organizing of the 
demonstrations during the Hajj ceremonies for the disavowal of 
pagans. The Saudis have said--and especially last year they 
said it blatantly--that because of U.S. pressures, they cannot 
allow the pilgrims to the House of God to organize these 
demonstrations! They insisted that this "fact"(!) should be 
understood by the officials of the Islamic Republic of Iran!? 
But if the esteemed head of the judiciary does not mean this 
when he refers to a problem(!) and a fact(!) then which 
"problem"(!) and which "fact"(!) is he talking about? 
  B. His Eminence Ayatollah Yazdi knows that after the bloody 
incident in Mecca and the massacre of the innocent pilgrims to 
the House of God by the Saudi Government in 1987 and after a 
three-year interruption in the hajj for Iranians, finally in 
1991 the foreign ministers of the Islamic Republic of Iran and 
Saudi Arabia officially agreed that each year at least 150,000 
Iranian pilgrims would go on the Hajj and organize the disavowal 
of pagans demonstrations in Holy Mecca on the sixth day of Dhu 
al-Hijja. This agreement was implemented in 1991 and 1992. But 
last year, the Saudi Government--despite this official 
agreement--deployed its military force and its armored units and 
APC's as if it was going to war against a gathering of unarmed 
pilgrims who were dressed only in their pilgrim's garb and were 
chanting "God is Great." And they prevented them from 
expressing their disgust with the polytheists of the twentieth 
century and with the modern idols! Therefore, should not the 
esteemed Friday prayer speaker have clearly referred to this 
breach of faith and spoken about the "fact" that the Saudi 
Government has officially trampled on official agreements and 
accords? 
  C. In another part of his second sermon, His Eminence 
Ayatollah Yazdi, strongly criticized the government's decision 
banning holders of passports from visiting Saudi Arabia during 
the Hajj ceremonies without observing formalities and said: 
  "I ask the honorable minister, and the esteemed deputy 
minister: Are you in a position to ban anyone from travelling 
abroad? Is leaving the country in your hands? What is the 
legal basis of your decision?" 
  Naturally the Government adopted this measure on the basis 
of 
interests and of norms and regulations. Instead of asking the 
worshipers, the esteemed speaker at the Friday prayers should 
have asked the officials--and he himself is a high-ranking 
official. As for us, even though we are not really aware of the 
reason for the decision to adopt such a measure, nevertheless we 
clearly consider it a logical decision in conformity with the 
people's interests. 
  Apparently the Saudi Government intends to independently(!) 
grant visas to 20,000 Iranian pilgrims outside the framework of 
the existing and official regulations of the Islamic Republic of 
Iran. The question that arises is: Would it not have been 
better for His Eminence Ayatollah Yazdi to ask the Saudi 
officials that if, according to what they allege, they cannot 
accept more than 60,000 Iranian pilgrims, why are they allowing 
20,000 more to go? And if this allegation is not sincere--and 
it is not--why do they want to reduce the quota of Iranian 
pilgrims? 
  The esteemed speaker at the Friday prayers definitely knows 
that currently, nearly 450,000 have applied for the Hajj. 
Therefore, is it fair for the definite right of these 
people--among them a large number of elderly women and men--to 
be handed over to others, even though they are also anxious to 
go on the Hajj? They have not applied and their names are not 
on the lists; but they can go anyway because of greater 
financial resources. Since the Saudis want to create 
impediments, is it right to take someone else's turn and to 
break the rules? In other words, in addition to the requirement 
of "affordability," as stated in the teachings [of the Koran], 
has "having more money" also been added to the list? 
Affordability for the Hajj applies to everyone who has the 
ability to perform the pilgrimage, and those who have more money 
do not take priority. And if there are limitations on performing 
the Hajj such as the Saudi officials have imposed, then the 
turns of those who "can afford the journey" and have applied and 
waited for years will be given to those who have more money. 
Finally, the esteemed speaker at the Friday prayers, who is 
himself one of the sympathizers and devoted servants of the 
Islamic revolution, should pay more attention to such points.... 

