CSO 

  [Text] New Delhi, Feb. 11--Belgium has asked Pakistan not 
to globalise the Kashmir issue and hailed India's six-point 
proposal to Islamabad for initiating a peace process between the 
two countries at the bilateral level, report agencies. 
  The Belgian foreign minister, Mr Willy Claes, during his 
talks with the external affairs minister, Mr Dinesh Singh, in 
Brussels, said it was not appropriate for Pakistan to 
internationalise the Kashmir issue. He stressed the need for the 
two countries to resolve the issue bilaterally through 
discussions, an official release said here today. 
  Mr Claes said the European union was keen to develop closer 
links with Asia, especially India. 
  He said India's six-point confidence-building proposals to 
Pakistan could mark the beginning of the peace process. 
  The Belgian minister said the problem of fundamentalism and 
terrorism posed a threat to the European union also. The EU had 
an interest in the stability of the Asian region, he added. 
  Mr Singh referred to Pakistan's instigation of terrorist 
activities in Jammu and Kashmir and its attempts to 
internationalise the Kashmir issue in various international fora 
through false propaganda on human rights. 
  Mr Singh was assisted in the talks by the foreign secretary, 
Mr K. Srinivasan, and other senior officials. 
  Mr Singh also expressed India's commitment to strengthening 
friendly ties with Belgium, both in the bilateral field and in 
the wider context of relations with the EU. 
  In a related development, India has regretted Pakistan's 
raising of the Kashmir issue at the non-aligned movement (NAM) 
foreign ministers' meeting in Jakarta. 
  Exercising the right of reply at the meeting yesterday, the 
minister of state for external affairs, Mr R.L. Bhatia, said it 
was a "well-known fact that the problems of Kashmir, which is an 
integral part of India, is a result of terrorism actively 
sponsored by Pakistan." 
  The Pakistani foreign minister raised the Kashmir issue and 
contended that the security of small states had been threatened 
and the right to self-determination was being denied to the 
people. 
  In Kashmir valley, meanwhile, a militant-sponsored bandh 
paralysed normal life today even as the security forces shot 
dead four Pakistan-trained militants and arrested seven others 
since yesterday evening. 
  A huge cache of arms, ammunition and explosives were 
recovered from the arrested militants. 
  The main building of the district police line in Doda 
district of the Jammu region was gutted in a fire. The building 
was damaged in the incident and some store items were also 
gutted. However, the armoury was saved from much damage, an 
official spokesman told reporters here today. 
  A complete bandh was observed in the valley today in 
response 
to the call given by the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front 
(JKLF) to observe the tenth death anniversary of its founder, 
Maqbul Bhat, as "third option day" today. 
  Maqbul Bhat was hanged to death in Tihar jail on this day in 
1984 on the charge of murder of a police official. 
  In Srinagar and rest of the valley, all shops and business 
establishments remained closed and transport was also off the 
roads. 
  The summer capital wore a deserted look with only a large 
number of security forces present on the roads and security 
vehicles plying. 
  In view of the bandh call and the JKLF's plan to hold 
demonstrations, the authorities deployed additional forces on 
the main streets and in sensitive areas. 
  Four Pakistan-returned militants including a self-styled 
company commander of a militant outfit were killed by the 
security forces in two separate encounters at Bomai and Sangrama 
in Baramulla district yesterday evening, the official spokesman 
said. 
  He said three improvised explosive devices and an 
anti-personnel mine were detected by the security forces during 
search operations at Anantnag district. The explosive devices 
were later defused. 

