CSO 

  [Text] New Delhi, April 21 (PTI)--The National Council of 
Applied Economic Research (NCAER) has forecast double-digit 
inflation to bedevil the economy in the current year, despite 
the government's recent assertion to the contrary. 
  In a macro analysis of the economy for 1994-95, the third 
year of the eighth plan, the council said the year should see 
"significant improvement" in economic growth, though inflation 
is expected to climb. 
  It said the level of average prices of different sectors (an 
index similar to wholesale price index) is projected to rise by 
10.2 per cent for the year as a whole in 1994-95 over 1993-94 
average. The impact of various administered prices is 
incorporated into this estimate, the council said barring 
further significant increases in procurement prices of grains. 
  The council said the rise in the price of manufactured items 
is higher than agricultural prices--a phenomenon noted in 
1993-94 as well--is due to enhanced industrial activity, higher 
capacity utilisation and hence higher mark-ups. 
  Presenting two sets of GDP (gross domestic product) growth 
for the current year, the council said the GDP at factor cost in 
constant prices is estimated to rise by 4.8 per cent in 1994-95 
over the last year. The GDP growth at this level will equal the 
growth rate scored in 1990-91. 
  In the alternative scenario with lower agricultural output 
and higher agricultural prices, the real growth drops to 4 per 
cent, giving a lower end of expectations for 1994-95. 
  The council contended that despite the problems of inflation 
which would call for "careful management," the economy seems to 
be set for recovery. 
  Referring to the reasons for its optimistic outlook on the 
recovery of the economy, the Council said, for the first time, 
both industrial growth and real GDP growth are mainly dependent 
on the growth in private investment expenditures. 
  Stating that in the past the major factor was the public 
investment, it said in 1994-95 public investment expenditures 
are expected to grow by 8 per cent, while private investment 
expenditures will grow by 31 per cent. 
  This sound growth in private investment expenditure, the 
council said, is due to the high business expectations for the 
next six months, substantial reduction in direct taxes and 
considerably enhanced inflows of investment from abroad along 
with improvement in mobilisation of funds from the domestic 
market. 
  It said the external factors for the economy seem 
`promising' as the economies in North America and western Europe 
were reported to be on the path of recovery from the downswing 
of the business cycle of the recent years. 
  The two macro models prepared by NCAER are contingent on the 
assumption that the monsoon is below `normal' like last year or 
in which it is much worse than last year. Significantly, the 
growth of agricultural production in both the scenarios is not 
very different at 2.6 per cent and 2.3 per cent respectively, 
the council said. 
  The models showed that the overall industrial output, 
including construction but excluding mining and quarrying, is 
projected to rise by 6.8 per cent and a major part of the 
increase is to come from the capital goods sector which is 
likely to get a reprieve from its recession through a recovery 
in private investment activity. 
  The council said the cuts in corporate income-tax, extension 
of MODVAT (modified value-added tax) to capital goods provided 
in this year's Union budget are likely to spur investment 
activity and hence the capital goods sector. 


