BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Liu Ruichang (0491 3843 1603)] </F>
  [Text] Bridgetown, 5 May (XINHUA) -- At the "Global 
Conference on Sustainable Development for Developing Islet 
Nations" -- a UN high-level meeting held in Bridgetown, the 
capital of Barbados -- on 5 May, Liu Chengguo, head of the 
Chinese Government delegation, pointed out that the principle 
defined at this meeting for the establishment of partnership for 
sustainable development should become the basis of international 
cooperation in the fields of environment and development. 
  Liu Chengguo believes that the sustainable development of 
developing islet nations is an important element of global 
sustainable development. Developing islet nations' efforts to 
develop their economy and protect the environment are 
contributing to attaining the goal of worldwide sustainable 
development. 
  Speaking of ways to establish this kind of partnership for 
sustainable development, Liu Chengguo said that it should be 
built on mutual respect and equal treatment. He said: All 
countries -- big or small, strong or weak -- should be equal 
partners in international cooperation; the basis for cooperation 
comes only in this way. Partnership will be out of the question 
if either side should indiscreetly criticize the other at every 
turn, always try to force on the other a certain model or 
policies and measures suited to some other countries, or even 
take monetary or technical aid as political chips for putting 
forward unreasonable demands regarding the recipient country's 
internal affairs. 
  Liu Chengguo said: This kind of partnership should also 
closely link the resolution of global environmental problems 
with that of practical problems facing developing islet nations, 
and help developing islet nations attain the two complementary 
goals of sustained economic growth and environmental protection. 
  Liu Chengguo pointed out: This kind of partnership should 
embody the principle of "common but differentiated 
responsibilities." He said: Climatic changes, rising sea 
levels, pollution of ocean and seacoast, and other environmental 
problems are not caused chiefly by islet nations, but they have 
become the first victims of them. Many problems left over from 
the colonial or trusteeship periods continue to restrict their 
social and economic development. To effectively resolve the 
environmental problems facing developing islet nations and help 
them attain sustainable development, therefore, the 
international community, particularly the developed nations, 
should make more commitments. 
  In conclusion, Liu Chengguo said: Being a developing nation, 
China understands very well the difficulties facing developing 
islet nations and sympathizes with them. China has established 
friendly relations and cooperation with many developing islet 
nations and is ready to further and actively explore and 
strengthen multilevel South-South cooperation in various forms 
in the hope of bringing about common development and prosperity. 
  The United Nations began the "Global Conference on 
Sustainable Development for Developing Islet Nations" on 25 
April. Government delegates from China and about 100 other 
member states of the United Nations attended the meeting. Held 
after the UN conference on environment and development in 1992, 
this meeting has the special purpose of resolving developing 
islet nations' peculiar environmental and development problems. 

