Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Leonid Nikitinskiy article: "The Communists Won the </F>
Struggle for the Post of Speaker of the State Duma"] 
  [Text] By the time this issue was being signed to press 
the final, official results of the secret ballot for the 
election of State Duma chairman had still not been announced. 
However, news agencies have already reported that the election 
has been won by Ivan Rybkin, the candidate from the agrarian and 
communist bloc and former leader of the "Communists of Russia" 
faction in the former Russian Federation Supreme Soviet. 
  The elections for the chairman of the chamber began with the 
nomination of 10 candidates and it is highly unlikely that this 
was a surprise to any of them. Nevertheless, four of them 
refused to stand. 
  Top of the list was Zhirinovskiy, who used his allotted few 
minutes on the platform to issue insults and threats against his 
rivals. Zhirinovskiy's reason for his withdrawal was, he said, 
his unwillingness to work as a "traffic controler." This 
argument does not stand up to criticism. The chairman of the 
Liberal Democratic Party of Russia [LDPR] himself could not 
stand for the post of parliament's "traffic controller" but any 
other member of that faction could. 
  However, the awesome LDPR is clearly not overendowed with 
potential speakers. The experience with Georgiy Lukava, whom 
Zhirinovskiy had already tried to direct from the provinces, 
demonstrated that the chairman's place must be occupied by 
someone who is at least more competent. Is there one in the 
LDPR? If there is, will he not use the protection of the 
independence guaranteed by the post of speaker to move away from 
the fuehrer's influence, thus splitting the falange and creating 
a second center of gravity in it? 
  Zhirinovskiy undoubtedly asked himself these questions 
before 
taking the platform. But they were meaningless in view of the 
main fact that today an LDPR candidate has no real chance of 
putting together either a relative or -- even less -- an 
absolute majority in the Duma. That is why the faction's 
general secretary gave the order to support a different 
candidate -- Yuriy Vlasov, it soon emerged. This is also 
interesting because Zhirinovskiy decided to back not a weak and 
ultimately manageable candidate but a strong and probably 
unmanageable candidate. 
  Anatoliy Lukyanov, apparently, was the only candidate who 
withdrew honorably because he was tired and we forgive him this 
little ruse, which is that he did not ask Nevzorov to simply not 
nominate him. The same cannot be said about Valentin Kovalev -- 
a nonparty candidate from [ot] the communist party, who withdrew 
his candidacy before the vote in favor of Ivan Rybkin, the 
nominee from the agrarian party, which was clearly agreed in 
advance. 
  The reasons for the withdrawal of Sergey Shakhray, a 
politician skilled in affairs of this kind, are not so simple: 
He clearly realized that neither he nor any other members of 
his faction had a chance of making a breakthrough in the first 
round but he has hardly abandoned the idea of occupying the 
speaker's chair once and for all. Most probably, Shakhray (like 
the Women of Russia faction) weighed the situation up and came 
to the conclusion that the first round of voting would not bring 
anyone success and that therefore it was better not to enter the 
fray until round two. 
  The election speeches of the remaining candidates were 
similar in that everyone (with the exception of Yuriy Vlasov who 
had bluntly stated to the Russia's Choice representatives in the 
hall: "I have opposed you and will continue to do so") tried to 
emphasize their commitment to parliamentarism and respect for 
the rights of minorities and to a greater or lesser extent 
declared that they would be apolitical if elected to the post of 
chairman of the chamber. For all the craftiness (greater or 
lesser, depending on the candidate) of these assurances they can 
all serve as testimony to the fact that the guiding principles 
of the deputies' corps, when compared with the Supreme Soviet, 
have indeed switched to some extent from political confrontation 
toward the ideas of cooperation and a desire for compromise in 
the spirit of true parliamentarism. 
  The finest and most tragic performance as a candidate 
speaker was undoubtedly the rearguard action fought by Sergey 
Kovalev. Soberly assessing the potential of its faction, 
Russia's Choice decided not to nominate from its existing 
reserves a candidate whose chance of success looked more 
realistic. Sergey Kovalev, a man who is by no means as naive as 
some of his opponents would arrogantly like to think, ascended 
the platform like Golgotha and as expected was insulted by the 
mob (using the term here in the sense that even the most 
respectable and highly organized meeting can turn into a mob at 
times) and fully demonstrated the meaning of the commandment to 
turn the other cheek. 
  Understandably in the table of the overall weighted voting 
[reytingovoye golosovaniye], Kovalev was second from last (138 
votes). But third from bottom was Vladimir Medvedev, leader of 
the "New Regional Policy" faction formed the day before and 
consisting of independent deputies, and this rating demonstrates 
more the inability of the democratic factions to carry out 
organizational work in the parliament: The 15-minute recess 
before the voting, I felt, could have substantially altered that 
result and possibly have taken Medvedev into the semifinal as an 
alternative to the communist Ivan Rybkin. 
  As these notes are being made up for print, the finalists on 
the platform at the former CEMA [building] will be Ivan Rybkin 
(233 votes) and Yuriy Vlasov (200 votes) who, in the political 
sense, are certainly not alternatives to one another. It is 
possible to forecast with a good deal of confidence (although by 
the time this newspaper is signed to print this result will be 
known accurately) that neither of the contenders will secure 223 
simple [zavetnyy] votes in a conventional (rather than a 
weighted) ballot. 
  Under the rating vote it is possible to support several 
candidates and thus, if you consider the overall disposition of 
the three major blocs, the votes of the democrats the day before 
became "black balls" for the two finalists while the votes of 
the Communists and Zhirinovskiy's supporters were "white balls" 
again for both candidates. In the final, however, complicated 
by the secret procedure of voting via booths when you can only 
vote for one or the other [alternativno], Rybkin must lose the 
votes of the LDPR faction and Vlasov the votes of the Communists. 
  We can take the length of time that the Duma needs to 
collect 
223 votes for a candidate speaker as a measure to some extent of 
the standard of its "parliamentarism," taking this term to mean 
first and foremost the ability to move toward a mutual, 
constructive compromise which takes into account the right of 
minorities. At the moment the Duma is split into three parts in 
which each of the three sectors with less than 50 percent is in 
the minority no matter what the disposition of forces is. 
  In the near future, under the catalyzing influence of the 
process of elections of the speaker in the Duma, a fourth quite 
powerful sector will be structured and it seems that this 
faction will be the "New Regional Policy." It is seeking to 
occupy the political center where it can absorb Shakhray's Party 
of Russian Unity and Accord because of a coincidence of main 
program aims, and become a center of attraction for other small 
associations of deputies and independent deputies. Clearly 
Russia's political destiny will depend to a considerable extent 
on whether this new political force operates as a center-right 
or center-left organization. 

