BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by 'Abdallah Hammudah, Hammud Munsir, Hani </F>
Naqshabandi, Taj-al-Din 'Abd-al-Haqq, and Muhammad Sadiq: "U.S. 
Warning of Disaster; Pressures To Convene Security Council"] 
  [Excerpts] London, Sanaa, Abu Dhabi, Washington, Aden, 
Cairo, AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT -- Extensive consultations are being 
conducted in the UN corridors and a number of Arab and 
international capitals to convene another Security Council 
session regarding the Yemeni war after the failure of five 
attempts to establish a cease-fire between northern and southern 
forces and Sanaa's continued refusal to deploy international 
observers in Yemen to contribute to determining which party is 
responsible for the [cease-fire] violations. [passage omitted] 
  International envoy Lakhdar Brahimi stated that he "is 
discussing with Yemeni leaders a settlement plan stipulating the 
participation of foreign observers in supervising the 
cease-fire." 
  While the southern leadership in the Democratic Republic of 
Yemen supports that and has submitted a memorandum to Brahimi 
about its plan in this connection, in which it proposed the 
participation of some 100 to 150 officers representing the 
permanent member states of the Security Council and some Arab 
states (like Syria, Egypt, Jordan, and the Sultanate of Oman), 
in addition to Yemeni officers, official sources in Sanaa said 
that they have informed Brahimi of Sanaa's agreement to revive 
the joint military committee to supervise and consolidate the 
cease-fire. 
  U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Robert Pelletreau has 
warned of the threats posed by the continued fighting in Yemen 
to stability in the region and of the consequences and human 
disasters that may result from it. [passage omitted] 
  A north Yemen source stressed that Sanaa has not agreed 
unreservedly to the principle of bringing in international 
observers, but it replied to a proposal conveyed by Brahimi 
which says that the secessionists told him that they did not 
want the committee to be Yemeni only. So Sanaa agreed to 
re-form the joint military committee, which used to include 
northern and southern officers as well as military experts from 
the Sultanate of Oman and Jordan, in addition to the U.S. and 
French military attaches in Sanaa. 
  The northern source said that the southern leaders' proposal 
to form a team of international observers from representatives 
of the OAU, the Arab Maghreb Union, and the EC, and the 
permanent member states of the Security Council, provided it 
operates under the UN flag, is aimed at diluting the issue and 
perpetuating the concept of two separate entities. However, the 
source stressed the northern leadership's principle of holding a 
direct dialogue with southerners in Cairo or the United Nations 
before Brahimi submits his report to the UN secretary general on 
the contacts he has conducted with Yemeni leaders in Sanaa and 
al-Mukalla. [passage omitted] 

