Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement by Roman Koval, chairman of the national </F>
association "Ukraine's State Independence," and deputy editor of 
the newspaper NEZBORYMA NATSIYA (An Invincible Nation): 
"National Dictatorship Alone Will Extricate Us From Chaos"] 
  [Text] In the election campaign in Lvov Oblast, the 
national association "Ukraine's State Independence" [DSU] is 
represented by three candidates: Anatoliy Shcherbatyuk 
[presently under arrest for stirring up interethnic hostility], 
Myron Levytskyy, and Roman Koval. In Ukraine, mainly in its 
eastern [as published] regions, 23 DSU members are standing to 
be deputies. 
  The DSU's election program is expounded by its chairman 
Roman 
Koval, deputy editor of NEZBORYMA NATSIYA and author of the 
books "Is Appeasement Between Ukraine and Russia Possible?," 
"With Whom and Against Whom?," and "On Enemies, Allies, and 
Fellow-Travelers." 
  The DSU is in favor of immediately suspending the 
uncontrolled export of foodstuffs and basic commodities to 
Russia, Israel, and Poland. By closing Ukrainian borders, we 
will also arrest the filthy tide of Russian and Western 
pseudoculture (pornography, occultism, sectarianism, psychic 
shamanism, and drug addiction), as well as migration from 
Russia, Caucasus, and Third-World countries. 
  We are against the demo-communist Kravchuk-Zvyahilskyy 
clique, which has plundered Ukraine, imposed Western prices, 
given the green light to speculators, profiteers, and 
corruptionists, and sharply reduced social programs. 
  We do not trust the so-called democratic opposition, which 
humbly fulfills the instructions of the West. Nor do we trust 
the communists, who have always looked toward Moscow -- the 
capital of the Russian evil empire. 
  The DSU supports a decisive offensive, involving the army, 
against the mafia and it endorses the nationalization of 
property accumulated by it. 
  We find it necessary to introduce a state monopoly on 
external trade and major transactions involving hard currency. 
  We advocate the return to state price regulation and 
expropriation of the non-Ukrainian bourgeoisie, which got rich 
through violating the law and exploiting Ukrainians. 
  Land, factories, and other large enterprises must become 
state property. 
  The DSU is against the privatization of Ukraine by aliens. 
For this, it is necessary to adopt a new law on citizenship 
that would guarantee Ukrainians the right to be masters on their 
own land. In accordance with the current law on citizenship, 
the following categories of people have the right to elect and 
to be elected to the Supreme Council: 
  -- veterans of the anti-Ukrainian struggle, former NKVD 
[People's Commissariat for Internal Affairs], KGB, GRU [Main 
Intelligence Directorate], and Ministry of Internal Affairs 
officials who were involved in repressions against the Ukrainian 
people; 
  -- millions of Russians who were brought in to ultimately 
enslave Ukraine; 
  -- separatists of various nationalities; 
  -- criminal mafiosi who are undermining Ukraine's economy. 
  As one can see, the present law on citizenship fixes the 
domination in Ukraine of aliens -- Charodyeyevs, Meshcheryakovs, 
Zvyahilskyys, Hurvitses, and Dvorkises [officials of Russian and 
allegedly Jewish origin].... 
  Thus, the DSU is in favor of adopting a new law on 
citizenship, a law that will guarantee the right to vote 
exclusively to those citizens who are loyal to the Ukrainian 
state. 
  In order to enable us to survive as a nation, preference in 
our state must be given to all things Ukrainian: Ukrainians 
must be given employment on a priority basis, their social 
provision must be promoted, and they must be given cheap housing 
and privatization rights. In making personnel cuts, Ukrainians 
must be the last on the redundancies list. 
  Peasants will receive land for permanent use with the right 
for their children to inherit it, but without the right to sell 
it. The peasant himself will choose the form of economic 
management, but not the political line. Ukrainian peasants will 
be given every possible assistance. 
  It is necessary to increase expenditure on ensuring a proper 
standard of living for officers of the law-enforcement bodies, 
Ukraine's Security Service, and servicemen, and to stop the 
conversion of the military-industrial complex and unilateral 
disarmament. 
  We are against democratic chaos and communist practices and 
for a strong national administration and a mighty Ukrainian 
Army, equipped with nuclear weapons. 
  The members of the DSU will stand for the Supreme Council 
exclusively for the purpose of promoting the Ukrainian national 
idea -- we do not believe that the Ukrainian state can be built 
through voting. Moreover, we believe that elections are a 
wasteful and harmful affair: While we are preparing to vote, 
Russia is preparing war against us for the Crimea and then for 
the whole of Ukraine. 
  It is only a strong Ukrainian military power that can stop 
the Kremlin's adventurers. 
  The preconditions exist for introducing military 
dictatorship: These are chaos, the unpunished growth of 
separatism, the factual departure of the Crimea, Donetsk, and 
Luhansk oblasts from Kiev's jurisdiction, and the escalation of 
crime. 
  The Ukrainian military will come to power by methods that 
are 
traditional in world history. They will be the ones who will, 
within a short period of time, close the borders that will 
delineate our state. 
  Precisely the military will subdue the administrations of 
the 
Crimea and Donbass, which are rapidly moving away from Kiev. 
  Precisely they, through the mass media that they will 
censor, 
will shape public opinion, which will approve the decisive 
establishment of order in Ukraine. 
  The so-called democratization will be curtailed. A 
transitional period will be announced, during which the 
"Ukrainian SSR Constitution" will not be effective. 
  A moratorium will be introduced on elections, referendums, 
and plebiscites. 
  Those parties and other organizations that are financed from 
abroad will be disbanded. 
  Anti-Ukrainian publications will be closed down. 
  Rallies and picketing will be temporarily banned. 
  Newsprint will be nationalized. Private printing houses and 
duplicating equipment will be confiscated by the state. 
  An emergency situation in the economy will be declared. 
  Speculation, pornography, and prostitution will not be 
tolerated. Homosexuals, prostitutes, pimps, and people with no 
fixed abode will be isolated. 
  A psychological campaign will be waged against enemies of 
the 
Ukrainian people through the mass media. Those who continue 
their antistate activity will be isolated and those showing 
disloyalty will be deported. The necessary effect will be 
created through disbanding anti-Ukrainian formations and holding 
several blitz trials of separatists with harsh verdicts. 
  There is no alternative -- national dictatorship alone will 
extricate Ukraine from chaos and will lead it toward achieving 
statehood. 
  We believe in the revival of the Ukrainian people. We are 
looking forward to it. We are bringing it closer. Upheavals 
will inevitably occur -- we are at a historical turning point. 

