Language: <F P=105> Afrikaans </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Tension in Bophuthatswana has increased, 
following a decision by President Lucas Mangope's cabinet not to 
register for the election. A full session of the country's 
parliament will decide next week on participation in the April 
election. Reports of a troop build-up on the South African side 
of the border were denied by the defense force this evening, and 
the South African Police have said they are not aware of any 
unusual police activities in the area. Civil servants have 
still not turned up for work and continue to demand the 
immediate pay-out of their pensions. Soldiers are guarding the 
entrances to government buildings and several streets in the 
capital, Mmabatho. 
  The South African ambassador to Bophuthatswana, Dr. Tjaart 
van der Walt, said this evening there is deep-seated 
dissatisfaction in the civil service, but that he does not 
expect immediate action at this stage. He told Television News 
that a delegation of Bophuthatswana businessmen called on him 
this morning and informed him of their intense disappointment 
over the cabinet's decision. He said he had conveyed this to 
the government of Bophuthatswana. [passage omitted] 
  Foreign Minister Pik Botha says he regrets Bophuthatswana's 
decision not to participate in the election. He said he 
believes that that country cannot survive independently. He 
told Johan Claassen that Bophuthatswana is not as economically 
independent as it claims to be. 
  [Begin Botha recording] President Mangope usually quotes a 
figure, saying, I believe, that they receive up to 70 percent of 
their income from their own sources. That's not true. You see, 
he is including the income from the Customs Union, which of 
course will be stopped after the election. A whole range of 
money transfers will stop. That country will not have the money 
to pay its people. I have never wanted to turn off the tap, 
because I knew that they would then be unable to pay their 
nurses, their teachers, their other government officials. They 
will pay their police and their defense force, but those with 
civilian duties will not be paid, and we will get the blame. 
But I am almost certain that a new government will stop all 
these transfers. So there is only darkness ahead for 
Bophuthatswana. There is no other realistic alternative for 
them but to come and participate in the election, and make their 
contribution to a peaceful southern Africa. [end recording] 

