BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Seyyad Aghababaly] </F>
  [Text] Oil and oil products are important strategic 
commodities. Naturally, the countries that have rich oil 
resources attract the world's attention. The question of oil is 
a matter that concerns the entire world. In fact, a struggle is 
waged on oil in the international arena. Oil and oil products 
are imported by many countries. That creates an opportunity for 
the oil-producing countries to establish their economic 
balances. Meanwhile, a struggle is waged among the influential 
countries and companies to influence the oil-producing 
countries. The matter is better understood if their relations 
with the Arab states and the war between Iraq and Kuwait, not to 
mention the interests that were behind that crisis, are 
considered in depth. 
  Regarding our Republic's resources, Azerbaijan is not among 
the leading oil-producing countries in the world. However, its 
capability of producing an annual 40 million tonnes of oil is an 
important factor. The special quality of Azerbaijan's oil is 
also important. The experts have a better idea on that matter. 
  It is common knowledge that Azerbaijan declared its 
independence after the collapse of the former Soviet Union. A 
state of war has existed in the Republic during the past six 
years. The loss Azerbaijan has suffered totals billions of 
dollars. Undoubtedly, the enemies of our Republic have been 
dissatisfied with President Geydar Aliyev's consistent policy 
and the statement he made some time ago that nothing can force 
Azerbaijan to abandon its independence. Consequently, 
Azerbaijan must benefit from its natural resources with each and 
every opportunity. 
  It must be noted that several oil companies, such as the 
British Petroleum Company, Statoil Company, and Amoco, which are 
among the largest Western companies in the world, are interested 
in establishing bilateral relations with Azerbaijan and 
investing in our country's oil industry. Undoubtedly, the large 
oil companies and the countries they represent, which intend to 
inject billions of dollars into our economy, want peace and 
stability to be established in Azerbaijan. Within that 
framework, the large oil companies may also benefit from the 
political and economic strength of their respective countries. 
Azerbaijan can benefit from that in the political, economic, 
and other fields. 
  President Geydar Aliyev received the leading officials of 
the 
British Petroleum Company and the Statoil Company in Britain in 
February. He supported the signing of an agreement for a 
consortium, which will invest $7 billion on the basis of mutual 
benefits. Aliyev also agreed that the participation of the 
Pennzoil Company, Amoco, Statoil Company, McDermont Company, 
Remco Company, and Turkish Oil Company in the consortium will be 
appropriate. In addition to the $7 billion, a capital of 
$500,000 can be invested with favorable conditions for 
Azerbaijan. The benefit all that may create for our Republic 
will total $118 billion in 30 years. Obviously, real 
opportunities exist to remove the crisis in Azerbaijan's 
economy. With a view to realize those opportunities, the 
Azerbaijan State Oil Company is holding talks with the Western 
oil companies in Istanbul on the joint exploitation of the 
Republic's oil resources. 
  Regarding the status of the Caspian Sea and Russia's 
participation in the exploitation of the oil resources in that 
sea, the participation of Russia's Lukov Oil Company in the 
consortium has been considered. Regarding the exploitation of 
the Azer and Chirag oil fields, those resources are independent 
and Azerbaijan's wealth and no country can have a claim on them, 
including the Russian Federation. 
  It will be recalled that the Russian minister of fuel and 
energy signed the intergovernmental agreement that confirmed 
that the said oil resources belong only to Azerbaijan. The 
agreement was signed during his recent visit to our Republic. 
Meanwhile, Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin has disclosed 
that Russia has not planned to reconsider any matter related to 
the Caspian Sea's status. Therefore, it can be assumed that our 
Republic's oil resources, including the Azer and Chirag oil 
fields, belong only to Azerbaijan and that matters related to 
them can be resolved only within the framework of our Republic's 
jurisdiction. 

