BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Soutik Biswas] </F>
  [Text] ``Is clean air a luxury we can't afford any more?'' 
That was the plaintive question raised by a citizen's body, 
People United for Better Living in Calcutta (PUBLIC), in its 
posters and hoardings on the eve of Earth Day last fortnight. 
The answer may already be a resounding ``yes'' as a startling 
new study by the renowned School of Environmental Studies at 
Calcutta's' Jadavpur University reveals. 
  The study released last month clearly establishes that 
Calcutta's air is the most poisonous in India. In the process 
it demolishes the widely held view that Delhi's air is more 
polluted than Calcutta's. Now the levels of noxious sulphur 
dioxide and nitrogen oxide in Calcutta are at least four times 
more than those of the country's capital. The overall suspended 
particulate matter in Calcutta's atmosphere is three times more 
than that present in Delhi. 
  For Calcuttans, to whom choking comes as naturally as 
breathing, this dubious distinction may come as no surprise. 
There are 11,516 factories, both small and large, spewing 
poisonous gases into the city's air. And adding to the lethal 
cocktail are the exhaust fumes of some 5.25 lakh automobiles. 
Yet, remarkably, the most serious source of urban atmospheric 
pollution may well be a `traditional' one: the coal burning 
chullahs on which about 70 percent of the city's population rely 
for their cooking. 
  For the past 10 years, a team of scholars from Jadavpur 
University's School of Environmental Studies led by its 
director, Dr. Dipankar Chakraborti, have been studying air 
pollution in Calcutta during the peak winter months--from the 
end of October to February--when the city turns into a veritable 
gas chamber. 
  The study found that the concentration of most pollutants 
(such as sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxide and carbon monoxide) 
had shot up alarmingly over the past seven years, but the rise 
in the level of one indicator--suspended particulate matter--was 
particularly sharp. This rose from 800 micrograms per cubic 
metre (mpcm) in 1987 to 1,325 mpcm in 1994. Researchers were 
particularly disturbed to find that a significant proportion of 
the particulate matter count was made up of benzene soluble 
organic matter (BSOM), which can be highly toxic and 
frighteningly carcinogenic. 
  Calcutta's pollution counts are all the more alarming when 
compared to those of the world's other smog capitals. In the 
winter of 1993-94, the average concentration of benzene in 
Calcutta's air was found to be more than 500 mpcm as against Los 
Angeles' figure of only 80 mpcm. While Los Angeles' vehicular 
concentration is unparalleled, Calcutta's chullahs more than 
make up for this. ``The dangerous benzene source is not the 
automobile exhausts alone,'' says Dr. Chakraborti. ``This is 
also due to the rampant coal burning in the city.'' However, 
another alarming revelation--the abnormally high organo-lead 
concentration in the city's air which is more than four times 
that of Los Angeles or London's, has been linked to 
Tetraalkyllead used in petrol. 
  While the noxious substances lacing Calcutta's air are known 
to be harmful, no studies have so far been conducted to 
determine the effect of atmospheric pollution on public health 
in the city. And perhaps many Calcuttans would rather spare 
their nerves than hear about the long term risk of cancer, or of 
the teratogenic (gene altering) pollutants they breathe. But 
there's no escaping the rising levels of asthma and other 
bronchial disorders that are already plaguing the city's 
residents. 
  The only silver lining in this dark pall is the fact that 
Calcutta's air pollution levels dip sharply during the monsoons 
when wind and rain scrub the skies clean for a while. But given 
the extent of the pollution in the five months after October, 
this is little consolation. 
  Clearly, it's time for panic stations, and the March for 
Clean Air by Calcuttans last fortnight was a timely effort. But 
before the city of palaces and gardens turns into a permanent 
gas chamber, the citizens and the Government need to combat the 
menace on a war footing. 

