Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report on Izetbegovic's speech at the founding </F>
session of the SDA City Council in Sarajevo on 12 January: "To 
Love What the People Love"] 
  [Text] The founding session of the Party of 
Democratic Action [SDA] City Council was held in Sarajevo. 
President of the Presidency Alija Izetbegovic attended the 
session; we present certain parts of his speech. 
  "The party has done much since it was founded and we have 
nothing to be ashamed of. We have heard of certain failures, 
which we have to eliminate. They concern mainly our 
carelessness, and it often happens that people who do not belong 
in the party enter it. It is nice to open up, and we should do 
it. Why? What has happened in Bosnia-Herzegovina is what 
happens to a people once in a thousand years. It will take a 
historical distance to assess the terror and the scope of the 
tragedy that has befallen us. This is a terrible thing, and not 
a single stone has been left upon another. If Bosnia has 
changed, if everything has changed, why should we think that the 
people have not changed? Some thought they could make a living 
by making speeches, by elbowing their way to positions, by 
referring to what they had done before. The party should open 
up to everyone who wants to join us in the struggle for 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and this people." 
<H5>  Cleaning Up in the Party </H5>
  ``After 20 months of such trials, you must have a criterion 
for seeing who is still with this people and who is not! 
Mistakes can no longer be forgiven. Earlier, we could select 
people, make mistakes, and justify them by saying we do not know 
how someone is behaving and so on, but no such excuses are valid 
today. Please, have those who have not passed the test removed 
from the party. You will be doing the party a great favor by 
doing so. I would thus use another term apart from the opening 
up of the party, and that is the cleaning up of the party -- 
removing those who do not belong in it. 
  ``Every party has the problem of having honest but 
incompetent people on the one hand, and very competent but very 
dishonest people on the other, and there are often qualms as to 
what to do. In this dilemma I would advise you to opt for the 
honest. It is very rare to have a very competent and at the 
same time honest man. Usually the combination is at the expense 
of either one or the other, but, I emphasize, if we have to 
choose, let us opt for the honest people, and we will surely not 
be wrong. Be especially careful with those who are now 
distributing office premises and apartments, those who have sent 
their children to diplomatic positions, and those who have a 
tendency to get involved in underhand dealings with foreign 
currency. 
  ``We are a large party, but we do not know the technology of 
power. You have heard of the saying that if something is not 
mentioned in the papers, then it did not happen and vice versa. 
It thus happened that, since we did not pay enough attention to 
these media, they organized the resistance, and we did not. Let 
me remind you that reality is one thing, and that the papers 
create another reality. The papers that are in the hands of 
one-tenth of the people create great people in Sarajevo, in 
Bosnia; they determine what each party has done, and so on. 
  ``Several days ago I told the people in the Central Office 
to 
prepare a monograph on the past 20 months of war, to present it 
realistically, without embellishing anything, if it is at all 
possible. I appealed to them to present this history of our 
contribution, our role in the defense and the saving of Bosnia- 
Herzegovina as objectively as possible, merely to put the facts 
together. This monograph will be finished in two to three 
months. A large quantity of material on what we have done in 
Sarajevo and other cities is being collected, and then we will 
invite the other parties to say what they have done. Not what 
they have said, not their stories: We support integral Bosnia, 
we are fighting, we hope -- but what they have truly done to 
preserve Bosnia! 
  ``I will give you the example of Hadzi Sfet, who is one of 
the first heroes to die in the fighting when we tried to take 
over Vogosca. The man gave his life. He went there knowing 
there was little chance of his coming back. I must mention our 
heroes, who are, among others, Safet Zajko and Ramiz Salcin. 
They are all prominent members of the party. We will make a 
list of our heroes, and make it known what the SDA has given in 
the struggle. 
  ``In April 1992 there were terrible attacks in several 
places 
in Bosnia-Herzegovina -- in Mostar, Bijeljina, Sarajevo, and so 
on. The war was flaring up. The Patriotic League could not take 
the blow. It simply could not take it. It resisted as much as 
it could -- in some places to a greater, and in some to a lesser 
extent. Naturally, everything depended on the quality of the 
people, on their courage. In some places the resistance lasted 
10 days, like in Foca, while in Zvornik it lasted much longer. 
It was a heroic battle, I think it lasted 36 days, and everyone 
died in it. Every one of them was a member of the SDA. 
  ``In Sarajevo, apart from the resistance of many 
spontaneous groups, the Patriotic League did the most. The 
former JNA [Yugoslav People's Army] was expelled from the city. 
This was on 2 May 1992. The history of successes and failures, 
of victories and defeats, and of our struggle against the 
occupier, that is, our history, is yet to be written. I again 
appeal to those who are working on this monograph not to make 
any embellishments. What we have done is enough for us to 
proudly say: We have done this! This is our contribution! Now 
you, gentlemen, tell everyone where your members are, where your 
officials are. Naturally, our success is partly the result of 
the contributions of other nations -- Croats, Serbs; members of 
other parties, but the greatest part of this struggle was 
carried out by the Muslim people, by the SDA. That this is not 
known should be attributed to the image that the press has 
created, which never corresponds to reality. This is the case 
even in the places where the press is developed, let alone here, 
where the press is often the monopoly of a small group of people 
who are given some 10,000 German marks to write what they want. 
  ``I would like to state clearly that I do not want an 
Islamic 
republic, but I want Islam to survive in these areas, regardless 
of whether the others like it or not! We here illustrate a 
European Islam, we illustrate a modern Islam. We can do a lot 
in this respect, both for the East and for the West. Perhaps it 
is our mission to portray Islam for what it really is, to 
portray it through civilized, cultured people, which, thank God, 
we have managed so far. God has put us to difficult trials 
here; we have been slaughtered, killed, our women and children 
have been killed, our mosques destroyed. We will not kill women 
and children, we will not destroy churches; this is not our 
policy, although I should say that sometimes this does happen, 
unfortunately. This should not happen. There are a certain 
number of soldiers present at this session, and I would like to 
use this opportunity to tell them this, and they should tell 
everyone else -- we should not be doing this. We will win 
because we will respect other religions, other nationalities, 
and other political opinions, and because we will try to be 
democrats in this great misfortune. 
<H5>  Respect for Others </H5>
  ``The Turks ruled Serbia for 400 years, and yet Decani, 
Sopocani, and Hilandar [Serb monasteries] remained, because the 
people stuck to the religious books and did not destroy other 
people's places of worship. Never follow the principle of an 
eye for an eye. Act according to the law that says that women 
and children must not be killed. Finally, we belong to the 
people who say: We should work, we should fight, and the result 
is not in our hands, because people do not rule history. God 
rules history and things will be as God says. 
  ``This is an opportunity to tell you this -- I had a talk 
with Tudjman, and you know he has offered us the agreement that 
has been called `confederacy,' an `alliance in all fields' and 
so on. Naturally, I received this paper, which Tudjman expected 
me to sign immediately. He was surprised that I had not signed 
it. I was surprised that he was surprised, and I had reason to 
be. He offered something I had not come to discuss. Naturally, 
I said we would consider it, as it is an important document, 
very important, but it requires consideration. 
  ``At dinner the cochairmen were surprised I had not signed 
it. I quoted the Greek proverb: `Timeo Danaos et dona 
ferentes.' Beware of the Greeks bearing gifts! We will take a 
better look at this gift, and if it is a true gift, and not a 
Greek one, we will probably accept it. 
  ``This talk with Mr. Tudjman was rather hard. After a few 
hours of talking I suggested that there be no borders. If you 
want, let Croatia stretch to the Drina River, and us to the sea. 
At a certain moment, Tudjman told me: 'Bear in mind that this 
is a discussion of a dual division of Bosnia. What is being 
offered now is a tripartite division in which the Muslims are 
getting the devil's share.' I had to keep reminding Tudjman 
that I was a representative of a state delegation. 'Remember 
how things were in 1939. The Serbs and the Croats sat down and 
divided Bosnia. This could happen to you. Do you not see the 
realistic danger?' I replied to Mr. Tudjman that there was no 
Alija Izetbegovic then. I exaggerated a little there. 
Naturally, I could not save Bosnia if it were not for the 
200,000 soldiers who are defending it. 
  ``We have to preserve this party -- we should reorganize it, 
transform it, but we have to preserve it. The SDA has become 
the symbol of our people, and a symbol of planetary importance. 
The SDA is very strong on other continents, too, for example in 
Australia. In Germany, in Heidelberg, a great meeting was held 
several days ago. It was a meeting of 29 SDA organizations in 
Germany. Therefore, no matter how much criticism we have 
regarding its failures, the Muslim people cannot renounce this 
party. We will continue to make the party stronger, creating a 
powerful support for our people, primarily here, but also abroad. 
<H5>  Congratulations to the Fighters </H5>
  ``As far as the army is concerned, I congratulate all our 
fighters. We have the main body of this army; its flesh and 
blood, so to speak, are members of the party or its supporters. 
The officers are most often not, and they do not have to be. 
Several days ago I had a meeting at the military headquarters 
in Konjic, which I ended with a short message to the soldiers: 
Be like your people! These people are courageous, clever; love 
what your people love. 
  ``They keep telling us to fight for an integral Bosnia. 
There is no integral Bosnia without the Serbs and the Croats. 
If the Serbs do not want Bosnia, and there are 1.3 million of 
them, then it is difficult. I do not know if the Serbs will 
want an integral Bosnia, and I do not know when. As far as the 
Croats are concerned, I think that most of them do, except for 
Boban! Some of them want to be with us, which is a great hope. 
All the Muslims, most of the Croats, and a smaller number of 
Serbs want Bosnia. After all, more than a half of the people 
want this Bosnia. We still have the right to emphasize the 
principle that we want the integral Bosnia because the majority 
of the people want it. If there is peace, we will try to create 
a republic that will serve as an example, and in which no one 
will be prosecuted for their religion, nationality, or political 
belief. I would also like to add that this will be a country in 
which the Muslim people must never again experience genocide. 
In my opinion, this is the most important law.'' 
  President Izetbegovic continued the speech by talking about 
the necessity for a commitment to improving the social position 
of the soldiers and civilians who have become disabled in the 
course of the aggression, and about the importance of our 
obligation to take care of the children and the families of the 
martyrs in the way that is worthy of their sacrifice for the 
defense and liberation of the homeland. 
  ``There is a specific phenomenon in Sarajevo, a constant 
attempt at making a division. It is the enemies who are doing 
it, remember that. This attempt to fragment the city into parts 
for the simpletons who came from the country and the rest of the 
people -- lately even the people from Sandzak, and others. 
There is a little charm there, but it is a great deception, and 
I do not know if the people are aware of what they are doing. 
We are besieged and we are all the same here, no division is 
allowed. This is an illness that could have terrible 
consequences. Go and count the graves of the Sandzak people 
around Sarajevo, and those who make the divisions will be 
ashamed. This is the more unfortunate section of our people, 
some of them have been left across the Drina River; they are 
there and we are here. This is the way things happened; we 
cannot bring them together, but when we try to divide things in 
an artificial way, it is not good. The people who are here 
should be represented everywhere because they are fighting along 
with us. 
  ``Finally, what else can I say but what a poet said: `We 
swear upon the great God that we will not be slaves!''' These 
were the closing words of the speech with which Alija 
Izetbegovic, president of the Bosnia-Herzegovina Presidency, 
addressed all present. 

