Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Roberto Morejon from the "Evening Information </F>
Review" newscast] 
  [Text] The Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces [FAR], which 
comprises naval, air, and land forces, has decided to achieve 
self-financing without neglecting their combat capabilities. In 
this regard, the initial results reflect the future fulfillment 
of this goal. 
  For three decades, the FAR obtained all of its weapons, 
spare 
parts, and training by way of donations or purchases at modest 
prices. The collpase of the Soviet Union, however, eliminated 
the main source of supplies to the Cuban armed institution. In 
light of this, the FAR's High Command had to draw up emergency 
plans to continue operating without greatly affecting the 
nation's diminished budget. The past three years have marked a 
time of hard work for the FAR to place itself in an adequate 
position to resolve the harsh limitations of resources that the 
nation in general is facing. 
  As a first step, the High Command designed a program to 
reduce surplus equipment and to rationalize several types of 
armed forces, particularly the air forces and Cuban 
Revolutionary Navy forces that have been incorporated into the 
ground forces. Under the guidance of the High Command, experts, 
and its best technicians, the FAR initiated a conservation 
process by which a sizable number of rifles, aircraft, and other 
materiel were demobilized and subsequently preserved. These are 
being kept in appropriate places until the nation can purchase 
the necessary fuel. 
  The High Command also encouraged the search for initiatives 
among lower and mid-level officers to use the remaining supplies 
to keep the equipment combat ready. This, however, is being 
carried out with a minimum of fuel, lubricants, ammunition, and 
spare parts. Meanwhile, the FAR developed the production of food 
supplies, except for salt and sugar. Currently, it can be said 
that all of the units in the nation are self-sufficient in rice, 
an indispensable item in every Cuban's diet. 
  Our nation's military personnel are also very involved in 
mariculture in an attempt to secure sources of protein in their 
daily diets, in addition to the cultivation of plants for 
therapeutic uses that make up 70 percent of the medicines used 
by the units. In this way, the Cuban FAR is trying to become 
one of the less costly institutions of its type in the world for 
the public [word indistinct]. This will help reduce 
expenditures in the Cuban state's limited budget. 

