CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Market Economy Rests On Legal Construction"] </F>
  [Text] There can be only one criterion for judging 
all aspects of legal construction: Does it contribute to the 
creation of a market economy and the development of productive 
forces? Does it enhance national strength overall? Will it help 
raise the people's living standard? 
  During the transition from one economic system to 
another, we must replace old rules with new ones promptly. 
Law-making must be the trailblazer and set the pace. Reform is 
simply political reform. We must change the system in accordance 
with the law. Use the law to guide, regulate, control, 
regularize, and ensure during the maturation of the market 
economy and in its operations by taking advantage of the law's 
special characteristics--its uniformity, coerciveness, openness, 
and stability. 
  Even as we accelerate law-making, we must step up 
corresponding judicial work and law enforcement. Use legal means 
to regularize and guide public behavior in the market economy 
and ensure normal activities in all links of the social chain: 
production, circulation, distribution, and consumption, thereby 
ensuring that the market mechanism fulfills its role and 
facilitates the accelerated development and continuation of the 
market economy. 
  In a certain sense, the market economy is a risk 
economy, which makes it even more necessary to strengthen the 
rule of law so as to avoid and manage risk. 
  The invigoration of the economy during the past few years 
has 
been accompanied by real estate wars, stock market wars, cotton 
war, steel war, and petroleum war, to name a few. Everything has 
happened, however bizarre. After Deng Xiaoping toured the south 
and made some speeches there, the economy was further energized 
and picked up additional momentum. Meanwhile, serious problems 
have proliferated in economic life. Examples: 
  A sharp rise in economic disputes. Between 
January and November 1993, the nation's courts tried 2,807,000 
assorted cases. Of this total, cases involving economic disputes 
rose 36.6 percent over the same period a year ago, while cases 
involving the maritime law and commercial law shot up 41.33 
percent. The total contested amount in economic cases brought to 
trial in all China reached 56.2 billion yuan, up 113.39 percent 
compared with the same period a year ago. 
  Proliferation of counterfeit and shoddy products. 
Between January and July 1992 trademark counterfeiting cases 
handled by the nation's procuratorial agencies numbered 1,911 in 
all, an increase of 232.9 percent compared with the 547 cases 
processed in the same period a year ago. Of these 1,911 cases, 
747 were major cases each involving over 10,000 yuan, up 375.8 
percent over the same period a year ago, when 157 similar cases 
were handled. In 1993 consumers' associations across the nation 
processed a total of 341,196 complaints, up 9.43 percent from 
1992, and recovered 204 million yuan in economic losses for 
consumers. Most complaints involved over-priced but poor-quality 
shoes and garments, problems caused by the use of cosmetics, 
injuries and deaths caused by gas water burners, injuries caused 
by beer can bursting, and quality problems pertaining to 
housing, motorcycles, and automobiles. The Beijing consumers' 
association handled 4,773 complaints from consumers in the first 
half of 1993, up 32 percent from the corresponding period in 
1992. On 16 December 1993, the Beijing technology supervision 
bureau tested 138 randomly selected commodities from five stores 
located at Landao Building and others. Of the 138 commodities, 
99, or 71.7 percent, passed the quality test, while 12, or 8.7 
percent, were found to be shoddy in quality. Shoddy products, 
counterfeited goods, and false advertising have been called the 
three leading public hazards in economic life today. 
  Stock market disturbances becoming frequent. There 
was a mad scramble by hundreds of thousands of people in 
Shanghai to purchase shares in early 1992. Similar episodes of 
frenzied share purchasing happened in June in Xiamen and in 
August in Shenzhen, the former involving hundreds of thousands 
of people, the latter close to a million. As a result, social 
order was badly disrupted. On 20 December 1993, the Shanghai 
stock exchange index plummeted 117 points (a precipitous drop of 
13 percent), the worst one-day decline on record. "Black Monday" 
left Shanghai's 5 million shareholders in shock and was a blow 
to social stability. By late 1993, there were already 15 million 
shareholders nation-wide, their ranks growing by more than 
10,000 every day on the average. The total value of shares being 
traded on the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges reached 250 
billion and 150 billion yuan, respectively. 
  Unbridled land and real estate speculation. The 
number of real estate enterprises in all China, which totalled 
just 3,000 in late 1991, shot up to almost 10,000 in 1992. 
Hainan alone boasted over 2,000 such companies in the first half 
of 1993. As part of its retrenchment effort aimed at cooling the 
economy, the government closed down 500. There were 1,500 
trading management agencies in addition to more than 100 trading 
forums. Some areas vie with one another to build the most 
development zones, which stood at 2,700 by late 1992, a 20-fold 
increase over the 117 in 1991. Between them the 2,700 
development zones take up 15,000 square kilometers of land, thus 
siphoning off into the hands of real estate owners and dealers 
hundreds of billions of yuan worth of return on state land. The 
state has not been fairly compensated. Whopping profits have led 
to a gradual increase in illegal speculative activities 
involving land and houses and created this contradiction. On the 
one hand, real estate speculators are sitting on almost 100 
million square kilometers of housing; on the other hand, the 
public has to grapple with a housing shortage. According to 
figures compiled by the State Statistical Bureau, there is a 
housing inventory of 50 million square kilometers nationwide in 
recent years. Thus a huge amount of farmland was taken up but 
not really utilized; land was allowed to lie idle. Peasants 
driven from farmland are joining the flow of migrants. Some have 
been driven to make trouble. There have even been cases of armed 
fighting. The upshot is a serious social problem. 
  Illegal fund-raising on the rise. Shen Taifu [3088 
1132 4395] of the Great Wall Machinery and Electronics 
High-Technology Company, for instance, swindled 1 billion yuan. 
His notarization organization in Beijing, the Zhongcheng 
Accounting Company, was involved in a false notarization case. 
  Swindling cases involving huge sums of money becoming 
commonplace. The Hengshui County branch of the Agricultural 
Bank was involved in a $10 billion credit card scam. It was also 
guilty of conspiring with a foreign swindler. Given the massive 
amount of money involved--equivalent to one-half of China's 
foreign exchange reserves--this case has disastrous consequences. 
  First, it was tax evasion and cheating. Now people inside 
and 
outside the country conspire to rob the treasury of vast sums in 
export rebates. In 1984 the Chinese government introduced an 
export rebate policy under which several circulation taxes paid 
on goods shipped overseas are returned to the appropriate export 
enterprises. But the policy is frequently exploited by criminals 
to defraud the government of tax rebates. In 1992 151 
enterprises were found to have obtained as much as 749 million 
yuan in tax rebates illegally, while the actual amount should be 
204 million yuan. In 1993 procuratorial agencies uncovered an 
organized ring that had been defrauding the government of tax 
debates. Investigators discovered that 71 state cadres took part 
in the scam and over 40 enterprises issued a total of 3 billion 
yuan worth of bogus invoices to cheat the government. 
Irrationalities in the fiscal system have persuaded some local 
leaders to see tax cheating as a shortcut to solving their 
fiscal problems, shaking off poverty, and achieving wealth. 
  Manufacturing of and trafficking in counterfeit 
currency on the rise. In 1984 a mere dozen cases of 
currency counterfeiting were reported nationwide. The number 
soared to 3,000 in 1991, when counterfeited bills worth 20 
million yuan were recovered, as were 400,000 yuan worth of state 
treasury bonds. Also uncovered were 30 plates for printing fake 
renminbi bills, 4 plates for counterfeiting state treasury 
bonds, and 13 plates for printing U.S. dollar bills. 
  Cases of fake drugs increasing. There were 15,000 
fake drug cases in 1991, up from 13,650 cases in 1990. 
Nationwide, as many as 33,857 enterprises are involved in the 
wholesale of drugs, a 1,500 percent increase over the early 
1980's. Of these drug enterprises, at least 50 percent are 
operating illegally, luring customers by offering hefty sales 
commissions. 
  More and more checkpoints being set up to demand 
payments. In recent years there has been a growing trend 
toward claiming a piece of land along a highway as one's turf 
and collecting payment from everybody who comes by. In Hebei 
Province alone, 26 agencies have set up 1,796 checkpoints along 
the highways and blanketed the area with an army of payment 
collectors. They stop and check every passing vehicle and 
invariably slap the drivers with a fine. Payments are demanded 
and fines imposed as arbitrarily as the checkpoints are set up. 
In 1991 alone, one agency collected 40 million yuan in highway 
fines, according to its receipts. 
  Enterprises may be tottering on the brink of bankruptcy 
but cannot actually go out of business. It has been five 
years since the Bankruptcy Law went into effect, but reform in 
other areas, such as account settlement by banks, assets and 
liabilities appraisal, order of transfer, and the social 
security system, has failed to keep up with it. The absence of a 
bankruptcy mechanism has made it difficult for enterprises to go 
bankrupt. Statistically, about one-quarter of China's state 
enterprises have been losing money for years. More recently, as 
many as one-third are openly in the red. Even if just 1 percent 
of state enterprises are unprofitable, that would be over 300 
companies. Yet fewer than 50 state enterprises actually went 
bankrupt during the entire 5-year period, less than 0.1 percent 
of the number of enterprises in a developed country that go 
bankrupt each year. Thus money-losing enterprises have become a 
bottomless pit that the state has no choice but to cover. 
  Mounting fire-related losses. In 1993 fires 
directly caused almost 900 billion yuan in economic losses, the 
worst since the PRC was founded in terms of the number of fires 
and their concentration. About 1,500 people were killed and the 
magnitude of direct economic losses was four times that 10 years 
ago. The fires occurred because people were so preoccupied with 
the pursuit of profits that they ignored fire safety. 
  All these shocking cases and events have seriously disrupted 
the economic order and resulted in all types of losses. The 
failure to make laws promptly and loopholes in the judicial 
system have combined to deprive the state of rules it can 
otherwise invoke as it goes about fulfilling its regulatory and 
control functions. At a time when the shortcomings of the old 
system have not been eliminated, we are confronted with new 
problems, which prevents the new system from working the way it 
should. 
  Even as we fully endorse the role of the market economy, we 
should realize the drawbacks inherent in it and the weaknesses 
and other undesirable things that may occur or have occurred in 
the market economy. The rise of the market economy has been 
followed by the emergence of market monopolies and local 
protectionism, by a drop in the output of public consumer goods 
and a steady increase in fake products and shoddy goods, illegal 
operations, and scams, by large amounts of public resources 
being wasted or damaged, by worsening environmental pollution 
and ecological degradation, and by widening income gaps among 
households. A string of activities in recent years aimed at 
cracking down on forgers, counterfeiters, smugglers; tax 
inspections; efforts to stop arbitrary fund-raising, 
apportionment, and fine collection; walks for quality and walks 
for the environment; and the anti-pornography drive have been 
highly successful. But organizing and launching short-term 
anti-crime sweeps can only solve a problem temporarily. 
(Sometimes anti-crime sweeps are overdone. We try to cover too 
much ground and crack down too hard.) The criminals re-emerge, 
more ferocious than before, when a campaign has spent its force. 
Result: The more you crack down, you worse the crimes. We have 
been treating the symptoms, not the disease. It takes much more 
than "decontrol," "policies," and eliminating administrative 
management to develop a market economy. What is even more 
important is to nurture sound market economic relations. And the 
only way to do that is to intensify legal construction and 
establish a market order. During the transition from one set of 
economic institutions to another, new rules must be adopted 
swiftly to replace the old ones. Since the old rules no longer 
apply under the new order, new rules must be put in place 
immediately. Otherwise, there will be chaos. 
  Legal construction today still fails to meet the 
requirements 
of the situation and is still not being taken really seriously 
by the various sectors, areas, and leaders at all levels. Deng 
Xiaoping told the 3d Plenum of the 11th CPC Central Committee 
back in 1979 that "we must institutionalize democracy and write 
it into law so that the system and the law will not change 
because of a change in leadership." The acceleration of China's 
modernization requires us to rule the nation in accordance with 
the law and earn the trust of the people and the world. In the 
new era of deepening reform and opening up China even more, we 
must further democracy, strengthen the rule of law, and avoid 
the rule of man. There have been many delays in the promulgation 
of a series of important laws badly needed to regulate and 
manage economic relations. To establish a socialist market 
economy, we must set up a coherent system of legal regulation 
and control. Half-hearted regulation and control will 
inevitably lead to chaos in the market economy, even economic 
life as a whole. To scale new heights, economic 
construction must proceed in tandem with legal construction. The 
two supplement each other and both are indispensable. 
  To meet the urgent need of using the law to promote reform, 
the standing committee of the National People's Congress and the 
ministries involved under the State Council are scrambling to 
formulate economic laws including a securities law, a budget 
law, a labor law, a foreign trade law, a central bank law, a 
commercial bank law, a notes law, an insurance law, and a 
futures trading law, etc. It is hoped that they will be 
introduced in close succession in 1994. 
  In short, a market economy not based on legal 
construction, in other words, a market lacking the rules and 
order of competition, will lead to chaos in the market economy, 
even in all areas of social and economic life. 
  The arduous task of building a socialist market economy not 
only represents a challenge to economists, but also presents a 
challenge and an opportunity to legal experts. The 
traditional theories, concepts, and methods of the academic 
legal community and legal circles have come under heavy attack 
and undergoing fundamental changes. In the end they will achieve 
a great leap forward. 

