SUMMARY 
                                None of the leaders of the former Yugoslavia, whether Serb, 
Muslim, or Croat, has expressed any interest in seeing the Serbs 
join the Muslim-Croatian federation in Bosnia-Herzegovina that 
was called for in the 1 March Washington agreement.  Serbian 
leaders, while rejecting a federation, have suggested forming a 
confederation loosely linking the Serb entities, Croatia and the 
proposed federation of Muslims and Croats in Bosnia.  However, 
Croatian and Muslim leaders have rejected any confederal 
relations between Bosnia and the so-called Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia (FRY, Serbia and Montenegro). 
                                     END SUMMARY 
   Having already expressed their strong opposition to joining the 
proposed Muslim-Croatian federation in Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
Bosnian Serb leaders, along with the Serbs of Croatia, are 
pressing for at minimum a confederation of all Serb-populated 
territories in former Yugoslavia.  Serb leaders in Bosnia and 
Croatia have reiterated their longstanding claims that their 
respective territories never seceded from Yugoslavia--as did the 
Bosnian and Croatian republics--and thus have the right to remain 
united with the FRY.  For example, Nikola Koljevic, "vice 
president" of the so-called Republic of Srpska (RS), demanded the 
right for the Bosnian Serbs to have "very close links" with the 
FRY since, "legally speaking," they "never left Yugoslavia" 
(Belgrade radio, 14 March).  Similarly, Milan Martic, "president" 
of the so-called Republic of Serbian Krajina (RSK) in Croatia, 
maintaining that the RSK never seceded from Yugoslavia, has 
called for establishing "everlasting connections with the FRY" 
(Politika, 10 March).  This apparently represents a significant 
and possibly coordinated shift in emphasis, since leaders of both 
entities had recently emphasized their contrary claims that their 
"republics" should be recognized as separate, sovereign states. 
   The Bosnian Serbs have not ruled out some type of future 
political links with the Muslim-Croatian federation in Bosnia- 
Herzegovina and Croatia.  Bosnian Serb "President" Radovan 
Karadzic suggested that the RS is willing to consider "broader 
integration" of the territories of former Yugoslavia, broaching 
the idea of joining Croatia and the FRY together "into some 
relationship" with the RS and the RSK (Tanjug, 14 March). 
Similarly, although Momcilo Krajisnik, president of the Bosnian 
Serb assembly, described the prospect of the Serbs joining the 
Muslim-Croatian federation as "unnatural, illogical, and 
unacceptable," he said the Serbs would "accept" talks on a 
"future modality" for linking the three peoples (Tanjug, 12 
March). 
   At the same time, another Bosnian Serb official set conditions 
for joining the negotiations on the fate of Bosnia-Herzegovina 
that would almost preclude Serb participation.  After delivering 
what Krajisnik said would be the "official" Serb position to 
Russian special envoy Vitaliy Churkin in Belgrade on 14 March 
(Tanjug, 13 March), Koljevic insisted that the Serbs would 
participate in talks with the Croats and Muslims only "on an 
equal footing, which would mean without sanctions" on the FRY. 
(Belgrade radio, 14 March).  Suggesting that he would prefer to 
see the Washington agreement derailed, Karadzic has called for a 
return to the Geneva negotiations, with the EU taking the lead 
back from the United States (Tanjug, 15 March). 
   Belgrade's Stance 
   Although the leadership of the FRY, including Serbian President 
Slobodan Milosevic, has not rejected the Washington agreement out 
of hand, Belgrade has not indicated any willingness to negotiate 
within the terms of the plan.  Milosevic stopped just short of 
rejecting the plan after talking with Greek Foreign Minister 
Karolos Papoulias, releasing a statement that made no mention of 
the plan but endorsed a peace settlement based on the November 
1993 European Union plan for a union of three sovereign states in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina (Tanjug, 11 March).  At the same time, 
apparently not wanting to be held responsible for rejecting the 
Washington agreement, Milosevic maintained what Churkin called a 
"flexible attitude" toward a Bosnian settlement at their 14 March 
meeting, a point that was stressed on Milosevic-controlled 
Belgrade television (Belgrade TV, 14 March).  Other comments from 
Yugoslav leaders and media have reiterated the position that the 
Serbs do not oppose a Muslim-Croatian federation as long as it 
does not threaten Serbian interests, while at the same time 
expressing skepticism that such a federation can long survive 
(Belgrade radio, 3 March; Belgrade TV, 12 March). 
   Bosnian Government Stand 
   The Bosnian Government has rejected Serbian proposals for 
confederal ties linking Bosnia-Herzegovina with the FRY and 
insisted that the Serbs will not be allowed to alter the borders 
of the country by seceding with the territory they control. 
While inviting the Serbs to sign on to the Washington agreement, 
President Alija Izetbegovic flatly declared during an interview 
with Zagreb television that a confederation between Bosnia- 
Herzegovina and the FRY is "out of the question."  He also warned 
that the Serbs would not be allowed to "snatch away part of 
Bosnia and attach it to Serbia."  Although he did not rule out 
the possibility of "certain forms of cooperation"--specifically 
"economic cooperation" --between the states of the former 
Yugoslavia, he contended that no "serious, responsible people" 
were considering the creation of a "new Yugoslavia" (Zagreb TV, 9 
March). 
   Croatia's Stance 
   The Croatian Government has also rejected the possibility of 
confederal ties between the FRY and either Croatia or Bosnia- 
Herzegovina.  Asked about Krajisnik's proposal to link the 
Serbian "states" with Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina, Foreign 
Minister Mate Granic flatly declared it "absolutely impossible" 
to accept.  He further stressed that "under no circumstances" 
would Croatia consider "any kind of relationship" linking it 
"directly or indirectly" with the FRY.  Attributing the proposal 
to Churkin, Granic said that he had conveyed his negative views 
"very firmly" to both the Russians and the Bosnian Government 
(Zagreb TV, 13 March).  Although President Franjo Tudjman has not 
directly rejected ties between the Bosnian state and the FRY, he 
did offhandedly dismiss the idea during a 7 March press 
conference in responding to a question on the subject (Zagreb 
radio, 7 March). 
   Implications 
   The Croat and Bosnian Governments' refusal to accept a confederal 
relationship between the Bosnian Serbs and the FRY appears to 
doom any possibility, however remote, that the Serbs will agree 
to the Washington plan.  In the near term, the Serbs are likely 
to continue combat operations to secure territory linking their 
enclaves into one entity, with the aim of declaring the new lines 
of demarcation to be the borders of their republic.  Although 
they may be willing to make territorial concessions in exchange 
for concessions from the Bosnian Government and the international 
community--particularly lifting the UN sanctions on Belgrade- 
-they are likely to continue to pursue the goal of eventual union 
with the FRY and the RSK. 
   (AUTHOR:  NASH.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF 
ANALYST, EUROPE/LATIN AMERICA GROUP - (703) 733-6120) 
CB 16/2003z Mar 

