Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, Feb. 3 KYODO -- A senior official of the 
opposition Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) expressed doubts 
Thursday [3 February] over the government's planned introduction 
of a new 7 percent "national welfare tax" to finance a 6 
trillion yen income tax cut. 
  Ryutaro Hashimoto, chairman of the party's Policy Affairs 
Research Council, told a news conference he could not tell the 
difference between the new tax and the current consumption tax. 
  But he voiced support for a cut in income tax cut announced 
at the same time as the welfare tax in a news conference by 
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa in the early hours of Thursday. 
  Hashimoto said the income tax cut will encourage spending by 
consumers and help recovery from the prolonged economic slump. 
  Hosokawa said his coalition government has decided to 
introduce a new 7 percent national welfare tax to finance a 6 
trillion yen tax cut which will be part of government efforts to 
boost the sluggish economy. 
  He told the news conference the government wants to 
introduce 
the new tax on goods and services on April 1, 1997. 
  But the Social Democratic Party (SDP), the largest of the 
seven parties in Hosokawa's coalition, strongly opposed the plan 
and threatened to withdraw its ministers from the cabinet. 
  Former Finance [Minister] Michio Watanabe called Hosokawa's 
plan to introduce a "national welfare tax" as an "important 
decision and the sole direction" the government can take. 
  Replying to reporters' question, Watanabe said opposition 
voiced by the LDP to the new tax plan lacks explanation on how 
to balance the planned income tax cut. 
  The LDP "must explain how to implement an income tax break," 
said Watanabe, who heads the third largest LDP faction. 
  He also criticized the SDP's opposition to the "welfare 
tax," 
saying the party is not qualified to be a ruling party. 
  Meanwhile, former Primer Minister Kiichi Miyazawa said the 
government should give priority to measures to boost the slumped 
economy which can bring about an increase in overall tax 
revenues. 
  Criticizing the government's plan to create the new tax, 
Miyazawa said he had no idea what basis the figure of 7 percent 
was set. 
  "I oppose the discussion (over the tax) without evidence of 
figures such as economic growth rates," Miyazawa said. 

