BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Ankara Show Television in Turkish at 
1920 GMT on 18 April carries a report on rumors that the PKK 
[Workers Party of Kurdistan] is settling in Armenia because the 
Turkish security forces operations succeeded in forcing the PKK 
to pullout of northern Iraq. The footage begins with "32d Day" 
correspondent Mithat Bereket reporting from (Samiram), the 
biggest Kurdish village in Armenia approximately 30 km from the 
Turkish border. The correspondent states "at first glance there 
is no concrete evidence of PKK presence in the village." The 
correspondent concludes his report in (Samiram) by saying that 
the villagers are very sympathetic to the Kurdish cause. 
  The report continues from Yerevan where Bereket attempts to 
procure permission to visit Lachin, "a point of interest because 
it is rumored that PKK camps are being established." The 
correspondent continues by saying "the Nagorno-Karabakh 
representative (Manvel Sarkisyan) claimed there are no PKK camps 
in Lachin." Permission to visit is not granted because Bereket 
is a Turkish citizen therefore "our doubts regarding PKK camps 
in Lachin continue." 
  The report continues with the correspondent interviewing the 
Armenian Vice President Levon Zurabyan [name, title as received] 
in Yerevan who says: "It is regretful that there are claims of 
PKK camps in Armenia. It is out of question that Armenia will 
support such a thing. Our borders are under closely controlled. 
We have not given permission to any person or group to enter 
and establish camps and we are not thinking of granting such a 
permission. We are behaving with great sensitivity regarding 
this issue. Of course, we have a degree of influence on the 
people of Nagorno-Karabakh, but do not forget that they have 
their own will and our influence is not endless." 
  The report continues with Show Television's Mehmet Ali 
Birand 
calling the Turkish Interior Minister Nahit Mentese on the 
telephone and asking whether there are any intelligence reports 
on the PKK establishing itself in Lachin and making use of 
Armenian territories. Mentese answers that the PKK might be 
using those territories since "there are no places they are not 
making use of" adding that the Turkish Government is following 
the issue. 
  The report concludes with the recent security forces 
operations in northern Iraq and Mentese's details on the issue. 

