BFN 

<F P=106> [Lionel Barber and David Marsh report: "EMU Fans Ready To </F>
Move the Goalposts"] 
  [Text] In Britain, the issue of economic and monetary 
union (EMU) has lit a fuse along the European election trail. 
In the rest of the continent, the subject is being given a lot 
less attention. None the less, the question of whether policies 
aimed at establishing EMU are consistent with efforts to bring 
down unemployment has explosive potential. 
  Across the continent, the fiercest discussions over whether 
EMU will take place by the Maastricht target dates of 1997 or 
1999 are taking place in northern Europe. 
  Despite Britain's "opt-out" from participation in a single 
currency, `Eurosceptics' in the UK Conservative party this week 
have focused on the EMU plan in their calls for a referendum on 
the shape of Europe. 
  In Germany and France, left- and right-wing anti-Maastricht 
parties are aiming for support on the somewhat contradictory 
basis that the EMU plan will undermine both German and French 
sovereignty. 
  In France, support for the franc fort policy remains solid 
among the political establishment. Yesterday's 0.5 point cut in 
Bundesbank interest rates will give the Bank of France more 
leeway to bring down interest rates and speed recovery from 
France's longest period of economic doldrums since the second 
world war. 
  On the other hand if anti-EMU parties -- including dissident 
conservatives led by Mr Philippe de Villiers, the right-wing 
National Assembly deputy -- gain more than 20 percent of the 
votes on June 12, that could unsettle France's pro-Maastricht 
stance. 
  By contrast, public debate on EMU in southern countries is 
far more muted. In Italy and Spain -- traditionally strong 
supporters of EMU but beset by domestic political uncertainties 
-- EMU comes well down the list of election issues. 
  The new government in Rome, headed by Mr Silvio Berlusconi, 
appears likely to take a more nationalistic line in promoting 
Italian interests in Brussels. Pushing for the lira's early 
return into the mainstream of European monetary integration is 
not expected to be one of them. 
  Nevertheless supporters of EMU across the continent have 
recovered their poise after setbacks caused by the ERM [Exchange 
Rate Mechanism] exit of Britain and Italy in September 1992 and 
the emergency widening of fluctuation bands to 15 percent last 
August. By deterring speculators, wider ERM bands have 
reinforced currency stability. 
  Since last summer, ERM central banks have lowered interest 
rates only gradually rather than resorting to competitive 
devaluations. "The spread (of interest rates) between Belgium, 
the Netherlands, Luxembourg, France and Germany is now so small 
that we are virtually in a monetary union," says one central 
bank governor. 
  One problem is that the Maastricht Treaty limits EMU 
participation to currencies which respect "the normal 
fluctuation bands for two years." However, in coming months 
European finance ministers are expected to agree a generous 
interpretation of this condition. They are likely simply to 
apply the test of whether exchange rate movements have been 
minimal. 
  The European Commission has set up a study group to prepare 
the change to the ECU as a new European currency. An advisory 
report is due by the end of October. Commission officials say 
they are using Britain's "exemplary" decimalisation in 1971 as a 
model for a single currency. 
  A large stumbling block is, however, the slow recovery from 
recession. Sluggish economic performance and rising government 
borrowing and debt levels have seriously impeded EU states' 
ability to fulfil some of the most important "convergence 
criteria" set down at Maastricht to determine countries' 
eligibility to take part in EMU. 
  The treaty lays down four numerical criteria determining 
countries' EMU suitability, concerning inflation rates, budget 
deficits, interest rates and debt levels. No EU [European 
Union] state last year fulfilled all four criteria, although 
five -- France, Ireland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and the UK 
-- satisfied three of them. 
  For watchers of the Maastricht criteria, Germany is a worry. 
Germany satisfied only two of the criteria last year, and German 
public sector debt will exceed the target of 60 percent of GDP 
in 1995 because of extra debt stemming from German unification. 
  Even for some low inflation countries, rigid adherence to 
the 
Maastricht debt targets will be very difficult. 
  An analysis by Belgium's Finance Ministry shows Belgium 
would 
need a primary budget surplus (the budgetary balance before 
interest charges) of 6 percent of GDP a year for the next 15 
years to reduce public sector debt to 60 percent of GDP by 2009. 
  The Maastricht Treaty does allow for a liberal 
interpretation 
of whether member states comply with the criteria. Countries 
deemed as tackling their deficits seriously would have a chance 
of joining EMU if they can prove that their public finances are 
moving in the desired direction. 
  But to supporters of EMU, Belgium remains a natural 
candidate 
for a "hard core" currency club, despite its high government 
debt. This point was made in Paris last month by Mr Alain 
Lamassoure, the French minister for European affairs, who said 
forcefully the convergence criteria had to be "complemented by 
political considerations." 
  Public statements like this however, can be 
counter-productive. In the light of public worries in Germany 
about the replacement of the D-Mark by a European currency, 
politicians in Germany are allergic to suggestions that the 
convergence criteria could be diluted. 
  In a ruling firmly backed by the Bonn government, the German 
constitutional court laid down last October that EMU could go 
ahead only on the basis of strict adherence to the criteria. 
One senior German politician says in private: "Anyone who 
thinks he can circumvent them (the criteria) by political 
considerations will have to go before our High Court" -- a sign 
of the political battles over EMU in store. 

