BFN 

<F P=106> [Klaus Rost report: "Critical Toward Europe -- But No </F>
Stubborn Opposition"] 
  [Text] Europe is going to vote -- and, for the first time, 
the east Germans are permitted to participate. Shortly before 
12 June, only 42 percent of the east Germans are certain that 
they will participate in the election. They reject the 
political union under a common European government and the 
European Currency Unit. They would welcome a common foreign and 
security policy. The Christian Democratic Union [CDU] is moving 
up slightly in the new laender. Today, we are publishing data 
gained by Infratest Burke Berlin in a fourth poll exclusively 
for NEUE ZEIT. 
  -- Which party do you like best at the moment? 
  In May 1994, the CDU was able to catch up a bit with its 
main 
competitor in eastern Germany. Even though the Social 
Democratic Party of Germany [SPD] still has the highest 
popularity value with 24 percent, the CDU is catching up: In 
May, its share rose to 20 percent, following 16 percent in April. 
  Obviously, the CDU is increasingly managing to regain 
voters, 
who had distanced themselves from the CDU without finding a 
lasting one in any other party. In view of the slightly more 
positive signals from the economy, more than just a few are 
turning back to the chancellor's party. The CDU is benefiting 
most strongly from the shrinking of that group of undecided 
people who do not like any party. Their proportion declined 
from 37 percent in February to 32 percent now -- a difference 
that corresponds rather closely to the gains of the CDU (+ 6 
percent). 
  The CDU particularly gained in popularity in Saxony-Anhalt 
and in Thuringia. However, in Berlin and in Brandenburg, too, it 
gained popularity over the past month -- in Brandenburg for the 
first time to the detriment of the ruling SPD. Alliance 
90/Greens were able to improve their standing (to 10 percent), 
the Party of Democratic Socialism [PDS] went down a bit (8 
percent). The Free Democratic Party [FDP] is still among the 
splinter parties regarding its popularity. These figures, 
however, just reflect the current mood in the new laender, but 
they do not permit any deductions as to the real behavior of the 
people at the Bundestag election in October 1994. 
  -- How do you assess the work of your land government? 
  Compared with other east German laender, the Saxon Land 
government gets the best marks from its own people: 58 percent 
of those polled are satisfied with its work; in February this 
was true for 55 percent. It has thus overtaken the Brandenburg 
government, which has lost in approval and gets 50 percent. 
  Minister-President Manfred Stolpe's team is thus the only 
one 
among the land governments that has had to accept tangible 
losses. Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Thuringia, Berlin, and 
Saxony-Anhalt got worse marks, but they were able to gain 
considerably in approval. The greatest leap was achieved by the 
grand coalition in Berlin: Following a 21-percent approval in 
February, now 37 percent of Berliners are satisfied with the 
Senat's work. The proportion of dissatisfied people is, 
however, still considerably higher in all laender with the 
exception of Saxony and Brandenburg. The bottom place on the 
list is still occupied by the government in Saxony-Anhalt, even 
though the potential effects of the Magdeburg riots on Ascension 
Day have not yet been taken into consideration in this study. 
  -- Which politicians have convinced you most? 
  Like his party as a whole, the current Chancellor Helmut 
Kohl 
has also managed to catch up a bit. From April to May, the 
proportion of those who find his policy convincing rose from 25 
to 29 percent. His distance from challenger Scharping is thus 1 
percentage point. At the beginning of the year he was still 12 
points behind Scharping. Negative assessments are still 
dominant for both of them. A total of 52 percent think that 
Scharping's work is not convincing, as many as 65 percent think 
the same of Kohl's performance. However, the proportion of 
those who are unable to assess the SPD candidate -- 19 percent 
-- is clearly higher than for Kohl (6 percent). 
  All other federal politicians of the various parties 
presented for assessment also show a negative balance sheet. 
Theo Waigel gets the worst marks. Only in the case of Rita 
Suessmuth, followed by Norbert Bluem, are positive and negative 
assessments approximately balanced. Of the federal politicians 
in the new laender, Angela Merkel was able to improve a bit. 
Gregor Gysi, on the other hand, lost 5 percentage points. 
  In the new laender, the SPD continues to benefit from the 
leading team in Brandenburg; Regine Hildebrandt and Manfred 
Stolpe. However, Stolpe's power of conviction has obviously 
suffered as a result of the break of the SPD-FDP-Greens 
coalition in Brandenburg. In May, for the first time, negative 
marks for him dominate. In his own land he lost most with 7 
percent, but he still need not worry too much with the remaining 
70 percent of approval. Berlin Mayor Eberhard Diepgen can show 
a balanced result: 47 percent of the Berliners find him 
convincing, 48 percent do not. Bernhard Vogel in Thuringia and 
Berndt Seite in Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania were able to gain 
a bit, but, just as in the case of Saxony-Anhalt Minister 
President Christoph Bergner, negative assessments for them 
clearly dominate. 
  -- Which party represents German interests in the European 
Union [EU] best? 
  The parties still have a lot to do. Asked which party seems 
to be best suited to represent Germany's interest in the 
European Parliament, one out of four east Germans (24 percent) 
are still unable to name a party. Almost one in 10 (8 percent) 
thinks that none of the parties running for election are able to 
do that. Characteristically, among them there is an 
above-average number of European skeptics who do not find their 
distance to the EU in the election program of the established 
parties on European policy and, at the same time, think that one 
cannot vote for parties with an expressly anti-European program 
-- such as the Republikaner. 
  So far, the SPD seems to be the most convincing party. A 
total of 28 percent of those polled think that it is best suited 
to represent German interests in Strasbourg, followed by the CDU 
with 25 percent, Alliance 90/Greens (5 percent), and PDS (4 
percent). Also, with a view to European policy, the FDP's loss 
in trust is dramatic. It is just getting 2 percent. 
  -- Does Germany's membership in the EU bring advantages or 
disadvantages? 
  When the east Germans automatically gained membership in the 
EU in the course of unification at the end of 1990, they 
welcomed this almost unanimously. After four years of 
membership, approval of European unification is undamaged, but 
the assessment is now more differentiated. Only 16 percent are 
now of the view that EU membership is primarily linked with 
advantages. About half of those polled think that advantages 
and disadvantages are balanced. As many as one-third (34 
percent) are convinced that membership rather gives rise to 
disadvantages. 
  Particularly skeptical toward Europe are middle-aged and 
older people as well as people with lower education. Younger 
people, as well as secondary school or university graduates, on 
the other hand, primarily believe that EU membership is linked 
with advantages. 
  -- Will you participate in the 1994 European elections? 
  On 12 June the east Germans are, for the first time, called 
upon to elect their representatives for the European Parliament. 
At the time of the poll -- one month before the election -- 42 
percent were determined to "certainly" participate in the first 
all-German European election. They are opposed by 20 percent, 
who will "probably not" or "certainly not" participate. It will 
depend on the hot election campaign period of the next few weeks 
whether the parties will manage to lure as many of the 38 
percent, who are at least considering participation, as possible 
to the ballot booths. If they manage to persuade only half of 
them, the turnout of 62.3 percent, which was achieved in the old 
laender in 1989, will not be reached in the new laender. 
  In view of this still open readiness to vote, one cannot 
make 
any predictions. For instance, the CDU has so far seemed to be 
slightly better able to persuade their potential voters, because 
in the group of those who are determined to vote, the CDU leads 
with about 33 percent, in front of the SPD with 30 percent. How 
difficult the decision is for not just a few east Germans is 
clearly shown by the fact that almost one out of four of those 
who are determined to vote is unable to cite a party as the 
representatives of his interests in the European Parliament. 
  -- How do you assess the goals and tasks of the EU? 
  The skepticism of the east German population is concentrated 
particularly on two goals: One-third each reject the 
establishment of a political union with a common European 
government and the introduction of a unified European currency. 
In rejecting an all-European government, in addition to the 
fear of long national independence, there might also be the fear 
that part of the transparency of political decisions and of the 
possibilities of democratic control, which had been gained after 
the upheaval, might be lost. 
  The clear rejection of the ECU as a common European currency 
is primarily the expression of trust in the stable German mark, 
which both west and east Germans do not want to give up. The 
agricultural policy of the EU is also assessed very critically. 
About 60 percent reject setting down limited production amounts. 
  The widespread skepticism regarding certain goals of the EU 
in the new laender is, however, not to be equaled with a general 
rejection of the EU. Thus, for instance, unified guidelines for 
consumer protection are welcomed by 86 percent of those polled. 
As many as three-quarters of the east Germans want a EU that 
acts more cohesively toward the outside than it is doing now: 
They advocate implementing a common foreign policy. Almost 
three-fifths of those polled agree with the establishment of a 
European defense community. 
  If the majority of the east German people had their say, the 
expansion of the EU toward East Europe would be part of the 
common European foreign and security policy. A total of 55 
percent would welcome the acceptance of East European states; 44 
percent, on the other hand, reject this, including primarily 
older people as well as the people in Brandenburg, which has a 
long border with Poland. 

