CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Hannes Gamillscheg: "Estonian Economy on Unsure </F>
Footing: Abundant Supply of Goods at Extremely High Prices; 
Government Shies Away From Massive Investments"] 
  [Text] Tallinn--At first glance Estonia's economic miracle 
seems impressive. Since its introduction two years ago, the 
currency, the Estonian kroon, has rigidly maintained its level 
of parity with the mark--one mark is equal to eight kroon--that 
was established at that time. The national budget is balanced, 
as is the current account, and the unemployment rate, at least 
unofficially, is only 2.4 percent. The supply of goods in shops 
and department stores is as plentiful as in the West, and in the 
capital city of Tallinn, bars, pubs, and cafes are springing up 
everywhere. 
  The representatives of the people gladly attribute this 
success to their bold policy of rapid reform. In Washington, the 
American political and financial establishment recently 
acknowledged to Prime Minister Mart Laar that Estonia has 
shifted from a Soviet planned economy to a Western free-market 
economy most rapidly and most radically, and that the small 
Baltic republic could serve as a model for all of East Europe. 
  The foundation upon which the economic miracle is built, 
however, is weak. Production has dwindled to less than half 
since the country's uncoupling from the Soviet economy. In 1994, 
the GNP is expected to increase for the first time, by around 
3.5 percent. Consumption has fallen drastically. "In comparison 
with the golden seventies, when we lived in style at the expense 
of Russia and its oil dollars, things are much worse now for 
most people," concedes Tiit Saat, state secretary in the Finance 
Ministry. "People have 25 to 30 percent less money to spend on 
food and clothing now than they had before." 
  Although the national budget is balanced, it is tiny. It 
amounts to only 5.8 billion kroon (725 million marks [DM]), plus 
2.5 billion kroon for a social welfare fund to be used for 
pensions, children's allowances, and other subsidies. Spending 
covers the most urgent consumption needs. Barely a single kroon 
is left over for capital expenditure by public authorities. 
"Things cannot go on like this for long," Saat admits. "The 
price of maintaining order in state finances is very high. In 
the area of social welfare, in the education system, in road 
construction, practically everywhere we have very strict 
limitations." 
  Thus the majority of the population does not experience much 
of the miraculous economy. The average monthly income is 1,200 
kroon. After the 26-percent income tax has been taken out--the 
first 300 kroon are tax-free--966 (DM120) remain. That is barely 
enough for rent and the most inexpensive groceries. Western 
goods, which to some extent have supplanted domestic products in 
department stores and supermarkets, are for most Estonians again 
as unattainable as they were in the days when they could be 
purchased only in the special stores for the elite. 
  Pensioners, who are being fed with 350 kroon, or the 
unemployed, whose compensation amounts to 180 kroon, have too 
little to live on and barely enough to die on. Elderly Estonians 
who can still remember the former republic and who have waited 
their entire lives for the reestablishment of independence are 
turning in great disappointment away from the state that they 
feel has deserted them. This is because the attention of the 
government, in which the average age is only slightly above 30, 
is drawn to the young and the strong. 
  That is why the tax progression was abolished "to offer work 
incentives to people with higher incomes." Saat is doubtful that 
increasing tax rates would increase public revenues: "The 
outstandingly high incomes are unknown to the revenue authority 
anyhow." No one dares speak of tax increases in the primary 
election year. But rent prices, the price of basic foodstuffs, 
or public transportation rates will be multiplied without 
compensation being provided even to small-wage earners. In 
January the consumer price index rose by 5 percent, in March by 
9 percent. In 1994 a price increase of 40 percent is looming, 
however since it is largely the result of reductions in 
subsidies it does not alarm the government. 
  Nevertheless, in the future monies borrowed from foreign 
countries, which up to now the state has passed directly on to 
banks and firms, are to be used for the first time for "public 
welfare"--translation: the development of the infrastructure. A 
deficit of more than 1 percent of the GNP will not, however, be 
permitted. "We do not want to become trapped in the vicious 
circle of debt," says State Secretary Saat in defense of the 
restrictive financial policy. 
  Foreign credits are essential to the survival of Estonia's 
economy. The layer of equity resources is thin, and the new 
firms are still not yielding the profits necessary for 
investments. That is why Estonia is seeking, despite its 
problems with integrating the Russian-speaking population and 
despite the unsettled issue of Russian troop withdrawal, to 
present itself as a stable country in which capital can be 
invested risk-free. A trust agency modeled after the German 
Trust Agency is supposed to have completed the privatization of 
state-owned firms by the end of 1995. At this point it has sold 
off 76 firms for $33 million, however these have been primarily 
small businesses, while parties interested in the monolithic 
giants have failed to appear. 
  The shifting of the economy is also evident in the export 
and 
import statistics. In 1991, 95 percent of exports and imports 
were still with the former Soviet Union. Now that country's 
successor states take delivery on only 30 percent of goods 
produced by Estonia, and provide only 20 percent of its imports. 
This is partly due to the tariffs that are arbitrarily imposed 
and lifted, primarily by Russia, and to price differentials with 
neighboring countries to the East, but is also the result of 
Estonia's search for new trading partners, such as Finland, 
Sweden, and Germany. 
  For the Estonians--Saat estimates that "90 percent earn low 
wages, 10 percent are paid well"--this means an abundance of 
Western goods that for the most part are prohibitively 
expensive. Still, very few would trade this for their former 
circumstances, when they had money but there was nothing to buy. 
"I have experienced the humiliation of having to ask former 
pupils whether they could sell me a small piece of meat under 
the counter," says Gaia, the teacher. "That is why I like the 
new system better, even if my money will buy only one small 
sausage per week." 

