Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by N. Vaskov: "Who Hinders Arms Trade?"] </F>
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] What are the chances of 
sovereign Belarus on the arms market? Unfortunately, on the 
vast arms market we only have a modest stall occasionally 
visited by poor customers. We cannot compete with any other 
state because we do not manufacture the end product. The 
contracts that we managed to sign with "consumer states" as a 
rule have to do with obsolete products. In one of foreign-trade 
organizations I was told: "The list of our offers includes 
almost a hundred articles. However, in reality consumers are 
interested in five to seven of these. We simply have to scrap 
the rest. Rich buyers turn to rich producers, while our clients 
are poor. They do not put forward any special demands as long 
as the equipment can move and shoot." 
  However, one thing I cannot comprehend: immediately after 
the 
Republic signs a contract, even a small one, [for selling arms] 
protests are voiced by different institutions, including the 
Control Chamber claiming that the deal will bring material and 
moral losses. 
  What makes them think so? These simple examples will help us 
understand their logic. In the fall of 1992, the Belarusintorg 
Association tried to sell $1 million worth of old weapons. 
Specialists say that the world price for the weapons was almost 
$2.5 million. Belarusian controlling organs suspended the 
contract, having decided that the Republic cannot afford to lose 
$1.5 million. In reality, Belarus lost much more than that, 
because it did not receive a penny. Nobody is going to pay us 
world prices for our products, because world powers, including 
Russia, will not put up with our attempts to compete with them 
in the arms trade either now or in the future. Besides, Belarus 
cannot provide spare parts or servicing for the arms it sells, 
which also brings prices down. 
  To be honest, I want to point out that many customers prefer 
to deal with Belarus because until recently, they could sign all 
the necessary documents in 15 to 20 days. Our government's 
approach is highly valued by entrepreneurs. 
  Here is another example: the controlling agencies once 
discovered that Belarusintorg was to pay a private company 
$5,000 for serving as a mediator. They raised a hue and cry: 
why is a state-run company paying private businessmen? And why 
not? Belarusintorg was going to pay with its own money, 
extracted from its own revenues. The existing Law on 
Enterprises does not prohibit this. 
  Claims that the Republic's political prestige may be damaged 
are often artificial and exaggerated. If one is honest he does 
not have to prove it to everyone. 
  Some time ago, newspapers carried reports on the 
Belvneshpromservis company, saying that the latter had attempted 
to sell a shipment of assault rifles to the United States, and 
later the weapons were detained at the Yugoslav shore. Some 
politicians jumped on this case, because there is a ban on arms 
trade with countries like Yugoslavia. They maintained that 
Belarus might face international sanctions. However, is there 
any evidence that it was Belarus who sold the weapons? Are 
there any documents proving this? We sold arms to a third 
country and they acquired a new owner. If the latter violates 
international regulations, let his own government deal with him. 
  Many rules determining arms trade have to be changed. The 
fact is that Belarus, finding itself in an abyss, is sitting on 
a sack of gold. 
  According to most moderate professional estimates, after the 
collapse of the Soviet Union Belarus inherited heaps of modern 
arms, equipment, and property. Some experts believe that 
Belarus could earn up to $1 billion even if it had to sell them 
at dumping prices. However, one of the main conditions is that 
sales should be conducted within the next two to four years and 
not later, because arms and all accompanying equipment become 
obsolete and consumers lose interest in them. We have entire 
arsenals packed with outdated artillery shells. The United 
States and Great Britain are helping us scrap them but they will 
not spend their money on this program forever. Thus, as long as 
somebody wants to buy our arms let us sell them. We do not have 
the means to eliminate large volumes of arms. 
  What and how shall we sell? Provided the $1 billion is a 
realistic figure, all the interested ministries, departments, 
and companies should study this issue with utmost attention. 
Analysts believe that in the immediate future we must outline 
our position with regard to the inherited property of the former 
USSR. In the military-industrial sector these are enterprises, 
amalgamations, and the like. In the Armed Forces -- these are 
troops, their property, and equipment. 
  Who does this legacy belong to? Undoubtedly, it belongs to 
the state. Thus, let the state handle all the serious aspects 
of the problem. 
  Let us start with the conversion project. Russia has begun 
altering its attitude toward conversion, its philosophy and 
ideology. What about Belarus? It is good that 30 U.S. 
companies are ready to participate in a bid for the best 
conversion project in Belarus. Three facilities have already 
been chosen for joint ventures -- BelOMO, Minsk Computer 
Association, and Integral. Our partners believe that as early 
as 1994 they can launch production of satellite television 
equipment and medium-capacity automatic telephone stations. We 
can only hail such plans. 
  At the same time, we should not forget that the Republic has 
decided to have its own army. If we equip it with outdated 
weapons, our sovereignty will be very fragile. If we want to 
maintain our Armed Forces' combat readiness, like it or not we 
have to start producing arms at our military enterprises. We 
cannot do this on our own because we depend on Russian producers 
for many technological processes. Thus, we must form joint 
stock enterprises. The process will be of mutual advantage. 
The famous Tunguska is used by a number of CIS, Middle East, 
and Persian Gulf states. The Belarusian contribution to 
Tunguska's production equals some 17 percent. If we create a 
joint-stock company we will be able to receive one-sixth of the 
profits. We will also preserve the scientific-technical elite, 
and maintain a high technical level of our Army. 
  The same can be said about tracking systems, communications 
equipment, equipment for training centers and test ranges, 
products like "Smerch," "Tor," "Igla," or "S-300." 
  It would be perfect if cooperation could develop within a 
single ruble zone. In this case Russia would not sell us arms 
and equipment at world prices. However, even if Belarus 
introduces a national currency, this approach will yield 
dividends. 
  What path should we choose? First Deputy Defense Minister 
Aleksandr Tushinskiy believes that we [the Defense Ministry] 
should not trade arms. The Ministry has its specific functions, 
while commerce lies in the competence of other structures. 
Beltekhexport General Manager V. Peftiyev suggests a solution 
that is worth mentioning. 
  Peftiyev maintains that the national economy should meet all 
the demands of the Army, which is the guarantor of sovereignty. 
A lion's share of Army orders should be placed with the 
military industrial sector so as to separate the latter from the 
rest of the economy. Besides, we should keep in mind that there 
is a vast demand for these kinds of products in Russia. 
  Second. We must finally determine what kind of army we need. 
I do not mean the number of cooks and generals. We must 
precisely know what would be the best solution under the current 
circumstances -- whether we only need border guards, a couple of 
strategic missiles and a presidential guard, or a garrison in 
every one-horse town. This should be determined by an 
independent committee represented by intellectuals. The 
estimates should be done according to contemporary world 
standards and not norms adopted in the 1940's. 
  After it becomes clear what our Armed Forces need, the state 
represented by a special coordinative committee, should assume 
control over excess arms. The committee should be supervised by 
an official, no lower than a deputy prime minister, competent in 
the issues of military industries. This official should have 
special powers, including issuing orders to sign contracts 
stipulating conditions of payment to foreign middlemen and 
native commercial companies. 
  This organ should not have supervisory functions over 
commercial organizations. It should form joint-stock companies, 
place orders, and decide who should or should not be allowed to 
sell arms. 

