BFN 

<F P=106> ["Roundtable" program with Wan Jingzhang, secretary of the </F>
UN Iraqi Sanctions Committee, and representatives of the 
Jordanian economic and government community, moderated by 
correspondent Zayd Zalatimu in Amman on 28 March: "UN Sanctions 
Imposed on Iraq and Its Effects on the Economy of Jordan"; 
broadcast simultaneously on Amman Jordan Television Network in 
Arabic with captioned Arabic translation -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Zalatimu] The Gulf war will be noted as possibly 
the most difficult and challenging episode in the history of the 
Arab world. Although it did not participate in the war, Jordan 
continues to be one of its most profound victims. As a result 
of the war, Jordan's population increased by 10 per cent in a 
matter of months, causing a severe strain on Jordan's economy, 
infrastructure, and services. 
  The total financial resources needed to cover the cost of 
these basic services was estimated at $3.5 billion. Jordan 
found itself dealing with this burden alone, at a time in which 
Israel was receiving $10 billion in loan guarantees. Jordan was 
forced to interrupt its economic adjustment program, and 
witnessed a substantial reduction in the exports of goods and 
services, workers' remittances, external grants, and endured the 
diversion of trade routes. The United Nations estimated 
Jordan's direct external financial losses caused by the conflict 
at $4.3 billion for 1990 and 1991. 
  At present, due to the UN sanctions against Iraq, Jordanian 
industry and trade continue to suffer from being deprived of 
this vital market. Prior to the conflict, Iraq was Jordan's 
largest trading partner, and the feasibility of many Jordanian 
businesses was based on the buying power of the Iraqi consumer. 
The UN Sanctions Committee, whose secretary is our guest this 
evening, was established to grant the necessary permissions to 
export to Iraq and to monitor the embargo. The export included 
only humanitarian goods and services. 
  It is important to note that Jordan is the only country in 
the region which has strictly adhered to the imposed sanctions. 
And yet, as Jean Ripert of the United Nations stated in 1990 on 
a report on the status of the embargo, Jordan is not the target 
of the embargo, but it may be its greatest victim. 
  Before we engage in discussion, I would like to welcome our 
distinguished guest this evening. As I noted, we have Mr. Wan 
[Jingzhang], the secretary of the Sanctions Committee. He is 
also the senior political affairs officer in the department of 
political affairs; Mr. Muhammad al-Jamal, director general of 
the Customs Department; Engineer 'Imad al-Shamma, deputy 
treasurer of the Chamber of Industry; Dr. Durayd al-Mahasinah, 
director general of the Jordan Ports Corporation; Mr. Tawfiq 
Qa'war, chairman of the Jordanian Shipping Agents Association; 
Mr. Muhammad 'Asfur, president of the Federation of Jordanian 
Chambers of Commerce; and last, but not least, Dr. Muhammad 
al-Mumtaz, adviser to the minister of finance. 
  Before we carry on with our discussion, and ask questions 
from Mr. Wan, I'd like to read a statement from the Royal Court: 
His Majesty King Husayn has taken the personal lead in this 
issue. His Majesty King Husayn called to his office at the 
Royal Court today [28 March] the ambassadors of the five 
permanent members of the UN Security council to inform them in 
very clear terms of the pressures and aggravation Jordan faces 
due to the blockade imposed on the Port of al-'Aqabah. 
  So, as you can see, we are here to discuss one of the most 
important issues faced by Jordan today. 
  Mr. Wan, if you could tell us of the mechanisms your 
committee uses in determining who is allowed to export the 
humanitarian goods and services to Iraq. As you know, this is 
an issue of utmost importance for Jordanian merchants and the 
industrial sector. 
  [Wan] Thank you, I would like to say in the first place that 
the Sanctions Committee is very thankful and appreciative for 
the important contribution made by Jordan for the effective 
implementation of the sanctions regime established under 
Resolution 661. I would like to give you a very brief 
introduction of how the committee works. As you see, the 
Sanctions Committee is established by Resolution 661, 1990, and 
the mandate of the committee is also defined very clearly in 
that resolution, that is Security Council Resolution 661. At 
the moment, the committee is composed of 15 members, which are 
also members of the Security Council. You are well aware that 
they are the five permanent members which are China, France, 
Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States, and also the 
10 nonpermanent members. They are Argentina, Brazil, the Czech 
Republic, Djibouti, New Zealand, Nigeria, Pakistan, Oman, 
Rwanda, and Spain. 
  The committee has established its guiding lines to guide the 
conduct of its work. Mainly, the principal rule is that a 
decision has to be made by consensus. This means that any 
approval for any application, for instance, would have to be 
approved by all 15 members in the committee. If one of them is 
against such approval, or is not in a position to agree to any 
application, that means that application would not be allowed to 
be exported to Iraq. 
  I have to mention another point. It is that the 
responsibility for implementation of that resolution rests with 
the government. That means all applications would have to come 
through government channels to this committee. If any 
individual or any company wishes to export anything to Iraq, he 
may, through the government channel -- here, maybe the Ministry 
of Finance -- and then in turn through the Jordanian permanent 
mission to the United Nations to submit the request to this 
committee. That is the normal procedure. Otherwise, if any 
request is submitted to the committee directly by that company 
or merchant, then the committee would to have return it, would 
have to start from the very beginning. So that takes time. So 
please, if there is any request, submit them through the 
Jordanian Government. 
  I also want to say that, apart from medicine and health 
supplies, which are exempt from the sanctions, there are 
foodstuffs which also need only notification to this committee. 
Apart from these two categories, most applications concern 
request for export to Iraq of commodities regarded as basic 
civilian-need items. And these items fall under procedure, 
which is described in Paragraph 20 of Security Council 
Resolution 687 as the simplified and accelerated non-objection 
procedure, which means, the request when it is submitted to the 
requestee would have to be commented [on] by all 15 members of 
the committee within a certain time limit. 
  If no negative comment is received that means that 
application is automatically approved. But if a member, or some 
members, are not in a position to approve such a request, they 
will notify the committee of their position and that one will 
not be approved. But of course, the final decision would be 
made at a committee meeting (?which would) be discussed and then 
a final decision would be made. Once a final decision is made, 
then a response from the chairman -- that is, a letter signed by 
the chairman -- will be addressed to the original requester; 
that is, the permanent mission of a certain country which has 
submitted that request to the committee on behalf of any 
individual or business. 
  So in that sense, if it is approved, an approval letter 
would 
be signed. If it is rejected, a refusal letter would be signed. 
And there are many cases, because of the lack of information 
pertaining to that specific request, and some members are not 
yet ready to have a final decision on that. We call that to put 
a certain request on hold -- to shelve it -- and in the meantime 
to seek further information from the original requester. If 
further information provided by the original requester is 
satisfactory, then they may say: It is okay. It could be 
approved. Then another letter of approval will be issued. But 
if they are not satisfied by any further information, or if no 
further information concerning that request is forthcoming, in 
that case, that particular request would be either refused, or 
still remain on hold, which means indefinitely on hold, it could 
last a month, or even years, because they are waiting for 
further information. 
  So, for the time being, the committee is working in a way 
which we try to make the applications simpler and we treat and 
process those applications in a more effective way. But 
unfortunately, because of the numbers of requests and also the 
limited resources we have and because of some of the complicated 
procedures guiding our work, there is a backlog. And we have 
succeeded in cutting that backlog to about one and one-half 
months now, from three to months at the end of last year. So 
this is all I want to say at the very beginning. 
  [Zalatimu] I am sure all our distinguished guests are very 
anxious to ask and comment on what you just said, but first 
we'll move to Mr. Muhammad al-Jamal, director general of the 
Customs Department, because, as you know, the Jordanian 
Government relies heavily on customs for its income, and with 
the loss of its most significant trading partner, that, of 
course, caused some severe financial problems for the 
department. Please, Mr. al-Jamal. 
  [Al-Jamal] Thank you. The Jordan Government has to implement 
the Sanctions Committee 661. And to implement that, the 
minister of finance have found an office, private office. The 
purpose of this office is to receive the application of the 
Jordanian exporters to send goods to Iraq. This office have to 
receive all his applications and send it through the minister of 
foreign affairs to our permanent ambassador in the UN. We send 
these application to get approval to be sent to export goods to 
Iraq. We found that most of these application is not approved. 
We have sent 4,454 applications to the Sanctions Committee, we 
have received 718 approvals, and we have received 852 
applications refused, and still 2,984 applications pending. 
  We are facing a lot of problems with the Sanctions Committee 
in terms of time needed for approvals, and the discrimination 
between Jordan applications and other countries' applications, 
and between the same commodity. For example, we have sent 76 
applications for textiles, they approved 11, they refused 41, 
and still 24 pending. 
  [Zalatimu] If I can make just a footnote. I think a lot of 
people send you applications and expect that you are actually 
the decisionmaking body on what they are allowed to export and 
what they are not allowed to export. When actually in reality 
its Mr. Wan's committee which makes these decisions, so... 
  [Al-Jamal, interrupting] Thank you for the question. 
Actually, our job in that is just to receive the application 
and send it to the UN Sanctions Committee through our ambassador. 
  [Zalatimu] So, to emphasize, again, you're just a conduit 
and 
not a decisionmaking body. So, when citizens come to you with 
complaints that, for example, they weren't given permission to 
export y or z, its not actually on your shoulders, but on... 
  [Al-Jamal, interrupting] No, exactly. And another question 
we are facing now, when I am mentioning that we are sending 76 
applications for textiles and we just got 11 approvals and that 
41 refused. Those 41 [word indistinct] why give approvals to 11 
people and you don't give us? Actually, it's not our decision. 
And we send 44 applications for tires, we received four 
approvals, and no approvals six, and 34 still pending. For 
glass, we send nine applications, three approvals approved, one 
is not approved, and five is pending. Another example, the last 
one is clothes. 38 applications, 12 is approved, zero not 
approved, and 26 still pending. 
  [Zalatimu] Sorry to cut you off, we're going to move Mr. 
Tawfiq Qa'war, chairman of the Shipping Agents Association. He 
is essentially Jordan's link to the outside world through its 
only port, al-'Aqabah, and he has, probably, the most severe 
gripe with these sanctions and the imposed embargo. Please, Mr. 
Qa'war. 
  [Qa'war] Well, inspection started in August of 1990. There 
was no prearrangement at all. It was all haphazardly, until 
March of 1991 when the guidelines set out and then we have kept 
a record as a shipping agents association. We have kept a 
record, and we have been monitoring every ship that was delayed, 
inspected, diverted, or refused entry. And, in the guidelines 
two conditions were played down. One, is that all documentation 
must be clear and visible, and that is very easy to comply with. 
And the second precondition is accessibility. Ships must have 
their cargo fully accessible, and this is very difficult to 
achieve, especially in general cargo. They are two types, 
conventional ships, where you have general cargo. And, to make 
all cargo accessible you have to open corridors and they keep 
some stackings of cargo here and there. So this is not safe for 
the ship in its navigation, nor for the cargo itself, 
containers, to have them accessible, I'll give you a very simple 
example which explains the difficulty of the situation. A ship 
coming from north continent down to the Red Sea serving 
al-'Aqabah. Let's say we will have around 1,000 containers. 
This is mainly the Red Sea Express, which is the basic line 
consortium of lines serving al-'Aqabah with that area. It has 
400, let's say, containers to al-'Aqabah general, and 600 to the 
other ports. It cannot come to al-'Aqabah with 1,000 containers 
to be fully accessible. Logistically this is impossible, so the 
ship has to go to Jeddah first, discharge the cargo, 
al-Hudaydah, Djibouti, Port, Sudan, restore al-'Aqabah cargo 
again, leave corridors among the containers, come back to al- 
'Aqabah so that it can be fully accessible, discharge the 
containers of al-'Aqabah, reload the empties, and the exports, 
go down to Jeddah, Port Sudan, Saudi, come back through the Suez 
Canal up north. This round trip cost the ship between 250 to 
300 thousand dollars, plus the delays that the ships must pass 
in by daylight, come out by daylight. All these delays cost 
money. Therefore, it is the ship owners who impose a certain 
inspection search charge, which is $500 for a 20-footer, and a 
$1,000 for a 40-footer container. This goes to the ship owners. 
It does not go to the United Nations, let's make this very 
clear. 
  [Zalatimu] Would you say this is the most difficult period 
you faced as a shipping agent? 
  [Qa'war] Exactly, yes. And I have to continue to give you 
this idea about the damages which have been caused Jordanian 
economy from the point of view of extra insurance at the 
beginning of the Gulf, from the delays in inspections, from the 
surcharges that have been imposed, from the losses of exports of 
Iraqi cargo, the losses of the import of the Jordanian-Iraqi 
cargo via al-'Aqabah. All this has cost the country, according 
to our calculation, in the vicinity, about 600 million dinars, 
close to $900 million, which is a very substantial crunch. The 
negative effect on the shipping side is that out of 41 regular 
lines that were calling at al-'Aqabah, 21 have stopped. Some 
others are now transshipping via Jeddah with feeding services. 
Al-'Aqabah has lost its position as a major port in the Red Sea 
and has become a subsidiary port. Before, al-'Aqabah was very 
important port for ship owners. Ships coming in, let us say, 
with 10,000 tonnes of sugar, on completion of this charge will 
easily pick up phosphate, potash, and go out. So, we were 
enjoying shipper freight coming in, shipper freight going out. 
  The other losses is the lack of confidence by the importers 
and exporters in their ships or containers coming to al-'Aqabah 
with raw materials afraid that the ship will be diverted, move 
their cargo via Latakia, Beirut, and Tartus. Last year, over a 
half a million tonnes out of 3 millions discharged in al-'Aqabah 
moved via those ports. This is another loss. 
  While sitting with the American side in September 1993, we 
discussed this question at length. And a suggestion came from 
them saying this is a very a cumbersome operation. Why don't 
you get an organization like Lloyd's, independent organization, 
to do this inspection on land? And we jumped at this suggestion 
and we placed it with the ICC, International Chamber of 
Commerce, in Paris, through which we have been complaining to 
the international world what is happening in al-'Aqabah and 
keeping them informed. They agreed to it, they supported us 
with Lloyd's, and finally we reached the Lloyd's Register to 
come in and do the inspection in the port, not as reported by 
the radio services from 5 o'clock this morning that the ships 
will be inspected in al-'Aqabah. We do not want the ships to be 
inspected in al-'Aqabah because we will be back in square one, 
where ships will not be able to have their full capacity. It is 
essential that the ships coming through the Tiran Straits, in 
accordance with the freedom of navigation -- a condition 
recognized all over the world -- with their full capacity, and 
the cargo can be discharged in the port. It will be inspected 
in the port area, during the customs clearance. And I think the 
discussions between the Jordan Government and the United States 
Government have advanced a lot towards instructing this job to 
an internationally-recognized independent non-profit 
organization called Lloyd's Register to do the job. And we hope 
that the ideal solution after three and a half years of agony 
and losses, it is time that we take stock, and the international 
community takes stock and looks at what is happening in 
al-'Aqabah. The ideal solution -- since Jordan is effectively 
complying with the United Nations resolutions and not one single 
package can move to Iraq unless there is a United Nations 
inspection certificate with it, and since no cargo can be loaded 
at the loading port if it is consigned to Iraq, cannot be 
loaded, and there has not been one single package which has been 
caught for Iraq -- therefore, we suggest the inspection could be 
lifted entirely, if this is not impossible [as heard] for some 
reason or another, then we move over to the inspection of cargo 
in the port. And I think this will be a very good proposal for 
the time being and we will fully support it. 
  [Zalatimu] Ok, thank you, sir. Staying in al-'Aqabah, Dr. 
al-Mahasinah, who is the director general of the Jordan Ports 
Corporation, I am sure feels a lot of your agony. You two have 
become very good friends, I assume, in the past few years. 
  [Al-Mahasinah] Well, as Mr. Qa'war mentioned and as you 
emphasized, we became so much in business together, 
unfortunately with this negative side effects. But, let me 
first welcome Mr. Wan in this panel, and thank you for 
presenting the whole issue, which is really vital. It took its 
climax yesterday, when His Majesty King Husayn called the five 
ambassadors to the Royal Court and really expressed our agony 
about this thing. Our agony is expressed both in statistics 
that my colleagues would mention or state and in principle. We 
feel that all the resolutions that Mr. Wan mentioned, 661 and 
the rest, Jordan was not the subject of these resolutions in the 
idea, or in principle, or in writing. Unfortunately, in 
practice, it is Jordan that is suffering out of these 
resolutions. We don't find a reason why. I don't find a reason 
why my cargo should be inspected and scattered all over the 
world; I don't find a reason why the UN, or any other agencies, 
or any other governments would take me as a victim or as an 
enemy and scatter my cargo all over the world and divert my 
ships. In the years since 1990 till 1994, approximately 150 
ships were either prevented or delayed or not allowed to proceed 
to al-'Aqabah. 
  Gentlemen, in terms of money, this is too much that Jordan 
can take. Our cargo in the Port of al-'Aqabah dropped. In 
1989, we used to handle about 20 million tonnes a year of 
exports and imports. We now handle, 1993 figures showed that we 
only handled 11.6, this is a drop from 1992, which was 13.3. 
That means that the situation is aggravated. And I don't find 
a reason for it; neither do I find a solution for it. Each 
tonne of cargo makes 25 JD's, which is approximately $32 and 
plus; that is, we have truck drivers benefiting out of that, 
approximately 7,000-8,000 trucks are working to load and unload 
this cargo; we have agents like Mr. Qa'war and his colleagues; 
the commercial sector and the industrial sector. All these 
people. The revenues, not my exact revenues, which are 
estimated with a loss of approximately $200 million to $250, I 
would presume that this situation is unbelievably unjustified, 
very harmful, and it causing me that much of disastrous 
consequences. 
  In this regard, I don't find a reason that why should this 
inspection goes on, and I don't find a mandate for it. If 
through the 150 ships that you diverted out of entering the Gulf 
of Aqaba, all the cargo on them came back was justified, and, as 
Mr. Qa'war mentioned, not a single box was found destined or 
bound to Baghdad in violation of 661, so why should this go on? 
  [Zalatimu] I think it is important to know also the way in 
which ships are often pirated by the MIF's, the Military 
Intervention Forces, which I believe are intend to be a U.S.-led 
groups which divert Jordanian ships to other ports, often not 
knowing exactly where they're going to, the captain of a ship 
doesn't exactly know where he is going.... 
  [Al-Mahasinah, interrupting] Let me add to this and give you 
an example. We had an example two weeks ago, or during the past 
two weeks. A ship came to al-'Aqabah, its cargo was refused, it 
did send the cargo back to Suez. Another ship came with the 
same cargo, and then the inspectors came to approach the ship at 
2 P.M. They said: OK, you wait till next morning. Next 
morning, they came on board the ship, and they couldn't inspect 
it because there were some bees on the ship. So they postponed 
it till he sprays insecticides against the bees and the flies. 
They came back again and it was mentioned that there is not 
enough light on it. 
  [Zalatimu] It's amazingly incredible difficult to set a 
schedule, for example, when the ships are coming or where they 
going. 
  [Al-Mahasinah] Here, I'm not talking biology. I'm not just 
mentioning bees and so on. The reason I want to tell you: If 
your legal cargo, that you are waiting for in Amman, is diverted 
or delayed because there is a bee on the ship that is not a 
reason. That's a very, very silly reason, and that's a 
harassment. That is not really justified technique. Mr. Wan 
mentioning simplifying, but it is not being simplified in the 
Tiran Straits. It is not being simplified for Jordan and its 
economy and survival. 
  [Zalatimu] I guess his majesty's statement yesterday 
underlined the importance of this issue for the Jordanian 
economy, and in fact, his majesty linked Jordan's participation 
in the peace talks with some sort of easing of the inspection 
and sanctions in al-'Aqabah. 
  Next, we move to the export side of this equation, Mr. 'Imad 
al-Shamma' from the Chamber of Industry is gravely affected as 
Jordanian exports. Sir. 
  [Al-Shamma'] Well, thank you very much, sir. Allow me first 
just to give you a brief idea about the Jordanian industry as a 
sector, and then I'll move on to the effect of what we talking 
about today. 
  Basically, we represent, as a Chamber of Industry, the 
industrial sector, which comprises about 18,000 companies and 
factories and firms and employs about 110,000 people. This is 
not the first time that the Chamber of Industry or the Jordanian 
officials raise the issue of the effect of Resolution 661 and 
the embargo or the ship searching on al-'Aqabah with officials, 
whether from the United States or visiting delegations. 
  We feel, as the Chamber of Industry, as Jordan as a whole, 
its economy has been targeted to a level of impoverishment. And 
we feel that Jordan as a result of this Security Council has 
suffered tremendously. As Mr. Qa'war has mentioned, and Dr. 
al-Mahasinah, we on both sides of the coin, on the import side 
and on the export side, suffered in the sense that our cost of 
imports has went up vis-a-vis that we have to pay about $1,000 
extra for every 40-foot containers that we import, and about 
$500 for 20-foot container. And even on the export side, we have 
lost tremendously on the export side, because we are paying now 
about $250 for every 20-foot container for export and about $500 
for a 40-foot container. 
  To make the problem even worse is finding the vessel. If I 
am saying that I don't need to export to Iraq and I'm looking 
for new markets in Europe or anywhere else, if I don't find a 
vessel to come and pick up my cargo, then I cannot export, I 
cannot compete. And if I have to pay an extra fee to put my 
container on a ship and to be searched by the military forces 
then that would add to my cost and to my competitiveness. 
  As you know, the Jordanian industry as a whole is of 
humanitarian needs; it is not of military type of industry. We 
are a converting industry. So, we do not believe why should we 
as Jordanian industrialists have to keep on convincing the 
United Nations and the Sanctions Committees that we don't export 
military to anywhere else in the world, and specifically to 
Iraq? Add to that, if the UN sanctions, according to a certain 
approval, it has granted to a certain product, as Mr. Jamal has 
mentioned, we do not see the reason why we should, every time we 
need to export the same product from the same company to the 
same market, why do we have to keep on asking for the same 
approval? We have mentioned to Mr. Wan that this would only add 
to his dilemma and problems because it would augment the demand 
on his services and the Sanction Committee services, whereby we 
have to keep on import applying for the same product from the 
same company to the same market. This as a whole, we feel, 
should be addressed in a very crucial manner, whereby we grant a 
blanket approval for that product for that company from a 
certain part of the world, especially Jordan. I have to 
emphasize another fact. It is that we are mixing two main 
issues here. It is that the sanction is a UN resolution while 
the inspection of the port is done on basis of the military 
forces or the allied forces that were there in the Gulf crisis. 
And we feel that the two are part and parcel of the whole 
crisis. The Jordanian industry has suffered tremendously. Many 
companies are closing down or reducing their staff. And as you 
see, Jordan is the hub of democratization, it is the hub of 
stability, thank God to his, you know, the vision, of his 
majesty the king. So, we feel with this sanctions and the 
search on our ports, whether on the import side or in the export 
side, is creating some sort of social instability. And this can 
affect not only Jordan, it would affect the whole region. Add 
on to top of that we know that Jordan is going through the peace 
process now and we believe that you cannot have a stable peace 
if the people are poor and if they are not happy. 
  Basically all this becomes to one simple factor: We should 
have economic prosperity to develop our country in the sense to 
accommodate the peace process, or else we cannot compete. 
  [Zalatimu] Thank you. Talking about the Jordanian consumer, 
possibly the most in touch with the Jordanian consumer in this 
panel here this evening is the president of the Jordanian 
Chambers of Commerce, Mr. Muhammad 'Asfur. I'm sure you are 
particularly interested in commenting on Mr. Wan's theme. 
  ['Asfur] Thank you, Zayd. I want to enter into a different 
line of direct but simple questions concerning the sanctions and 
the siege on Iraq. My first question, Mr. Wan, would be until 
when is Jordan to keep suffering and sacrificing the constants 
of free trade on false political grounds? All my questions are 
going to be interrelated, really. And on that pretense, how 
will the region enter a new phase of economic relations while 
Jordan cannot purchase its imports for the same prices available 
to other countries in the region? Where is the just formula in 
this political agenda? And also for my own education, I would 
like to know does the United Nations Resolution 661 concerning 
the siege on Iraq gives the upper hand to the United States to 
investigate ships loaded with goods or imports to Jordan? Is 
Jordan the target? 
  Will the U.S. really halt vessels carrying American exports 
to Jordan, in the same [way] it stops any other vessel, ship 
that has goods shipped to al-'Aqabah? What is the intention 
there? Is it to hurt Jordan more than it had been hurt as a 
result of the Gulf war? Are we trying to increase the 
percentage of unemployment? Are we trying to increase the 
percentage of people beyond the poverty line? What are we 
really trying to do within all these sanctions? And as a result 
Jordan is suffering? Thank you. 
  [Zalatimu] I think we'll keep the, we'll keep Mr. Wan's 
answers to the end. First, before we move to Mr. Wan, I would 
like to hear from Dr. al-Mumtaz, advisor to the minister of 
finance, who's with us today. If you have, I'm sure you have 
some comments Dr. al-Mumtaz. 
  [Al-Mumtaz] Thank you Zayd. It seems to me that nothing is 
left to me to talk about, but I have two comments. The first 
one relating to the mechanism of the Sanctions Committee. Now, 
I think that the mechanism is used especially when it comes to 
handling Jordan's requests to ship goods to Iraq is very slow. 
Now, this unanimous vote of the committee, you know, when you 
are dealing with human beings, you know, with sending 
humanitarian goods to Iraq and, you know, you leave it to the 
(?whim) of one person to block any decision of that committee. 
So, again, the consensus, you have to have consenus, is 
bothering me a lot. The other thing is limiting now, limiting 
the period of the, you know, implementing the approval of a 
certain commodity for four months. Now, again, people are 
complaining about this in Jordan. You know, why don't leave it 
open as it used to be before? 
  Now, the other point. Now, wherever we go to present our 
case, the whole world now knows that we are abiding by the 
sanctions and also everybody will tell us: You know, look, you 
know, we understand your case. We are very sympathetic. But 
until now, no, and practically no, real support is provided to 
Jordan. Now we, the whole world knows, that we did take care of 
the evacuees who left Iraq and Kuwait and we took care of even, 
you know, some refugees all over the world. And now, in a 
country like Jordan, where democracy is flourishing, we have to 
take care of the concerns of our citizens in Jordan. Now, I 
have a quotation. I am quoting a report by Mr. Jean Ripert, who 
was then the director general for development and international 
economic cooperation at the United Nations who came here to 
Jordan in October and he wrote a report. In that report, I'm 
quoting him: The Security Council should take every effort to 
see that these embargo-related losses are compensated in full in 
order to avoid destabilizing the economy, etc.. in Jordan. 
  Now, I think, you know, the world community should listen to 
us and concerning the citizens of Jordan, I think, you know, 
their patience is running thin and we expect, you know, the 
world community to respond to our concerns. Thank you. 
  [Q'awar] Can I interject here just on one point regarding 
the 
inspection which is relevant to this as this stems out from his 
majesty's remarks and declaration, is that Iraq is able to 
import anything it wants from any port around without the ships 
calling at those ports being inspected. This is very important 
to be a point, focal point. 
  [Zalatimu] So, I guess actually when the objective of the 
Sanctions Committee is to forbid things from entering Iraq, 
things are entering Iraq, and Jordan, in the final analysis, is 
paying the price for UN-imposed sanctions which have been 
insensitive to Jordan's economic, and political, and social 
needs. 
  [Al-Mahasinah] Other ports are flourishing on behalf of our 
port, which is unjustified. Plus, you must take in 
consideration that the reputation that Jordan made through the 
years of being a very moderate country, a country that believes 
in international decisions, international committees, it 
respects them all the time. Now, people think of Jordanians as 
maybe smugglers, contrabandists, and everything is concentrated 
on Jordan [words indistinct]. 
  [Zalatimu] In reality, Jordan has become a model for Third 
World democratization and institutionalized democracy. 
  [Al-Mahasinah interjects] As Mr. al-Shamma' mentioned it. 
  [Zalatimu] I think you have, may be, 15 questions or so. I 
don't know if you've had a chance to look them over and see 
what... [changes thought] I'm sure some of them are 
interrelated, if you'd like to begin answering them. Hate to 
put you in the hot box, but that's the situation here in now. 
  [Wan] Thank you. 
  [Zalatimu] You're welcome. 
  [Wan] I can set on the sea. I have a lot of difficult 
questions to answer. First of all, I shall thank you for your 
statement and your comments. The points you raised in your 
statement are well taken and I'll certainly -- can promise you 
-- that I'll report your feelings, the feelings of the Jordanian 
people and your government and the business to the chairman of 
the Security Council Committee for consideration. Hopefully, 
something could be done in that area, but I cannot promise 
anything because the final decision rests with the 15 members of 
the committee, not with the Secretariat, from which I am from. 
We are providing secretarial service to the committee, not the 
policy makers, the decisionmakers. That is the first point I 
want to make. 
  Secondly, I can see our host, my host, has raised a number 
of 
very interesting questions. Some are of a general nature and 
some are more individualized. Let me address some of the 
questions one by one and if I omit anything or if you have any 
further questions, I'm always at your disposal. 
  Personally, I should say, I am keenly aware of the difficult 
plight, the difficult situation faced by Jordan, because, from 
the carry out of the Security Council resolution sanction 
regime. [sentence as heard] And I can assure you, gentlemen, 
that when that question was brought up to the committee for 
discussion, all the members of the committee expressed their 
great sympathy and also all the committee members recognize that 
Jordan had indeed been significantly affected by the sanctions 
regime established and Resolution 661, 1990. That is a fact I 
want to convey to you. At the same time, the committee members 
they're also concerned with a view of finding a way to address 
that issue although no consensus has been reached in that 
respect. I think Mr. al-Jamal is right. We have received 
thousands of applications from Jordanian businesses for export 
of various commodities to Iraq and I think I would be right to 
say that Jordan is one of our chief clients, or the main client, 
because about half of the applications are from Jordan. However, 
the committee has its own guiding lines as expressed in the very 
beginning, that we are operating on a non-objection basis which 
need the consensus of all 15 members to decide upon anything. 
  With regard to some of the points raised by Mr. al-Jamal, I 
would like to say when that question of discrimination was 
brought up to the committee for discussion, many members 
expressed the idea that the committee was conducting its 
business and is carrying out its mandate on a non-discriminatory 
basis, considering each application submitted to the committee 
for its consideration and no objection procedure on its own 
merit and without any focus, without focusing its attention on 
the origin of the goods involved, [word indistinct] who is the 
requester. 
  [Zalatimu] If I could just interject, I understand as a 
recent case of some water purification system, something which 
Jordan applied to export to Iraq and I believe the Netherlands 
had applied to export the same item and for some reason the 
exporter from the Netherlands was given permission and the one 
from Jordan was not. I do not know if you are aware of this 
most recent occurrence. 
  [Wan] I'm well aware of that. I just want to give you, 
gentlemen, some explanations how we work. I'm not commenting on 
any of the comments of member individual member states. His 
excellency the prime minister of Jordan, when he visited New 
York, he presented a statement to the committee and he also 
raised that example you raised. It's true that the committee 
did approve a request from Netherlands for -- if my memory is 
right -- about 2,000 tonnes of chemical materials for water 
treatment premises. At the same time, we have received dozens 
of requests along that line. Most of them are either rejected 
or put on hold and that is a case which has been approved 
because some members can see they include or they have enough 
information about the end use and end user and other relevant 
information concerning the issue. That was approved indeed. In 
the case of Jordanian applications, we received a number of 
them. Most of them are still (?shelved) on hold, not rejected 
outright because the committee members, some of them at least, 
are wishing to have further information concerning the request. 
That explained why. You see there could be similar requests, 
but because of the abundance or the absence of further 
information regarding certain aspect of the request, that also 
affect the decision of some members. 
  [Zalatimu] If my memory serves me correctly, I believe this 
particular incident, I believe you, sir, resubmitted the 
application providing full details. I mean the application of 
Netherlands and the application of Jordan were almost identical 
in the information they contain, and yet, you know, the outcome 
was to grant permission to Netherlands. 
  [Wan] Yes, indeed. Sometimes, you may provide further 
informations in that regard. But, it's up to the judgment of 
members to decide whether they are satisfactory or not. That's 
why I would say although they're of a similar or identical 
nature the applications, but, because of the information 
pertaining to the goods contained in that request that are 
really matters. Sometimes of crucial importance to determine 
whether that application met with the approval of the committee. 
  [Zalatimu] It seems to me that comes down to a technicality. 
I mean, what seems to me to be more important than some 
technicality in an application is the fact that Jordan has 
suffered greatly because of the sanctions and the embargo 
imposed on Iraq. And that seems to be much more important than, 
you know, a few missing words in an application. And it seems 
that the committee should consider the fact and the position of 
the Jordanian economy vis-a-vis this crisis, and not deny 
applications on the basis of you minor technicalities. I mean it 
is very hard for us as Jordanians to understand why we are not 
given permission to export, as you say, based on the 
technicalities. 
  [Wan] I'll certainly convey what you said to the committee 
members. What I want to stress in this respect is that if the 
requester provide enough information regarding that particular 
request they have a better chance to be considered by the 
committee. That's why when the chairman wrote to the permanent 
representative of Jordan to the United Nations, he said that it 
would be a greatly helpful if fully detail information about the 
relevant product and end user and the general circumstances 
related to the export is included on the application form when 
it is initially submitted for the consideration of the committee. 
  [Zalatimu] Thank you gentlemen, and good evening. 

