Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by RABOCHAYA TRIBUNA economic commentator Arkadiy </F>
Solovyev under the rubric "Viewpoint": "Taking a Penny From a 
Pauper..."] 
  [Text] Our newspaper published two immediate comments 
on Boris Yeltsin's Edict "On Lump-Sum Compensation to Russian 
Federation Savings Bank Depositors Who Had Money on Deposit as 
of 1 January 1992." It is now time to take a more detailed look 
at this document. 
  As if to prove the folk saying that "one waits three years 
for a promise to come true," in precisely the third year of the 
reformation era the president, prompted by the generosity of the 
former chief cashier of the country, finally decided to show 
much favor to his subjects by giving them an unexpected 
gift--compensating for people's losses from the devaluation of 
their deposits in savings institutions. The "generosity" of the 
gift-givers is shocking even to ordinary folk schooled in the 
experiences of the period of shock therapy. 
  It is therefore not accidental that the actual text of the 
corresponding edict issued by the president was concealed from 
the mass media for almost a month and a half, while the 
government press published only tear-jerking panegyrics about 
the fatherly concern for the huddled masses. An attentive study 
of this rescript's text brings very sad thoughts to mind. 
  What does a tripling of deposits kept in savings accounts as 
of 1 January 1992 mean? It means that given inflation of a 
factor of at least 260 over the period 1992-1993 (according to 
data of the Russian Federation State Committee for Statistics), 
respectable citizens of Russia who had been trying to save their 
money with the help of the Savings Bank system will get slightly 
more than 1 (one) kopek on each ruble deposited before 1992. 
  It should be remembered that even the size of the lump-sum 
minimum wage raise instituted in order to compensate for 
Gaydar's jump in prices on 1 January 1992 measured a factor of 
3.5. Thus, the tripling of deposits, coming more than two years 
late, is incommensurate in scale even with the shameless 
stealing of workers' wages. 
  Of course, any minimally literate person knows that the 
money 
we used to put in the state savings bank system at a miserly 
interest rate were withdrawn into the state treasury and used to 
pay off internal debt or at best for investment in the national 
economy and patching holes in the budget. In other words, our 
money was used in such a way that it could not earn us any 
income and it is apparently no longer there anyway. If in those 
quite recent times (when we still had a state budget and one 
could at least calculate some things and compare them in a 
normal way) all depositors simultaneously had withdrawn their 
money from the savings bank, the state would have immediately 
become bankrupt. Because the amount of deposits was commensurate 
with the size of the national income, the payroll fund, and the 
state budget. 
  The acknowledgement of savings bank deposits as a state 
debt, 
expressed in the decision of supreme organs of legislative 
authority in Russia, by itself should have meant, in my opinion, 
a legal and material-financial guarantee of their security and 
the ability to put it to its direct use (be it as it may on 
certain terms). Instead of our ruble, however, which we loaned 
to the state, we are being offered a kopek. 
  I think it is inarguable that the purchasing capacity of 
savings should be restored through their indexation. The 
mechanism is well known: in keeping with the consumer price 
index. In 1992 prices increased by a factor of 26, in 1992--by a 
factor of 10. This makes it a total factor of 260 by 1 January 
of the current year. Which means that slightly under 100 
trillion rubles [R] (R372 billion times 260) should be 
automatically entered into savings books. 
  Among the arguable questions that remain are the following 
major items: 
  --what to do about indexation of savings for 1991, which 
lagged by an order of magnitude behind inflation? 
  --how to restrict (within the boundaries of constitutional 
rights and laws) the flow of this money into the already 
impoverished consumer market? 
  --where to get this money long used up by the previous 
government? 
  Answering these and other questions will require more than 
one newspaper page, and I do not have ready recipes for 
everything. One thing is obvious: the compensation of deposits 
by a factor of three, as envisaged by the edict, is a violation 
of the constitutional right of citizens to property and its 
security. This compensation cannot be called anything other than 
a miserly handout. 
  The government must put together a long-term (let us say, 
10-year) program for repayment of the internal state debt to 
savings bank depositors. This program, in my opinion, must 
include direct budget financing of compensatory payments (which, 
by the way, the government has already been tasked with in the 
president's March edict), the use of state nonbudget funds 
(pension and medical, employment and social protection), the use 
of property payments (in the form of an additional share in the 
privatized property--production, housing, and land), and so on. 
  In this context we could look at the proposed compensation 
as 
the first phase or a component part of the state program for 
repaying the debt to depositors. 
  I know that many people are puzzled by a half-year gap in 
payments to those who are able to work and those who are not. 
First, most elderly people transferred their accounts to their 
heirs, who support them, long ago. Second, the current economic 
reality is such that it is precisely the working people who are 
experiencing the greatest material difficulties--because of the 
mindless structural restructuring of production and conversion, 
mutual nonpayments between enterprises and the disruption of 
economic ties, the breakdown of the state financial system, and 
so on. Life is especially hard for those employed in education 
and health care, science and culture, as well as geologists and 
the machine-building sector. Millions of them have not been paid 
even the minimum wage for months. They are the ones who could 
use most even this pithy compensation. It would be no less 
important for the residents of northern regions, who this winter 
found themselves on the threshold of survival. 
  And one more, perhaps the most delicate, element--the frank 
absence of the financial resources needed to accomplish the 
announced operation. The amounts that are being mentioned 
clearly are insufficient. Only Central Bank credit could serve 
as a reliable source. But the R200 billion promised by the bank 
will only be enough to pay compensation to pensioners and the 
disabled. There is a real danger that the matter not only will 
not get to the point of paying able-bodied citizens, but that 
there will not be enough even to pay the pensioners their 
"kopek." 
  The triple compensation of deposits envisaged by the edict 
will require R1.1-1.2 trillion in 1994. Neither the Savings Bank 
nor the draft state budget have this sort of money for this 
purpose. Are we dealing with another "fairy tale?" Sad... 
  I will not even mention other, no less sad, considerations 
that come to mind when one analyzes the edict. All I want is to 
learn the names of the authors of this masterpiece. Operational 
"investigation" has revealed that neither the Savings Bank nor 
the Central Bank nor the social security administration had 
advance knowledge of the text of the edict. The carefully 
concealed "creators" hide from people behind the oak doors of a 
department of the Ministry of Finance. I think it is time to ask 
them to take a curtain call. 

