Poppy   Cultivation 

<F P=102> PM2005100294 London THE TIMES in English 20 May 94 p 13 </F>
<F P=103> PM2005100294 </F>
<F P=104>  London THE TIMES </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Edward Gorman report: "Afghan Exiles Return to Reap Heroin </F>
Profits"] 
  [Text] Kabul -- Continuing civil war and anarchy in 
Afghanistan are causing a huge increase in the production of 
heroin, much of which is heading towards Europe. 
  Aid officials and Western diplomats in Islamabad, the 
Pakistani capital believe that the amount of land in Afghanistan 
under poppy cultivation has increased by more than 50 per cent 
since 1990. 
  They see it as a long-term crisis facing Europe and believe 
that the production boom is a consequence of hard-pressed 
refugees returning from Pakistan and Iran to broken villages 
short of cash and opting for the most profitable crop where once 
mainly wheat and maize were grown. 
  One Western envoy said: "What I find frightening is that at 
the moment people are making money out of it, but when the `Mr 
Bigs' realise there are serious profits to be made there will be 
an explosion of drug trafficking from this region. We are just 
seeing the tip of the iceberg." 
  Most of the poppies are being grown in the eastern and 
southern provinces of Afghanistan--areas which suffered the 
worst destruction during the ten-year Soviet occupation. 
Figures are difficult to get, but in some areas of Nangarhar 
province, around Jalalabad, for example, aid officials estimate 
that 98 per cent of the cultivated land is under poppy. United 
Nations estimates for total opium production nationally from 
1990 to 1992, even before production started to rise 
dramatically, show an increase from 415 ton's to 640. 
  The problem for the West is that with no effective central 
government in Afghanistan, it is difficult to put in place 
adequate drug control programmes. Many of the areas under 
cultivation are inaccessible due to general brigandry and 
lawlessness, while the civil war is causing rampant inflation 
and unemployment, which is making life difficult for returning 
refugees. 
  In the eastern provinces, the situation is compounded by 
what 
Western observers see as the failure of the Pakistani 
authorities to crack down on the thousands of heroin 
laboratories and smugglers operating in the tribal areas of the 
North-West Frontier province. Some suspect corruption within the 
Pakistan establishment at a high level. 
  Another aspect of the problem is that smuggling routes have 
proliferated since the Soviet war. While most of the heroin 
probably continues to be exported through Pakistan, which has an 
estimated 1.5 million addicted to the drug, other routes include 
the north, through Badakshan province, into Tajikistan and up to 
Moscow and into Europe; north into Uzbekistan or through Herat 
into Turkmenistan; west through Iran into Turkey; or south to 
the Makran coast for shipping to Dubai. Anthony Fitzherbert, 
programme co-ordinator for the Food and Agriculture Organisation 
farming rehabilitation project in Afghanistan, believes that 
once farmers get used to growing poppies it will be difficult to 
stop them. "It'll grow at the same rate as the market in the 
West," he said. "The Afghans are not going to produce a 
surplus--they are going to produce for the market. 
  Andrew Pryce, project manager for the UN Drug Control 
Programme based in Peshawar, cautions against scaremongering. 
"A lot of it is conjecture. If one does nothing about it, it 
is going to grow. When we are able to do something about it, we 
can bring alternatives to it and kill it," he said. 
  One difficulty is impressing on the Afghans that heroin is 
bad news for everybody. In the village of Khushgumbat near 
Jalalabad where this year's harvest is under way, a village 
elder responded defiantly to criticism of poppy growing. "Why 
are you manufacturing weapons and sending them here where they 
will kill people? The problem is that we have less land and we 
have to live and feed our families. There is nothing else to 
compare with the poppy yield. The people who buy it from us take 
it abroad--that is their business." 

