BFN 

<F P=106> [Conor Cruise O'Brien article: "An IRA Wolf Adjusts His </F>
Disguise"] 
  [Text] Gerry Adams's "positive response" to the British 
Government's "elucidation" of the Downing Street Declaration 
does not mean that peace is on the way. All it means is that 
the IRA wolf feels the need, right now, to adjust its sheep's 
clothing. Its bloodstained snout was showing, and even the most 
gullible were beginning to notice. 
  The sheep's clothing is, of course, Sinn Fein, the political 
and propaganda front of the IRA. The adjuster is the president 
of Sinn Fein, Gerry Adams. Mr Adams is, to our misfortune, an 
extremely skilled operator. Over the Downing Street 
Declaration, both on the run-up to it and in its aftermath, Mr 
Adams played a blinder. He succeeded in becoming widely 
accepted as essentially a man of peace, while remaining the 
known head of the political arm of a terrorist organisation. It 
would be hard to parallel that achievement, just as it would be 
hard to parallel the complacent fatuity of the two governments 
whose craven compliance made it possible. 
  All the same, even for such a virtuoso as Mr Adams, the 
conduct of a peace process in harness with a continuing campaign 
of terror is a demanding business. The peace fans were 
beginning to be a bit restive by the time five months of 
continuing IRA terror had followed a Downing Street Declaration 
which the poor suckers had been led to believe would result in a 
permanent cessation of violence. To keep his Orwellian peace 
process in being, for the benefit of the killers whom he serves, 
Gerry Adams needed some new tricks, and he has now come up with 
some plausible ones. These are contained in the present comedy 
of clarification/elucidation into which the British Government 
allowed itself to be drawn by Mr Adams, through his 
indefatigable intermediaries, John Hume and Albert Reynolds. 
  It worked this way: Mr Adams allowed it to be known, through 
that ever-dependable grapevine, that if he got positive answers 
to some of the questions which he would put to the British 
Government, he would make a conciliatory response to the British 
answers as a whole. From previous experience, he knew that both 
the Irish and British Governments would fall for that one, since 
it would enable them to claim that the Downing Street peace 
process, for which they had made such extravagant claims, was 
beginning to show results. 
  Mr Adams was not disappointed. Sinn Fein's 20 questions were 
worked over by Irish and British officials, supplied with 
specifications by Mr Hume, briefed by Mr Adams, as to the 
minimum required to elicit a conciliatory response from Sinn 
Fein. Mr Adams did not ask for too much. He knows the British 
are not yet ready to abandon the guarantee to the majority in 
Northern Ireland that there shall be no constitutional change in 
the status of their province without their consent. For the 
moment, Mr Adams just wanted small things, which would give him 
an opportunity to sound conciliatory in reply, thus remaining 
central to the peace process and supplying decent cover for that 
unsightly snout. 
  The most welcome aspect of the replies, for Sinn Fein, is 
that London replied at all. Earlier, John Major had haughtily 
refused Sinn Fein's request for clarifications, saying "take it 
or leave it". Now he has meekly filled in the Sinn Fein 
questionnaire. To Sinn Fein-IRA, this change demonstrates a 
promising flexibility under the pressure of its own continuing 
armed struggle -- the reality behind the peace process. Further 
demonstrations of flexibility will be sought, by the same 
well-tried methods. 
  A whiff of Sinn Fein-IRA's real thinking can be picked up 
from a report in yesterday's IRISH TIMES of an interview with "a 
senior republican source in West Belfast." The source said -- 
"The British answers to our questions showed that at present 
they are not prepared to move on the key issues, which are the 
Unionist veto and their (British Government's) becoming 
persuaders (of the Unionists) for Irish unity.... We are nowhere 
near the conditions that would merit a cease-fire. (But) we 
don't want to be negative -- that's why statements went out 
offering limited praise of the British response.... We have to 
keep the peace process alive, yet stress that the British 
haven't offered enough." 
  In Northern Ireland, the Unionist community feels the screws 
tightening on it, through the continuation of the IRA's armed 
struggle and a peace process centring on Sinn Fein. 
Predictably, the loyalist paramilitaries are increasingly 
active. Overall, violent incidents, by both sets of 
paramilitaries, increased in the four months following the 
Downing Street Declaration, compared with the equivalent months 
of the previous year. Last weekend, some loyalists were sniping 
at members of the RUC [Royal Ulster Constabulary], while others 
were attempting a bombing operation against a Sinn Fein-IRA pub 
in Dublin. 
  The attempt was unsuccessful, but a young doorman, Martin 
Doherty, was shot in the course of it. His funeral rites 
provided the occasion for the most open IRA demonstrations 
Dublin has known for many years: probably since the foundation 
of the state, 73 years ago. The IRISH TIMES ran a big 
photograph of the paramilitary funeral on its front page. The 
opposition denounced the Government and the gardai for failing 
to respond to this open paramilitary challenge to the authority 
of the state. In return, Martin McGuinness, at the interment of 
Doherty's remains, denounced the opposition leaders as 
"quislings." In that paramilitary context, that term has an 
ominous ring. 
  Sinn Fein has gained enormously in perceived legitimacy in 
the republic in the months since the Downing Street Declaration. 
Now Sinn Fein's masters, the IRA itself, are seeking to emerge 
openly as defenders of the people against the loyalist violence 
that they themselves have provoked and continue to provoke. 
  There is some daft talk at present of including the loyalist 
paramilitaries, as well as the IRA, in the peace process. What 
is really needed is to shake off the delusive peace process and 
deal with both sets of paramilitary godfathers, not as 
politicians to be conciliated but as terrorists to be brought 
under control. That may yet happen, but I fear that the growing 
violence will be allowed to get worse before the governments see 
through the peace process. 

