CSO 

  [Text] Madrid--The secretary general for employment, Marcos 
Pena, announced yesterday that the government this week will 
complete the work of drawing up a package of incentives for 
hiring the long-term unemployed and jobless persons over age 45; 
he also said the latter will be exempt from Social Security 
payroll contributions for a period between one and three years. 
  Marcos Pena, who participated in a Eurotraining workshop on 
Spain's labor reform, said some 500,000 persons will benefit 
from the new measures, though he admitted some of the specifics 
have not yet been decided and it is still uncertain what 
juridical or administrative form the incentives will take. 
  "This initiative covers access to the labor market through 
temporary-hire contracts and subsequent conversion into a 
different status, with the possibility of retaining the current 
subventions," he added. 
  The secretary general for employment also referred to the 
announced reform of the National Employment Institute (INEM), 
which he said will be completed by early summer and will consist 
in reorienting the agency to focus primarily on population 
groups that have greatest difficulty gaining access to the labor 
market (those older than 40-45 years of age, young people, and 
long-term unemployed). 
  Marcos Pena expressed "moderate satisfaction" with the 
"success" of the new contract categories that went into effect 
at the first of the year, with 1,500 apprenticeship contracts 
having been signed to date and some 200,000 part-time workers 
signed on in the first quarter of the year. 
  In his opinion, it is necessary to establish some 
relationship between unemployment outlays and benefits derived, 
such that subsidies can offset the lack of income and job and 
enable the jobless person to search actively for new employment, 
but all without sacrificing the "financial solvency" of the 
unemployment and pension systems. 
  During the same proceedings Angel Laborda, director general 
for projections and trends at the Ministry of Economic Affairs, 
predicted the labor reform would, among other things, make net 
job creation possible with a lower overall rate of economic 
growth--2 percent, instead of 2.5 or 3 percent, the current 
growth threshold for job creation. The comparable figure for the 
European Union as a whole is 1.5 percent. 
  Speaking in a personal capacity, Laborda said that although 
unemployment will diminish "significantly" in the next few 
years, it will continue to be "a serious problem for economic 
policy." 
  He discussed two possible scenarios for trends in 
unemployment between now and the year 2000. 
  In the first scenario, assuming the Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) grows by 4 percent annually and 300,000 jobs per year are 
created, unemployment by the year 2000 will be no more than 2.5 
million--a result which he admitted will be difficult to achieve. 
  The other scenario assumes economic growth of 3.2 percent 
annually and creation of 325,000 work positions per year, which 
would reduce the unemployment rate to 18 percent of the work 
force. 
  The economic affairs minister underscored the 
"insensitivity" 
of wage levels to fluctuations in the economy. 
  In that connection, he emphasized that business and industry 
have little leeway to reward outstanding job performance or to 
adjust costs with cyclical economic fluctuations, because of the 
high percentage of payroll outlays earmarked for fixed 
compensation. 

