This     Foreign Press Review series focuses on economic issues in 
Egypt.  The information is summarized from Egyptian or Arabic- 
language expatriate publications.  The hardcopy version of this 
Foreign Media Note contains 1 cartoon with caption. 

   $35 Million Tourism Publicity Campaign in the Works 

   The Tourism Ministry is planning to launch a $35 million 
advertising campaign this year to attract tourists and to "offset 
Egypt's declining tourism income."  Tourism Minister Dr. Mamduh al- 
Biltaji, who pointed out that last year's campaign was no more than 
$3.1 million, said that this year "the ministry's departments are 
devoted to drawing up two programs for stimulating Egyptian 
tourism."  The overseas program seeks to increase foreign demand 
and, as al-Biltaji said, restore Egypt's "place in new and 
traditional markets" by endeavoring to "allay fears caused by recent 
terrorist operations against tourists and by foreign media 
exaggerations of these acts."  He also said that the ministry has 
begun thorough inspections of its overseas tourism offices "in light 
of new developments."  Under the motto "Tourism is the engine of 
development driving Egypt's economy," the domestic program "aims at 
raising tourism awareness among Egyptians, making them realize that 
they have a direct stake in promoting tourist activity."  The 
ministry "intends to spend the earmarked funds for advertising on 
television networks and tourist magazines in Europe and the United 
States."  (London AL-HAYAH 19 Jan 94) 

   Minister Announces Plans to Expand Tourism Market 

   Dr. Mamduh al-Biltaji announced ministry goals to "open new 
tourism markets" in the Far East and South Africa following a 
meeting with the president of South Africa's Union of Tourism 
Companies.  He added that Cairo had agreed to hold a general 
assembly for the South African union this September.  The minister 
also confirmed plans to run "an additional flight between Seoul and 
Cairo effective this month to handle increasing tourism activity 
from Korea and the Far East to Egypt."  (Cairo AL-AHRAM AL-DUWALI 17 
Jan 94) 

   Governor Unveils 1994 Banking System Goals 

   Central Bank Governor Isma'il Hasan affirmed that "banks will 
play a larger role in the capital market in order to stimulate the 
stock market by promoting bond protection, establishing investment 
funds, and encouraging companies to explore the securities market 
for long-term financing."  He added that mid and long-term 
government securities will be issued to provide these firms with 
"new capital which will yield some success in terms of liquidity, 
security, and rising profitability."  All of this, he said, will be 
tied to equipping bank employees in Egypt and abroad with "the 
latest banking industry skills" through bank institute vocational 
programs conducted last year for 3,414 employees.  The governor 
mentioned these and other generally defined goals during his 
discussion of 1993 banking achievements.  (Cairo Al-AHRAM AL- 
IQTISADI 17 Jan 94) 

   "World's Second Largest Defense Electronics Firm" To Develop 
Communications System 

   French electronics firm Thomson-CSF has agreed to "design and 
install a state-of-the-art radio communications system in Egypt" at 
an approximate cost between 3O and 7O million francs.  The company's 
commercial director, Jean Madi Lafakiyuri, said that the project, 
"considered to be the first of its kind in Egypt," will comprise 
three stages: "the first covers the Greater Cairo area; the second, 
Alexandria and the northern Cairo district; and the third, southern 
Egypt."  Once completed, the system, Lafakiyuri said, "will be used 
in urban projects, as companies, banks, and police departments will 
be allowed to use it, and for air traffic control purposes."  He 
also said that "the increased cost of this project will be covered 
by the protocol signed by Egypt and France, as was done previously 
when Thomson-CSF installed the same system in Portugal, Switzerland, 
Turkey, and Morocco."  (London AL-HAYAH 19 Jan 94) 

   Meat Importers, EC Middlemen Flood Market with "Spoiled" Meat 

   Centrist opposition daily AL-WAFD criticized Egyptian meat 
importers and distributors, labeling them "the mafia", and EC meat 
distributors for deals that are resulting in the saturation of local 
markets with "sizeable quantities of overpriced frozen meat 
available from European storage facilities that has expired or is 
near its expiration date", thereby exposing Egyptian consumers to a 
range of health hazards.  The newspaper's two-part investigative 
report on this subject published on 23 and 24 January included 
comments from Egyptian health officials and meat industry 
representatives.  According to AL-WAFD, this "spoiled" meat is said 
to frequently exceed international standards fdr fat content and is 
available at extremely low cost to local importers, and, 
consequently "the meat is sold at from LE 7 to LE 10 whereas the 
import cost is only LE 1."  Due to the profit margin available from 
sales to Egypt, European distributors and Egyptian middlemen are 
reportedly mounting a campaign against the Egyptian Government "to 
pressure the Egyptian government into raising the fat content of 
imported meat from 2O percent to 35 percent; in other words, for 
every 1000 kgs of meat, the fat content is 350 kgs."  AL-WAFD 
continues, "This pressure by distributors extends even to EC 
officials, to the point that one official has threatened to halt 
meat shipments to Egypt."  In an effort to circumvent government 
controls, importers reportedly further conceal the fat content of 
foreign meat imports by selling the meat piecemeal, thereby 
invalidating import certificates. 

   Egyptian health experts interviewed by AL-WAFD expressed concern 
about the illnesses that can result from the consumption of such 
meats, ranging from heart disease to salmonella.  They said that the 
availability of this meat will have a direct impact on the public's 
health. Of particular concern is the plethora of factories producing 
inexpensive luncheon meats primarily from frozen imported meat. 
Health officials pointed not only to the spoilage of this meat but 
also to the carcinogenic additives used by local companies to retard 
it.  Further compounding this problem is the storage issue: "Egypt's 
biggest problem is an inadequate number of refrigeration units to 
store meat and retard bacterial growth in butcher shops and meat 
suppliers' facilities." 

   Industry experts also maintained that factories and shops must 
comply with existing standards and specifications; however, they 
acknowledged that "the first step is to guarantee the quality of 
imported meat."  While Egypt reportedly has procedures in place to 
guarantee the quality of imports upon arrival, elimination of the 
"meat mafia" requires "enforcement of (existing) food laT?s."  AL- 
                                                        ? 
WAFD has asked the ministers of health and industry to "confront the 
demands of the distributors" and wondered whether "the health and 
manufacturing agencies will carry out their role."  (Cairo AL-WAFD 
23, 24 Jan 94) 

   Suez Canal Bridge Planned 

   President of the Suez Canal Agency Muhammad 'Izzat 'Adil 
announced that an agreement had been concluded with Minister of 
Transportation Sulayman Mitwalli to begin construction of a bridge 
over the Suez Canal to further development in the Sinai and ease the 
growing transit traffic in the area. At present the bridge will not 
include a railway bed due to technical difficulties.  The four-lane 
bridge will be at least 60 meters high.  Japanese officials have 
been contacted for some technical assistance on this project. 
(London AL-HAYAH 27 Nov 93) 

   Foreign Staffing Restrictions Lifted 

   According to an official from the Power and Employment Ministry, 
restrictions on foreign businesses that limit employment of foreign 
employees to 10 percent of the total office manpower are being 
lifted.  The new measures reportedly will also apply to small 
enterprises and to family businesses.  The stated purpose of the 
change is to encourage foreign investors to develop projects in 
Egypt and create more job opportunities overall   (Cairo MENA 8 Feb 
94) 

   Minister Comments on Privatization Program, Employment 

   Speaking before the People's Assembly Economic Affairs Committee, 
Dr. 'Atif 'Ubayd, minister of the public business sector and 
minister of state for administrative development and environmental 
affairs, commented on the privatization program and emphasized that 
"there will be no rush to sell public sector companies so that 
workers' rights may be protected."  Under the current program, 
"revenue from the sale will be used to reform the company's 
financial structures, settle bank loans, and reinvest the remaining 
funds."  Reportedly, the sale of public sector companies to 
foreigners will adhere to certain specifications, intended to 
stimulate the aquisition of new technology, increase exports, and 
develop employment opportunities.  Dr. 'Ubayd stated:  "We need 
700,000 job opportunities annually in order to eliminate 
unemployment in seven years.  This requires investments totalling 14 
billion pounds, which the government cannot provide except through 
privatization."  He further cited the example of the Pepsi Cola and 
Coca Cola companies where "the net worth of the companies was around 
27 million pounds, but they were sold for 500 million pounds." 

   Dr. 'Ubayd emphasized that the government would not "rush to 
sell" and that that "there will be no monopolies under the policy of 
privatization" and that "the government will not monopolize any 
industry of which it retains ownership."  Dr. 'Ubayd added that "the 
public sector's overall capital reached 8.4 billion pounds last year 
which represents the net worth of companies where the state is a 36 
percent shareholder."  According to this report, 314 of these 
companies are in the public sector, exclusive of insurance, banking, 
and military industry companies, whose overall debt is 53 billion 
pounds.  (Cairo MENA 9 Feb 94) 

   (QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, AFRICA/LEVANT 
BRANCH AT (703) 733-6408) 
ENEAG/03 Mar/ECONF/NEASA Division/CB 03/2038z Mar 

