CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by Serob Oganyan: "The Russian Peace Initiative </F>
Should Be Accepted by All Parties"] 
  [Text] As already reported, General of the Army Pavel 
Grachev, minister of defense of the Russian Federation, arrived 
in Yerevan on 8 June. 
  Judging by what the minister said, his arrival in the 
Transcaucasus and, in particular, in Armenia was brought about 
by three factors. The first--a number of military-political 
matters, which include the cooperation of the armed forces of 
Armenia and Russia and the accommodation of Russian military 
bases in Armenia and the solution in this connection of a number 
of administrative questions such as the number and location of 
these bases, has to be discussed with the president of Armenia. 
It is a question of one or, at the most, two bases, 
incidentally. The second--in connection with the start of the 
period of military exercises, the inspection of the Russian 
military units stationed on Armenian territory. And the 
third--after the visit to Tbilisi on 11 June, Pavel Grachev will 
fly to Baku for several hours. This came as a surprise to 
everyone since the decision was made directly prior to the 
departure from Moscow. The run-up to events is as follows: 
Azerbaijani President Geydar Aliyev requested this of Boris 
Yeltsin personally, and the latter, in turn, gave Pavel Grachev 
the appropriate directive. The minister himself said that he 
would attempt in these few hours to finally persuade the 
leadership of Azerbaijan to accept the Russian peace initiative. 
  Having stopped briefly at Reception House, the Russian 
minister set off for the meeting with Levon Ter-Petrosyan, 
president of Armenia. The talks took place behind closed doors. 
At the conclusion of the negotiations Pavel Grachev evaluated 
their results as satisfactory, saying, in particular: 
  "The most important thing is that we once again obtained 
from 
President Levon Ter-Petrosyan confirmation that Armenia wishes 
to have Russian bases on its territory. We are within the 
framework of collective security to provide for the security of 
both Armenia and Russia...." 
  To a question by your RESPUBLIKA ARMENIYA correspondent as 
to 
whether the question of a settlement of the Karabakh conflict 
had been discussed, the minister replied: "Yes," and continued: 
  "The Armenian president once again supported unconditional 
compliance with the agreement worked out in Moscow. I will take 
these thoughts to Baku, where I shall propose that Geydar Aliyev 
sign this agreement." 
  "Will there be negotiations with the Karabakh side?" 
  "They are not anticipated...." 
  Yesterday the military inspectors toured Russian military 
units and by 1600 hours were to have gotten together with their 
summaries. Pavel Grachev said that it would be decided after 
this "what to reduce where, and what, on the contrary, to 
increase." He noted also that the bases quartered in Armenia 
would not, most likely, be fixed motorized bases but air-mobile 
bases. 
  "Levon Akopovich also agreed that within the framework of 
providing for security it was essential that we create a common 
air defense system," Mr. Grachev said. 

