Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Hans Peter Stihl, president of the </F>
Federation of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce [DIHT], 
by Rainer Bittermann; place and date not given -- recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [Bittermann] Mr. Stihl, economic experts and 
politicians, and employers' associations basically agree on one 
point at present: The recession has reached its lowest level, 
it is bottoming out. Yet there is no agreement concerning the 
possible beginning of a recovery. What is the opinion of the 
entrepreneurs with whom you are talking? What view prevails at 
the chambers of commerce and industry? 
  [Stihl] The basis of our assessments is information from 83 
chambers of commerce and industry in Germany that regularly 
brief us on the economic situation, and inform us on the mood in 
enterprises. As a matter of fact, the majority of companies are 
still planning to lay off people, and only a minority is 
considering carrying out future-oriented investments. The 
Federation of German Chambers of Industry and Commerce is able 
to confirm the statement that the recession is finally bottoming 
out. As far as exports are concerned, certain positive signs 
are visible. However, they are not sufficient to trigger a 
strong recovery of the German economy. The question is: How 
long will we remain at the lowest point, and how long will it 
take until positive economic signals from abroad are strong 
enough to trigger a positive development in our country? 
  Taking into consideration developments in the United States, 
in North America generally, in Latin America, and in Southeast 
Asia, we believe that a recovery in Germany will only be 
possible after the classic increase in exports. Yet I think 
that this will take some time. 
  [Bittermann] Does this mean that you believe that a proper 
recovery may not take place before 1995? 
  [Stihl] If we are lucky, we will see certain clear signs in 
the second half of 1994. However, this will not lead to a 
fundamental and sustained recovery in Germany. It might happen 
in 1995. Yet this is mere speculation. [passage omitted] 
  [Bittermann] At present, it looks as though industrial 
action might take place in the metalworking and electrical 
industry in western Germany. Might such a conflict have a 
negative impact on the economic upswing? 
  [Stihl] I believe that labor action is always the last 
resort in wage conflicts. Against the backdrop of the current 
difficult situation, it would be deplorable if economic recovery 
were to be impaired by a large-scale industrial action, which 
would naturally be the case. On the other hand, the 7 March 
date for a strike ballot in Schleswig-Holstein does not mean an 
end to all negotiations. There is still a chance for the 
parties to the wage negotiations to hold another round of talks 
to explore possible solutions before actually calling a strike. 
  By the way, it seems as though the metalworkers trade union 
does not plan a large-scale nationwide strike, but that it 
simply wants to increase pressure to achieve a solution. Yet I 
would like to make one thing completely clear: If the 
metalworkers trade union believe that an increase in wages and 
salaries can really be achieved in the current wage 
negotiations, it is wrong. Most of the enterprises in the 
metalworking and electrical industries are operating at a loss, 
or their profits have declined drastically. They urgently need a 
reduction in costs. If the metalworkers trade union wants to 
preserve the current regulations on collective bargaining 
policies, they will have to face up to the existing conditions 
and reach an agreement that does not entail new burdens for 
enterprises. This means nothing but a zero round. I pointed 
this out as early as in the middle of last year. 
  [Bittermann] It looks as though the trade unions have 
realized that the safeguarding and creation of jobs are 
currently to be given priority over real wage increases. There 
is currently no longer any talk of a 6-percent rise. Do you 
agree? 
  [Stihl] This demand has not been abandoned. Safe jobs would 
require guaranteed orders for the enterprises by the 
metalworkers trade union. This is unrealistic. Trade unions 
cannot provide a guarantee for orders. Thus, the entrepreneurs 
cannot guarantee jobs. This is the wrong approach to wage 
negotiations. By the way, this sphere cannot be regulated 
through wage negotiations. 
  [Bittermann] What measures should be adopted in the sphere 
of collective bargaining policies to increase Germany's 
attractiveness as an industrial base? 
  [Stihl] I am firmly convinced that we made big mistakes in 
the past few years, particularly concerning the lower-wage 
groups. Wage groups one and two have been abolished. 
Generally, wages in the lower groups increased 
disproportionally in the past few years. This means that work in 
the lower groups, unskilled labor, has become very expensive, so 
that it became increasingly necessary for enterprises to use 
machines and adopt rationalization measures. Expensive labor was 
also a reason for them to give up production in Germany and 
transfer jobs abroad. This is currently occurring in many 
sectors. 
  If we want to create more jobs in Germany, we must also 
create the possibility for cheaper work through wage 
negotiations, not only in the form of part-time work but by 
reintroducing wage groups one and two. 
  [Bittermann] What do you think is the reason for the 
exacerbation of the wage conflict? Generally, it was believed 
that readiness for industrial action would not be too great in 
view of the current weak economic situation. 
  [Stihl] If the industry is facing an economic situation in 
which it does not see another way out except by reducing costs, 
its resistance against demands for a 6-percent raise increases. 
The fact that the metalworkers trade union called for a 
6-percent increase showed from the outset that it has completely 
lost touch with economic realities. The enterprises themselves 
exerted massive pressure on their own organization by demanding 
a reduction of real costs. This is the reason it is so 
difficult for both sides to achieve a sensible solution. 
  [Bittermann] Do you still see an opportunity for a 
negotiated settlement, or are strikes -- even limited ones -- 
inevitable? 
  [Stihl] If an industrial action should actually take place, 
it will only be possible for a relatively short time to limit it 
to certain areas because the enterprises and the metalworkers 
trade union will be forced to expand the strikes as quickly as 
possible to ensure a quick end. It would not be fair for a few 
enterprises to have to endure the strikes in lieu of many others. 
  However, I believe that it is still possible to achieve a 
solution through negotiations. In the meantime it has also 
become known in trade union circles that numerous German 
enterprises are producing losses instead of profits, and that 
wage increases are therefore not really possible. To illustrate 
this, one can use the picture of a cake that has become smaller 
in 1994. The piece of cake that the metalworkers trade union 
claims for itself cannot become larger, simply because others 
are not ready to give up their piece of cake in favor of the 
metalworking trade union. [passage omitted] 

