Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] In a communique, hundreds of leading Colorado Party 
members stated yesterday that the communique issued by party 
president Blas N. Riquelme on 5 January does not reflect the 
political will of the Colorado people. The document charges 
Riquelme with violating the party bylaws and with being "too 
anxious" to participate in the government to the point of 
neglecting the party's institutional affairs. Riquelme is also 
criticized for being unaware of the president's constitutional 
powers and of the role he must perform as party chairman. 
  The document criticizing Riquelme's political actions was 
released at Mburuvicha Roga [Wasmosy's official residence] after 
a meeting between the president and Colorado leaders. The 
meeting was attended by cabinet ministers, members of the 
party's executive board, heads of state-owned companies, and 
other government officials who conveyed their support to Wasmosy 
and described as inappropriate Riquelme's anger over the 
dismissal of Antelco [National Telecommunications 
Administration] officials. 
  The communique states that the crisis provoked by Riquelme's 
reaction to the reshuffling of senior Antelco officials by the 
Executive Branch "shows with unmistakable clarity that Mr. 
Riquelme believes he owns the party, and that he is not only 
unaware of the president's constitutional powers but also of the 
role a ruling political party can and must play." 
  The document, which was signed by hundreds of party members, 
charges the party chairman with having failed to observe the 
party bylaws, with overlooking the institutional procedures 
established therein, and with acting on behalf of the party 
"only when he feels like it and often to address matters that 
had not been discussed earlier by the Colorado executive board, 
of which he must be the leader and the spokesman." 
  The communique adds: "In light of these circumstances, in 
which the party president is so anxious to participate in the 
government to the point of neglecting the party's institutional 
affairs, we -- members of the executive board, congressmen, 
heads of precincts, mayors, councilmen, governors and members of 
departmental boards; leaders of women, youth, professional, 
peasant, and labor organizations -- hereby assume the essential 
and urgent responsibility of clearly explaining that the 
communique released by Mr. Riquelme does not reflect either the 
political will of the executive board or of the Colorado people." 
  The communique notes that, in a special session, full 
members 
of the Colorado executive board -- many of whom signed the 
communique -- will propose that the board consider the actions 
and communique signed by Riquelme. 
  The communique adds: "We, the undersigned, hereby express 
their full support for the government of President Juan Carlos 
Wasmosy, based on their conviction that his government 
represents the Colorado proposal of promoting national interests 
as presented to the people by the Wasmosy-Seifart ticket." 

