BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Comrade Do Van An, secretary of Son La Party </F>
Committee and head of Son La National Assembly Deputy Delegation 
by an unidentified radio correspondent; place and date not given 
-- recorded] 
  [Summary] [Correspondent] "Dear Comrade: Recently, the 
government presented a report on the national socioeconomic 
development situation in the first six months of 1994. On the 
basis of the report's general assessment, what can you say about 
prominent issues of economic development in Son La and its 
development direction in the future?" 
  [Do Van An] Our Son La National Assembly deputy delegation 
unanimously agrees with the government report presented by 
Deputy Prime Minister Phan Van Khai to the National Assembly. 
Our national economic situation has started to improve with 
more positive factors to help us emerge from the crisis. After 
Comrade General Secretary Do Muoi's visit to Son La, the 
province started to improve its economy with a quicker changing 
pace from an autarkic economy to a commodity production economy. 
Presently, Son La enjoys great potential in industrial trees, 
fruit trees, and livestock breeding. To further increase its 
economy, Son La needs more capital, greater energy resource, and 
better transportation so that it can process its forestry and 
agricultural products. If we can solve these problems, I 
believe that the transformation rate from autarkic economy to 
commodity economy in Son La Province will be higher and 
stronger, leading to quicker success in our undertaking of 
starvation elimination and poverty alleviation. 
  [Correspondent] "So Son La has realized its development 
direction. Regarding the aforementioned problems, apart from 
assistance from the central level and different sectors and 
levels, what measures have been taken by the province to 
overcome these difficulties?" 
  [Do Van An] Realities prove that in the past three years, 
the 
Son La Party Committee and people have heightened their 
self-reliant spirit. With very little capital for medium and 
long-term investment, Son La has used its local budget to 
provide loans to the public to improve local production. The 
local people have invested much of their labor into the 
production. I consider this a great contribution from the 
public. 
  [Correspondent] "What do you think about the construction of 
the national electricity transmission line to solve the energy 
problem?" 
  [Do Van An] "The energy problem is a concern of our party 
committee and people. We are proud that Son La is one of the 
two provinces that greatly contribute to the Hoa Binh energy 
resources. We are glad that the 500-kilovolt transmission line 
has brought electricity from Hoa Binh to Ho Chi Minh City with a 
great contribution from people in Son La and Hoa Binh Provinces. 
However, we are still worried that so far, we still have pay a 
very high electricity rate because our power stations are run 
with diesel generators. Therefore, the production development 
is very limited. The comrade general secretary, during his last 
trip to the province, realized that this is not reasonable. We 
expect that the national electricity system will reach Son La 
early. It may be very exciting for me to find out that the two 
provinces of Son La and Hoa Binh will be totally electrified 
first. It think this is fair." 
  [Correspondent] "Thank you, comrade." 

