Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 20 Mar (XINHUA) -- During this year's 
National People's Congress [NPC], as in last year's session, the 
market economy is a topic discussed most frequently among 
deputies. What differs between this year and last is the new 
perception acquired by the deputies on building a socialist 
market economic structure. They stress the need to "have new 
ideas" when speaking about development and to pay attention to 
"the overall situation and balance." 
  We can also cite many other similar "changes." 
  A feeling common to all deputies is that the socialist 
market 
economy is a great school where you can learn things that could 
never be learned in the past several decades. 
<H3>  A Practice-Rooted Great Theory Triggers Profound Social and 
Economic Changes; the Great Stage of the Times Is Full of 
Vitality, and the Spring Tide of Reform and Development Surges 
in Our Vast Divine Land </H3>
  Nine years after the birth of New China, people through 
practice began to understand the role of the law of value. 
Comrade Mao Zedong once pointed out: The law of value is a 
great school. 
  After several decades of arduous exploration and under the 
guidance of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics, we have finally established a 
model that makes the establishment of a socialist market 
economic structure the goal of China's economic structural 
reform. We have codified this model in the 14th national party 
congress report and the PRC Constitution, thereby transforming 
it into the will of the party, the state, and the people. 
  Its rippling effect is like a rock thrown into the water. 
  Last year, from the coastal region to the interior, reform 
deepened, opening up widened, and the economy developed 
healthily. News brought by deputies from different localities, 
departments, and industries is heartening. Figures released by 
authoritative departments are likewise encouraging. 
  Capital, labor, technologies, and other production factors 
are flowing and optimizing in the market, breaking geographic 
and space restrictions and creating many new industries and new 
economic benefits. 
  New development ideas and strategies and new reform measures 
are being transformed into action. 
  Amid this great tide of market economy, the central and 
western regions, not to mention the eastern and southern coastal 
regions, are trying to find the optimum development strategy. 
  Shanxi, a province rich in energy resources, has formulated 
an energy construction and development strategy under which it 
tries to vigorously tap the market, break the transportation 
bottleneck, undertake large projects to benefit from economies 
of scale, broaden processing, and march toward the world market. 
Deputy Hu Fuguo said: Thanks to the implementation of this 
strategy, Shanxi's construction of energy and heavy chemical 
bases last year began to enter the "fast track." 
  Yue Qifeng, a deputy from China's heavy industrial base of 
Liaoning, said: Liaoning has found itself in the transition to 
a market economy from a planned economy and has begun its 
arduous market-oriented "second pioneering." 
  The once enclosed and backward Yunnan has changed. Governor 
He Zhiqiang, also a deputy, said: "Last year, we seized the 
opportunity to open our southern gate to move toward the 
Asia-Pacific region. This has increasingly narrowed the 
distance between once enclosed Yunnan and the outside world." 
  Qinghai has rich natural resources. However, it has suffered 
from poverty despite its "gold mountain." At the NPC session, 
Deputy Tian Chengping said: We felt "suddenly enlightened" when 
we took another look at our strong points from the new 
perspective of market economy. Qinghai must not fear taking 
risks if it wants to open its door. We must let other people 
make a profit after entering the province. 
  The deputies also brought with them news on the public 
security and judicial, educational, cultural, ideological, and 
theoretical fronts. All fronts across the country have stepped 
up self-construction, focusing on accomplishing the goal of 
building a new structure. This has created a favorable 
environment for the establishment of the new structure. 
  Studying in the great school of socialist market economy, 
our 
cadres and people have learned and grasped many philosophic 
theories on reform, development, and stability. 
  The party Central Committee assessed the situation and, 
after summing up practical experience, forwarded the emphasis of 
work: "to seize opportunity, deepen reform, open up wider, 
promote development, and maintain statability." Recalling what 
was done over the past year, the deputies believe from the 
bottom of their hearts that the emphasis of work is a 
concentrated summation of the practical experience of the whole 
party and the people across the country, as well as a 
concentrated summation of the knowledge acquired by the hundreds 
of millions of people in the great school of socialist market 
economy. 
<H3>  Practice Produces Genuine Knowledge, Understanding Is 
Enhanced During the Course of Practice, Practice Leads to Ways 
and Means, the Solution of Tough Problems Begins During the 
Course of Practice, and People Gradually Become Wise in the 
Great School of Socialist Market Economy </H3>
  Shuai Liguo, mayor of Beihai, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous 
Region, and a NPC deputy, said emotionally after summing up last 
year's experience that market economy has taught us something 
new, something the people in Beihai could not learn for many 
years. What he said is significant and worth pondering, and it 
is not just the experience of him alone. As shown by their 
speeches, the deputies have become more comprehensive in their 
observation of things and their methods of analyzing problems 
have become more conformable with materialist dialectics. 
  A craze for undertaking real estate business, development 
projects, and fund-raising occurred in some regions last summer. 
To deal with it, the central authorities proceeded from 
rectifying the banking order and resolutely took a series of 
macroeconomic regulation and control measures. Guangdong deputy 
Huang Diyan said at the current NPC session: The macroeconomic 
regulation and control has solved the overheated economy problem 
in some regions while maintaining high growth rate. This shows 
that we have begun to free ourselves from the vicious circle of 
"relaxation of control leading to disorder, disorder leading to 
resumed control, and control leading to stagnation." 
  Market grain prices rose sharply at the end of last year, 
and 
the governments at all levels had to adopt measures to stabilize 
the prices. At the current NPC session, some deputies from 
grass-roots units pointed out that it is the government's duty 
to take care of the price business. Some deputies holding 
leading posts said that it is the commodity price department's 
functional responsibility to stabilize the prices and the 
government should fulfill its duty. 
  The law of socialist market economy has provided clear and 
definite answers to questions about which people had endless 
arguments in the past. It has unified those understandings that 
were not unified for a long time in the past. 
  Market economy is the best way for distributing resources 
and 
guiding production, but it is not omnipotent. Hainan deputy 
Ruan Chongwu said that although market regulation can solve many 
problems, there are sill some problems that cannot be solved by 
market regulation alone and must be solved with government 
intervention. The government should adapt itself to the law of 
market economy and change its functions. It is not that market 
economy needs no government intervention at all. Market economy 
requires the government to provide more effective and 
standardized economic management. Shanghai deputy Gao Wenkui 
said: It is a misinterpretation that socialist market economy 
needs relaxed or no macroeconomic regulation and control. Other 
deputies said that the establishment of a socialist market 
economic structure does not mean the dispensability of the 
central government's authority, and that macroeconomic 
regulation and control by a highly authoritative and powerful 
central government are always indispensable to the development 
of socialist market economy. On questions concerning growth 
rate and the local economic situation, the deputies now seldom 
follow the old practice of arguing over whether or not the rate 
is warranted, and whether an overheated economy is good or bad. 
They are using productive forces and the market as criteria in 
appraising these questions. They hold that high growth rate is 
OK so long as we are capable of it and the products are of good 
quality, yield high economic returns, and have a market; and 
that it is total blindness to seek high growth rate in disregard 
of objective conditions and market factors. 
  The deputies have an unprecedentedly unified understanding 
of 
the emphasis of work for the whole party and country this year. 
They wholeheartedly support the emphasis. Guangxi deputy Zhao 
Fulin said: As we are a team rowing the big boat of the 
country, we should follow the drum and work together. The 
deputies' rational views show that both our people and our 
country are becoming mature in the great school of socialist 
market economy. 
<H3>  Things Always Advance Wave Upon Wave and Develop in Spirals; 
the Edifice of the New Structure Cannot Be Built Overnight; We 
Must Practice Again and Again and Study Again and Again in This 
Great School </H3>
  A market economy consists of a comprehensive economic 
operational system, and establishing a socialist market economic 
structure is a gigantic system engineering work. Deputy Lu 
Xueyi, a sociologist, said: The change from a planned economy 
to a market economy involves a fairly long process that cannot 
be completed at one stroke. The edifice of the new structure 
cannot be built overnight. Our tasks are still extremely 
arduous, and there are still many things we do not know. We are 
trying to build a socialist market economic structure, an 
original creation that has no established patterns for us to 
follow. To avoid detours, we have no other alternatives but to 
study and study and explore and explore. Zhao Pengfei, a deputy 
from Beijing, said: Deepening reform is an arduous task, and 
new developments and problems will appear in the process of 
building a socialist market economy. This requires us to study 
harder and respect the masses' pioneering spirit. Some deputies 
who were in leading positions felt deeply about their lack of 
knowledge, ability, and skills and the need to learn and grasp 
many new things in the great tide of the market economy. 
Shandong deputy Jiang Chunyun said: We must learn from the 
masses and the market, and we must further emancipate our minds 
and change our concepts. Fujian deputy Jia Qinglin said: We 
must learn more about dialectics to improve our leadership art 
and skills. 
  Establishing a socialist market economy is a pioneering work 
without precedent. To move from "disorder" to "order," new 
problems and contradictions will appear all the time. Deputies 
not only brought new experiences to the session from the 
localities but they also brought new problems requiring urgent 
solutions. 
  In essence, a market economy is a kind of economy with a 
highly developed culture. It requires idealism and the pursuit 
of ideals. Indulgence in irrational over-expansion is bound to 
lead to chaos. Many deputies stress the need to pay attention to 
noneconomic aspects of socialist market economy, pointing out 
that a legal system and spiritual civilization serve as 
infrastructures for the new socialist market. Tianjin deputy 
Gao Dezhan said: Spiritual civilization must enter a new stage 
of development along with economic construction to create a good 
environment for reform and development. Qiao Weixiong, another 
Tianjin deputy, pointed out that dedication to one's work is an 
important element of China's character and moral education. He 
called for publicizing it and using it to educate people. 
  Deputies touched a broad range of issues related to the 
topic 
of establishing a socialist market economy. Some deputies 
commented on ways to make government more effective and to 
operate the economy more according to established standards. 
Some suggested ways to handle well relations between developing 
the economy and controlling inflation. Still others suggested 
ways and means to maintain balanced development between regions, 
between industries, and between urban and rural areas; to help 
peasants enter the market as soon as possible; and to guide 
state-owned large and medium enterprises change operating 
mechanisms. It is safe to say that in the great school of 
socialist market economy, deputies have filled in many blanks in 
the test. 
  Lenin once said: During the revolutionary period, millions 
of people learned more things in a week than they did in a year 
of their befuddled lives. Now, our reform goal has been set, 
and the blueprint of construction has been drawn. If we study 
with an open mind, courageously explore the great school of 
socialist market economy, and transform every measure into 
effective and concrete action, the edifice of the new structure 
will certainly be able to stand rock-solid in China's vast land. 

