Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By WEN WEI PO special correspondent in Paris Cheng Jo-lin </F>
(6774 5387 7792): "Interviewed by Our Reporters Before Leaving 
for Beijing, French Special Envoy Talks About Two Missions on 
His China Trip"] 
  [Text] Paris, 26 Jan (WEN WEI PO)--Alain Peyrefitte, 
special envoy of French Prime Minister Balladur, is leaving on a 
visit to Beijing today. When interviewed by our reporters 
before leaving, he said during his visit to China that he will 
make preparations with the Chinese authorities for Edouard 
Balladur to visit China. He also hinted that the French prime 
minister's March visit will be very important. "Some concrete 
achievements will be made during the visit," he said. 
  Alain Peyrefitte is a member of the French National 
Assembly, 
an academic, a LE FIGARO editorial writer, and a former minister 
with the government of General Charles de Gaulle. He has 
written a variety of books about China, including one entitled 
"When China Awakes..." He has many readers in France and is one 
of the best known China experts in his country. 
  He told our reporters that the French prime minister expects 
that concrete achievements will be made in both the political 
and economic fields during his China visit. "We hope we can 
bring some contracts back to our country. With regard to 
technology in the fields of energy, communication, and 
telecommunication, which are three crucial fields for China's 
economic construction, France is the most powerful country or 
one of the most powerful countries in the world. For this 
reason, there are good prospects for cooperation between France 
and China." 
  Talking about the goals of his Beijing visit, Peyrefitte 
said: "I have been designated by Prime Minister Balladur this 
time to visit Beijing with two missions. First, to celebrate 
the 30th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic 
relations between France and China. No ceremonies were held by 
any of the two to mark the 20th and 25th anniversaries of the 
establishment of diplomatic relations, because Sino-French 
relations were good at that time and there was no need to do so. 
But this time, some difficulties have appeared between the two 
countries. Therefore, it is necessary to dispel the dark clouds 
over the two countries and turn a new page in history. A 
historic day for both countries was 27 January 1964. On that 
day, France and China issued a joint communique on the 
establishment of normal diplomatic relations. The purpose of 
celebrating this historical date is to reestablish good 
relations of mutual trust between France and China. Members of 
my delegation include Philippe de Gaulle, son of General Charles 
de Gaulle and a member of the National Assembly, (Clode Chaille) 
[ke luo de xia ye 0344 3157 1795 1115 0673], who built the 
French Embassy in China 30 years ago, and other people who have 
rendered contributions to the establishment of diplomatic 
relations between France and China." 
  "My second mission is to make preparations for Prime 
Minister 
Balladur's visit to China. I will discuss with the Chinese 
authorities such matters as the itinerary of Balladur's visit 
and the agenda for talks. Of course, this also includes the 
date of the visit and concrete achievements to be made, because 
this will be a very important visit, which cannot yield no 
concrete results." 
  He pointed out: "I believe that resuming a relationship of 
mutual trust will benefit both countries, France and China, 
alike. This relationship of mutual trust has been established 
through great efforts over the past many years, which can be 
traced back to 1963 when General de Gaulle began to take action 
and sent his special envoy Fuer [fu er 1381 1422] to China to 
seek the possibility of establishing diplomatic relations with 
China. As a result, France became the first Western power to 
recognize the People's Republic of China [as published; Britain 
established diplomatic relations with the PRC in 1954 at charge 
d'affaires level]." Alain Peyrefitte continued: "In recent 
years, as France first sold a destroyer and then Mirage planes 
to Taiwan, bilateral relations have been harmed. Therefore, it 
is important to repair the friendly relations between France and 
China now. I am pleased to see that both sides have finally 
ironed out their disputes arising from arms sales to Taiwan." 
  Referring to France-Taiwan relations, Peyrefitte pointed 
out: 
In 1963, General de Gaulle began to take action and sent his 
special envoy (Fuer) to China to seek the possibility of 
establishing diplomatic relations with China. At that time, 
both Beijing and Taipei held that there was only one, 
inseparable China. Taipei always held it had sovereignty over 
the mainland. To France, this was obviously not in conformity 
with reality. 
  A reporter asked: Former French Foreign Minister Dumas of 
the Socialist government said some days ago that when he was 
minister of foreign affairs, he promised to China that 
Lafayette, the destroyer sold to Taiwan, would not be equipped 
with weapons. Therefore, he criticized the Balladur Government 
for breaking the promises he had made to China on behalf of 
France. What is your comment on this? 
  Peyrefitte replied: According to the files and relevant 
documents I have read, I feel that Mr. Dumas might be frank and 
honest when talking about this issue, because he did not know 
that, at that time, the French Government had reached a secret 
agreement with Taiwan on this issue. This secret agreement was 
included in the contract with Taiwan. According to the secret 
agreement, if Taiwan was unable to fit out weapons on the 
destroyer sold by France, it would ask France to bear 
responsibility. What I want to explain is that it is not the 
Balladur government which has taken action to equip those ships 
with weapons, because it does not conform to the government's 
policy. On the contrary, having knowledge of this agreement 
after assuming office, Balladur realized immediately that this 
was something that should be changed.... That is why he 
believes that reestablishing a relationship of mutual trust with 
China is very important. 
  Peyrefitte also told our reporters that France is confident 
that economic cooperation and trade with China will be rapidly 
increased and France will be able to regain its lost share of 
the Chinese market due to the sale of fighters to Taiwan. 
  He pointed out: France was the first Western power to 
recognize China. The late Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai, whom I 
met several times in 1971, once told me that "when French 
enterprises come to China, under conditions of competition on an 
equal basis and so long as the price and quality are the same, 
we will give them first consideration." However, French 
enterprises have not made full use of this. Since 1981, France 
has been going backwards in the Chinese market. In those years, 
France occupied some 4 percent of the Chinese market, which was 
already rather low. But now its share has dropped to as low as 
1.8 percent. It has dropped by 2.2 percent in the past decade. 
But this was still the figure before the arms sales to Taiwan. 
Since then, because of China's economic sanctions, France's 
Chinese market occupation rate has been dropping from 1.8 
percent toward zero. Therefore, I hope that with the 
improvement of Sino-French relations, this important share can 
rise a little bit. Especially, as in the same period, the share 
of the Chinese market occupied by Germany, Italy, and other 
countries have been increasing rapidly. Yet France's has 
dropped to as low as those of Romania or Belgium. To France, 
this is incredible. 

