Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Madrid EFE in Spanish at 0227 GMT 4 
January, in a Mexico City datelined item, reports that on 3 
January the Guatemalan guerrilla movement confirmed in Mexico 
City that it is preparing to meet with Guatemalan Government 
officials between 6 and 9 January. The guerrilla announcement 
also pointed out that it will not discuss the government's peace 
proposal during the meeting. The Guatemalan National 
Revolutionary Unity, URNG, recently indicated through a 
communique that "the meeting which is intended to establish the 
foundations for renewing the peace process negotiation which was 
interrupted last May, cannot be used to discuss the government's 
peace plan, nor is said peace plan discussion part of the 
meeting." The URNG insists that the meeting's main objective is 
to search for alternatives leading to a resumption of peace 
negotiations that will end the 33-year-old civil war. The 
announcement also specifies that "the URNG considers the 
progress accomplished during the Oslo 1990 and Mexico 1991 
negotiations as inalienable. The URNG position will be to 
preserve the content of the negotiation and the agreements 
improved by the civilian society and the conciliating role 
played by Monsignor Rodolfo Quezada." 
  According to a Guatemala datelined report by Mexico City 
NOTIMEX in Spanish at 0109 GMT on 4 January, the Permanent 
Commission for Refugees in Mexico reiterated on Monday that 
during 1994, it will continue with plans to repatriate 
approximately 20,000 Guatemalan Indians to their country as 
scheduled. Commission Leader Ricardo Curtz told NOTIMEX that 
violence initiated by armed groups operating in the southeastern 
Mexican State of Chiapas, bordering on Guatemala, will not 
affect the repatriation program. Curtz also denied that the 
violence would bring negative repercussions to life in the 
refugee camps which provide shelter to at least 40,000 Indian 
refugees who fled to Mexico during the 1980's. The commission 
leader pointed out that the return of 1,000 refugees housed in 
the Chiapas refugee camp is scheduled for 12 January and that 
they will be relocated to a camp set up in Huehuetenango. It is 
expected that 20,000 refugees out of the 40,000 in Mexico will 
be repatriated during 1994. 
  Guatemalan Indian leader Rosalina Tuyuc warned on Monday 
that 
the guerrilla uprising in Mexico "is the result of lack of 
solutions to problems confronted by the Indian and peasant 
communities" which could extend to other nations throughout the 
continent. In a Guatemala City datelined report by Paris AFP in 
Spanish at 2343 GMT of 3 January, the Indian leader pointed out 
that "the methods used by the Mexican rebels to redeem their 
rights could be repeated in other countries of America since 
legal or political mechanisms seem very inadequate" to 
eliminating discrimination against indigenous populations. 
Tuyuc is the one of the main leaders of the National Commission 
of Guatemalan Widows, Conavigua. She proceeds to explain that 
actions by the guerrilla groups controlling several communities 
of the Mexican state of Chiapas "cannot be praised or 
criticized," and also pointed out that "they have their reasons 
for embarking on an armed struggle." The Conavigua leader 
specifically points out that despite everything that is taking 
place, "the Guatemalan refugees should not be associated" with 
the conflict. On the other hand, Rigoberta Menchu, a Guatemalan 
Indian leader and 1992 Nobel Peace Prize laureate currently 
living in Mexico, expressed her concern about the repercussions 
the uprising could have on her country's refugees. 

