Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Italicized passages recorded] </F>
  [Text] Since no single party has obtained an absolute 
majority in the country's legislative elections, alliances will 
have to be formed to know which political group will be asked to 
form the new government. As soon as the results were released, 
discussions on alliances began. For his part, the president of 
the Republic, who, according to the Constitution, must appoint 
the prime minister from the parliamentary majority, has begun 
consultations with the main political parties of the country. 
In this regard, delegations of the Togolese People's Rally 
[RPT], the Union for Justice and Democracy [UJD], the Action 
Committee for Renewal [CAR], the Togolese Union for Democracy 
[UTD], and the Coordination of New Forces [CFN] were at the 
presidency in Lome II district this morning where they took 
turns in meeting President Eyadema. Their discussions centered 
on general problems and efforts being made for the country's 
recovery. At the end of the discussions, the heads of 
delegation of the parties concerned gave us their impressions. 
First, the impressions of Joseph Kokou Koffigoh, leader of the 
CFN. 
  [Koffigoh] As prime minister, I usually hold 
discussions with the head of state and report to him on 
government business. We discussed state affairs. You are well 
aware of the principle of continuity in state affairs. It is 
therefore quite normal for me to hold discussions with the 
president at the end of this transition. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] You were also consulted in 
your capacity as CFN chairman. What do you have to say on this 
consultation? 
  [Koffigoh] The CFN philosophy is known since our 
campaign was based on it. We participated in the election 
campaign in a very democratic manner. We are in search of 
national reconciliation, definitive peace in Togo, the recovery 
of the nation's economy, and the consolidation of our democracy. 
That is our philosophy and of course we are holding discussions 
with all political actors who so desire so that these objectives 
can be realized. 
  [Correspondent] How do you see the future of the 
Togolese political scene and what will be the positive 
contribution of the CFN to the nation's political life? 
  [Koffigoh] I shall soon end my term of office as prime 
minister of the transition and a government will soon be formed. 
I believe that the current consultations being held by the head 
of state are aimed at appointing a new prime minister, but we 
shall always be there -- at the disposal of our activists as 
well as the entire Togolese people -- for the realization of the 
four objectives I have just mentioned, namely national 
reconciliation, the restoration and consolidation of civil peace 
in Togo, and the social and economic recovery of our country 
which has been weakened by political conflicts of all kinds, 
conflicts which have affected the upper and lower strata of the 
masses. We shall also be there for the consolidation of our 
democracy, which is like a new-born child. When the new 
government is formed and parliament begins sitting, this young 
democracy must be consolidated. However, particular attention 
must be paid to our country's economic recovery. We shall 
always be present with the people for the accomplishment of this 
task. 
  Let us now follow the statement of RPT Secretary General 
Vigniko Amedegnato. 
  [Amedegnato] It must be said that we have been waiting 
for this moment for three years now. We are now at the 
crossroads and we have understood that the president of the 
Republic does not intend to waste time. We need to help our 
country out of its present difficulties and it is useless to 
waste time in futile bickering. That is why we praise the 
president for his prompt gesture of contacting the political 
parties. Second, the president is ready to consult everyone 
before taking any step whatsoever. We have had the occasion to 
discuss with him and to communicate to him the RPT's proposals 
and suggestions. 
  UJD chairman, (Lal Tankpa Djaki) who was part of the RPT 
delegation, talks of his party's alliance with the RPT. 
  [(Djaki)] As you know very well, the RPT is the first 
Togolese party. UJD was created to support the president of the 
Republic and to help him to establish democracy, something he 
had begun to do long before the social and political strife. 
UJD is conscious that only the president is capable of leading 
the country to the democracy which every Togolese is yearning 
for and this is why we support the president. It is for this 
reason that we have formed an alliance with the RPT, which is 
the main party supporting the president. The RPT and the UJD 
will therefore work together to help the president lead the 
country toward democracy and economic recovery. 
  Yaovi Agboyibor, who led the CAR delegation to Lome II, also 
spoke to us after the discussions with the president. 
  [Agboyibor] The discussions focused essentially on 
general problems, especially the efforts being made to create 
the social and economic conditions needed for the country's 
development. We dwelled at length on this point because we of 
the CAR believe that before discussing the main issues, 
especially the formation of the government, the opposition must 
act in a united manner. The CAR and UTD will first have to take 
well-defined positions before discussing with the presidential 
group. 
  [Correspondent] You told the international media that 
the opposition has the majority. You said that the UTD-CAR 
tandem has absolute majority in the National Assembly. Does 
that mean that an alliance has been formed between the CAR and 
the UTD. If so, on what basis? 
  [Agboyibor] Yes, I would say that an alliance was 
sought by and has almost been imposed by the voters. If we have 
to be true to the will of the people, the UTD and the CAR should 
unite. This alliance is almost natural and no one has the right 
to call it into question. 
  [Correspondent] Is it a wish? Is it a desire? 
  [Agboyibor] Yes, you know, as political leaders we have 
the duty to act in accordance with the will of our voters. 
People have voted either for the RPT and its allies or for the 
opposition. We do not have the right to ignore this 
reality. 
  [Correspondent] Yesterday, the UTD chairman made a 
statement to the media saying he does not want UTD seats to be 
attributed without his opinion. What is your observation about 
this opinion. 
  [Agboyibor] I consider this opinion as Edem Kodjo's and 
not his voters' and even less so that of his party. 
  Finally, UTD chairman Edem Kodjo also gave us his 
impressions. 
  [Kodjo] We reviewed and examined the country's problems 
in general. So far, this is what has been done. 
  [Correspondent] Yesterday, you issued a communique 
underlining the UTD's specific nature, and the determination of 
your party to work for national reconciliation and economic 
recovery. We have heard other statements to the effect that 
this position is only that of the UTD chairman and less that of 
his party and its voters. What observation can you make on that 
statement? 
  [Kodjo] The UTD chairman always speaks on behalf of the 
UTD and the statements made by the chairman are binding on the 
whole party. In regard to speaking on behalf of the Togolese 
people, I believe no one can arrogate to himself that right. It 
is however evident that what we said is in accordance with our 
policy which is to say that we belong to the parliamentary 
majority and we believe our specific nature must be taken into 
account and our views considered. We want our views to be 
considered so that we are not reduced to a rump party. However, 
if decisions are made without consulting us then we will kindly 
make it known that we cannot agree to such methods. That is all 
we wanted to say. We are not declaring war on anyone. We are 
very peace-loving and wish for mutual understanding so that we 
can agree on programs and actions for the future of this country 
within the framework of economic recovery and national 
reconciliation. 

