Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Reacting to the savage Zionist massacre, Mr. Ahmad 
Jibril, secretary general of the Popular Front for the 
Liberation of Palestine-General Command [PFLP-GC], has said 
that there is nothing surprising in the Zionist acts of 
barbarity. The Ibrahimi Mosque massacre will not be the last. 
It is a natural link in the chain of the Zionist enemy's 
actions against our Palestinian people, whose resolve to 
liberate their stolen homeland will never weaken in the face of 
the Zionist occupation and its tools of war, which are supplied 
by a U.S. Administration that cares only about its own interests. 
  The U.S. Administration's policies, now as in the past, show 
how biased it is to the Zionist enemy. This fact makes us 
certain that for Washington, Arab blood is not worth a drop of 
oil. The U.S.-sponsored rounds of negotiations over Arab 
rights, including Palestinian rights, only illustrate the 
solidity of the American- Zionist alliance, which is being 
joined by weaklings from our midst in a cheap transaction 
involving the homeland, the people, and sanctities. 
  The PFLP-GC secretary general's press statement added: The 
savagery committed by the Zionist entity against Palestinian 
worshipers at the Ibrahimi Mosque is a corollary of the 
negotiations over blood, dignity, and rights. It is one of the 
fruits yielded by the Gaza-Jericho accord. This gave the 
Zionist entity a short cut to its goals and helped it legitimize 
its occupation of Palestinian Arab territory. It laid the 
groundwork for the gangs of killers and settlers to vent their 
hatred and Nazism against our people, whose only weapon is 
confidence in the inevitability of their triumph over this 
barbaric invasion. 
  We can only conclude from the incidents at the Ibrahimi 
Mosque that the real killers are those who encouraged the Jews 
and stretched out their hands to the enemy, who saw that its 
interests are being met by concessions from the 'Arafat 
leadership and certain Arab regimes who are playing the role of 
broker to promote mutual recongition and a settlement that by no 
means serves Arab or Islamic interests. 
  Jibril's statement added: The customary denunciations and 
condemnations by official Arab regimes will do nothing to dress 
our people's wounds nor restore their stolen rights, at a time 
when these regimes are working on opening up to the Zionist 
enemy and to their capitals becoming playgrounds for these 
vagabonds. 
  We in the PFLP-GC are aware of the scale of the conspiracy 
and what the forces of injustice, capitulation, and concessions 
are out to achieve. We are confident, therefore, that our 
Palestinian Arab people and Arab and Muslim nation will take 
revenge on those who have bargained away sanctities, land, and 
history. 
  Our Palestinian people inside the occupied homeland and in 
the diaspora camps will never forgive the killers their deed. 
Their retribution will be great. We are a nation of martyrs 
and martyrdom and have no fear of death. This horrible massacre 
will only serve to stiffen our people's and nation's resolve and 
boost their confidence in the inevitability of victory. 

