BFN 

  [Text] Mexico City, 26 Jun (EFE) -- Gabriel Larrea, 
president of the Mexican Copyright Institute (IMDA), has told 
EFE that the piracy business is dealing a fatal blow to 
intellectual property rights because for each original, five 
pirated copies are sold on the black market. 
  "If the author is not reimbursed, he is discouraged from 
continuing to create," said Larrea, who calls piracy -- the 
practice of copying originals to sell copies on the black market 
-- the greatest economic and moral wrongdoing suffered by 
creative people. 
  Mexico's copyright tradition dates back to the 19th century, 
although the first Mexican copyright law was passed in 1947 and 
the current copyright law in 1963. The 1963 law guarantees an 
author protection equivalent to his lifetime plus an additional 
75 years after his death before his works enter into public 
domain. 
  Other Latin American countries face the same problems in 
protecting the rights of authors. Currently, the countries 
which are most interested in improving their copyright laws are 
Argentina, Colombia, Brazil, Venezuela, and Costa Rica. 
  "A great effort has been made to protect the rights of 
authors in these countries," says Larrea, who stressed Latin 
America's intention to join the Ibero-American Organization of 
the Rights of Authors (Finauto), which was created in Costa Rica 
in May. This organization will compile catalogues of production 
companies, recording companies, and users so authors will be 
better protected inside and outside of Ibero-America, Larrea 
said. 
  Larrea believes the economic loss is "fatal" to authors 
because for each record sold legally, as many as five illegal 
copies are sold in the underground economy. This harms the 
authors who, faced with the exploitation of their works without 
receiving any benefits, prefer to produce fewer works. 
  According to the Mexican Record Producers Association, 
illegal production exceeds legal production five-fold and serves 
as an arrow that pierces personal creativity affecting industry, 
culture, and society. 
  Larrea said the protection of the authors rights is "sacred 
property," adding that "the idea that the expression of the 
creator must be protected" is still upheld in Mexico as a 
continuation of its European tradition. 
  Meanwhile, there is an Anglo-Saxon culture that is more 
concerned about preserving the right of businessmen to copy 
works, although in the long run they protect intellectual 
production through these works, Larrea added. 
  Mexican authorities and the Attorney General's Office under 
the leadership of Humberto Perez Trevino have promised to fight 
piracy, but a spokesman for the Prosecutor's Office told EFE 
that his office did not have any figures on the number of 
articles confiscated. 
  It has recently been reported that in 1994, more than 1 
million illegally copied records were confiscated, the 
production of which greatly affected producers and authors. 
  Copyrights should be protected because they represent an 
investment in producing culture. If copyrights are not 
protected, then no one will want to invest in production, Larrea 
said. Larrea is the well-known lawyer who defended singer Juan 
Gabriel in a lawsuit against a record company to recover the 
copyrights of more than 500 songs. 
  For the IMDA president, piracy not only involves those 
individuals who copy something: "Many others are behind this 
phenomenon because capital, distribution channels, and storage 
facilities are needed; in other words, there is a pirating 
industry." 
  Larrea believes that fighting piracy does not merely 
comprise 
confiscating illegal copies on the black market. He said: 
"People must be reminded of authors rights because if we do not 
know what those rights are, we begin to fail to recognize the 
rights of intellectuals." 
  Copyrights should be balanced with society's ability to 
accept the following facts: on one hand, society must recognize 
that authors have material rights, and on the other, that 
authors are exploited by industry. 

