Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by George Jones and Colin Randall: "Ulster Peace </F>
Hope Fades as Sinn Fein Fails To Deliver"] 
  [Text] Even before yesterday's announcement by the Ulster 
Unionists that they would not take part in Ulster peace talks 
involving Dublin, the early promise of the Downing Street 
Declaration had faded. 
  Eleven weeks ago, on Dec 15, Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish 
Prime Minister, stood shoulder by shoulder with Mr Major outside 
No 10 and said there was now an "historic opportunity" for 
peace. Mr Major said it "opened the doors" to those who 
abandoned violence. 
  But Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Provisional IRA has 
so far refused to take up their invitation to "turn the key in 
the lock." 
  Initially, Mr Major showed considerable irritation with Sinn 
Fein's reluctance to respond. Early in January, he branded its 
demand for "clarification" as a desperate delaying tactic. The 
word in Whitehall was that Sinn Fein would have a month to 
accept the document or face a tough security clamp-down. That 
deadline -- never publicly acknowledged by the Government -- 
came and went. 
  The Americans then tried. President Clinton agreed to waive 
the ban on Mr Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein president, entering the 
United States last month, because the powerful Irish-American 
lobby persuaded him that Mr Adams would use the visit to back 
the declaration. Mr Adams, however, milked the visit for 
considerable publicity but carefully avoided giving any 
commitments. 
  Attention switched to Sinn Fein's annual conference in 
Dublin 
last weekend. It was described as a "watershed" -- the defining 
moment for the republican movement. 
  Ministers hinted that failure by the conference's delegates 
to support the declaration would be seen as tantamount to 
rejection -- a clear signal that the IRA and Sinn Fein were not 
prepared to abandon violence. But Sinn Fein, while softening 
its criticism of the peace initiative, set further conditions 
for a suspension of IRA operations. 
  There are plenty of pessimists in Whitehall and Westminster 
ready to say "I told you so." They say that Sinn Fein was never 
really interested in peace and has used the process to raise its 
profile and secure important concessions, including the lifting 
of the broadcasting ban in the Republic and the international 
media blitz in New York. 
  The Government has also had to soften its previous firm 
stance on refusing to clarify the declaration. Last week, in 
the run-up to the Sinn Fein conference, Sir Patrick Mayhew, the 
Northern Ireland Secretary, and Mr Hurd, the Foreign Secretary, 
made speeches clearly aimed at clarifying the small print of the 
document, reaffirming that the British Government would not seek 
to impede the "exercise of self-determination" -- North and 
South. 
  Mr Major used an article in the Irish News, Northern 
Ireland's leading nationalist newspaper, to spell out how Sinn 
Fein could enter political talks. 
  Yet the 11 weeks since the two Prime Ministers stood outside 
No. 10 have seen the most intense period of political activity 
in Northern Ireland for years. The optimists in Government 
argue that Sinn Fein is being gradually drawn into mainstream 
politics and is raising expectations of peace which may make it 
difficult for the IRA to return to the previous level of 
violence. 
  As always with Ulster politics, any progress is 
infuriatingly 
slow -- and there is now an acknowledgement that it could take 
months -- even years -- before Sinn Fein and the army council of 
the IRA are prepared to back the declaration. Both Downing 
Street and the Northern Ireland Office stress that it remains on 
the table and will not be withdrawn. Even without a positive 
Sinn Fein response the joint declaration remains an important 
statement of principles agreed by the British and Irish 
Governments. "There never was any time limit. It did not have 
a sell-by sticker," said one official. 
  Some politicians most closely involved with Northern Ireland 
believe that that a new phase has opened up. 
  They argue that if events since Dec 15 are judged against 
the 
broad sweep of the Irish troubles, rather than from a short-term 
perspective, there has been considerable movement. The softer 
tone of remarks by some leading Sinn Fein figures at their 
Dublin conference reflects the party's limited welcome of what 
it says is a less confrontational approach from British 
ministers. It said it found recent speeches by Sir Patrick and 
Mr Hurd "intriguing." 
  At the weekend, the essentially uncompromising line taken 
by Mr Adams, was followed by a succession of less hostile 
contributions, most notably from Mr Martin McGuinness, 
vice-president, and Mr Mitchel McLaughlin Northern Irish 
chairman. 
  Yet the stumbling blocks seem as solid as ever. While Sinn 
Fein says it accepts that Protestants cannot be coerced into a 
united Ireland, it has not convincingly explained how this 
squares with its continuing demand for a British assurance that 
Unionists should have no veto. 
  Though the Irish government considers it has stuck more 
firmly to the letter and spirit of the declaration than Mr 
Major, it has shown itself increasingly ready to make gestures 
intended to bring Sinn Fein into the peace process. 
  Mr Reynolds has sought to maintain what he recognises is the 
crucial backing of his Fianna Fail party's republican 
traditionalists by accommodating Sinn Fein's demand for 
clarification in spite of London's contrary stand. 
  His interpretation of the joint statement, including an 
assertion that no one, including Unionists, had a veto on 
progress, was particularly welcome to Mr Adams and Mr 
McGuinness, who have gleefully exploited differences between the 
governments. 
  Republicans were also triumphant when Mr Reynolds's 
government lifted the 20-year ban on broadcasters interviewing 
Sinn Fein activists and para-militaries a move condemned by 
Unionists as "grovelling to the gunmen." 
  The Taoiseach's [Irish prime minister] comment that the 
future of terrorist prisoners would be considered in the 
negotiations after a permanent end to violence was also seen as 
a distinctly unhelpful concession. 
  Critics of the Dublin approach point out that the promise of 
more stringent security should Sinn Fein and the IRA reject the 
initiative sits uneasily with the actions of the Dublin court 
that last Friday [26 February] refused to extradite Joseph 
Magee, accused of murdering an Army sergeant in Derby. 

