BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Salwa al-Ustuwani: "Iraqi Opposition Detects </F>
Military Deployments Around Capital With Intensification of 
Sweeps"] 
  [Text] Damascus, London, AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT -- Iraqi 
opposition sources have said that the regime in Baghdad is 
intensifying arrest and sweep campaigns in the capital in a 
calculated escalation in reply to the recent series of 
booby-trapped cart explosions in Baghdad. Opposition sources 
saw military deployments encircling Baghdad and search convoys 
deployed at the capital's approaches and exits in anticipation 
of an explosion in the situation after the escalation of 
operations against the government. 
  In a statement, a copy of which AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT has 
received, Dr. Hamid al-Bayyati, representative of the "Supreme 
Assembly of the Islamic Revolution in Iraq" [SAIRI] in London, 
said: "Arrest campaigns have been stepped up in Baghdad. Our 
sources inside Iraq confirm the continuation of the arrest and 
sweep campaigns launched by the repressive organs. Arrest 
operations have been intensified since the booby-trapped car 
explosions which the capital witnessed recently." 
  The statement issued by the SAIRI support office in London 
said that "most arrest operations centered in Baghdad's new 
areas, al-Hubaybiyah, and the fringes of al-Thawrah, where more 
than 50 people opposed to the regime have been arrested in 
Baghdad al-Jadidah alone. As for al-Thawrah and al-Fudayliyah 
areas, forces of the Republican Guard and special security, 
headed by 'Udayy, Qusayy, and Saddam Kamil [as published], 
encircled them, searching homes and confiscating the personal 
property of families accused of collaborating with the 
opposition, that is, after attacking and harming them by various 
brutal methods." 
  The SAIRI statement pointed to the continued artillery 
bombardment of the marshland in the south. "In the absence of 
international deterrent measures, Saddam's forces continues to 
launch their repressive and devastating operations in the 
marshland area in southern Iraq," according to the statement, 
which cited opposition sources as saying that artillery shells 
continue to affect all the positions situated on the 
al-'Amarah-al-Salam district, like the areas of Abu Sab', Abu 
Karmali, al-Ra'ash, and al-Hashiriyah. This is in addition to 
the search and sweep campaigns. 
  Government forces have also launched an attack on the areas 
of al-Kabibah and Abu Kabrah and on some villages in al-Rifa'i 
area in al-Nasiriyah Governorate, inflicting heavy losses and 
damage on people, their property, and homes in these areas. 
  In Damascus, an official source from the Islamic Action 
Organization in Iraq confirmed that the regime has encircled 
Baghdad using the Armed Forces, deploying search vehicles at the 
capital's approaches and exists in anticipation of an explosion 
in the situation following the increase in the masses' 
indignation and jihad action against the regime early this 
month. The source pointed out that "the security collapse which 
southern cities in particular are witnessing has begun to extend 
to the capital, Baghdad. Public criticism of the regime, its 
elements, and Saddam is now a common phenomenon, even in 
Baghdad," which Saddam considers his safe stronghold. 
  Meanwhile, a statement issued by the Islamic Action 
Organization Information Office has said that Baghdad has for 
some time been experiencing widespread cases of looting at the 
hands of armed gangs run by supporters of the regime to alarm 
people and preoccupy them with defending themselves. 
  The statement says that these cases are distributed 
particularly in the areas situated between Baghdad and 
al-'Aziziyah. Cases of the assassination of the regime's 
supporters among security, police, and intelligence elements 
have increased. They are assassinated by people who are 
indignant at the execution and arrest campaigns. 
  The statement also says that the regime recently executed 40 
people who had been jailed in al-Radwaniyah prison on charges of 
collaborating with the "mujahidin" opposed to the regime. The 
sources which supplied this information confirm that 
al-Radwaniyah prison is now full of prisoners who are being 
exposed to the harshest of physical and mental torture and 
offered bad food. 

