Plastic   Automobile Residues 

<F P=102> BR1504114194 Milan IL SOLE-24 ORE in Italian 29 Mar 94 p 9 </F>
<F P=103> BR1504114194 </F>
<F P=104>  Milan IL SOLE-24 ORE </F>
<F P=105>  Italian </F>
BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Jacopo Giliberto: "Combustible Gas From Plastic </F>
Residues"] 
  [Text] We know that old automobiles have always been 
recycled as much as possible. The steel that is used for the 
automobile chassis and the mechanical parts, amounting to 70 
percent of the vehicle's weight, is melted down and reused. 
  Together with a pool of specialized companies and car 
wreckers belonging to the ADA [Car Wreckers Association], Fiat 
has launched the FARE (Fiat Auto Recycling Program) to recycle 
other components that generally end up in refuse sites: glass 
(car lights, windows, windshields), upholstery, principal 
plastic materials. 
  However, something always remains at the end of the Fiat 
cycle. It is the so-called fluff: various plastic fragments, 
pieces of upholstery, rubber strips, tires, and so on. 
  To date this material has only gone to refuse sites, since 
the presence of such varied components has made combustion in 
traditional incinerators a difficult problem. In addition the 
fumes are generally very "dirty" and purification calls for 
costly equipment. 
  In order to recycle this material the Montello Steelworks 
(of 
Bergamo) have taken part in the FARE project to test a 
innovative system of energy recovery that is based on the 
principle of pyrolysis. 
  The process has been developed in conjunction with the 
Smogless company of Milan. 
  A semi-industrial plant called SMIR is already at an 
advanced 
stage of testing. Here the fluff is transformed into 
combustible gases that are useful in improving steel fusion and 
thereby result in energy savings. All this is achieved with 
very limited emissions. 
  The material undergoes a first separation stage: the finest 
part "which is generally very rich in inert gases," they explain 
at Montello, is eliminated. Then the real two-stage process 
begins. 
  The first stage is the transformation of fluff into gas and 
vapor at 600 degrees Centigrade. 
  The material is then fluidized by premixing with ferrous 
waste, which comes out at 500 degrees Centigrade: the iron is 
then introduced into the electric kilns at this temperature, so 
as to reach "a considerable saving in electrical energy because 
of the fusion," the steelworks affirm. 
  The vapors thus generated are sent to a second plant that 
was 
constructed with the experience of Smogless. 
  It is a grinding furnace in which an electric arc with 
carbon 
electrodes (which also generates thermoelectric and 
photochemical reactions) brings the gases to a temperature of 
1,000 degrees Centigrade in an ionized and reducing environment. 
  A bed of incandescent coke, crossed by a difference in 
electric potential, exhalts the reactions. 
  In this way all the most dangerous composites, such as 
dioxins and furanes due to the presence of chlorine (which is 
contained in PVC for example) are eliminated from the gases. 
  "Since the energy required to increase the temperature is 
supplied by electric energy and photochemical reactions," 
explain the Montello technicians, "the introduction of 
supporting combustion or air is not necessary." 
  The result is an extremely low content of carbon dioxide and 
nitrogen, thereby increasing the heating power of the gas that 
is produced. 
  In addition the vapor molecules are broken up and 
transformed 
into elementary components: carbon monoxide, hydrogen, and 
methane while the presence of chlorine and sulfur forms simple 
residues such as muriatic acid and hydrogen sulfide. These are 
eliminated with an alkaline solution purification, since the 
absence of carbon dioxide gives extremely high efficiency at 
limited costs. 
  The vapor obtained from this plant is a technological gas 
that Montello uses in the steel billet heating ovens. 

