BFN 

<F P=106> [By P.V. Vivekanand] </F>
  [Text] Amman--The government and the Lloyds Register are 
continuing negotiations and a deal could be concluded before the 
end of the month to have the London-based agency set up a 
presence at the port of al-'Aqabah to observe the enforcement of 
sanctions against Iraq, informed sources said Monday. 
  In the meantime, offshore interceptions and inspections of 
all al-'Aqabah-bound ships continue at the Tiran Straits in the 
mouth of the Gulf of Aqaba; but no diversion of vessels were 
ordered by the American-led warships enforcing the sanctions in 
the last one month, officials said. 
  A negotiatng team from the Lloyds Register visited Jordan 
two 
weeks ago for talks with Jordanian officials on the land-based 
sanctions verifications regime and reached agreements on most 
basic points, but several "minor points remain floating" in the 
air, one source told the Jordan Times. 
  "There are no major points of conflict and we expect major 
progress by next week," said the source. Another source said 
Lloyds Register officials were drafting the necessary agreements 
and these could be ready by next week. 
  "Both sides have agreed on most of the key points and a few 
issues, which are very minor in nature, remain to be sorted 
out," said the source without elaboration. 
  Under the agreed formula, Lloyds surveyors will be included 
in a committee made up of port and customs officials and a 
representative of the concerned clearing agent which will 
monitor all Jordanian imports and exports through the port as 
part of the customs procedures dictated by Jordanian law. 
  The Lloyds representatives could freely observe whether the 
goods tally with the concerned documents accompanying them and 
send reports to the U.N. Sanctions Committee. Beyond that, 
Prime Minister 'Abd-al-Salam al-Majali has said, Jordan will not 
accept any "inspection" of Jordanian imports and exports since 
the Kingdom is not under any sacntions and is free to import 
whatever it wants. 
  All cargo addressed to consignees in Iraq will be inspected 
separately for adherence to the sanctions and those consignments 
will be allowed to leave the port only after approval by the 
Sanctions Committee wherever necessary. 
  Food and medicine are exempt from the sanctions and 
therefore 
do not need sanctions approval. Other items related to the 
production and distribution of food and medicine are also 
allowed, but they should have prior Sanctions Committee approval. 
  It is expected that the Lloyds presence at al-'Aqabah will 
cost nearly $3 million for the first year. Importers will pay 
the cost on the basis of the tonnage of their imports and the 
amount will be remitted to a special account, which in turn will 
be linked with an as-yet undesignated escrow account at the U.N. 
at the disposal of the secretary-general. 
  The sources noted that such an arrangement will have clear 
transparency of the amount that Jordanian importers pay and 
allow the importers to apply for compensation of equal amount 
from the U.N. 
  Diplomatic sources said the United States, the most hardline 
advocate of the sanctions against Iraq, had agreed to most of 
the points. No details were immediately available of 
disagreements if any. 
  Washington accepted the proposal to replace the sea-based 
inspection of al-'Aqabah-bound vessels by U.S. warships with a 
land-based verification system in April. The acceptance came 
after Jordan made its return to peace talks with Israel 
conditional on an end to the inspections, which cost the Kingdom 
more than $1 billion since the sanctions against Iraq were 
imposed in August 1990. 
  Importers and shipping agents have welcomed the Lloyds 
arrangements saying it would not only ease their financial 
burdens and logistical problems but will also encourage shipping 
lines to resume their regular services to al-'Aqabah. 

