BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Kim Ho-sang: "The Japanese Reactionaries </F>
Should Not Act Recklessly"] 
  [Text] Recently in Japan, extremely grave military moves 
have cropped up. The Japanese reactionaries are moving its 
fleet close to the Korean peninsula from its port on the Pacific 
Coast. 
  According to foreign reports, the Japanese authorities are 
reportedly moving its naval fleet to Kure Port in the western 
part of Japan from Yokosuka Port on the Pacific Coast. 
Regarding this, officials of the Japan Defense Agency are 
claiming innocence, saying that such a move was taken because of 
overcrowding at Yokosuka Port. Nevertheless, world public 
opinion does not take them at their word. Reporting on this, the 
U.S. paper DEFENSE NEWS exposed that this is aimed at gaining 
easy access on the East Sea of Korea in case of an emergency on 
the Korean peninsula. The U.S. paper's evaluation is by no 
means groundless. 
  Recently, the Japanese Government authorities and military 
class have taken to babbling a lot about the regional security 
of northeast Asia. Accusing us of developing nuclear weapons, 
they are calling for joint measures under the premise of our 
threat to the security of northeast Asia. 
  The Japanese authorities are driveling that the tripartite 
operational system should be set up among the United States, 
Japan, and South Korea at the earliest possible date as a way to 
take joint measures. What is more, they are raising a clamor 
that their armed forces should serve a similar purpose as the 
U.S. Armed Forces stationed in Japan. The transfer of a naval 
fleet to Kure Port in the western part of Japan, which is within 
a stone's throw from the western sector of the Korean peninsula, 
from Yokosuka Port, was a step taken in accordance with this. 
  Such ill-boding movements have been perpetrated in a 
full-fledged manner ever since the U.S. defense secretary 
visited Japan and the puppet South Korean defense minister and 
the director general of the Japan Defense Agency have even gone 
so far as to hatch a plot. We cannot but take a particularly 
serious view of this. 
  The main topics discussed at the confab among the United 
States, Japan, and South Korea were, maintaining the 
international cooperative system against us, and taking joint 
steps against our nuclear development. In particular, during 
the talks between the puppet South Korean defense minister and 
his Japanese counterpart, the two sides agreed on mapping out 
responsible countermeasures [chaegiminnun taeungchaek] while 
babbling about regional security. It goes without saying that 
this reflects the Japanese reactionaries' attempt at another 
invasion. 
  The recent transfer of their naval fleet to Japan's western 
part from Yokosuka Port can be seen as a military step to 
implement their re-invasion attempt. Already, the Japan Defense 
Agency has moved its Self-Defense Armed Forces from northern 
parts of Japan, like Hokkaido, to the western part of Japan, 
which is not far from our Republic. Hence, it has become clear 
to everyone that the Japanese Army Self-Defense Force and its 
Naval Self-Defense Force could be immediately dispatched to 
Korea if a war were to break out on the Korean Peninsula. 
  What needs to be noted seriously is that newly appointed 
Foreign Minister Kakizawa of the Hata cabinet, in a news 
conference, disclosed that several Japanese Government posts are 
closely examining the enactment of an emergency law enabling the 
Self-Defense Forces to handle the situation in the event of a 
contingency on the Korean peninsula. This is tantamount to 
openly revealing their attempt of invasion by saying that they 
would prepare a new legal foundation for the dispatch of their 
armed forces at any time by amending the present law which bans 
the dispatch so as to immediately mobilize its forces in the 
event of contingency. 
  As a matter of fact, the director general of the Defense 
Agency of the Japanese cabinet had once revealed that the 
working preparations for the amendment of the law were almost 
complete. Saying that several Japanese Government posts are 
reviewing the dispatch under such conditions implies that the 
enactment of the law preparing against emergency which has been 
mapped out by the Japanese authorities for a long time is in its 
final stage. 
  The Japanese Dietmen are reportedly discussing the 
protection 
of Japanese residents in South Korea in an emergency. 
Imperialists always come out with excuses that it is for the 
protection of their people, when attacking other country with 
arms. The case in Grenada and Panama are clear proof of this. 
As the U.S. imperialists did in the past, the Japanese 
authorities are trying to jump into a war with preposterous 
excuses in the event that a war breaks out on the Korean 
peninsula. 
  As we can clearly see from the above cases, Japan has 
deployed its naval forces near the Korean peninsula and is 
attempting to complete the legal basis for outside invasion. It 
has even reached the stage where the Diet is discussing ways to 
find excuses for entry into a war. However, the Japanese 
militarists' ambition for overseas expansion would only bring 
about Japan's destruction. This is the lesson that recent 
history has taught. Japan should learn from its past and should 
not act recklessly. 

