Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The devastated father of a Jordanian convicted in 
the New York World Trade Centre bombing is agonising over why 
his son's lawyer did a volte-face in his summation, which he 
believes led to the conviction of not only his son but also 
another three defendants. 
  Amin Salamah, father of Mohammad Salamah (26), who, along 
with three others, was found guilty by a jury in a New York 
court Friday [4 March], is also bitter that no Jordanian 
organisation or individual stepped forward to help him or advise 
him. 
  He said he had obtained a three-month-valid U.S. visa in 
September, but did not have enough money to buy a ticket to New 
York to visit his son and see whether there was anything he 
could do to help establish his innocence. 
  Mr. Salamah, a retired army lieutenant who hails from Bedia 
village in the West Bank, works for Amman Customs Clearing 
Agency to provide for his family of 11 children younger to 
Mohammad and their mother with his Army pension and a JD 120 
monthly salary. 
  "I did not leave a single known door unknocked," he told the 
JORDAN TIMES. "But there was nobody who was willing to help, 
including those who call themselves human rights activists and 
experts in law." 
  "They had no interest in the case, and many appeared anxious 
not to have anything to do with it," he said. 
  "My question to them is: "Isn't every accused entitled to a 
fair trial? And if so, was my son given a fair trial? Did any 
Jordanian lawyer take the slightest interest to find out whether 
the trial followed the due process of the law?" 
  Mr. Salamah, 51, who fled his village along with his family 
in the 1967 war, believes that neither his son nor any of the 
other three is guilty, and that Israeli agents seeking to 
distort the image of Arabs and Muslims had a hand in the affair 
and entrapped the accused in the case. 
  "My instinct and conscience tells me there is much more to 
the entire affair than we have been told," he said, adding that 
the summation of his son's lawyer, Richard Precht, was the most 
damaging element that led to the guilty verdict. 
  "Throughout the trial, the lawyer was very good and made a 
very good case of Mohammad's defence. But, for some unknown 
reasons, he took a complete turn in the last minute," said Mr. 
Salameh, who lives in Zarqa. 
  "Perhaps he was coerced, pressured or forced into doing 
that," he said. "But it does not change the fact that my son 
and three others now face life in prison." 
  He was referring to Mr. Precht's closing argument that 
Mohammad Salamah was an unwitting victim of another defendant 
who trapped him into taking part in the Feb. 26 explosion at the 
twin-towers. The blast killed six people and injured more than 
1,000. 
  Describing Ramzi Yusuf, an accused who remains at large, as 
an "evil genuis," Mr. Precht asserted that Mohammad Salamah was 
duped by Mr. Yusuf. "Mohammad Salamah was terribly misled, 
terribly manipulated... by a person who came into this country 
with a single mission, to destroy American targets," Mr. Precht 
told the court on Feb. 17. 
  Mr. Precht was the only defence lawer who presented such an 
argument which implied that there was a bomb plot and Mr. 
Salamah was part of it. All others maintained the total 
innocence of their clinets and at least one of them accused Mr. 
Precht of undermining his client's defence. 
  Mr. Salamah said his son contacted him over the phone on 
Thursday, less than 24 hours before the verdict was announced. 
  "He sounded very confident that all would be acquitted," Mr. 
Salamah said. "He told me he would be with us here in a few 
days." 
  "Even the lawyer, who had called me a few days earlier, told 
me the same thing. He said the charges were unfounded and 
unsubstantiated," said Mr. Salamah. 
  The ex-serviceman noted that Mohammad had filed a petition 
to 
the judge that Mr. Precht's incriminatory summation did not 
represent his views and that the lawyer was no longer his legal 
counsel. 
  "But the court decided to accept the lawyer's argument that 
there was no change in his status as Mohammad's counsel," Mr. 
Salamah said. 
  "I don't know why (Precht) did such an injustice to my son, 
who always maintained his innocence and never told the lawyer 
anything of the nature that was presented to the court," said 
Amin Salamah. 
  "My limited knowledge of things tells me a lawyer is not 
supposed to invent things and present them in court on behalf of 
his client," he said. "Where did he get the notion that 
Mohammad had any part, witting or otherwise, in the attack?" 
  Mr. Salamah said his son, who has been in touch with the 
family over the phone from his prison, "always swore by God and 
assured me that he had nothing to do with the bombing and that 
he was never involved in any subversive plots. 
  "I brought up and educated my son, and I believe him." 

