Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Zagreb, March 14 (AFP) -- A Russian envoy said 
Monday [14 March] he expected Bosnia's three warring factions to 
hold talks next week on an overall settlement to their nearly 
two-year-old war. The envoy, Vitaly Churkin, was speaking after 
talks here with Croatian President Franjo Tudjman. Earlier in 
the day he met in Belgrade with Serbian President Slobodan 
Milosevic on a plan for a Moslem-Croat federation designed to 
end the fighting in Bosnia. 
  Churkin said he would meet soon with U.S. and European 
diplomats "and then I hope we will be able to move towards the 
next stage of this effort, that is a closer discussion between 
all the three parties of all the issues remaining, to have a 
final political settlement of the conflict." 
  He added: "I think that something more flexible might emerge 
next week than what usually is called formal talks because ... 
there would be a need for some flexible and a rather quick 
action." 
  Plans for the proposed Moslem-Croat federation were 
finalized 
Sunday in Vienna. The U.S.-backed blueprint calls for the two 
groups to link their territories in a loose federation that 
could later be joined with Croatia. Bosnian Serbs could exist 
alongside the new entity in their own state and possibly join it 
later in some form. 
  Of his talks in Belgrade, Churkin said Milosevic was 
"thinking of ways, not to reject but to incorporate all 
possibilities in a global agreement, which would take account of 
the idea of a confederation." 
  On Sunday, Churkin visited the Serb stronghold of Pale, near 
Sarajevo, where he met Momcilo Krajisnik, speaker of the Bosnian 
Serb parliament. Churkin suggested there that the self-declared 
Serb republic in Bosnia could join the federation and eventually 
be linked with the rump Yugoslav state, comprising Serbia and 
Montenegro. 
  According to the Serb news agency SRNA, Krajisnik told him 
it 
was "absurd to ask the Serb side to join a federation with 
Croats and Moslems (...) without being able to have the same 
links with the Serb people" in Croatia and the rump Yugoslavia. 

