BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with 'Abdallah al-Asnaj, "foreign minister of the </F>
Democratic Republic of Yemen", by Salah Salamah on 20 June; 
place not given; from the "Today's Guest" program -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Salamah] Mr. 'Abdallah al-Asnaj, foreign minister 
of the Democratic Republic of Yemen, which was unilaterally 
declared almost one month ago. You are welcome to Radio Monte 
Carlo. 
  [Al-Asnaj] You are welcome. 
  [Salamah] Arab and international efforts to settle the 
dispute have failed. Battles are continuing. Aden is besieged 
and is being exposed to daily shelling. What is the current 
military balance of forces in the battles between the northern 
and southern units? 
  [Al-Asnaj] As you have said, battles are continuing. The 
siege on the Yemeni citizens in the Aden Governorate reached its 
peak when water and electricity supplies were cut and when 
hospitals and public utilities were destroyed by the invading 
northern military units. 
  [Salamah] Lakhdar Brahimi, the international mediator in the 
Yemeni dispute, failed yesterday and today to hold a meeting of 
the northern and southern delegations present in Cairo, with the 
aim of agreeing on a mechanism to monitor the cease-fire 
preparatory to sitting at the negotiating table. What are the 
reasons for this failure 
  [Al-Asnaj] Lakhdar Brahimi has not succeeded in holding a 
meeting between the northern and southern sides at the 
negotiating table, or at least in getting acquainted with the 
viewpoint of the northern side in a precise way, because the 
northern side has not assigned a delegation on a level 
authorized to make a serious decision, such as cease-fire, or to 
agree on a mechanism to monitor a firm cease-fire. 
  [Salamah] Mr. 'Abdallah al-Asnaj: Sanaa sources today 
affirmed that the northern delegation had all powers to hold a 
dialogue, provided this is done within the framework of the 
ruling coalition, the Republic of Yemen, and constitutional 
legitimacy. These sources said you refused to meet with the 
northern delegation. Does this mean that you shoulder a moral 
responsibility for the failure? 
  [Al-Asnaj] This is another falsehood on the part of Sanaa. 
First, the delegation that came to Cairo represented the General 
People's Congress [GPC] and the Yemeni Reform Grouping [YRG]. 
The delegation did not represent the central authority in Sanaa. 
The members of the delegation are known to everyone; they are 
incapable of forcing 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih, the small dictator of 
Sanaa, to adopt a stand of which he himself is not convinced, or 
to make a cease-fire decision and abide by it. 
  So, the delegation did not have authority, was not on the 
required level, and its members were known. I do not have to 
reiterate this. The delegation includes a southern GPC member, 
who is on the payroll of 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih, and brother 
'Abd-al-Qadir (?al-Qayri), secretary of Shaykh 'Abdallah 
Bin-Husayn al-Ahmar [speaker of the House of Representatives], 
from the YRG. These have no capacity on the level of the 
central authority, which is loyal to 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih. So, 
the southern side bears no responsibility whatsoever because it 
sent a delegation on the highest level with absolute 
authorization. We communicated this in writing to Lakhdar 
Brahimi, namely, that this delegation has all powers to swiftly 
set an urgent date for cease-fire and to abide by this date. 
  I hope the picture will be clear. Sanaa is the party making 
accusations and the one which makes promises and does not keep 
them. 
  [Salamah] Therefore, you adhere to the demand of negotiating 
with a delegation that has the authority to decide? 
  [Al-Asnaj] Most definitely. We are a delegation that has the 
right to decide the fate of a people who adhere to this right, 
which is guaranteed by the UN Charter. 
  [Salamah] Recently, President 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih showed 
noticeable flexibility over terms to resume dialogue with the 
southern Leaders. However, the southern leaders insisted on 
entering the dialogue, as you has said, in the form of an 
independent government. According to Sanaa, this led to the 
failure of the Cairo meeting. Are you insisting on going ahead 
in your secession from Sanaa and on adhering to the formula of 
the unilaterally declared Democratic Republic of Yemen? 
  [Al-Asnaj] The world has never seen a president waging a war 
against his own people, destroying their installations and 
public utilities, ruining houses, and reiterating his insistence 
on invading a people in a besieged governorate. What kind of 
legitimacy is left for this ruler who declares war against his 
own people? The fact that this war was declared, that it is 
continuing, and the fact that the cease-fire demands are 
rejected cancel what remains of the legitimacy claimed by the 
northern side. Moreover, the southern side has the right to 
self-determination. It was a state four years ago. It 
voluntarily renounced its independent and regional identity and 
is now trying to regain it. This is nothing new. 
  [Salamah] Today, Salim Salih Muhammad, a member of the 
southern Presidential Council, demanded quick Arab and 
international recognition of the declared Democratic Republic of 
Yemen. With the exception of Qatar, the Gulf Cooperation 
Council states have tacitly recognized this republic. Are you 
going to insist on this move? Do you expect quick Arab and 
international recognition? 
  [Al-Asnaj] Having declared his indiscriminate and all-out 
war 
against our brothers in the south, there is no place for central 
authority or a unity that was basically destroyed by Sanaa. 
Unity is mutual acceptance, a covenant of cooperation, a joint 
responsibility. It is not hegemony, control, tyranny, and the 
usurpation of the right of the southern part to have an opinion 
and a role in drawing up the future of the homeland. 
  Sanaa's authority has violated everything that it was hoped 
it would abide by, in terms of the unity agreement, and it 
unilaterally canceled the pledge and accord agreement reached in 
the Jordanian capital. It dismissed ministers and ambassadors 
and took feverish measures that no law or constitution would 
accept. 
  Sanaa voluntarily renounced its responsibility and its 
legitimacy. Sanaa has stripped itself of its legitimacy in the 
same way that it stripped Aden of it. Each side in the north 
and south now has an absolute right to choose the most 
appropriate way to preserve its rights and develop its society. 
In the future, there will be fields of cooperation, as they 
were in the past. 
  [Salamah] You demand the deployment of international 
observers to supervise the cease-fire. The northern leaders 
demand the revival of the joint military committee formed last 
December. Do you believe it is impossible to find an acceptable 
compromise between these two proposals, to stop the shooting and 
begin talking? 
  [Al-Asnaj] Had there been enough credibility and sincere 
intentions to cease fire or to stop the current war in Yemen and 
abide by a definite date for enforcing the cease-fire, an 
appropriate mechanism would be possible and ready at hand. I 
would like to say that the previous military committee was 
formed by a decision from 'Ali 'Abdallah Salih to contain and 
solve problems in Yemeni military camps housing joint forces. 
War had not broken out by then. Now the war has expanded and a 
military committee of the size in which it was formed at that 
time cannot monitor an agreed cease-fire violation on a large 
terrain covering almost all Yemeni territory. 
  [Salamah] In view of the continuing battles and the failure 
of Arab and international mediation, the Yemeni crisis has 
reached an impasse. Do you believe it is possible to reach a 
solution enabling the Yemeni people to stop the war and return 
to peace and security? 
  [Al-Asnaj] The Yemeni people want peace. They want to reach 
a quick end to this war. They are fed up with the calamities of 
this war that was imposed on them. However, the decision is up 
to those who call for the continuation of the war. It is up to 
'Ali 'Abdallah Salih and his allies from the political Islamists 
in the reform party. I believe further Arab and international 
pressures will convince the little dictator in Sanaa that the 
international community rejects all the massacres he is carrying 
out against the Yemeni people in the south. 
  [Salamah] Observers believe the military balance of forces 
is 
tipped in favor of the northern units. Minister 'Abd-al-Karim 
al- Iryani said today that if a negotiated solution is not 
reached, there will be a determination to resort to a military 
solution and to occupy Aden and al-Mukalla. Do you in the south 
have the ability to remain steadfast and continue in the 
fighting, given the lopsided balance of forces? 
  [Al-Asnaj] I do not know if brother 'Abd-al-Karim al-Iryani 
is qualified to be a general and to ascertain the ability of the 
armed forces to reach their aims in the vast areas in Hadhramaut 
and to penetrate the steadfastness of Aden. Aden will remain 
steadfast and the north -- we greatly regret to say this because 
the victims and the killers are children of Yemen -- will pay a 
very high price and will not be able to have its own way if they 
penetrate the city of Aden. As for Hadhramaut, the results of 
the battles so far indicate that the southern forces repulsed 
all the northern forces attacks and scattered their 
concentrations in this vast desert, and that our northern 
brother soldiers wish that they had remained in Sanhan, Anif, 
and Hamdan, instead of being pushed by the little dictator of 
Sanaa into a fight in which they have no interest at all. 

