BFN 

  [Text] Moscow June 17 TASS -- President Boris Yeltsin 
returned to Moscow on Thursday evening from a three-day working 
trip to the cities of Blagoveshchensk, the Tuva Republic capital 
Kyzyl and Novosibirsk. 
  The president visited Kyzyl on the final day of his tour. 
The Tuva Republic heavily depends on its relations with the 
outside world. Many difficulties would have been avoided if not 
for destroyed relations with other Russian regions. 
  Yeltsin noted at a meeting with the Tuva leaders that the 
republic borders Mongolia and has contacts with China -- it is 
necessary to develop these relations. The republic can be 
pulled out of the deep economic crisis only through stepped up 
development of contacts with other regions and through 
participation in the inter-regional association called "Siberian 
agreement". 
  Turning to the economic situation in the republic, Yeltsin 
noted that the main indices in Tuva are worse than the Russian 
average. The republic cannot live, relying only on its own 
resources. 
  The chief executive stressed that the strengthening of the 
Russian Federation is the president's most important task. "The 
state should have a single economic space and single 
legislation," he stressed. "Proceeding from this premise, it is 
necessary to tap unique possibilities of Russia's every region." 
  Speaking of his working trip to the Amur region on May 15, 
the Russian leader said that that region, according to the 
structure of its economy, should be self-sufficient. It can 
live without subsidies. The president did not put forth the 
same task before Tuva. 
  "The difference between ratios and living standards is too 
great. It would be unjust to say: live, relying on your own 
resources. People and leaders are not to blame for a shortage of 
resources, and nobody reproaches them for this. 
  "This is the way Tuva's economy has shaped up. Therefore, we 
should help the republic so much as to bridge the gap between 
the living standards of its people and those of entire Russian 
population." 
  The president noted that he does not intend to limit himself 
only to promises but gave guarantees to the Tuva leaders of a 
substantial aid from the federal budget. 
  Yeltsin pointed to Tuva's rich natural resources. In the 
president's opinion, the republic can provide itself with 
timber, electricity and develop tourism. The development of 
infrastructure and the transportation system is the pressing 
problem of the region. 
  The chief executive said in conclusion that efforts should 
be 
made to implement two decrees he signed in Tuva to develop the 
economy and the social sphere in the republic. The president 
noted that the former mistrust between the centre and the Tuva 
leadership has disappeared, and the republic has removed the 
tense racial atmosphere which was present there two years ago. 
  Therefore, the main thing now is joint actions to pull the 
republican economy out of the crisis in order to create normal 
social conditions for the Tuva population, Yeltsin concluded. 
  En route to Moscow, the Russian leader made a stopover in 
Novosibirsk where he had a meeting with the regional leaders. 
Head of the regional administration Ivan Indinok who 
participated in the meeting, described it as very interesting 
and substantive. 
  He said that the president agreed with a request to send to 
the region a government commission which should examine, 
together with local specialists, the administration's activities 
and consider questions of rendering assistance. 
  Yeltsin was also interested in the results of the spring 
sowing and expressed concern over the coming difficult 
harvesting. Indinok told the chief executive that 30 per cent 
of ploughland were sown with substandard seeds. However, the 
region managed to avoid cutting acreage under spring crops. 
  The regional leaders expressed a request to send combine 
harvesters to the region, since the workload on the present 
fleet will be very great. 
  The president gave instructions to examine the question of 
delivering 1,000 combine harvesters to the region. "This will be 
a serious support for us," Indinok commented on the president's 
decision. 

