Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] An Israeli security delegation will visit Cairo next 
week to discuss Egyptian accusations that Israel is continuing 
its spying on vital installations in Egypt, providing terrorist 
groups with weapons, and exploiting the Israeli Academic Center 
as a cover for spying activities. Israel in return accuses 
Egyptian officials of being behind the assassination of Albert 
Atrakchi, former administrative attache in the Israeli embassy 
in Cairo. It bases this accusation on Egypt's demand for his 
withdrawal before his assassination after accusing him of 
involvement in spying activities against Egypt. 
  The Israeli security delegation's visit will be made under 
the cover of searching for the remains of 19 Israeli officers 
killed during the October war. But the main objective of the 
visit is to discuss the worsening security crisis between Egypt 
and Israel. Israel is demanding the release of four Israeli 
spies arrested in Sinai last year in return for releasing eight 
Egyptians detained in Israeli prisons. One of the important 
Egyptian security organs refuses to release the Israeli spies, 
who were caught with 24 rolls of film of vital installations in 
their possession as well as reports on Egypt's peaceful nuclear 
program and the ministries' buildings, activities, and guards. 
  More than 16 Egyptians in Sinai had reported that the four 
spies had contacted them in an attempt to recruit them. 
  The Egyptian side is also raising the issue of the role of 
six Israeli officers in distributing weapons inside Egypt, 
particularly in Upper Egypt. The six officers are: Mordechai 
'Azar, Benyamin Vataniyu, Ra'ul Farhat, Menahem Raymond, Shoktol 
Avraham, and Soson Musa. All of them are members of the Israeli 
military intelligence service and were helped by two of staff of 
Israel's Cairo embassy to smuggle weapons in diplomatic bags. 
The Egyptian security services monitored 12 contacts between 
these two employees and 35 Egyptian figures; they arrested 22 of 
the latter and seized weapons like those captured with terrorist 
groups. Egyptian authorities have asked for the recall of the 
involved embassy staff. 
  Egypt has also protested a new attempt to continue with the 
same activities by three embassy employees who were recently 
expelled. Israel objected to this expulsion, regarding it as a 
non-cordial act. 
  The talks will also involve the activities of the Israeli 
Academic Center. Egyptian authorities have in their possession 
documents on research and information collected by the center, 
including four documents about the People's Assembly and two 
about the cabinet, in addition to documents and other studies on 
the ministries of defense, interior, education, economy, 
agriculture, industry, and planning. 
  Egyptian security organs' reports noted that diplomatic 
pouches are used to carry information to Tel Aviv. They said 
that six Egyptian researchers who cooperated with the Israeli 
Academic Center gave Egyptian authorities information and 
documents on the center's role and spying activities. 
  While the United States is trying to contain the crisis 
through its Cairo Embassy on the pretext that its escalation 
would marginalize the Egyptian role in the peace process, 
Egyptian authorities are demanding the removal of the director 
of the Israeli Academic Center and an end to Israel's hostile 
activities against Egypt. 

