SUMMARY 

                           Syrian media reacted to the massacre in Hebron by intensifying 
criticism of the Israel-PLO Declaration of Principles (DOP) and 
the PLO itself and reviving more hostile anti-Israel rhetoric 
reminiscent of the years preceding the current peace 
negotiations.  At the same time, despite the Arab suspension of 
bilateral peace talks with Israel and the use of Syrian media to 
question the benefits of resuming them without further Israeli 
concessions, Damascus has taken pains to signal its commitment to 
the overall peace process. 

                        END SUMMARY 

   Syria's closely controlled media have portrayed the 25 February 
massacre as a direct product of the DOP, implying that the event 
serves to vindicate Syria's opposition to the agreement.  In this 
context, the media have stepped up criticism of the PLO 
leadership for signing both the DOP and a subsequent document on 
its implementation, which was concluded in Cairo on 9 February. 
A Damascus radio commentary declared that the "massacre must be 
directly or indirectly laid at the door of the Oslo and Cairo 
agreements and whatever other pact may follow."  It criticized 
"Palestinian negotiators" for having "forgotten Israel's crime- 
ridden track record" and being "too trustful and unsuspecting, 
thereby facilitating" the killings in Hebron (26 February).  As 
reported by Damascus radio the following day, an editorial in the 
daily Al-Ba'th called the massacre "the end result" of "the 
flawed and lame agreement" concluded between Israel and "the 
Palestinian negotiators." 
   Moreover, in a revival of the volume and virulence of media 
criticism of the PLO that followed the signing of the DOP in 
September, Syrian media have given substantial coverage in the 
wake of the massacre to anti-PLO statements by hardline Damascus- 
based Palestinian groups.  For example: 
   --The official news agency SANA quoted Popular Front for the 
Liberation of Palestine-General Command leader Ahmad Jibril as 
implicitly threatening the lives of 'Arafat and other mainstream 
PLO leaders (See Note 1).  Calling the massacre a "fruit of the 
Gaza-Jericho agreement," Jibril declared that "the determination 
of our Palestinian Arab people and Arab and Islamic nation will 
punish those who conceded our sanctities, territories, and 
history" (27 February). 
   (Note 1) Jibril's threatening statement echoed his declaration on 
30 September that "'Arafat's fate will be no better than that of 
French General Petain during World War II" (Damascus radio). 
   --Damascus radio, reporting on a "mammoth popular demonstration" 
in the Palestinian camp al-Yarmuk organized by the hardline 
factions, quoted Islamic Jihad Movement Secretary General Fathi 
al-Shaqaqi as calling the massacre "a continuation of the 
liquidation plot embodied in the Gaza-Jericho accord" (28 
February). 

   Anti-Israel Vitriol 

   Syrian media have also reverted to the kind of virulent anti- 
Israel rhetoric that was a staple of Syrian commentary in the 
past but had been used with less regularity at least since the 
start of the current peace process in October 1991.  Thus, 
commentaries in the wake of the massacre have very frequently 
favored the term "Zionists" and "Tel Aviv rulers" over "Israel" 
and "the Israeli government."  Claiming that the Hebron bloodbath 
was simply the most recent of a long series of Israeli massacres- 
-alleged to have included the 27 February church bombing in 
Lebanon (for example, Damascus radio, 27 February)--the 
commentaries have declared bluntly that the killings are 
consistent with the nature of Zionism and demonstrate the 
impossibility of Arab-Israeli "coexistence."  Several 
commentaries in the daily Tishrin, as reported in same-day 
broadcasts by Damascus radio, followed in this vein: 
   --On 26 February an editorial claimed that the Hebron massacre 
"proves the impossibility of coexistence between Arabs and 
Israelis resulting from the fascist Zionist rancor against the 
Arabs." 
   --An editorial the following day declared that, through the 
recent massacre, "Zionism is addressing a message that it has not 
changed . . . its racist and aggressive colors." 
   --An editorial on the 28th claimed that "Zionism and racism . 
thrive on rivers of blood" and referred to Israel as "this racist 
Nazi Zionist ghoul." 

   Commitment to Peace Process, But ... 

   Nevertheless, Damascus has taken pains to emphasize commitment to 
the peace process, while using the media to question the utility 
of resuming the now-suspended talks in the absence of significant 
concessions by Israel--a tack it has taken during previous 
disruptions in the negotiations.  The Damascus radio announcement 
of the suspension of bilateral peace talks in Washington by 
Syria, Lebanon, and Jordan was quick to cite a Syrian spokesman 
as having "confirmed statements by U.S. officials that this step 
does not mean an end to the whole peace process that began two 
years ago" (28 February). 
   Two subsequent media commentaries that referred to the suspension 
of talks also took pains to convey that the suspension is 
temporary and to stress that Syria remains committed to the peace 
process.  Damascus radio, affirming that "the Arabs are advocates 
of true peace," declared that "the suspension of talks will not 
harm the peace talks, especially since only a few days are left 
before the conclusion" of the current session (1 March).  And the 
daily Al-Ba'th on the same day followed up mention of the 
suspension of talks by adding that the Arabs are not "terminating 
the peace efforts" but are "in effect telling the sponsors of the 
peace process to wake up to their responsibilities" (Damascus 
radio). 
   At the same time, some editorial commentary has cast doubt on the 
usefulness of negotiations under current conditions and called on 
Washington to play a more vigorous role in pressing Israel for 
concessions (See Note 2).  For example, Damascus radio declared 
that "talking about peace in light of the serious Zionist 
escalation and Israel's continued refusal to withdraw from the 
occupied territories or halt settlement activities is a waste of 
time," adding that "it is, indeed, absurd."  The commentary 
concluded that "there is no purpose or meaning in holding any 
peace talks that are not based on a clear Israeli commitment to 
implement the UN Security Council resolutions and withdraw from 
the occupied Arab territories" (28 February).  As reported by the 
radio, a subsequent editorial in Al-Thawrah asserted that 
"salvaging the peace process and the stalled peace talks requires 
the application of all sorts of pressures on Israel to make it 
honor the relevant international legitimacy resolutions and 
conventions, respect human rights, dismantle settlements, disarm 
settlers, and return to the Arabs all their territories and 
rights" (2 March). 
   (Note 2) Such expressions of doubt, and even the conditioning of 
resuming the talks on Israeli concessions, have appeared 
periodically in Syrian media commentary since the beginning of 
the peace process.  For example, an editorial in Tishrin last 
November declared that "any resumption of the peace talks"--which 
had not then convened since before the signing of the DOP--must 
be preceded by a clear and public Israeli commitment to the peace 
process and its principles, especially full withdrawal from the 
Arab territories" (Damascus radio, 20 November 1993).  Several 
weeks later, however, Damascus announced its intention to return 
to the peace talks, without any public commitment from Israel on 
the issue of withdrawal (Damascus radio, 9 December 1993). 

   Implications 

   Although Damascus is probably hoping that the attack will scuttle 
the DOP, Syrian media's anti-PLO attacks and shrill, hostile 
rhetoric on Israel will likely subside, though not disappear, if 
peace negotiations are brought back on track.  Moreover, in 
raising claims that coexistence is impossible, Syrian media took 
care to rule out coexistence not between Israel and the Arab 
states but between "Israelis and Arabs" --presumably in the 
occupied territories.  By such behavior, Syria has ensured that 
the door remains open to the eventual resumption of the peace 
talks. 
(AUTHOR: BROWN.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
NEAR EAST ANALYSIS BRANCH (703) 733-6094.) 
CS 3/0119z mar 

