Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Ministry of Finance [MOF] has begun studying a 
plan to increase taxes on tobacco and liquor. This is because 
the MOF has judged that since it plans to abolish additional tax 
on automobile acquisitions and to remove a special tax on 
business corporations as part of the pump-priming measures, it 
needs to cover the expected shortfall in tax revenue -- which is 
expected to be nearly 400 billion yen -- that will occur 
following implementation of the plan. A probable plan is to 
raise cigarette taxes by 1 yen per cigarette. However, the 
situation concerning economic pump-priming measures is a fluid 
one due to the difficulties in coordination on the cost of the 
income tax cuts. Moreover, industrial circles and consumers are 
expected to oppose the MOF plan. For this reason, the MOF 
intends to coordinate with the ruling coalition and other 
parties while watching the situation concerning the shortfall in 
estimated tax revenue. 
  At a request by the Ministry of International Trade and 
Industry, the MOF intends to include the plan to lower the 
consumption tax on motor vehicles from the current 4.5 percent 
(which is the standard consumption tax of 3 percent plus an 
additional tax of 1.5 percent) to 3 percent, and to remove the 
(current 2.5 percent) special tax on business corporations in an 
economic pump-priming package which it will compile within this 
month. The MOF plans to raise the consumption tax to 7 percent 
in April 1995. It hopes that demand for automobiles and other 
products will increase in response to the proposed income tax 
cuts and change in tax rates, and this will help the economy 
escape from the current recession. 
  It is expected the drop in consumption tax on automobiles 
will push down the overall tax revenue by approximately 80 
billion yen and the abolition of the special tax on business 
corporations by 315 billion yen. Because an expected drop in 
tax revenue is serious in view of the economic recession, the 
MOF intends to make up for the fall by raising taxes on liquor 
and cigarettes, which are not daily commodities and will have 
little impact on the economy. 
  Since Japan Tobacco Inc. gave up its plan to list shares on 
the Tokyo Stock Exchange by the end of the fiscal 1993, the 
proposed hike in cigarette tax is not expected to affect its 
business profits as well as the listing issue. If the MOF's 
plan is implemented, this will be the first increase in 
cigarette tax since fiscal 1986 and the first increase in liquor 
tax since fiscal 1984. 

