Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Phnom Penh -- THE Cambodian government hopes 
Prime Minister Chuan Likphai's visit this week will encourage 
reputable Thai businessmen to invest in Cambodia and result in 
the departure of business "cowboys", Cambodian Minister for 
Economics and Finance Sam Rainsy said yesterday. 
  Among the preferred investors he named Sahawiriya, Dusit 
Thani Group and Ital-Thai. Representatives from these companies 
will be in a delegation of about 50 businessmen who will 
accompany Chuan to Cambodia on Wednesday. 
  "We hope that these groups will come to replace (some) 
existing bad ones," Rainsy told THE NATION. 
  "Prestigious and honourable businessmen will only come when 
there is a clear situation and transparency," said Rangsi. 
  "We have not seen prestigious Thai investors in Cambodia -- 
only middlemen or brokers who came and got licences (to do 
business) unfairly through private arrangements." [passage 
omitted] 
  While maintaining that not all Thai businessmen are bad, 
Rangsi likened some of them to cowboys intent on plundering the 
Indians in the far west without respect for the law, regulations 
sovereignty or national identity. 
  "If you send only cowboys to Cambodia to look down on us as 
the far west, you will not have peace and friendship. In 
return, the Indians will rebel against you," he warned. 
  Rangsi singled out the Floating Hotel as the worst case, 
because it was allowed to operate without an official contract. 
  He did not say to what extent other Thai businesses would be 
affected, but said the government would look into ways of 
putting all previous contracts into the regular system. 
  "They will also have to adapt to the new situation," he 
said. 
  However the minister admitted the government would have to 
rely on Thai investors given the similarity of their experience 
in economic development which Thailand went through 20 years ago. 
  He hopes that by learning from the Thai experience, Cambodia 
can catch up to the present level of development in Thailand 
within 10 years. 
  "I hope we will not need 20 years if we can learn to follow, 
or to avoid, what Thailand went through," Rangsi said. 
  During Chuan's three-day visit he will sign an agreement to 
set up a Joint Commission on bilateral relations. 
  The Thai businessmen will also attend the first major 
seminar 
on prospects for trade and investment in Cambodia since the new 
government took power in November. The seminar will be jointly 
hosted by Thailand's Board of lnvestment and Cambodia's newly- 
established National Investment Committee (NIC). 
  The government of Cambodia is set to finalize by the end of 
this month its first investment law, which is crucial to provide 
a conducive environment for much-needed foreign investors, said 
Rangsi. 
  He said the government is also preparing to sign specific 
bilateral agreements on investment cooperation with each foreign 
government if such deals are needed to provide more secure 
investment for them. 
  "It (the investment law) will be very easy and transparent 
and includes provisions that leave no room for interpretation 
and corruption. The law will be the same for everybody," said 
Rangsi. 
  Basically, the law will provide more incentives for foreign 
investment in the government-encouraged sectors, helping create 
jobs and train inexperienced Cambodians. 
  The minister cited as priority projects the processing 
industry, namely rubber plant, food processing and furniture 
factories. Among incentives to investment are five-year 
business and corporate tax holidays, tax exemptions for the 
import of raw materials and transferring of profits back to the 
home countries. [passage omitted] 
  Rangsi asked Thailand to help give Cambodians expertise in 
tax collecting and training on customs procedures. 
  He will raise the request with his Thai counterpart Tharin 
Nimmanhemin, who is accompanying Chuan. 
  The minister said he already wrote Tharin about such 
requests 
following their meeting at the World Bank and IMF meeting in New 
York in October. 

