BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Kiev Ukrayinske Radio First Program 
Network in Ukrainian at 1205 GMT on 25 May carries a 40-minute 
"Independence" program moderated by Alla Storozhenko and 
attended by People's Deputy Borys Oliynyk, head of the Ukrainian 
Supreme Council commission, and People's Deputy Yuriy Kostenko, 
member of the commission, who participated in the 24 May 
Ukrainian-Crimean negotiations. 
  Borys Oliynyk begins by denying mass media reports that the 
situation in Crimea is critical. He says that the Supreme 
Council commission had been set up and had met the Crimean 
delegation to "receive first-hand information" on the situation 
in the peninsula. According to Oliynyk, Crimean representatives 
assured him that the situation in Crimea is "under control." 
This was confirmed by "appropriate Ukrainian functionaries." 
Oliynyk says that "the problem should be resolved on an 
interstate level." In his opinion the Ukrainian delegation 
applied a "proper benevolent approach" in its talks with Crimean 
counterparts and "managed, to some extent, to halt the 
development of processes undesirable for Ukraine, Crimea, all 
the neighbors, and the world community." 
  Yuriy Kostenko confirms that the parties were trying "to 
find 
solutions and avoid accusations, because everybody understood 
the responsibility for the situation." Kostenko then quotes 
head of Crimean delegation Serhiy Tsekov who presented the 
situation in Crimea as "complex, however devoid of traits 
depicted by the mass media." Tsekov reportedly denied reports 
that Ukraine is building up its military presence in that 
region. According to Tsekov, "a war of laws" is being waged 
between Crimea and Ukraine, but the actual situation is 
"absolutely different" from that depicted in Russian mass media. 
Tsekov said that he had held a news conference in Crimea aimed 
to "alleviate tension built up by media reports." 
  Tsekov is quoted as having said that "a number of Crimean 
problems demanded that this kind of resolution be passed by the 
Crimean legislature." According to Tsekov, these are "bitter 
economic problems," opposition against "the isolationist policy 
of the Ukrainian leadership," and the Meshkov party's desire to 
live up to their pre-election commitments. Tsekov reportedly 
said that the issue of dual citizenship is "extremely urgent" 
for the Crimeans. 
  Rejecting claims about Ukraine's isolationism Kostenko, who 
was a member of the delegation at the Ukrainian-Russian 
negotiations on the Black Sea Fleet, says that it was often due 
to the rigid stance of the Russians that agreements were not 
reached on certain issues of contention. Among all the reasons 
that allegedly prompted the adoption of the legal acts by the 
Crimean legislature, Kostenko singles out the fact that Meshkov 
and his accomplices are trying to carry out their electoral 
promises and adds: "This problem cannot be resolved by the 
Ukrainian Supreme Council without goodwill on the part of the 
other party." 
  Oliynyk points out certain ambiguities in the Ukrainian 
Constitution which permit dubious interpretation of certain 
provisions. He asserts that the two sides "regulate their laws 
so as to make them explicit." He adds that it should be stated 
that Ukraine is an independent sovereign state, while Crimea is 
an autonomous territory. According to Oliynyk, the fact that 
Crimean legal acts contradict Ukrainian laws and the 
Constitution was written down in a joint communique issued by 
the two parties. Ukraine, in its turn, acknowledged "the 
inefficiency of decisions regarding Crimea, passed by Ukraine's 
superior bodies of power." Speaking about Crimea's economic 
problems, Oliynyk cites the figure of "hundreds of billions 
karbovantsi" earmarked by Ukraine for the needs of the 
peninsula. The Ukrainian delegation suggested that a working 
group be set up to coordinate mutual claims and "put our 
relations in order." 
  Kostenko quotes Article 70 of the Ukrainian Constitution, 
which envisions that Ukraine's territory cannot be changed 
without the Ukrainian people's consent. The issue of Crimean 
secession can be resolved solely by means of a nationwide 
referendum. Kostenko says that the only way to resolve the 
situation is "to suspend the validity of acts destabilizing the 
legal situation in Ukraine." Kostenko brings up the fact that 10 
days have been given to bring the Crimean Constitution in line 
with Ukrainian laws. Five days have elapsed and if nothing is 
done in the remaining period of time "the Ukrainian president 
will take steps to protect Ukraine's territorial integrity." 
Crimean bodies of power are forming their own army, 
subordinating law-enforcement agencies, and the like. Kostenko 
stresses that "Ukrainian and Crimean executive bodies may 
overstep the limit behind which a peaceful solution will be 
practically impossible." The two delegations agreed to address 
their legislatures with appeals to suspend the observance of 
their decisions so that a coordinating group has time to draft 
proposals on how to appease the conflict. Kostenko points out 
that "although everybody seemed to agree to this option in 
private talks"..."the Crimean delegation refused to address its 
legislature." Kostenko adds that the Crimean Supreme Soviet is 
to discuss the issue of suspending the validity of its decisions 
at its 26 May session. 
  Evaluating the results of talks, Oliynyk says that one 
statement was approved by both delegations: "The Ukrainian 
Supreme Council Commission suggests that the Ukrainian Supreme 
Council and the Crimean Supreme Soviet discuss within three days 
the issue of suspending the validity of acts adopted on 20 May 
1994 for the period of activities of the joint working group." 
In Oliynyk's opinion, the two delegations did what they could 
in light of current realities. 
  Kostenko points out that Refat Chubarov, a representative of 
Crimean Tatars, attended the negotiations and stressed that "the 
optimal solution for all the ethnic groups residing in Crimea is 
autonomy within the Ukrainian state." 
  Completing the program, Oliynyk says that he believes in a 
"positive outcome" of the developments incited by "political 
profiteers." Kostenko adds that once Ukraine's economic 
problems are resolved there will be no grounds for Crimeans' 
discontent. The other important factor determining further 
development of events is Russia's stance. Kostenko believes 
that if Russia abandons its policy of inciting the conflict, the 
latter "will have no future." 

