Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Miljenko Dereta, vice chairman of the </F>
Serbian Civic Alliance movement, by Christophe Urbanowicz; date 
and place not given: "Spring Will Be Hot in Serbia"] 
  [Text] "During the winter it was [Serbian President] 
Milosevic who was stealing the show, this spring it will be us." 
So thinks Miljenko Dereta, producer and vice chairman of the 
Serbian Civic Alliance, an intellectual movement opposed to 
Milosevic's nationalist regime. In an interview with LE 
QUOTIDIEN, he explains the strengths and weaknesses of Serbia's 
democratic opposition. 
  [Urbanowicz] Today, Milosevic's power seems stronger than 
ever in Serbia. Do you share this opinion? 
  [Dereta] Milosevic's regime is in crisis, but very little of 
this crisis is visible. His Socialist Party won the elections, 
which he organized at an opportune moment during the winter, a 
traditionally festive period in Serbia. Milosevic stole the 
show in the winter, but in spring it will be us. And spring 
risks being hot because of the protest movements which will 
certainly manifest themselves. 
  Serbia's economy has been totally destroyed by the UN 
embargo. We were lucky this winter. The weather was very mild, 
which is why people, pensioners in particular, did not start to 
die of hunger. But on the social level, things are beginning to 
move. Recently high school students protested for the first 
time, during five days, their hostility to those in power. 
Civil society is gradually waking up. I believe that change is 
inevitable, it is merely a question of time. 
  [Urbanowicz] What are the strengths and weaknesses of the 
democratic opposition? 
  [Dereta] We have more weaknesses than strengths, obviously. 
We have neither Solidarity or Havel with which to confront the 
Milosevic regime. Apart from the absence of a dynamic and 
uncontested leader, one of our greatest weaknesses is the lack 
of unity. We could have had 14 more seats, with the same number 
of votes which we gained at the December elections, but the 
opposition was unable to present a common front, for reasons of 
personal ambitions of some of its leaders. 
  In theory, the democratic opposition constitutes the main 
force in Parliament. In the Assembly, this democratic 
opposition represents a total of 127 deputies, as against 123 
seats taken by Milosevic's Socialist Party (the DEPOS 
[Democratic Movement of Serbia] coalition: 45; the Democratic 
Party (DS): 29; the Serbian Democratic Party (DSS): 7; the 
Hungarian Party (DZVM): 5; and the Albanian Party (DPA): 2). 
  But this advantage is of little use because, in practice, 
the 
opposition is incapable of presenting a common front, for 
personal reasons. Example: A Milosevic man was elected in 
January as speaker of the Assembly with four opposition votes! 
Milosevic's phrase: "I have only 123 deputies, but the 
opposition will never have 127," clearly sums up the play of 
forces. 
  Another weakness: the media. It is very difficult for us to 
gain access to the official media, in particular television, 
which is almost entirely controlled by his men. The way 
Milosevic's regime stupefies people with manipulated information 
is a crime. Throughout the election campaign, Serbian Democratic 
Alliance President Vesna Pesic was unable to appear on the 
screen except at the legally obligatory presentation of all the 
parties. To our great dismay, the phantom Communist Union -- 
led by the Serbian president's wife, Mira Milosevic -- took up 
more TV time than the other democratic opposition parties. And 
this Communist Union exists only in the state administration and 
in the army, not on the political scene! 
  Our strength lies in young people, who are increasingly 
turning toward opposition movements. Our strength lies also in 
the experience which we are acquiring, for the time being at our 
own expense. Let us not forget that democracy in Serbia is just 
four years old. 
  [Urbanowicz] What do you intend to do to convince the 
Serbian 
hinterland, whose votes enabled Milosevic's Socialist party to 
remain in power? 
  [Dereta] We were shocked by the results of the elections in 
the Serbian hinterland. We did not imagine that the past 
weighed so heavily and that the fear of change was so strong. 
We underestimated the provinces; it was what happened outside 
Belgrade which clinched the election. Whereas Serbian city 
dwellers remain relatively well-informed with their four TV 
channels and numerous radio stations, rural Serbia is unaware of 
what is going on in the outside world. That Serbia does not 
read the newspapers. Sociologists are well aware that one 
Serbian in two is illiterate. There are more illiterate people 
in Serbia than in its Kosovo province, which has an Albanian 
majority. Our program is not well understood by this rural 
Serbia. 
  [Urbanowicz] You took part in the last issue of TEMPS 
MODERNES [title as published], devoted to "Another Serbia." 
What, for you, is this other Serbia? 
  [Dereta] Our electoral slogan was: "To live like normal 
people." Living normally, that is our objective, that means in 
a state governed by the force of law, in a market economy, and 
with respect for our neighbors, whatever their origin. None of 
these concepts are well understood in our country. The 
absurdity of our situation is that we are fighting for the 
arrival of normality and against being forgotten in the West, 
where we are almost completely ignored. 

