Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Prague, January 7 (CTK) -- The Czech Republic 
understands the Partnership for Peace project as the maximum 
which, given the present world situation, Western partners are 
prepared to offer Central and Eastern European countries, but 
also as a minimum for ensuring the security needs of the Czech 
Republic, Deputy Defense Minister Jiri Pospisil said on his 
return from Warsaw today. 
  This was the opinion which Pospisil presented in Warsaw at a 
meeting of Visegrad Group (the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Poland, 
and Hungary) defense ministers, and at a meeting of all the 
delegations with U.S. Army Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman John 
Shalikashvili and American Ambassador to the United Nations 
Madeleine Albright who flew to Warsaw today. 
  Shalikashvili agreed with this description of Partnership 
for 
Peace and said it was up to concrete talks between experts to 
make a maximum out of the minimum, Pospisil reported. 
  The Czech Republic is one of the countries which is prepared 
to make use of the fact that the American initiative is called 
partnership, and wants therefore to influence the conditions of 
the partnership, Pospisil said. He added that the Czechs could 
develop a lot of initiatives within the framework of the 
partnership for peace, but might have problems with fulfilling 
them in a qualified way. 
  It was better at present to develop specific cooperation and 
become integrated into European structures. Later, attempts 
could be made at informal but recognized guarantees that "no-one 
will try to attack us." The Czech Republic was neither willing 
nor capable of believing formal guarantees, Pospisil said. 
  "It is better for the Czech Republic to have multilateral 
relations with the rest of Europe and with the working security 
structure of Europe, which is NATO," Pospisil said. 
  Pospisil said he understood Poland's standpoint, presented 
by 
Polish President Lech Walesa, who appealed to Visegrad Four 
defense ministers today to work out a united strategy for their 
countries to join NATO. 
  In Warsaw Pospisil said several times that the Czech 
Republic 
did not want "to be the only country to join NATO and that it 
wanted neither exclude nor isolate anyone." The Czech Republic 
was ready to join NATO jointly (if this was more effective), but 
it would join the alliance by itself if this proved a more 
advantageous and quicker way, he added. 
  The Czech Republic would not consider it had failed if some 
other Visegrad country were accepted to NATO before it. It 
would be an opportunity for the Czech Republic to learn how to 
achieve the same goal, Pospisil said. 
  He said the reason for the Polish standpoint was that Poland 
had a common border with Russia and any sort of surprises could 
be expected from the countries to the east of the Visegrad 
Group. "That is why the Czech Republic understands Poland's 
nervousness and did not distance itself from its position," 
Pospisil said. 

