BFN 

  [Text] A National Defense Ministry delegation of the 
Kingdom of Cambodia headed by His Excellency [H.E.] General Tie 
Banh and H.E. Gen. Tea Chamrat, co-ministers of national 
defense, visited Malaysia from 15 to 20 May. 
  Upon arrival at Subang International Airport, the delegation 
was cordially welcomed by Brigadier General Ismail and several 
other high-ranking Malaysian Defense Ministry officials. 
  On 16 May the delegation had an audience with H.E. Abdul 
Razak, Malaysian minister of national defense, and several other 
military officers. During the audience, H.E. Abdul Razak talked 
about bilateral relations and noted that Malaysian forces took 
part in Cambodia's peace process through the Paris peace 
agreement. He also stated clearly that Cambodia should live in 
peace among all other Southeast Asian countries. Concerning 
investment, he said that Malaysian investors are interested in 
seeing Cambodia achieve economic development. 
  On that occasion, H.E. Gen. Tie Banh briefed the Malaysian 
defense minister on the military situation in western Cambodia. 
He stressed that although the government has to confront the 
Khmer Rouge, economic rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts 
are continuing all over the kingdom. 
  On 17 May the delegation was received by Sri Dr. Mahathir 
Mohamed, prime minister of Malaysia. 
  During the meeting, H.E. Gen. Tie Banh informed Mahathir of 
the political, economic, security, and social situation in 
Cambodia and Cambodia's rehabilitation and development since the 
establishment of the legal administration. 
  The delegation also visited the shipyard at Johore Port in 
southern Malaysia and the Proton automobile plant in Kuala 
Lumpur. The delegation also visited the Sapura telephone 
factory, which produces telephones for local consumers and for 
export. 
  On 19 May the delegation visited the FELDA [Federal Land 
Development Authority] development zone, a vast area of 871,600 
hectares, of which 60 percent is planted with oil palm, 22 
percent with rubber, and the rest with coffee. 
  The delegation returned home on 20 May. 

