Language: <F P=105> Lithuanian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jonas Bagdanskis: "Five Ministers' New Year's </F>
Soliloquies"] 
  [Text] Viktoras Baublys, press representative for the 
government leadership, organized a New Year's Eve reception for 
journalists with no fewer than five ministers. Finance minister 
Eduardas Vilkelis, who is currently acting prime minister, 
interior minister Romasis Vaitekunas, health minister Jurgis 
Bredikis, agriculture minister Rimantas Karazija, and social 
security minister Mindaugas Stankevicius attended the press 
conference. Each of the high government officials stressed what 
had been accomplished in the past year at the ministry he 
headed; none of them either censured themselves or boasted of 
their accomplishments. 
  Summing up the results of the past year's economic-financial 
activity, Vilkelis indicated that the government budget had 
gotten more than 800 million litas in supplementary revenue. The 
minister noted that there had been fully nine increases in the 
salaries and pensions of workers at budgetary institutions. 
About 350 million litas from supplementary budget income was 
included in the funds used for these payments. Local 
governments, which are experiencing difficulties, also received 
supplementary aid. 
  According to the minister, this year's national budget will 
be even more "stretched". At year's end, inflation is supposed 
to be about 10 percent, but it might be higher. In planning 
budget outlays, the government leadership was forced by the 
Seimas to forego certain investments and agreed to allocate more 
funds for social welfare requirements. However, this does not 
mean that economic entities will have to do without financial 
aid. Aid will be provided through commercial banks, using 
credits allocated to Lithuania by international financial 
organizations and foreign countries. Vilkelis said that there 
would be more such sources of credit than last year, when some 
of these sources had to be tapped to cover the country's debts 
for energy resources. So this year there would be more favorable 
conditions for developing private business, and there should be 
no difficulty in getting these credits because the government 
leadership plans to relinquish its role of distributing them. 
  R. Vaitekunas, who has worked for almost three decades for 
law protection entities, said that this past year had been the 
most difficult of all, and it was as if he had had absolutely no 
personal life. The minister felt the heavy burden of 
responsibility towards the people who had selected him for this 
post. In his words, it was only in midsummer that interior 
ministry agencies had gotten in step and had started to work 
normally. This happened not because the people themselves had 
changed, but rather because there was a change in the way in 
which the government and other national institutions viewed the 
structures of interior ministry agencies and their work. There 
was agreement with the assertion that the greatest danger to the 
country was coming from within, from the criminal world. Because 
of this, the interior ministry received fundamental material 
assistance, and at the same time it also undertook to influence 
improvements in the system of law and order. This enabled it to 
leave its "state of weightlessness", recognize its strength, 
gain greater trust, and achieve results that are already 
tangible. 
  Leaving it up to the Lithuanian people to assess the work of 
the interior ministry, the minister said that in starting the 
new year--unlike last year--"we already know where to go and how 
to get there." The basic structures needed for the battle with 
organized crime have been created, and they will be constantly 
strengthened. A department staffed by solid academic experts and 
other specialists has been established at the ministry to draft 
laws, and the ministry's collaboration with foreign interior 
ministries has been expanded. Last year, treaties of cooperation 
were signed with the interior ministries of Russia and some 
other eastern countries, and this year, similar treaties are 
expected to be signed with counterpart ministries in Germany, 
France, and other western countries. The minister was also 
pleased that matters relating to the technical outfitting of the 
interior ministry were being handled successfully. 
  "I took over a very neglected health ministry, and 
unfortunately the standpoint of other governmental institutions 
on health security is not yet what it should be," minister J. 
Bredikis said. Nevertheless, the ministry is being gradually 
reorganized. The bureau of health security reform that has been 
created indicates that the entire system will continue to change 
fundamentally. Several international organizations will also 
earmark substantial funds for this in the new year. The minister 
maintained that the activities of health insurance plans would 
be substantially expanded this year already, as the foundations 
of insurance-based medicine are created. With the assistance of 
foreign experts, a well-functioning system for providing drugs 
and medications is also supposed to be set up this year. The 
leadership of the ministry clarified the ways in which other 
assistance received from abroad would be used. Important 
agreements for cooperation have been made with colleagues 
abroad; some of these agreements are already being implemented. 
For example, nurses are being retrained in Denmark. The Swedes 
are providing a sizable amount of financial aid in implementing 
certain projects. Thanks to assistance from foreign countries, 
Lithuania's medical professionals are performing in Lithuania 
joint transplants, orthopedic operations, eye operations, and 
other very complex operations for which patients previously had 
to be sent abroad. The minister noted that we should also be 
thankful to many charitable organizations in western countries, 
whose assistance in treating children sick with leukemia, 
performing kidney transplants and other operations is simply 
priceless. Knowing that there is a great shortage in our 
country's budget of funds needed to provide medical care, and 
knowing that we will not have the amount of necessary funding 
for a long time yet, the minister urges everyone to conserve 
their strength and the health which they inherited from their 
parents. 
  Despite the many and well-known troubles of rural Lithuania, 
R. Karazija tried to persuade us that there were also some 
changes for the better. First of all, the current Lithuanian 
leadership is trying to make land reform a controllable process. 
Not only was land reform not stalled at mid-year, as some are 
trying to assert, but, to the contrary, it is continuing to pick 
up speed, following amendments to the laws regulating land 
reform and restoration of property, the adoption of decrees on 
the price of land and its rent, and the preparation of other 
legal acts. Last year, land was returned to more than 33,000 
owners, and the number of farmers already totals approximately 
110,000. When they were polled, 19 percent indicated a 
determination to continue farming and 24 percent will try to 
continue living in rural areas. The minister said that we can 
only be pleased that the rural countryside will really not 
become deserted and that the production of agricultural output 
will be expanded. He believes that the mechanism of the land 
market will be regulated legally at the beginning of this year, 
and this will create the conditions for the establishment of 
large-size commodity farms. And we would now have fewer 
difficulties with respect to food products if we hadn't gotten 
tangled up with mutual reimbursements and if the futile 
experiment to regulate prices through administrative measures 
had not been tried. In addition to dealing with the 
aforementioned problems, the new year will see the attempt to 
accelerate cooperative processes for agricultural output and to 
modernize the processing industry enterprises that are being 
privatized. Farmers, too, are expected to be among the 
shareholders of these processing enterprises. In an attempt to 
create more favorable conditions for the farmers to cover 
production expenses, the minister expects substantial increases 
in the purchase prices for produced output. This year, for 
example, plans call for the purchase of about 500,000 tons of 
grain at prices which are at about 80 percent of world prices. 
While increasing the purchase prices, ways will have to be found 
to increase the use of local agricultural products. It is 
thought that higher salaries and other earnings will have a 
positive effect in this regard. In addition, after signing a 
free trade agreement with the European Union, a portion of 
agricultural production will be able to be exported in 
accordance with established quotas. 
  Minister M. Stankevicius noted, that there had after all 
been 
success in 1993 in halting the fall of the inhabitants' real 
income and he considers this to be a significant achievement of 
the current government. Last year, prices rose by a factor of 
2.7, whereas wages rose by a factor of 2.9, and pensions by a 
factor of 3.0. Although they might be small, real wages rose by 
approximately 5 percent. 
  The minister reminded us that we have about 350,000-400,000 
people who need social assistance. They should be supported and 
aid will be given to such people. The most important thing, 
however, is to create the conditions for them to earn money for 
themselves. The efforts of the ministry will be oriented towards 
this goal in the new year. Another important direction for the 
ministry's efforts will be to strengthen local wardship and 
guardianship centers. More people are now working at these 
facilities, which are computerized and have the task of 
accurately identifying the people who truly need and require 
government wardship. 
  The minister informed us that a draft law on pensions has 
already been prepared. When it goes into effect, we will 
apparently retire to our "well-deserved rest" a few years later 
than we previously did. The minister thinks that the law will go 
into effect in the year 2000. But things could also turn out 
differently. And the biggest worries at present, according to 
the minister, are the small salaries for the workers at the 
budgetary institutions, which the government is going to try to 
raise to the level of the average inhabitant's income. Another 
big problem is unemployment. We will not solve it easily. M. 
Stankevicius believes that some people are unnecessarily 
reconciling themselves to the loss of their jobs and are 
avoiding retraining. He assured us that there were jobs and 
professions where there was a shortage of people. 

