Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Julian Rodriguez Marin] </F>
  [Text] Mexico City, 20 Feb (EFE) -- The Mexican Government 
dealt a severe blow to drug trafficking in 1993 by seizing over 
500 tons of drugs, ranging from cocaine to ephedrine, and 
confiscating thousands of weapons, vehicles, and two dozen 
planes, according to the Attorney General's Office (PGR). 
  The data supplied to EFE indicate that last year authorities 
seized 45 tons of cocaine, 404.2 tons of marijuana, 59.8 tons of 
heroin, 83.1 tons of opium, 1.6 tons of ephedrine, and 
confiscated 1,567 weapons, 1,793 vehicles, and 24 aircraft. In 
addition, according to the PGR, 11,489 hectares of marijuana 
plantations and 3,500 hectares of poppy plantations were 
destroyed. The report added that 6,804 persons from Mexico and 
29 persons from other countries were arrested for drug-related 
offenses, while 25 police officers were killed in the struggle 
against drug trafficking. 
  Among the most reputed mafias controlling the production and 
distribution of narcotics in Mexico are the "cartels" of the 
Mexican cities of Juarez, Tijuana, Matamoros, Sinaloa, and 
Jalisco. 
  From Ciudad Juarez on the northern border, the "Cartel of 
Juarez"--one of the oldest drug rings--takes drugs into the 
United States through the "central route," which runs from the 
States of Oaxaca to Coahuila and is linked to Colombia's 
Medellin Cartel. Its main "capos" were brothers Eduardo and 
Rafael Munoz Talavera (both of whom are imprisoned). Carlos 
Tapia Anchondo, Carlos Enrique Tapia Ponce, and Cuahutemoc Ortiz 
are now in charge. 
  The chief kingpins of the "Sinaloa Cartel" are Joaquin "El 
Chapo" Guzman and Luis "El Guero" Palma. Guzman was arrested in 
connection with the death of Cardinal Jesus Posadas Ocampo on 24 
May 1993 at the Guadalajara airport. 
  The "Tijuana Cartel" has an area of influence throughout the 
Baja California Peninsula and its "capos" are brothers Ramon and 
Francisco Arellano Felix. One is under arrest, and the other is 
wanted in connection with the shooting of Cardinal Posadas. 
  The "Jalisco Cartel" operates in the States of Jalisco, 
Nayarit, and Colima. One of its leaders was Rafael Caro 
Quintero and it is now run by Caro Quintero's relatives Emilio 
Quintero Payan and Juan Jose Quintero, who are devoted to 
marijuana production although they also traffic in cocaine. 
  The "Matamoros Cartel" or "Gulf Cartel" operates in the Gulf 
of Mexico area. It brings marijuana and cocaine into the United 
States through Matamoros, and its leader is Juan Garcia Abrego. 
  Mexican authorities have detected various routes for drug 
trafficking. The "central" route originates in Colombia from 
where the drugs are transported by air to the northern states. 
The "Pacific" route originates in Colombia from where the drugs 
are taken by air to Chiapas, Oaxaca, and Guerrero. Next they are 
transported by sea to the United States. The "Caribbean-Gulf of 
Mexico" route originates in Colombia and leads to Guatemala and 
Belize. It then goes through Yucatan and travels the gulf coast 
to Tamaulipas. Finally, the "Pacific Coast" route reaches the 
State of Guerrero through the Pacific Coast. 
  The mafias are competing for the enormous U.S. market, 
where--according to official reports--revenues from drug 
trafficking reach $52 billion annually. 
  According to a PGR report, in 1992 gross revenues from drug 
trafficking in Mexico represented an amount equal to the net 
foreign currency revenues for Mexican petroleum and nonpetroleum 
exports, plus the value of maquiladoras in 1990. Most of this 
money stays outside Mexican territory. According to reports from 
1992, the number of drug addicts in Mexico is less than two 
million people. Forty percent of them smoke marijuana, while 
heroin and cocaine consumers total 3.4 percent. The remaining 
addicts are addicted to other drugs such as sedatives, 
amphetamines, analgesics, and drugs that are inhaled. 

