Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] It is forest resources (timber) that both the 
private and public sectors who are involved in this activity 
believe might well constitute the most suitable substitute for 
oil, although they do not minimize the potential importance of 
tourism and other productive sectors. 
  The government is apparently aware of this, and this could 
be 
the reason it has been decided to invest between $180 million 
and $200 million in a project designed to reach a level of 
600,000 hectares planted to trees within the next 30 years. If 
this goal is achieved, Ecuador could export timber worth about 
$500 million annually. 
  Exports of sizable volume would begin at the end of about 
five years for balsa wood and about seven years for wood pulp. 
<H5>  Exports Are Increasing </H5>
  Ecuador's exports of timber have seen a gradual increase 
throughout the years, although in 1992 there was a significant 
drop. This trend was reversed in 1993, when the figure almost 
tripled. 
  We see that in 1985, for example, the income obtained from 
timber exports came to $8.798 million, that for 1986 to 
$236,000, that for 1987 to $582,000, and that for 1988 to 
$11.766 million. The figure for 1989 was $12.036 million, that 
for 1990 $11.584 million, that for 1991 $12.158 million, and 
that for 1992 $5.845 million. And finally, by November of 1993, 
the total for the year had reached $14.823 million. 
<H5>  Very Interesting Prospects </H5>
  The prospects for growth in the industrial sector that 
processes timber are very interesting, particularly when such 
major heavy-demand markets as those in Japan, North America, and 
the EEC itself are taken into account. The experts believe that 
in the next century, Japan will become the leading world 
importer of timber, eucalyptus in particular. This is a species 
on which major work is being done in Ecuador with a view to 
improving production and quality. 
  At present the country has about 4 million hectares of 
forests in natural parks, about 6 million hectares of usable 
tropical forest land, about 5 million hectares of unusable 
tropical forest land, and between 60,000 and 70,000 hectares of 
forest plantings. 
<H5>  A Source of Foreign Exchange and Jobs </H5>
  Jorge Barba Gonzalez, the executive director of the 
Ecuadoran 
Forest, Natural Areas, and Sylvan Life Institute (INESAN) 
believes that Ecuador has all of the conditions required in 
order for it to become one of the leading timber-exporting 
countries in the world. 
  He maintains that the situation at present is very clear, 
and 
he says that the existence of a Master Afforestation Plan today, 
the country's first, is the proof. It has been designed to cover 
the next 30 years, and it calls for the afforestation of 600,000 
hectares. 
  This official explains that with 600,000 hectares of forest 
land, Ecuador can earn $500 million annually from the export of 
the products of timber exploitation. This would provide work, 
directly and indirectly, for at least 30,000 individuals. One of 
the goals of the master plan, among others, he says, is to 
safeguard biodiversity. It also calls for an investment total in 
the first few years of about $8 million. The World Bank has 
approved $6.7 million of this sum, and the state will cover the 
difference through the INESAN. 
  Currently, forest resources are generating thousands of jobs 
throughout the country, both directly and indirectly. In all of 
the cities, however small they may be, one can readily see 
sawmills, establishments for the manufacture and sale of chairs, 
beds, other furniture, doors, plywood, etc. 
<H5>  Afforestation Plan Launched </H5>
  This official announced that the INESAN has already 
initiated 
the PLANFOR [Program To Encourage Forest Replanting], through 
which some 240,000 sucres per hectare is being given to the 
farmers or peasants participating in the plan in the mountain 
region, with a slightly larger sum being provided in the coastal 
region. The Forestry Engineers' College is overseeing this 
process, and the funds are being handed over four months after 
the trees are planted. 
  Barba emphasized that there is also a plan for improving the 
nation's forestry resources, in which a Brazilian expert will 
participate. To begin with, eucalyptus and pine will be 
involved. The 11 best species of trees in the country have 
already been chosen, and clones (of eucalyptus) will be 
developed. The same will later be done with other species of 
trees. 
  This official concluded with the statement that the future 
in 
terms of forest resources is undoubtedly encouraging. However, 
he warned that in order to be successful, the Master 
Afforestation Plan must be maintained, and if possible, it 
should be strengthened. 
<H5>  A Substitute for Oil </H5>
  The president of the Ecuadoran Timber Industrialists' 
Association (AIME), Nicanor Fabara, also says that the timber 
sector could provide the best substitute for oil, since Ecuador 
is a prominent afforested country, as foreign experts have noted. 
  We must educate all of the citizens of Ecuador about the 
ecological and economic importance to the country of our 
forestry resources, he stressed. "We executives in the timber 
industry are dedicated to achieving sustainable management of 
the forests, or in other words the cutting of only the trees 
that are absolutely required, while at the same time replanting 
trees and engaging in organized reforestation in order to 
exploit the timber in an organized fashion as well," he added. 
<H5>  Education About Forests Planned </H5>
  Fabara announced that the timber industry sector will go 
forward with a plan called "Forest Culture." It will involve a 
campaign to develop a national understanding of afforestation as 
a measure that is indispensable not only for ecological 
development, but for good business as well, although its fruits 
will not be seen immediately, but only after a number of years. 
  This campaign will be pursued in all of the media, and some 
will participate as promoters. Millions will be invested in this 
effort. The financing will basically come from the resources of 
the AIME (in the initial phase) and foreign funds, as well as 
from entities like the San Francisco University. 
  The timber-processing industry is aware that forest 
resources 
have been exploited without any planning, Fabara said. In 
conclusion, he indicated that the important thing is that there 
is time to correct this, and in order to do so, we must raise 
the consciousness of the citizens of Ecuador. We must begin by 
teaching children the importance of planting trees, and teaching 
the farmers and settlers to make rational and proper use of this 
resource, since 70 percent of the timber being cut is being 
wasted due to ignorance and failure to protect the wood. 

