CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Col Militia Ruslan Shkhamgeriyevich </F>
Yeshugaov, chief of the Administration for Organized Crime in 
the North Caucasus, by Z. Malbakhova: "Crime Is a Shadow of 
Society"; place and date not specified] 
  [Text] A few years ago, when organized crime was 
discussed at the state level, many, including specialists from 
the Ministry of Internal Affairs, believed that the creation of 
special subdivisions for the struggle with it is has no 
prospects, basing their argument on individual facts of the 
appearance of gangsterism, the corruption of the state 
administrative structures, etc. 
  The transition to the new social order proved to be 
protracted. And this is what had to happen in a country that had 
started, towards changes, clearly understanding only one 
thing--from what it is running away, but having only a vague 
notion of where the road will lead on which it has embarked, and 
what pits, turns, and holes it will encounter on this road. 
  The criminals of all colors and categories could not 
but profit from this, and the apprehensions about the lack of 
prospects for the creation of the country's Ministry of Internal 
Affairs new structural subdivisions for the struggle against 
organized crime, unfortunately, turned out to lack foundation. 
On the contrary, their appearance was somewhat late. 
  Today I am talking with the chief of the Administration 
for Organized Crime in the North Caucasus Col. Militia Ruslan 
Shkhamgeriyevich Yeshugaov. He is heading the only subdivision 
of this kind in Russia that is not subordinated to the 
territorial organs of internal affairs but is an independent 
structual organ of the RF Ministry of Internal Affairs and 
carries out the full scope of work in regard to the exposure and 
unmasking of corrupt persons and organized criminal formations 
that have inter-oblast, inter-republic, and inter-state links. 
  Given the complication of the operational situation in 
the region, this subdivision must provide qualified assistance 
to the territorial organs of international affairs and monitor 
the implementation of federal laws pertaining to the struggle 
against organized crime and corruption by the local organs of 
internal affairs. 
  [Malbakhova] Ruslan Shkhamgeriyevich, today, as never 
before, 
a great deal depends on the personality of the leader of any 
level. We would like to find out in detail about your career 
path, about who you were prior to your appointment to this post? 
  [Yeshugaov] Since birth I have lived and worked in 
Kabardino-Balkaria. My first post was inspector of the nursery 
of the militia at the Nalchik Railway Station. Upon graduation 
from the USSR Ministry of Internal Affairs, I was appointed 
deputy chief for criminal investigation of the republic and then 
took part in the formation and creation of the new Sixth 
Department for the Struggle Against Organized Crime of the 
Kabardino-Balkar Republic Ministry of Internal Affairs. While in 
this post, I was invited to work in the USSR Ministry of 
Internal Affairs as deputy chief of the Inter-regional 
Department for Struggle Against Drug Traffic in the territory of 
the North Caucasus. During this time there took place a training 
period in the FRG in line with the new appointment. After the 
breaking up of the USSR Ministry of Internal Affairs I was 
invited to create this subdivision in the territory of the North 
Caucasus, which is what I worked on. 
  [Malbakhova] How justified is the presence of an independent 
subdivision for organized crime of the RF Ministry of Internal 
Affairs when such departments exist in the territorial organs of 
internal affairs? 
  [Yeshugaov] The criminal world has changed. It has expanded 
its influence not only on the social but also on the geographic 
plane. If state relations have weakened, criminal ones, on the 
contrary, acquire an increasingly stable character. 
  The creation of such a subdivision had many reasons, 
including the unabating Osetino-Ingush, the Abkhaz-Georgian, and 
the Armenian-Azerbaijan armed conflicts, and the confrontational 
policy of Chechnia in relation to Russia. 
  The North Caucasus has become a convenient place for the 
acquisition and sale of weapons, the hi-jacking and sale of 
means of transport and many other no less serious manifestations 
of the criminal milieu. 
  The crimes themselves, as a rule, have ceased to have a 
local 
character. They can begin in one republic, develop in another, 
and be realized in a third. Our tasks include the coordination 
of the activity and the extension of practical assistance to all 
territorial organs for organized crime in the North Caucasus. 
  Quite recently, for example, an operation was completed to 
arrest criminals during the delivery of fire arms destined for 
sale, in which, together with us, staff members of the Ministry 
of Internal Affairs of Kabardino-Balkaria and Stavropol Kray 
took part. Forty-nine automatic weapons were confiscated. 
Jointly with the UOP [Office for Combating Organized Crime] of 
the Kabardino-Balkar Republic, we are conducting an 
investigation into a case concerning the sale of a large batch 
of drugs, more than a thousand ampoules, stolen, according our 
information, from pharmaceutical institutions. 
  A group of criminals was arrested, inhabitants of 
Kabardino-Balkaria and Chechnia, from whom 26 million in 
counterfeit money were confiscated. The success of this 
operation was also attained through joint efforts. Our 
administration is handling more than 30 operational 
investigations, including a certain part dealing with the 
Kabardino-Balkar Republic. 
  [[Malbakhova] They say that in the employment of staff 
members in your subdivision preference is given to those who are 
not residents of the republic. 
  [Yeshugaov] In the formation of staffs we proceed only from 
the professional suitability of the candidates and we put the 
moral qualities of people in first place. Representatives of 13 
nationalities are working in our administration, and among them 
also Kabards and Balkars. Many of our staff members are former 
paratroopers, masters of sports, military officers who have 
lived through Afghanistan, have the title of Honored Workers of 
the Ministry of Internal Affairs, decorated with the orders and 
medals "For Bravery" and "For Personal Courage." 
  [Malbakhova] How does your subdivision differ from similar 
territorial ones? 
  [Yeshugaov] First of all, we are better equipped 
technically. 
We have more powerful means of transportation; if necessary, 
even helicopters are put at our disposal, since the entire North 
Caucasus region is our zone of operation. Appeals for our 
assistance come from Perm, Kursk, Ryazan, and Magadan in order, 
in cooperation with the Chechen organs of internal affairs, to 
solve the tasks of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the 
Ministry of Security of the Russian Federation. 
  [Malbakhov] Why do you single out the Chechen Republic? 
  [Yeshugaov] Because it singled itself out. Proceeding from 
the reports of the press and radio about the Chechen mafia and 
the frequently hypertrophied rumors about disorders in the 
republic, internal affairs staff members from the Russian 
regions do not go there, fearing refusal of assistance by 
representatives of the law enforcement services of Ichkeria. We 
are successful in getting this cooperation; for example, our 
people took part in the liberation of two hostages from Moscow, 
who were held in the territory of the republic for over 2 months. 
  Secondly, we have subdivisions that the territorial 
administrations do not have. For example, a department for the 
introduction of new forms of operational and intelligence 
activity. 
  [Malbakhova] What does this department do? 
  [Yeshugaov] It develops and introduces new methods of work 
in 
the criminal sphere. 
  [Malbakhova] What is the result of your work after a year of 
existence, and what are you engaged in at the present time? 
  [Yeshugaov] As the result of the operations that have been 
conducted valuables worth R4.5 billion have been confiscated 
from criminals, several thousand units of ammunition, two rocket 
launchers, 142 kilograms of explosives in the Kabardino-Balkar 
Republic. It is necessary to work in the zone of the 
Ossetian-Ingush conflict together with the operational and 
investigation group and the RF Ministry of Internal Affairs for 
the ascertainment, investigation and release of hostages. 
  We take part in the investigation of crimes that have been 
perpetrated by members of revolutionary groups. For example, 
[the investigation] regarding the exposure of the murder of V. 
Polyanichko--the former head of the provisional administration. 
  [Malbakhova] Can one call it a political crime? 
  [Yeshugaov] The work has not yet been completed, but all of 
its participants are known. The only thing remaining is their 
arrest. 
  [Malbakhova] Incidentally, why do the representatives of the 
law enforcement organs in their numerous press conferences 
regarding the exposure of various sorts of crimes utilize such 
answers: "The situation is under control." "We know the names of 
all the participants," and so on. Journalists perceive such 
statements as subterfuges, an escape from direct answers. 
  [Yeshugaov] I disagree in principle with such assertions. To 
our great regret, according to data of the analytical center of 
the RF Ministry of Internal Affairs, only one-third of the 
organized crime groups are known. . . 
  [Malbakhova] Could you not tell us about the most serious 
cases on which you are now working? 
  [Yeshugaov] We are investigating the theft of large monetary 
assets carried out through the forgery of bank documents, and 
the creation of fake enterprises in the territory of Dagestan. 
Ninety investigators and as many operational workers are taking 
part in it. From this you can conclude what the "dimension" of 
crime is. 
  Recently, according to our operational materials, we 
instituted criminal proceedings, in accordance with which about 
100 motor vehicles are being confiscated that were stolen, among 
400 others, from the Nizhni Novgorod Automobile Plant. . . . 
  [Malbakhova] Have you in your practice encountered cases 
with 
mafia manifestations? 
  [Yeshugaov] The case of the theft of 400 motor vehicles, 
which I mention, is in the stage of investigation and a great 
deal remains to be illuminated. But already now, as soon as we 
started to confiscate transportation, the deputy plant director 
for marketing, has shot himself. For the time being, we do not 
yet have reason to believe that the suicide took place because 
of the involvement of the director of the enterprise in this 
crime. But the very fact points to corresponding changes of the 
investigation. 
  [Malbakhova] What are the basic characteristics of the 
manifestations of organized crime in the region? 
  [Yeshugaov] First of all, the high degree to which criminals 
and the population in general are armed. Every third serious 
crime is committed with the use of fire arms or in their 
presence. Secondly, gangsterism in pure form. Somewhere in the 
region there is less, for example, in Karachayevo-Cherkessia and 
the Kabardino-Balkar Republic, and somewhere there is more--in 
Dagestan. 
  Attack on motor transport, cargo theft, the murder of 
drivers. Thirdly, all conceivable machinations with 
securities--counterfeit, forgery of bank documents. These trends 
are not subsiding. 
  [Malbakhova] What can you say about the two murders in 
Nalchik: In the barbershop and the "Audi-500" motor vehicle? 
According to rumors, this was a quarrel of two gangs. 
  [Yeshugaov] We have not worked on this case. 
  [Malbakhova] Why? Is this not a manifestation of organized 
crime? 
  [Yeshugaov] In terms of our functional obligations, we work 
on inter-republic and inter-state cases of organized crime. 
Although I can say that not a single serious case remains 
outside of our purview. The presence of quarrels characterizes 
the level of organized crime. But in the territory of 
Kabardino-Balkaria their intensiveness is not great. Close by, 
in Mineralnyye Vody, we have many more of them, but in Dagestan 
up to 160 terrorist acts with explosions and similar affairs. 
Moreover, whole groups of criminals take part in the quarrels, 
in this case one can suppose the settling of accounts of two 
enemies. 
  [Malbakhova] What, in your view, are the reasons for the 
growth in crime? 
  [Yeshugaov] This is the seamy side of the political, social, 
and economic processes that are taking place in society. The 
militia can influence some one trend, but to put a stop to this 
growth as a whole is beyond its strength. 
  Beginning in 1982, the law enforcement organs have been in 
constant change. Because of low salaries, 600,000 high-class 
specialists in their time left the internal affairs organs. It 
was at that time, in my view, that the inadmissible 
rapprochement of the poles of the criminal world and the law 
enforcement services took place. In many respects this is 
connected with the material aspect. 
  According to the data of our Main Administration, 500 cases 
have been recorded where action was brought against staff 
members of the militia who had become members of criminal 
groups. In our Administration, there is a special subdivision 
that monitors our own staff members. A similar structural unit 
exists in many special services in the world. And I think that 
in the present conditions it is necessary. 
  To the reasons for the growth in crime one can add the 
factor 
of impunity. At a recent conference in the Main Administration 
it was stated that there are 120 cases, where gangsters were 
released from custody by the unjustified decision of courts. And 
this means that their subsequent decisions will still be more 
audacious and impudent. One cannot but single out the inertness 
of society itself. If all citizens of the country cease [as 
published] to be so passive and individual means of reaction to 
criminal manifestations remain, indifference to the fate of 
others and fear for their own will remain high. 
  The reports of the law enforcement organs on the criminal 
situation in the country at times remind one of fragments of 
"hard-boiled" Western police films. We have already become quite 
accustomed to all the horrors being created by criminals which 
are talked about on TV screens and simply in the people. Because 
of this there is a special demand of the law enforcent organs, 
for they are the guardians of the law. But, apparently, it is 
worth thinking about the fact that all the claims which society 
is making on the militia service must also be addressed to 
society itself as a whole, which is suffering from a shortage of 
spirituality, morality, purity of thoughts, and hence just 
causes as well. 

