Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Raymond Kendall, Interpol Secretary General </F>
since 1985 by Vincent Jauvert; place and date not given: 
"Drugs--The Confession of Interpol Chief"] 
  [Text] Jauvert: You are very pessimistic at 
present... 
  Kendall: Yes, the situation has deteriorated 
enormously. In the early 1970's, when I headed the Interpol's 
narcotics division, there was no real drug problem in Europe: 
Trafficking was essentially directed toward the United States. 
What is the situation now at the beginning of 1994? In Paris, 
London, Frankfurt or Rome, in all the great European cities, the 
drug market is booming, with an ever increasing number of drug 
addicts. This is why I am sounding the alarm, making an appeal 
to politicians, and saying: Beware, if we continue fighting 
against drug abuse in the way we have for the past 20 years, we 
will definitely lose the battle--perhaps we have already lost 
it, for that matter... 
  Jauvert: Can you suggest any solutions? 
  Kendall: There is only one possible solution: 
Doing everything in our power to reduce consumption. Our 
rulers must finally acknowledge this: Whatever efforts the 
law-enforcement agencies make, drug producers and dealers will 
continue to thrive as long as there are millions of consumers in 
our countries. The only way of breaking the market, is to make 
demand drop dramatically. 
  Jauvert: What about hitting the producing 
countries even harder? 
  Kendall: You can try to, of course... Recently, a 
French politician even said that they should be attacked 
militarily, if necessary... 
  Jauvert: It was Charles Pasqua [interior 
minister], am I right? 
  Kendall: You are saying so. 
  Jauvert: Was it not a good idea? 
  Kendall: Let us be realistic. Let us take, for 
example, the case of the Medellin cartel's boss Pablo Escobar. 
Will the fact that he was eliminated change anything at all? 
No, it may perhaps have a psychological effect on other drug 
dealers but, as to the rest, we know for some considerable time 
that his cartel has been replaced by that of Cali. In other 
words, the economic and social conditions in the producing 
countries are such that it is nonsense to believe that people 
there are going to deprive themselves of the financial benefits 
derived from producing coca, opium, or cannabis. Of course, we 
must try to convince them, one way or the other. But we should 
not expect significant results in the short or even in the long 
term on that front. 
  Jauvert: What if we help those countries convert 
their production to coffee, wheat, rice... 
  Kendall: We must do so, obviously. But, there 
again, let us be realistic and look at the results. In 
Thailand, for example, a conversion policy has now been 
implemeted for over 15 years, but this did not prevent a heroin 
production boom from taking place in the Golden Triangle. No, 
that is not how the problem will be solved. 
  Jauvert: Nor do you believe it will take us any 
further to concentrate our efforts on the drug trade itself and, 
therefore, on repressive measures. 
  Kendall: No. Every year we are seizing greater 
and greater quantities of drugs and arresting an ever increasing 
number of dealers. However, at the same time, the amount of 
narcotics available in our countries is increasing. Therefore, 
let us continue by all means to crack down on dealers but, there 
again, let us not hope for miracles. 
  Jauvert: Not even if the means of repression were 
considerably increased? 
  Kendall: Let us imagine that we double the 
financial resources available for the narcotics brigades. Will 
we thereby multiply by two the seizures? I do not think so. We 
will get to know the problem better, we will develop what is 
today called "criminal intelligence," that is to say, 
information techniques on organized crime. This is important, 
but how can it improve the root problem, namely consumption? A 
few years ago, the Americans tried to determine the ratio 
between seizures and the amount of actually available drug. 
Well then, according to this study, in certain countries the 
ratio is as low as 5 percent, and the maximum is 25 percent. 
Now, researchers have estimated that it would be necessary to 
seize 40 percent or even 50 percent, according to a recent 
investigation, in order to have a real impact on the market, 
that is, in order to reduce consumption. We are very far from 
these figures. The traffickers' stocks are gigantic. In other 
words, even by increasing the repressive means considerably, we 
would not achieve a significant impact on drug addiction. 
  Jauvert: It might also be possible to intensify 
the fight against the laundering of narco-dollars, which has 
become very topical over the past few months. 
  Kendall: It must be done, of course. But I am 
afraid that this new hobby-horse may lead us to lose sight of 
the real problem. Combating the laundering of money is not an 
end in itself, it is only a means for stopping drug dealers, and 
one which is not--let us be frank about it--particularly 
effective. Let us take, for example, the BCCI affair, the 
greatest laundering operation ever to be discovered. What did 
it come to? After 4 years' work, after mobilizing a huge number 
of police, only 3 people have been prosecuted for laundering 14 
million dollars. Now, the annual turnover for drug dealing is 
estimated at 350 billion dollars, about 100 of which would 
appear to be invested in the international financial circuit. 
Fourteen million out of 350 billion: This is little more than 
a drop of water in the sea! 
  Jauvert: Since then, special brigades have been 
set up to combat money-laundering. 
  Kendall: So much the better. But what resources 
do they have at their disposal? In France, for example, the 
team comprises some twenty people. Ask them how many cases they 
are able to crack in a year. You will be surprised at the 
ridiculously small figure they will quote. You will object that 
their personnel could be increased. This would of course be 
positive, but it would not change the root problem in the least. 
There is, in our countries, considerable demand for narcotics, 
and as long as this is the case--you can rest assured--people 
will continue to produce drugs, deal in them, and will continue 
to launder money. 
  Jauvert: In your view, then, this demand can be 
reduced? 
  Kendall: In any case, we should try to. Until 
now, there have been few efforts in this direction. Politicians 
speak of "war" on drug addiction, and they are right because the 
future of our democracies is at stake. Nevertheless, let us 
compare the defense budget to that available for special centers 
for drug addicts. Do the resources available, say in France or 
Britain, exceed the price of a single fighter plane? If this 
were so, I would be very surprised to learn it. The Swedes, 
however, have shown that, when a genuine political will is 
there, demand can be curtailed. For some years now, they have 
been spending considerable sums of money in information 
campaigns and aid programs aimed at drug addicts. As a result, 
consumption has dropped dramatically. I am not saying that the 
Swedish model can be transplanted anywhere, but it should be 
studied more closely. 
  Jauvert: Why are Western governments, in your 
opinion, being so inactive? 
  Kendall: I have often asked myself that question, 
and I have found 3 reasons. In the first place, developing an 
effective prevention and help program for drug addicts is 
unquestionably a difficult task. We know the motivations of 
drug dealers, but it is much more difficult to pinpoint the 
social and psychological reasons that lead a person to heroin. 
Even those who are supposedly specialists in the field do not 
agree on the most effective form of treatment. Secondly, such 
programs are extremely expensive and only lead to positive 
results after a number of years--even as long as a decade. The 
third reason results from the first: If they have to invest 
resources in combating drug addiction, politicians prefer to 
concentrate their efforts on repression, the results of which 
are more readily perceived by public opinion. However, if we 
took our time, results would follow. Consider what happened in 
the case of tobacco: Following years of campaigning to 
sensitize public opinion, consumption finally dropped. Why 
should it be impossible to do the same in the case of drug 
addiction? 
  Jauvert: To curtail demand, you advocate 
"decriminalizing" drug abuse. Why? 
  Kendall: Because regarding consumers as offenders 
serves no useful purpose. In fact, it is even dangerous. A 
convicted person discovers a culture in prison which may make 
him become something he was not when he first came in, namely, a 
criminal. Note, however, that I am speaking of decriminalizing 
drug abuse, not of legalizing it. I believe drug addicts must 
not be put in jail, but rather, forced to undergo treatment in a 
specialized medical center. 
  Jauvert: Are you in favor, then, of 
"decriminalizing" the use of heroin and cocaine as well as 
cannabis? 
  Kendall: Yes, medical doctors have muddled the 
issue for a long time by trying to draw a difference between 
"soft" and "hard" drugs. As a matter of fact, we now know that 
both are toxic products. The substance contained in cannabis, 
THC, is hazardous for the brain, its negative effects last 
longer than those of alcohol, for example. So why should the 
two types of drug be treated differently? 
  Jauvert: You said that the police should be able 
to force drug addicts to undergo treatment. In fact, this is 
now almost the case in France, with the so-called "therapeutic 
injunction," although few people are aware of this. Once 
arrested, drug users (as opposed to peddlers) can theoretically 
choose between treatment or prison. 
  Kendall: Yes, but this law is not being enforced 
through a lack of means. How many places are available in the 
specialized centers that can provide treatment for drug addicts? 
Ten, 20 times as many would be required in order to be 
effective. Throughout Europe, the state has so far relied too 
heavily on charity organizations. However, it is up to the 
state now to take the initiative. On the other hand, this 
choice between treatment or inprisonment seems to me to be 
inappropriate: Prison is in no case an effective solution. 
Drug addicts must be treated--even forced to do so--and doctors 
must be given the means to help them. 
  Jauvert: Forced? How? 
  Kendall: I do not know. It is the specialists who 
must decide. 
  Jauvert: Do you think doctors should be allowed to 
prescribe substitute products, such as methadone, or even heroin? 
  Kendall: Why not? If results can be achieved in 
this way... I have only one reservation: Substitute products 
should not replace one form of dependence with another for any 
great length of time. But, once again, this is a matter for 
specialists. 
  Jauvert: As a matter of fact, a few days ago, the 
highest medical authority in the United States announced it was 
favorable to legalization, purely and simply... 
  Kendall: I am totally opposed to such a view. 
  Jauvert: Why? 
  Kendall: Simply because legalizing drugs would 
automatically lead to an increase in consumption. Do you know 
why more and more people are in favor of legalization? Because, 
through laziness or ignorance, the phenomenon has been 
trivialized. When 400 kilos of cannabis are seized in Calais, 
who cares? Nevertheless, if tomorrow a chemical plant dumps 
toxic products into a river and kills some fish, that will stir 
up a scandal. Drug dealers do that every day, by placing 
products that are highly toxic to humans on the market, and 
nobody says a word. 
  Jauvert: Yet, alcohol and cigarettes are sold 
freely... 
  Kendall: So what? Two toxic products are already 
socially accepted. Is this a reason to add two more to the 
list? What else should be legalized next--crack, LSD? At what 
age? 
  Jauvert: It is also argued that legalizing drug 
consumption would reduce the incidence of crime. 
  Kendall: For a while, perhaps. But did the end of 
prohibition cause the mafia or gangsters to disappear in the 
United States? Of course not. Dealers will find other sources 
of profit. 
  Jauvert: Nevertheless, this solution is being 
advocated by policemen in many countries. 
  Kendall: True. I have recently discussed the 
subject with some British colleagues. A few years ago they 
would have said an outright "no" to decriminalization, whereas 
today some Scotland Yard officials are publicly posing the 
question of legalization. I understand their viewpoint. A 
policeman is there to enforce the law. Now, the laws on drug 
abuse are flouted a thousand times a day. So they ask 
themselves: Why not abolish them? It is a legitimate feeling, 
even if I do not share it. 
  Jauvert: So you believe that the moment has come 
to start a major debate? 
  Kendall: Yes, let everyone clearly express their 
opinion. Today Europeans are very sensitive to ethical and 
individual responsibility issues. Let us take advantage of 
this, before it is too late... 

