Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentator's Article: "A Major Event in Protecting </F>
Children's Health -- Polio Immunization Program Begins 5 
December"] 
  [Excerpts] With State Council approval, urban and rural 
areas across China will take unified action today to start a 
polio immunization program for children under the age of four. 
This is an important measure adopted by the Chinese Government 
to protect children's health and improve the quality of the 
Chinese population, as well as an important event in the history 
of public health in China. [passage omitted] 
  Western Asia, in which China is located, has set a 1995 
deadline for the elimination of polio.[passage omitted] 
  The Chinese Government all along has attached importance to 
children's issues, and has regarded concern for children's 
healthy growth as a basic major issue in national construction. 
In 1965, China succeeded in developing a live polio vaccine, 
which has been applied in various places in China since that 
same year. In the "10-Year Plan for National Economic, and 
Social Development and the Program for the Eighth Five Year 
Plan," which China adopted in the early 1990's, planned 
immunization was listed as an important measure for protecting 
children's health. In 1991, Premier Li officially signed, on 
behalf of the Chinese Government, the "Declaration on the 
Subsistence, Protection, and Development of Children" and the 
"Plan of Action" for implementing this declaration, thus making 
a solemn commitment to the whole world. In 1992, the State 
Council officially promulgated the "Program and Plan for the 
Development of Chinese Children in the 1990's," and included the 
elimination of polio by 1995 as an important goal for the 
protection of children's health. 
  To eliminate polio and cut back on the handicapped 
population 
is of great significance today. On the basis of achieving a 
planned polio immunization rate of 85 percent, China in recent 
years has adopted a series of measures -- based on provinces and 
counties as units -- to accelerate the elimination of polio, and 
it has achieved pleasing results in the past few years. The 
incidence of polio has fallen with each passing year, and no 
cases have occurred in the urban areas of some cities, whereas 
the incidence of polio has approached or achieved the lowest 
level in history. This situation has won the universal 
admiration of the international community. However, because of 
China's vast territory and huge population, as well as the great 
differences between various places, the development of the 
planned polio immunization among children is imbalanced, and 
weak links continue to exist. Regarding the absolute figure in 
the incidence of polio, China still accounts for around 
one-fifth in the world, ranking top among the 35 countries 
(regions) in Western Asia. Should we fail to take unified 
action in unfolding a polio immunization program, it would be 
very difficult to achieve the goal of eliminating polio. This 
being the case, China has decided to take the current nationwide 
immunization program as a crucial measure for eliminating polio, 
and is ready to seize the favorable period between now and 
January 1995, when the spread of polio virus is comparatively 
weak, to unfold polio immunization programs twice each year so 
as to upgrade children's organic resistance to the virus. 
  The immunization program, which involves approximately 100 
million children, is unprecedented in China. To make the 
program successful calls for the active participation of the 
whole society and the close coordination of various departments. 
[passage omitted] 

