BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Anwar Haddam, exiled leader of the Islamic </F>
Salvation Front, by Gilles Millet in London; date not given: 
"Islamic Salvation Front Must Be Recognized as Political Party" 
-- first three paragraphs are LIBERATION introduction] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] We met in London with Anwar 
Haddam, one of the leaders of the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) 
and an elected member of Parliament since 1991. Currently a 
refugee in the United States, he gave us his views on the 
prerequisites for a successful dialogue. 
  Like most exiled FIS leaders, Anwar Haddam finds it 
difficult 
to voice an opinion on the various actions perpetrated in 
Algeria by the armed islamic groups. While he confirms that 
assaults against police forces are indeed part of the strategy 
of fundamentalist leaders, his answers are much foggier when it 
comes to the murders of intellectuals, journalists, and 
anonymous civilians. He does condemn the killing of "innocent 
people." However, as he himself puts it, "we need to agree on 
the meaning of the word `innocent.'" In his opinion, 
"pseudo-intellectuals or pseudo-democrats for whom democracy 
ends where their failure begins" are not "innocent." In other 
words, they deserve being fundamentalist targets. 
  To a direct question on the murders of Algerian journalists, 
he answers: "I will not get into this. We suggested to our 
mujahidin brothers that they might hit on those who backed the 
coup. These are a group of extremist secularists who reject the 
choice of the Algerian people. It so happens that among them 
are a number of academics, journalists, politicians, 
soldiers..." And when the murders appear "dubious" to him, he 
rather expediently puts the blame on military security forces. 
  Millet: Algeria seems to be in a dead end. Do 
you think talks are still possible between the authorities and 
fundamentalists? 
  Haddam: From the very outset we have asked for a 
political solution to be found through serious negotiation. 
Trouble is, those who forcibly seized power have no clear 
policy on the matter. The FIS is a political party. Therefore, 
it was not ready to go into armed conflict. After the December 
1991 coup, we were faced with a new situation. This is why 
orders were given to people to organize locally and target all 
those who were illegally clinging to power, including security 
forces, which were supposed to preserve the institutions and 
respect the people's choice. We made good headway and the 
mujahidin (freedom fighters) now are an organized entity which 
will abide by FIS decisions in case of serious negotiations. 
  Millet: What do you mean by "serious negotiations"? 
  Haddam: We asked those currently in power to 
clarify their position. To begin with, they must acknowledge 
the fact that political authority may only spring from the 
choice of the people. Unelected, self-styled "decisionmakers" 
cannot play a part in the talks. Then they must agree to 
implement a genuine separation between the three powers: 
Parliament, the executive, and the judiciary. This means that 
we reject any encroachment on political power by the Armed 
Forces or intelligence services. Moreover, Algeria's 
sovereignty and unity must be preserved. Those in power should 
not be allowed to stir up trouble in areas such as Kabylia, for 
instance. These prerequisites tie in with another, basic one: 
All decisions made since the interruption of the democratic 
process must be repealed, including the ban on the FIS. The FIS 
must be recognized as a political party. 
  Millet: Does this mean that no real negotiations 
will take place as long as the authorities have not committed 
themselves to organizing elections? 
  Haddam: Indeed it does. Not only must the FIS' 
legitimacy be recognized, a formal statement must be issued with 
respect to the reactivation of the electoral process, and 
international assurances must be obtained, especially from 
France. And last but not least, all jailed islamists must be 
released. 
  Millet: Who has been or must be involved in the 
talks? 
  Haddam: The FIS, with the mujahidin's assent, 
decided that only Abassi Madani, the party's president, and Ali 
Belhadj, its vice president, are mandated to participate in 
potential negotiations with those in power. This is what 
happened. The talks have now ground to a halt because Zeroual 
(the president of the Republic) has his hands tied and therefore 
cannot recognize the FIS as a political party. [passage omitted] 
  Over 80 percent of combatants are now part of a single 
entity. We share the same objective and same strategy. Now, I 
do not intend to be more specific; nobody was mandated by the 
mujahidin to talk about their structures. [passage omitted] 

