BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Sejm Speaker Jozef Oleksy by Krystyna </F>
Szelestowska; place and date not given: "Can We Pass Up China?"] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] [Szelestowska] However, you 
still have not answered my question: What did the talks of the 
Sejm delegation concerning human rights in China look like? 
  [Oleksy] Whenever I was talking about our standards of 
democracy, the hosts stressed that other countries should not 
impose their own rules on anyone. They kept saying that they do 
not agree with our interpretation of human rights, because, for 
China, a country populated by 1.2 billion people, the most 
important rights consist in supplying food, clothing, shelter, 
and other things to the people. Democratization is not one of 
the priorities. The chairman of the Chinese parliament asked me 
the following question: Is the world aware of the possible 
international consequences of a breakdown of the situation in 
China caused by famine or an outbreak of social dissatisfaction 
and rebellion? 
  [Szelestowska] What did you say to the hosts? 
  [Oleksy] I said that public opinion is concerned about the 
limitation of freedom in China, that we will be satisfied with 
any progress in this area, and that we have not changed our 
opinion on this. 
  [Szelestowska] Despite the great differences in the approach 
toward the issue of human rights, we are making every effort to 
have good relations with China... 
  [Oleksy] This is decided by the importance of China, which 
will soon become the greatest market. China is characterized by 
the fastest development rate in the world--over 17 percent last 
year. Right now it is going down to the level of 9 percent; it 
is doing this consciously, for fear of overheating the economy. 
  The Chinese are living with the future, reforms, and 
openness 
to the world. They are making very profound analyses of the 
mistakes of the past centralized socialism, the several year's 
experience of the postcommunist countries, as well as their 
mistakes, the consequences of those mistakes, and the 
difficulties of Western states. They want to transfer what is 
best for their policy of reforms and openness. On many 
occasions, they repeat the thought of Deng Xiaoping: "Capitalism 
has its planning, and socialism can have its market." This 
individual, third path of development is yielding good results. 
  [Szelestowska] You said that our turnover should reach $1 
billion. We reached this level in the past, in 1986. However, 
is it possible to reach this level now? 
  [Oleksy] I believe it is. China perceives Poland as the 
greatest country in Central Europe that is familiar and 
increasingly closely linked to the European Union and that, at 
the same time, knows well the reality of East Europe. The hosts 
stressed that there are no conflicts between our countries. 
Bejing has no reservations concerning Poland's integration with 
Western Europe or its membership in NATO. It wants to cooperate 
with us; however, this cooperation will to a considerable degree 
depend on ourselves. If we perceive China exclusively as a 
country with prisons full of dissidents, inhabited by 
yellow-complexioned, slant-eyed people eating dogs, if we wait 
for a revolt to break out, we will pass up our chance. Business 
favorable to us can be conducted already now. This has been 
noted by the businessmen who accompanied the Sejm delegation on 
its visit to China. 
  [Szelestowska] Thank you for the interview. 

