CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Fang Pingxiao (2455 1627 2556) and Fu Xiangdong </F>
(4395 0686 2639): "Options and Demands of the Peasants of the 
Large Cotton-Growing Province of Shandong--Questionnaire Survey 
of 300 Shandong Cotton Farmers"] 
  [Excerpts] To obtain an up-to-date idea of the mentality of 
the cotton farmers, and to correctly assess this year's cotton 
production, the agricultural investigation team of Shandong 
Province conducted a questionnaire survey of 300 cotton farmers 
in the cotton-growing region, i.e. in the five counties of 
Xiajin, Gaotang, Qihe, Caoxian, and Dingtao. 
  1. Cotton Acreage Continues To Decline 
  Following the establishment and perfection of the socialist 
market economy, market awareness among the peasants gradually 
increased, with the result that many cotton farmers again 
reduced their cotton acreage in their arrangements for this 
year's cultivation. The total acreage contracted for by the 300 
cotton farmers involved in the present investigation was 
2,258.43 mu. The actual acreage sown to cotton last year was 
826.7 mu, or an average of 0.6 mu per person. Arrangements this 
year were for 736.1 mu, i.e. 90.6 mu, or 11 percent less than 
last year, the average per person being only 0.07 mu. Of the 300 
cotton farmers, 118 households--i.e. 37.3 percent--were 
preparing to reduce acreage sown to cotton. In 89 of these 
households the reduction would be to over 20 percent, and 21 
households decided not to grow any cotton at all. In the case of 
112 households--i.e. 37.3 percent--arrangements were for a 
cotton-growing acreage equal to that of the preceding year. The 
balance of 70 households arranged for a cotton-growing acreage 
that would be larger than that of the preceding year. The 
investigation revealed that this year's trend is one of a 
continued decline in acreage sown to cotton. Computing at an 11 
percent reduction, the cotton acreage throughout the province 
would only be around 10.15 million mu, hardly sufficient to 
fulfill the provincial government's plan for an acreage of 18 
million mu. Unless forceful measures are adopted, this will be a 
year of the lowest cotton acreage since 1981. 
  2. Reasons for the Decline in Cotton Acreage 
  What are the true reasons for the year by year decline in 
cotton acreage? The 118 cotton-growing peasant households who 
reduced acreage replied as follows: Ninety households--i.e. 76.3 
percent--listed in first position their serious losses due to 
insect pests. Forty-three households--i.e. 36.4 percent--listed 
in second position that cotton growing required much labor, was 
high in costs and low in returns. Altogether 62 households of 
cotton-growing peasants, i.e. over half of those who reduced 
cotton acreage, listed the low state procurement prices in third 
place. Ninety-four households listed in fourth position the long 
time that it takes to grow cotton and the greater risks 
involved. Ten cotton-growing peasants investigated in Jinqidian 
Village, Xiajin County, had last year sown a total of 23.9 mu to 
cotton, but at harvest time there were only 8.2 mu of that 
acreage left, from which they harvested 470 kg of unginned 
cotton, or 57.3 kg per mu. One of these cotton farmers had 
harvested only 10 kg. and when he started to talk about the 
damage due to bollworm infestation he was so grief-stricken that 
he began to cry. 
  The main reason why cotton farmers this year again reduced 
their cotton acreage is to be seen in that cotton-growing is 
still beset with many difficulties. The 300 cotton-growing 
households presently investigated recognized as the main 
difficulties in cotton growing: First, the difficulty in coping 
with insect infestations, and 230 cotton-growing 
households--i.e. 76.7 percent--listed this in top position. 
During the last two years, there had been an enormous increase 
in insect pests, and the peasants have expended a great amount 
of human and financial resources in combating these pests. The 
expenditure for pesticides alone added over 100 yuan per mu to 
the costs of production, and as this was not fully effective, it 
was supplemented by manpower, but the result of all these 
efforts was still not satisfactory. In this year's cotton 
growing, the peasants feared most the large infestation by 
insect pests, against which they by themselves seem to be 
powerless. Second, shortage of production capital. This problem 
was listed in second place by 158 households, i.e. 52.6 percent. 
The continuous reduction of cotton production over the last two 
years has reduced per capita income of peasants in the 
cotton-producing district by over 150 yuan. Cotton farmers are 
short of ready cash, while production costs for cotton are high, 
so that the insufficiency of capital is the second great 
difficulty for cotton farmers. Third, there is a serious 
shortage of cotton seeds for improved varieties. The cotton 
farmers reacted by last year growing less cotton, which resulted 
not only in less income for the individual cotton farmer, but 
also in the difficulty of less seed being retained and available 
for planting. With so little cotton harvested, there could 
hardly be any seed retained, and the problem of shortage of seed 
was particularly acute for the summer planting of cotton. Some 
of the cotton seed for summer planting supplied last year 
centrally to the villages and townships had poor germination 
capacity, and some cotton farmers just stopped planting 
altogether, exchanging the cotton seed for cotton oil. "Even the 
cleverest housewife cannot cook a meal without rice." Without 
seed cotton farmers have no way to grow cotton. Fourth, 
insufficient acreage available as cotton fields. There were 174 
cotton-growing households that listed this in fourth place. 
During the autumn planting season last year, the soil had good 
moisture content, and in addition grain prices had gone up, so 
that many cotton farmers expanded their wheat fields, and did 
not leave much acreage for cotton. Insufficiency of cotton field 
acreage added yet another major difficulty for peasants wanting 
to grow cotton. 
  3. Some Problems That Cotton Farmers Hope Will be Resolved 
  Cotton is the major cash crop of Shandong Province, also one 
of the major sources of income for peasants of the 
cotton-growing districts. Although there is presently no great 
urgency for cotton farmers to grow cotton, the farmers 
themselves are not willing to give up cotton production. Cotton 
farmers hope to further develop cotton production, and they hope 
the state will resolve the following problems as quickly as 
possible: 
  First, most significantly resolve the problem of the supply 
of highly effective, low-toxic pesticides; Second, 
perfect a more socially effective service organization that 
would promptly render technological services; Third, as speedily 
as possible open up the cotton market, allowing all 
cotton-growing peasants to trade freely; Fourth, resolve as soon 
as possible the problem of a more favorable policy and the 
problem of delayed payments. 
  The vast number of cotton farmers also demand that the 
relevant agencies take strict punitive action according to law 
against producers and providers of spurious or inferior means of 
production, especially spurious or inferior pesticides, and that 
economic compensation be paid where damage has been caused. They 
demand that effective measures be adopted to control the large 
price increases for means of production, so as to reduce costs 
of cotton production. The state should at the same time, and as 
soon as possible, publish its policy as regards cotton 
production, so that all cotton farmers may "feel at ease" when 
they again take up planting cotton. 

