BFN 

  [Text] On behalf of the government, Dr. 'Abd-al-Karim 
al-Iryani, minister of planning and development, today submitted 
a verbal report to the House of Representatives on Yemeni 
developments from the political perspective. The brother 
minister dismissed any possibility of a definitive end to the 
fighting short of recognizing constitutional legality and 
placing those who are still misguided in the Armed Forces under 
the command of constitutional legality. It is not surprising 
that a number of brother and friendly countries have called for 
a cease-fire -- some of them in good faith -- due to their (?not 
knowing what will happen) after the cease-fire. He emphasized 
that a cease-fire will not be possible before constitutional 
legality is recognized and the Armed Forces are placed under a 
single command. It is possible to engage unionists in the 
Socialist Party in dialogue after the voiding of the secession 
declared by the traitor 'Ali Salim al-Bid and [word indistinct] 
to the Constitution and [word indistinct] and the results of the 
elections of 27 April, 1993. 
  Later, the House Constitutional Committee read out a report 
to the people's deputies concerning a request to lift 
parliamentary immunity from a number of deputies. 
  The committee's report, which led with the constitutional 
and 
legal standpoints, also stated the following: 
  Given that the crimes committed [words indistinct] as stated 
by the memorandum of the brother minister of justice, which 
proves that the legal action has not been not brought out of 
spite, and in view of compliance with the legal and 
(?procedural) aspects in this regard, and accordingly, the House 
(words indistinct) the following: 
  The parliamentary immunity shall be lifted from the house 
members listed below: 
  [Name indistinct], number of the constituency: Ahmad 'Ubayd 
[word indistinct], 154; Anis Hasan ('Atwah), 25; Haydar Abu-Bakr 
al-'Attas, (?161); (Salim) Muhammad Jubran, 152; Qasim 
'Abd-al-Rabb Salih, 21; Muhammad 'Ali (al-Qayrahi), 126. 
  [Words indistinct] the judicial authorities to take measures 
toward the arrest, search, and investigation, or imprisonment, 
or any other penal measures that justice authorities deem fit to 
take against them as per Article (?64) of the Republic of 
Yemen's Constitution. 
  Second [as heard], the committee recommends that the House 
Speakership Council pursue investigation and prosecution, and 
brief the House on evolving developments. The House has 
approved the recommendations of the Constitutional and Legal 
Committee in this regard. [Words indistinct] messages [words 
indistinct] to the Arab League secretary general, the UN 
secretary general, and Arab and international [word indistinct] 
about the developments in the Yemeni arena. 
  The House is to resume tomorrow morning, Monday [words 
indistinct] 

