Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Sarajevo, Jan 29 (AFP) -- Croat forces agreed to 
briefly halt their shelling of the Moslem-held sector of Mostar 
Saturday while UN troops evacuate the bodies of three Italian 
journalists killed by shrapnel the previous day, UN forces said. 
  Idesbald van Biesebroeck, a spokesman for the UN Protection 
Force (UNPROFOR), said the bodies would be taken later in the 
day from the Moslem hospital in eastern Mostar to a medical 
center run by the Spanish UN contingent at Draveco, south of 
Mostar in southern Bosnia. 
  The three Italian television journalists, Marco Lucchetta, 
41, Dario D'Angelo, 47, and Alessandro Otta, 37, were killed 
Friday [28 January] by a mortar shell fired from the Bosnian 
Croat western part of Mostar. 
  Their bodies were due to be flown out of Split, a Croatian 
port town, later Saturday, the Italian ambassador at Zagreb, 
Salvatore Cilento, said. 
  The Bosnian Croat "defense ministry" on Saturday deplored 
the 
"tragic deaths" of the three Italians and expressed "deep 
sympathy for their families," in a statement carried by the 
official Croat news agency Hina. 
  Seven other people were killed in the Croat bombardment of 
Mostar Friday in which 55 rounds of artillery fire fell on the 
eastern part of the town, a spokesman for the UN's Spanish 
contingent said. 
  A spokesman for the UN High Commissioner for Refugees 
[UNHCR], Kris Janowski, said Saturday that snipers had also 
killed two Moslem civilians near where an aid convoy was being 
unloaded into a UNHCR warehouse in eastern Mostar. 
  Two mortar rounds also fell near the convoy, but caused no 
casualties. 
  Friday Britain suspended its participation in aid conoys in 
Bosnia after a British driver was murdered and two Britons 
wounded by uniformed gunmen in the Moslem-held central Bosnian 
town of Zenica. 
  Meanwhile, Radio Sarajevo reported that Croat aircraft 
bombed 
the Moslem village of Kute, near Prozor in central Bosnia, early 
Saturday after shelling the village throughout the day Friday. 
  The radio, quoting officials in the mainly Moslem Bosnian 
army, gave no toll from the bombing and UN officials were unable 
to confirm the attacks on Kute, which, together with the nearby 
village Here that was overrun by Croat forces Tuesday, is a 
strategic supply link between southern Bosnia and Sarajevo. 
  The UN was unable to confirm the attack on Kute, although it 
confirmed on Friday the capture of Here. 
  Numerous Moslem refugees fled to Kute in October 1992 after 
a 
Croat offensive at Prozor. 
  Sarajevo's government called Friday for the UN to convene in 
emergency session and condemn the "open military intervention of 
Croatia in Bosnia-Herzegovina." 

