BFN 

  [Text] On 17 April, the Rwandan Patriotic Front [RPF] 
president, Alexis Kanyarengwe, held an interview with foreign 
journalists. They asked him questions about the current 
situation, especially questions related to the war and the 
killings. A journalist said everybody thought the RPF would 
conquer Kigali in a few hours. Now a week has gone by. He 
asked whether it was a difficult task. 
  President Kanyarengwe answered by saying that our first 
objective was to rescue the innocent people being killed and to 
reinforce the RPF battalion in the parliament building. He also 
added that the war against the clique continued. Saying that 
Kigali could be overrun in two days was an exaggeration in view 
of the distance and the heavy weapons that first had to be taken 
there. The journalist was not satisfied with the answer and 
asked when Kigali would be captured: days or weeks. President 
Kanyarengwe said it was not easy to be precise but up to now we 
were in control of some areas which allowed us to control the 
town. We also had other positions in the center of town. 
  The journalist asked whether the government's strength was 
unexpectedly high or low. Kanyarengwe said that up to now we 
had not found any unpredictable strength in the government 
troops. He said our priority was first to rescue those who are 
being killed. He said that capturing Kigali would not be a 
problem. 
  Concerning the killings, the journalists asked how they 
could 
stop since there were so many. President Kanyarengwe said that 
the Republican National Movement for Democracy and Development 
[MRND] party had prepared the Interahamwe [MRND militia] by 
giving them weapons and awaited any pretext to kill the 
innocent. He said that with the death of President Habyarimana, 
the bloodsuckers had implemented their evil plan. He said many 
soldiers had now realized this. Those who saw the truth would 
help the RPF, he said, but even if they did not, the RPF would 
soon fulfill its mission. As to whether the RPF would kill the 
murderers, President Kanyarengwe said that the priority was to 
stop the killings and secondly to arrest the criminals and hand 
them over to courts so that everyone could defend himself and be 
punished according to his crime. 
  President Kanyarengwe told them that some killers had fled 
the country. He asked the world to help us arrest the people so 
that they are brought to book, as the killings were crimes 
against humanity, which is an international crime. He said that 
some of the killers had fled outside the country. But there are 
others still in the country who use the country's radio to 
divide the people. He said there was also the Radio Television 
Libre des Milles Collines radio which divided Rwandans. He said 
all these questions would be followed up. 
  The journalist asked whether the killers would not have 
pretexts so that they were not punished. President Kanyarengwe 
said no one was allowed to kill, to loot, and torture people. 
He said that our country had laws to punish the concerned 
people. He also said that even other foreign countries pursued 
such people. 
  A reporter said they were among the first journalists who 
had 
been in Kiziguro and witnessed a very high level of killings. 
He asked to be told about the situation in the entire country. 
President Kanyarengwe said that what was happening in the 
country was not just killings, but genocide. He said there were 
many killings in Kigali. The government troops finished off 
hospital patients, took injured people from the Red Cross and 
finish them off too. Almost all the opposition leadership was 
killed. President Kanyarengwe said that [words indistinct] win 
and that peace return in the country, we shall meet with other 
political leaders of the country so as to install a government 
wanted by the people. Those were some of the questions answered 
by President Alexis Kanyarengwe the day before yesterday. 

