Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with ANC spokesman Carl Niehaus, and Freedom </F>
Front spokesman General Tienie Groenewald, by SABC announcer 
Leslie Mashokwe on the "Newsline" program, date not given -- 
live] 
  [Text] [Mashokwe] Good evening and welcome to Newsline. 
Tonight in our program we focus on the manifestos of the Freedom 
Front and the African National Congress [ANC]. Later on the two 
parties debate these manifestos. The question of a volkstaat 
[Afrikaner homeland] raised a lot of eyebrows when it was first 
mooted and it remains one of the most contentious issues to come 
to the fore in recent years. I am now being joined by the 
Freedom Front's General Tienie Groenewald and the ANC's Carl 
Niehaus. Good evening gentlemen and welcome. What is the real 
state of affairs? Are we going to have a volkstaat? Mr. Nelson 
Mandela proclaims that during his lifetime there will never be a 
volkstaat. What is the latest? 
  [Niehaus] Well, Leslie, the important issue is whether we 
are 
keen to address the concerns that everyone in this country has 
of different languages and different cultures. The ANC says we 
are. We are keen to try and work out a feasible and a workable 
plan on how to address these concerns. You know, this is not a 
new thing. We had said since 1955 that all the languages and 
all the cultures in this country must be able to grow and 
develop, but we also say there are practical ways of doing it 
and there are impractical approaches, and an impractical 
approach is to insist on a geographical area, a specific piece 
of land, and the reason why we say that is very simple, not 
because we try to deny anyone in this country their rights, 
their culture, their language, but because the reality is that 
nowhere in South Africa are the Afrikaners or that group of the 
Afrikaners who support a volkstaat, and they are a minority, 
even amongst Afrikaners, nowhere are they in the majority in any 
geographical area. And the citizens ... 
  [Mashokwe, interrupting] Okay, but ... 
  [Niehaus, continuing] Can I just conclude this, because it's 
crucial. The people who live in that area are in every area -- 
the majority are black people, and what I hear from the 
Afrikaner Volksfront [National Front] is that those people will 
not be able to have full citizenship. They won't have voting 
rights. They will be in a position of second class citizens. 
That is unacceptable. The ANC had fought since 1912 for 
nonracialism, for an inclusive democracy which will grant rights 
to everyone. We cannot now come and grant rights to one group 
to the detriment, at the cost of the majority of our people. 
  [Mashokwe] Tienie Groenewald, the ANC's manifesto says the 
land belongs to all who live in it. In a way it is an inclusive 
document which seems to be addressing some of your concerns. 
  [Groenewald] You'd like my comment on the ANC's statement 
that the land belongs to everyone? Certainly, we do not deny 
that but in South Africa we have all three major causes for 
conflict. There are only three causes for conflict. The first, 
is disputes over territory, secondly, disputes over ethnicity or 
nationalism, and thirdly, disputes over religion or ideology. 
There is not one single unitary state in the whole world where 
these three causes of conflict are present in states that are 
democratic states. The only states where this occurred was 
where you had a dictatorship, such as the old Soviet Union and 
in Yugoslavia, and the moment you imposed a democracy these 
states fell apart, which proves one thing -- that when the 
causes of conflict are present, and the three causes of conflict 
are present in any particular state, then you must look at a 
different dispensation. Now in this respect what we've done in 
South Africa is -- we have been led by the ideological thinking 
and the constitutional thinking, mainly from the communist 
sphere of influence on the one side, and secondly, by American 
thinking as to what is good for South Africa. We never looked 
at the European examples, examples such as Switzerland, examples 
such as Belgium. Now if we take those examples we find that 
these were countries where you had the same causes for conflict, 
and they went for a constitutional dispensation in which power 
was basically brought down as close to the people as possible. 
Now this, this is where the basic difference is in the ANC's 
policies and our policies. Now coming back to the points that 
Mr. Niehaus made, now first of all, could I correct a few 
statements. He said first of all there is no such area in which 
there is a concentration of Afrikaners, in which the Afrikaners 
are the majority. In the discussions that we've had with the 
ANC, we have presented to them a scientific map in which there 
is an area of approximately 14 percent in which there is a 
majority of Afrikaners. Now this is the first point which I 
think is extremely important. 
  [Mashokwe] Where is this area? 
  [Groenewald] This area has Pretoria as the center, with a 
part of the eastern Transvaal, a part of the western Transvaal, 
and a part of the northern [Orange] Free State. Now let's come 
back to the second point. That second point was that in this 
volkstaat only Afrikaners will have the vote. Now let me say 
that this question is still being debated, and we are still 
negotiating with the ANC, and there is an accord which is 
presently being negotiated which specifically addresses this 
particular point, of voting rights within the volkstaat. That 
question has not been resolved yet. 
  [Mashokwe] Mr. Niehaus, you want to respond quickly? 
  [Niehaus] Well, first of all, the question of voting rights 
is not resolved because there is a continuation and an 
insistence from the Volksfront that they want to give special 
rights to what they call the Afrikaner group who they want to 
see as exclusively in control of that area, but secondly, 
nowhere in South Africa, I repeat again, is there an area where 
Afrikaners are in the majority. Of course you can go and take a 
small little area in Pretoria, where because of the Group Areas 
Act there may be a majority of whites living there, but that 
area is an integrated part of an economic system and Pretoria is 
integrated with Mamelodi, with Atteridgeville, and all the areas 
surrounding it. It's an impractical suggestion, except if Gen. 
Groenewald is saying that those areas such as Mamelodi and 
Atteridgeville should be used in the old racist and apartheid 
system, as satellites to the Pretoria area where they will be 
able to monopolize the economic power and make use of people who 
come in on the basis of migrant labor, moving in and out to work 
there and not being able to deal in the richness and in the 
economy of that area. 
  [Mashokwe] Let's get Gen. Groenewald to explain his position 
with regards to the areas -- the black areas around Pretoria for 
instance, because you mentioned Pretoria particularly. 
  [Groenewald] Now I can give you examples, in the United 
States for example ... 
  [Mashokwe, interrupting] Let's look at Pretoria. 
  [Groenewald] Okay, but let me give you an example of what is 
acceptable in the rest of the world. In the United States they 
have demarcated certain constituencies, one in particular which 
is a hundred miles in length, and at one place a hundred yards 
wide, specifically to draw in an area in which the negroes have 
a majority so that they could have more negro seats in the 
senate. In Belgium they have drawn ... 
  [Mashokwe, interrupting] Let's look at Pretoria. I am 
worried about time. 
  [Groenewald] Now what I'm saying is we should also look at 
how these problems are solved in the rest of the world, and we 
find in Belgium, in particular, the boundaries have been drawn 
very strictly along language lines. Now whether you draw the 
boundary in such a way that Pretoria is in the Volkstaat, and 
for example Mamelodi and Atteridgeville is outside, that does 
not really matter. What matters is what happens to the 
industrial areas, in the areas in which the wealth is created, 
in those areas where people work and where the jobs are, on 
which side of the border ... 
  [Mashokwe, interrupting] It doesn't answer the question on 
what do you do with the people around there. Do they become 
part and parcel of the volkstaat, of the Pretoria volkstaat as 
it were, or are they migrant laborers as its was the case in the 
past? 
  [Groenewald] No, there's no reason whatsoever why they 
should 
be migrant laborers. 
  [Mashokwe] Dormitory townships? 
  [Groenewald] Yes, there is no reason whatsoever ... 
  [Mashokwe] What do they do? Do they then have their own 
little black volkstaat outside of Pretoria? 
  [Groenewald] If they want it. This is the advantage. If 
they want it. Now the point -- let me just explain this to you. 
We are not talking of a South Africa which is economically 
completely segregated. We are talking about an area in which 
economically we are still integrated as we are in South Africa 
today. There's no reason why we cannot do that. 
  [Mashokwe] Let me get Carl to respond and react quickly to 
this. 
  [Niehaus] Leslie, we are talking about a lappieskombers 
[patchwork quilt], as we say in Afrikaans -- little pieces of 
land torn apart, but the reality is this kind of proposal 
doesn't take into consideration that throughout South Africa, 
through all the different cultural groups, through all the 
language groups -- now no group that says as a majority they 
want a volkstaat. There is a small minority in the Volksfront 
who say they want a volkstaat, and the reality is that in this 
country there are political divides that cut across all the 
different language groups and all the different cultural groups. 
I'm sitting here tonight. I'm an Afrikaner. I don't want to be 
part of a volkstaat and the vast majority of the Afrikaners 
don't want to be part of a volkstaat, so the concept, as it was 
set out for some of the European nations, doesn't work for South 
Africa because in this country we have a South African nation 
where people, regardless of whether they are Afrikaners, Zulus, 
Xhosas, are identifying themselves with particular political 
ideals set out in the ANC, in the Volksfront, in the National 
Party, in the Democratic Party, all of those parties. 
  [Mashokwe] Could you respond quickly. 
  [Groenewald] That is what the negotiations with the ANC is 
about, to prove substantial support and by means of 
participating in the election, to also prove exactly where the 
boundaries of such a volkstaat should be. In other words, what 
I'm saying, is the whole question of support and the question of 
boundaries is a question which will be resolved in the election 
on the 27 April, so let's not argue about that now. We'll see 
what happens on the 27 April as far as substantial support is 
concerned. Let me also add that all the opinion polls, all the 
meetings we have had at this stage, proves beyond all doubt that 
70-80 percent of Afrikaners in South Africa want a volkstaat. 
  [Mashokwe] The one question that always bothers people is 
that who are the Afrikaners, who are the Boere and who are these 
people? That seems to be confusing the issue all the more 
Tienie. 
  [Groenewald] Yes, certainly, but in every nation, in any 
ethno-cultural group you have divergent views. 
  [Mashokwe] Are you Boer or are you Afrikaner? 
  [Groenewald] I'm an Afrikaner Boer and I can explain that to 
you, but I think the point is you took a statement made by Mr. 
Robert van Tonder. He is not a member of the Volksfront and he 
is not a member of our party. 
  [Mashokwe] But he is one of the Afrikaners, one of the 
Boere. 
  [Groenewald] Okay, he is one of the Boere. Now the point I'd 
like to make is, Carl considers himself an Afrikaner, as I 
certainly do, now the first point I'd like to make -- an 
Afrikaner knows whether he is an Afrikaner or not. There are 
two requirements. First of all you must classify yourself as 
something, and secondly, once you have classified yourself to a 
particular group then that group must also recognize you as part 
of that group. Those are the basic two criteria. 
  [Mashokwe] Thank you. Carl you were going to respond to Gen. 
Groenewald. 
  [Niehaus] Yes, it immediately links with what Gen. 
Groenewald 
is saying. Who is the Afrikaner? The Afrikaner is diverse. 
There is no center really of who the Afrikaner is. I am an 
Afrikaner, Gen. Groenewald is an Afrikaner, but the real issue 
is, is there anyone who tries to talk on behalf of the 
Afrikaner, who put themselves so to speak at the gate of 
Afrikanerdom, and is arrogant enough to say that they talk on 
behalf of Afrikaners? There I must take issue, because Gen. 
Groenewald and the Afrikaner Volksfront very often says that 
they are talking on behalf of the Afrikaner and I don't know on 
whose behalf they are talking. They are definitely not talking, 
and I repeat again, on behalf of the majority of Afrikaners. 
The Markinor survey of a few weeks ago said exactly the 
opposite of what Gen. Groenewald is saying about support for the 
volkstaat, in fact, it said that six out of every 10 supporters 
of the Afrikaner Volksfront is not prepared to leave their 
territory, to leave their land, and sacrifice anything for the 
sake of a volkstaat. So it's very weak support even amongst 
those groups who identify themselves. 
  [Mashokwe] Okay Carl, let me get Gen. Groenewald here to 
explain to me exactly what is going to happen then to the people 
who happen to be in those areas that are designated as the 
volkstaat. 
  [Groenewald] Let me say first of all that we don't expect 
anyone to leave any part of South Africa and to move to the 
volkstaat. The idea of a volkstaat ... 
  [Mashokwe interrupting] What about people who are in the 
volkstaat -- in the areas that you designate as a volkstaat? 
  [Groenewald] Exactly the same thing. We do not expect mass 
movements of people. This is not what the intention of the 
volkstaat is. What we are saying is that we'd like a center 
somewhere where we as a people can survive, where our culture 
can grow, where we have the political power to determine our own 
future. It's a matter of...[pauses] We have been talking about 
the volkstaat all the time, but the critical question is the one 
of self-determination. It's a matter of being in the position 
where you determine, as a people you determine your own future. 
Now this does not mean that in South Africa we are looking at 
mass movement of people. This is certainly not the intention. 
  [Niehaus] There are two questions: The first one is, if 
there 
is not going to be mass movement of people out of the volkstaat, 
will every person who lives in that volkstaat have exactly the 
same rights as every Afrikaner? Will they vote there? Will 
they be able, if they are the majority, when they have a 
political party, to take over the government of that area? 
That's the first question. And the second question, in addition 
to that is, are we actually saying to each other that it is 
possible to talk about self- determination without a 
geographical area, because the ANC says, we believe it is -- we 
believe we can address the center of concern that Gen. 
Groenewald is talking about without granting a particular 
independent geographical area, and that is, can I just 
emphasize, that is exactly the crux of the question that we have 
been debating and what that memorandum that Gen. Groenewald is 
referring to is trying to address. 
  [Groenewald] Let me answer that question quickly by saying 
no 
people has ever, in the history of mankind, survived without 
having their own geographic area. That is the first and a vital 
question, so geographic area is very much a part of the survival 
of any people. Secondly, as far as citizenship is concerned and 
as far as civil rights is concerned, and as far as voting rights 
is concerned, whatever system we eventually negotiate in the 
volkstaat will have to conform to international accepted 
standards. 
  [Mashokwe] So you will not discriminate against people who 
are not Afrikaners? 
  [Groenewald] No, no certainly not. 
  [Niehaus] So there will be the chance for the black majority 
in that area to take control and to rule that area together with 
a united South Africa. 
  [Groenewald] I'm not saying that. 
  [Niehaus] That's the crux of the question. 
  [Groenewald] No, that's not the crux of the question. The 
question is: We have a South Africa, and a South Africa which 
belongs to everyone, now what we are now saying is let us in 
this South Africa find a place for everyone of the different 
ethno- cultural groups. That's the first and vital question. 
So we don't want a situation ... 
  [Mashokwe] Is there such a place? 
  [Groenewald] Yes, there is such a place. I have indicated 
this to you, but you see what you've done is you have 
concentrated so far on the volkstaat, you've concentrated on the 
question of self-determination, but we should start looking at 
the alternatives. We should start looking at the ANC 
alternative, because what we have done so far is we have limited 
this discussion ... 
  [Mashokwe, interrupting] Okay. What problems do you have 
with that one? 
  [Groenewald] Okay, now let me tell you what the basic 
problem 
is, and this is the crux of the political problem in South 
Africa, is the fact that the ANC wants to concentrate all the 
power at the center so all political power must be at the 
center, and in the present constitution, and certainly according 
to the viewpoints of people like Mr. Joe Slovo, and people that 
we have negotiated with, that there is not single, not one 
single critical function that has been devolved to provinces or 
to the different states, not one. There is no exclusive powers 
whatsoever in the provinces. This basically means that because 
all the power is at the center, and as far away from the people 
as possible, this is an absolute requirement for the creation of 
a Marxist state or a socialist state where you have central 
planning. We say no. We want the power as close as possible to 
the people in the provinces. 
  [Mashokwe] Let me respond to that -- power to the people. 
Don't you believe in that? 
  [Niehaus] With respect, I don't agree at all with Gen. 
Groenewald that the African National Congress and the other 
negotiating parties have not taken great care and went to great 
lengths to try and accommodate the concerns of the Freedom 
Alliance. That is why we had another session of the negotiating 
council and why a number of powers were actually devolved to the 
regions, and Gen. Groenewald knows that those powers as they 
were set out at the last session of the negotiations council 
actually were exactly the powers that were negotiated and 
discussed with the Freedom Alliance, so that is not correct, but 
secondly, let us talk actually about economic policy because 
that is the crux of the matter. 
  [Groenewald] I think we must, we must first talk about this 
issue of exclusive powers, because a wrong statement was made by 
Mr. Niehaus and we must correct that statement. 
  [Mashokwe] Correct it now and we have to move on. 
  [Groenewald] Certainly, we'd like to move on. The point I'd 
like to make is -- the functions negotiated and passed on to 
provinces in the changes in the constitution were powers 
previously that presided with local authorities, like abattoirs, 
and it was now pulled up to the second level of government. 
  [Mashokwe] But are you not happy with that at least? 
  [Groenewald] Of course, because they are not exclusive, 
because there are at least seven provisions -- subjects -- so 
there is not one function that has been allocated to provinces. 
Secondly, all the functions of provinces can be changed by the 
central government without the authority of the provinces. 
  [Mashokwe] Is it not a fact Carl? 
  [Niehaus] Leslie, the fact is that those powers, including 
the powers of abattoirs were exactly the ones that were asked 
for by the Volksfront and especially that the leader of the 
Conservative Party, Dr. Ferdie Hartzenberg, had asked for. The 
sad thing is that it seems that Dr. Hartzenberg and members of 
the Volksfront have not even known exactly what they were asking 
for, because once we gave it to them then they complained that 
they were not getting the powers that they wanted, and we gave 
them exactly what was discussed. 
  [Groenewald] That is not true. That's simply not true. 
  [Mashokwe] Gen. Groenewald, let's look at how you are going 
to address the issue of the disadvantaged people and the fact 
that we had a situation where the Afrikaners were poor and now 
they are the economic powerhouse of this country. Are you going 
to address that one? 
  [Groenewald] First of all, when we look at the volkstaat as 
such, or the proposed volkstaat, it only -- it provides for 
approximately 12 percent of the GNP of the whole of South 
Africa, so it's one of the poorer areas of South Africa. I 
think this is the first and the most important point. The 
second point I'd like to make is in the volkstaat we'll have an 
absolutely freemarket economy. You cannot always create wealth 
by taking away from the rich and giving to the poor. I think 
this is the first point. 
  [Mashokwe] But there was an important thing that happened in 
1929 when the Afrikaners were poor, there was a deliberate 
effort at empowering them economically. Are you going to do the 
same in addressing the demands and the wishes of the black 
majority in this country, or are you at all worried about that 
problem? 
  [Groenewald] No, of course we are. The important thing is 
that everyone has a responsibility towards the socioeconomic 
upliftment of those people who are less advantaged. This is a 
commitment which we all have. The question is how do you do it. 
Do you do it through a program by creating a socialist economy 
or do you do it by creating wealth through a freemarket system. 
Now our point is that if you employ a socialist sys?em there is 
no way in which you are going to get foreign investment. 
  [Mashokwe] You are not suggesting that the ANC is ... 
  [Groenewald] Of course they are. Of course they are. 
  [Niehaus] Well, that's surprising because the ANC is not 
having a socialist system. We say that we have an economic plan 
that must create jobs and we say that we work in an integrated 
and complex economy where those jobs must be created. You 
cannot do it in little pieces of land. It must be an integrated 
process of having the necessary public works programs, laying on 
electricity to all our people, building roads, running water, 
all of those issues. 
  [Mashokwe] But then how are you, Carl, how then are you 
going 
to have the state playing such an important role in creating all 
these jobs? 
  [Niehaus] Well, the state will play an important role in 
helping to direct this process together with the private sector. 
We are saying we will enter into a partnership where the state 
will help with the creation of a public works program, but we 
will also, together with the private sector, help with the 
creation of small business and that again is an issue which 
cannot be addressed in small areas. It must be a national 
approach, of course devolved through the nine provinces that we 
have, and the ANC says that as the Afrikaners in 1929 and 1948 
were trying to change around an unjust system, I agree, 
Afrikaners were disadvantaged, they were being discriminated 
against, so has the majority of people in this country got the 
right to change that system around but not through an unjust and 
divided economy. Through an integrated economy that will serve 
... 
  [Mashokwe, interrupting] Okay, let's get into this point ... 
  [Niehaus] Just give me a chance. I think Gen. Groenewald has 
been receiving quite a lot of time. And the ANC says, yes, let 
us work together. Let us get also the expertise of the 
Afrikaners, and I think the Afrikaners have got a lot of 
important expertise to ensure that jobs are being created for 
all our people, but let us not isolate the Afrikaner and 
sideline them and put them in that area that only has 12 percent 
of the gross national product, and actually create a new 
situation where the Afrikaner will be impoverished by this plan 
of standing apart from the rest of South Africa. 
  [Mashokwe] Tienie? 
  [Groenewald] I can assure you one thing, that we will not be 
impoverished, but I think the important thing is, and this 
really is the Achilles heel of the ANC -- let's leave the 
economy to private enterprise and not to the state, because this 
is the basic, the real basic difference between the policy of 
the Freedom Front and the policy of the ANC. The policy of the 
ANC is centralizing everything -- political control, the 
economy, everything. The state must control every individual. 
What we say, the state has but one responsibility, one prime 
responsibility, and that is to see that the individual is not 
exploited and that the individual is safe. That's basically it. 
Let's leave the economy over to industrialists, to private 
enterprise. 
  [Mashokwe] But Gen. Groenewald, the Nationalist Party 
government took the bold step of addressing the Afrikaner 
problem. How are you then going to address the black problem 
this time of deprived people, disadvantaged people? Do you care 
for their vote? Should they vote for you? 
  [Groenewald] Let me say, first of all, as far as black 
people 
are concerned. Of course you have to create jobs, but so far 
experience throughout the world has proved one thing, and that 
is that socialism, state control of the economy has destroyed 
job opportunities and not created it. This is the experience of 
Africa. This is the experience of every Marxist state throughout 
the whole world. What we do find is those economies that have 
grown, that have relieved the problems of poverty amongst the 
people has been those states in which you have a private sector. 
  [Mashokwe] You are not answering my question on affirmative 
action General with due respect. 
  [Niehaus] But Leslie, with respect ... 
  [Groenewald] I beg your pardon? 
  [Mashokwe] You are not responding to my question on 
affirmative action. 
  [Niehaus] But can I just come in quickly, because Gen. 
Groenewald ... 
  [Mashokwe] But let him respond to that one. 
  [Niehaus] I think he can respond but he keeps on harping on 
socialism. The ANC is not presenting a socialist program. We 
are presenting a plan where the private sector, the different 
trade unions, all the people of this country, all the different 
economic interest groups have worked together in the national 
economic forum and also in the plan that we have developed in 
the Reconstruction and Development Program. 
  [Mashokwe, interrupting] Let me get Gen. Groenewald to 
respond first to my question. Thank you, Carl. 
  [Groenewald] To the whole question of affirmative action? 
  [Mashokwe] Yes, what are you going to do on that one? 
  [Groenewald] Let me say that we have been busy with 
affirmative action for a very long time. Let me give you an 
example. From 1970 -- from 1970 until 1990 there has been a 
real increase in black wages of 70 percent. 
  [Mashokwe] We are talking about the Freedom Front please. 
  [Groenewald] No I'm just indicating to you that we have been 
busy with a whole program of affirmative action for the last 20 
years. There has been enormous changes. Now affirmative action 
is something which should be related first of all to your 
productive capacity -- the creation of wealth in the country 
through private enterprise, and jobs being created, certainly, 
by private enterprise and not by the state. Now this is the 
first and important question, so it's a very delicate measure of 
having a system of taxation ... 
  [Mashokwe] Let me hold you right there. Carl Niehaus, 
respond quickly. 
  [Groenewald] Let me just complete it. Let me just complete 
my point. 
  [Mashokwe] Let him respond. 
  [Niehaus] Well, you interrupted me so now can I proceed. 
  [Mashokwe] Please continue. We'll come back to you. 
  [Niehaus] General Groenewald knows very well that no 
economy that is successful in Western Europe and in the United 
States is only, simply a private enterprise. It is a 
combination of state and private enterprise, and the ANC says, 
let us first of all acknowledge that there was an unjust system 
in this country and that system needs to be turned around and 
the state, together with private enterprise has got a role to do 
it. And with respect Gen. Groenewald, the National Party who 
you seem to refer to as having implemented some kind of program 
of affirmative action in the past, has not done so. If we look 
at the World Bank's economic index, the one category where South 
Africa comes first is on the category of the most divided 
society and the most unequal society in the world. That has to 
be addressed ... 
  [Mashokwe, interrupting] Let him respond quickly Carl. 
  [Groenewald] Look, I'm not arguing about that. We are 
talking about the future, first of all, and the point that I 
wanted to make is that in your system of taxation, which is the 
base and which will be the base of the ANC's program of 
affirmative action, it's a matter of a delicate balance, whereby 
you can have enough funds available for investment through 
private enterprise and enough funds available for so-called 
affirmative action. 
  [Mashokwe] Carl, you were still explaining one thing or the 
other with regard to the economic policies. Yes, the hand of 
the state seems to be very strong. To what extent would you 
then say the private sector is able to maneuver and create jobs? 
  [Niehaus] Well, the private sector will be able to maneuver 
and create jobs very well. If you look at our plan we say there 
are certain sectors where obviously the private sector will have 
a real problem in providing for all the needs like the provision 
of electricity, but we say let us work together, for example, on 
the building of houses in a combination with the private sector. 
The state will help through a public works program, through 
providing some resources and so will we expect from the private 
sector to do so, and Gen. Groenewald agreed with me, although he 
initially just spoke about free enterprise, that in no state 
that is truly successful there is only free enterprise. 
  There is always this combination and those countries like 
Chile during the last few years that have been truly successful 
have worked out a plan, and it is a comprehensive plan that 
includes the whole geographical area. It can't be a plan that 
is divided by the kind of volkstaat concept that Gen. Groenewald 
has. That is the plan for poverty and that is a plan for 
division and eventually for a total destruction of the South 
African nation. 
  [Mashokwe] Okay, let me get Gen. Groenewald here. I asked 
you earlier whether you want black votes. 
  [Groenewald] At this stage our intention is to get a 
volkstaat, but certainly, everyone, everyone who cherishes the 
question of self-determination, will find in the Freedom Front a 
party that will do everything in their power to achieve a 
constitutional dispensation in South Africa where 
self-determination plays a central role. 
  [Mashokwe] Do you want black votes? 
  [Groenewald] We are not going out of our way to specifically 
look for black votes. 
  [Mashokwe] So you are racist. 
  [Groenewald] No, please don't say that. It's not a question 
of racism. It's a question that we are looking at the self- 
determination, first of all, of the Afrikaner people. That's 
what it's all about, and this has got nothing to do with racism. 
Let's be quite clear about that. 
  [Mashokwe] Okay, Carl. 
  [Niehaus] Leslie, at a time when we are in South Africa's 
history where the injustices of the past must be put right, 
where the people who have been oppressed must be helped to 
become part of a full South African nation, Gen. Groenewald is 
saying: We are not interested in black votes. We are simply 
there to continue to help to promote those who have been 
privileged in the past. That is, he said the Achilles heel -- 
in the past he used that concept -- that is the Achilles heel of 
the Volksfront, and unfortunately this whole evening Gen. 
Groenewald has been beating around the bush and I must really 
thank you for having put your finger on the real issue. Behind 
all the nice talk, the Volksfront still has the festering sore 
of racism and the Afrikaner cannot afford that. The Afrikaners 
cannot allow ourselves to be pulled into that situation. The 
Afrikaner can only survive, Leslie, in a united South Africa. 
The Afrikaner is strong enough to do so without geographical 
areas. We've got a good language. We've got a good culture. 
  [Mashokwe] General. 
  [Groenewald] Okay, let me emphasize this once and for all. 
South Africa is looking at a constitutional dispensation in 
which we will have peace. We have many examples in the world, 
examples such as Switzerland, which went through a period of 
enormous friction and violence until they resolved a situation 
in which you have good neighbors working together as a group. 
We are not racist. What we are saying is that let's move power 
away from the center and let's realize that in South Africa we 
have different ethno-cultural groups who must take hands across 
the table, who must take hands across the table and find a way 
in which they can live together in such a way they do not 
destroy each other. 
  [Mashokwe] Gentlemen, your concluding statements 
  [Niehaus] Well, Leslie, racism is evil. It must be rejected. 
In whatever form it comes, even in a Afrikaner Volksfront form. 
What we need in South Africa is an economic plan. A plan for 
justice, a plan to give free education for the first 10 years to 
our children, to provide proper health care. That can only be 
done in a united, nonracial South Africa. The only organization 
that has such a plan is the ANC and that we will promote. 
  [Mashokwe] Thank you, your last statements. 
  [Groenewald] Let me say the solution in South Africa is not 
imposing a system that has never worked in the Soviet Union or 
in other socialist countries. Let us look at a system in which 
we have a new and modern approach -- approach where everyone can 
have his own dignity and his own place under the sun, and this 
is what the Freedom Front proposes. 
  [Mashokwe] On that note, Gen. Groenewald, Carl Niehaus, 
thanks for joining us on Newsline. Goodnight. 

