Created   Service 

<F P=102> 944E0650A Moscow ROSSIYA in Russian No 11, 23-29 Mar 94 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> 944E0650A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ROSSIYA </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Tax Police Department Director Sergey Almazov: </F>
"As You Get Rich, Look Around at the Law"] 
  [Text] Relatively recently, a new structure appeared 
in the system of organs of executive power, the Russian 
Federation Tax Police Department. The department's director, 
Sergey Almazov, talks about how it came to be and the problems 
connected with this phase. 
  In creating the tax police, the experience of many foreign 
countries, where analogous services have existed for a long time 
and have proven their necessity by the results of their work, 
was taken into account. 
  The appearance of an analogous service here is neither a 
tribute to fashion nor a copying of Western models. With the 
appearance of free enterprise in Russia, the old system of 
taxation proved incapable of ensuring the stable fulfillment of 
the state budget. Therefore, in 1991, a new structure was 
created, the State Tax Service (GNS). Life has shown, however, 
that this mechanism for implementing tax legislation requires 
strengthening. The problem is that the Russian market has 
attracted not only law-abiding citizens. It has been inundated 
by criminal capital, and an entire shadow business industry has 
begun to form. Not only are they beyond the reach of taxation; 
this capital nourishes the criminal world and fans inflationary 
processes. 
  For the tax inspector (these are civilians, most of them 
women, moreover), incursion into this sphere has become a risky 
and frequently dangerous affair. After all, even at the office 
of some seemingly respectable firm, an armed guard might 
unceremoniously escort them out. 
  The only way to force people to respect the law and to 
ensure 
its unswerving implementation by all is by relying on a special 
force structure that possesses the authority of a law-keeping 
organ. Such a service in the tax system was in fact created by 
the Russian president's edict of 18 March 1992. The service's 
official title is "Chief Administration for Tax Investigations 
Under the State Tax Service of the Russian Federation." As of 
July 1993, the lawful heir to the Main Administration for Tax 
Investigations became the Tax Police Department. 
  Last year alone, we, in conjunction with the GNS, uncovered 
and cut off more than 32,000 violations of tax legislation. 
Brought to light were more than 1000 enterprises and 
organizations that were not registered with the state tax 
inspectorates. Naturally, they were not contemplating paying 
taxes. 
  As a rule, the tax police are involved in the sphere of 
criminal business, deals connected with concealing income in 
major and grand proportions. That is, if I can express myself 
this way, we are talking about the below-water part of the 
iceberg. Again in 1993, 617 criminal cases were opened. By the 
end of January of this year, about 60 of them had already been 
heard by the courts and punishment imposed on the guilty. 
  By law, we are obligated to ensure the safety of the 
activities of state tax inspectorates and to protect their 
associates from illegal infringements during the execution of 
their official duties. In the past year in Russia, 128 instances 
of violent and other illegal actions against associates of the 
tax organs were recorded. There have been incidents of arson and 
shootings at buildings in which tax inspectorates are located. 
  Physical protection subdivisions of the tax police have been 
created in order to resolve this problem in the structure of 
federal organs. These also provide security for those same 
buildings of the tax inspectorates. 
  In the United States, the tax inspection service has been 
given authority that would amaze some of our champions of human 
rights. After all, those suspected of concealing income are open 
to secret surveillance, wiretapping, and the opening and 
inspection of correspondence. In the event of nonpayment of 
taxes here, we can seize the bank account of the defaulter, 
confiscate an automobile or other private property, shut down an 
enterprise, and deprive the representative of a free profession 
of his private practice. When necessary, the services of paid 
informants are used, and colleagues are being introduced into 
structures with criminal capital. 
  Every year, the American tax inspection services create 
hundreds of dummy corporations through which they are able to 
uncover concealed forms of business. And all this is provided 
for by law. 
  The ordinary American would rather sleep peacefully than 
deal 
with the tax organs. Nor is it wise to: just for incorrectly 
filling out a declaration one is subject to a fine of up to 
$1000, and intentional reduction of income is punishable by a 
fine of $5000 or a prison term of up to five years. Moreover, 
the principle of the presumption of innocence seems not to 
exist: the tax inspector does not have to prove the guilt of the 
suspect. According to U.S. laws, the taxpayer himself is obliged 
upon request by the tax organs to submit documents proving the 
legality of the source of his income. 
  In Russia as yet there are quite a few people among whom a 
different psychology reigns: get rich quick. Even seemingly very 
proper people who in the past were not completely certain of 
tomorrow are rushing to grab everything they can today and often 
act without looking around at the law. By no means am I inclined 
to see a potential criminal in everyone; moreover I agree that 
our tax legislation is not yet complete. However, if we really 
do want to make the transition to a rule-of-law state, effective 
laws must be implemented rigorously. 
  In the last year, the additional sums resulting from audits 
carried out in conjunction with the GNS totaled about R600 
billion, more than $120 million, and millions of German marks, 
French francs, and other currencies. 
  Unfortunately, manifesting themselves more and more 
distinctly in society today are interests whose very existence 
represents a serious threat to the tax police. Attempts are 
being made to inculcate in public consciousness an image of the 
tax police as yet another structure of force, supposedly capable 
of inhibiting the formation in Russia of a class of property 
owners, the assertion of the spirit of free enterprise, and the 
speedy rise, on this basis, of the Russian economy. For this 
reason, it represents an extra, unnecessary link. 
  I assure you, though, it is unnecessary only for those who, 
while declaring their devotion to the principles of free 
enterprise and a rule-of-law state, are in fact employing unjust 
means for enrichment, including concealment of income from 
taxation. 
  Many representatives of business and entrepreneurial circles 
who are concerned not only about their own pocket but about 
Russia's rebirth note with alarm that billions are draining away 
abroad today and settling in foreign bank accounts. 

