BFN 

<F P=106> [By Jean Michel Stoullig] </F>
  [Text] Geneva, April 16 (AFP) -- An international 
commission of experts will present a 3,300-page report on crimes 
against humanity in the former Yugoslavia, with Serbs 
responsible for most of them, members of the commission said 
Friday [15 April]. 
  The acting deputy prosecutor for the International Criminal 
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Australian Graham Blewitt, 
said he hoped the 11 judges of the International Court of 
Justice (ICJ) in The Hague would start to examine the report by 
the end of the year. 
  On Thursday, the General Assembly of the United Nations 
voted 
11 million dollars for the tribunal, set up in November 1993, to 
charge and prosecute all those responsible for crimes against 
humanity in the region. 
  "No one ethnic group or country bears responsibility" and 
violations have been committed by all the belligerents -- Serbs, 
Croats and Moslems in the former Yugoslavia, the retiring head 
of the commission Sherif Bassiouni told reporters Friday. But 
"there is certainly one group in the conflict where a lot more 
violations have been reported than among the other groups," he 
said -- a reference to the Serbs. 
  The commission report will be presented on May 2 to UN 
Secretary General Butrus Butrus-Ghali and to the prosecutor of 
the tribunal. It documents specific cases of serious violations 
including mass executions, ethnic cleansing, rapes, the setting 
up of concentration camps and torture. 
  But Bassiouni, a U.S. law professor, refused to name both 
the 
suspected authors of the crimes and the number of cases cited, 
though he said a team of 30 women had interviewed over 200 rape 
victims to add to the data already filed. 
  "The events in Opstina Prijedor (northwest Bosnia) since 
April 1992 constitute crimes against humanity and that it would 
probably be possible to establish that genocide has been 
committed there," Bassiouni said Friday. 
  Bosnian Serb militia in Prijedor have frequently been 
accused 
of carrying out murder and ethnic cleansing, mainly against 
Moslems. 
  The commission also said "acts of wanton destruction were 
committed in the Medak pocket in September 1993" by Croatian 
forces against secessionist Serbs in Krajina. According to the 
United Nations, dozens of people were killed in Medak and more 
than 500 buildings destroyed. 
  The tribunal is still attempting to get permission to exhume 
the remains buried in mass graves at Vukovar, on the 
Croatian-Serbian border, where Croatians are believed to have 
been summarily executed at the end of 1991 following its capture 
by the Serbian-led Yugoslav army. 
  Asked about cases underway in Germany and Denmark against 
people charged with crimes against humanity in the former 
Yugoslavia, Blewitt said countries with the "legal competence 
and jurisdictions to do so," should prosecute cases, even if 
they were later transferred to the tribunal. 
  Earlier Friday, Bosnia-Herzegovina filed a legal brief 
Friday 
with the ICJ detailing human rights violations and war crimes 
against Bosnians by the rump Yugoslavia. 
  The ICJ has twice called on both parties to respect the UN 
convention, and asked each side to submit a detailed brief on 
the alleged crimes. 
  The rump Yugoslavia has said that it would file its brief in 
April 1995, which means that a public trial on the matter cannot 
be held before the summer of next year. 

