Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, March 28 (BTA) -- Bulgaria woke up this 
morning to empty newsstands and a heavy snowfall. The national 
dailies will suspend publication until March 31 in protest 
against the value added tax [VAT] which is to take effect on 
April 1. Express, Darik Radio, FM Plus, Radio 99, Tangra and 
Vitosha are the four private radios which stopped broadcasting 
at 6 A.M. today. 
  The newspapers, whose editors-in-chief declared the four-day 
boycott, include the dailies of the two major political forces: 
DUMA of the Bulgarian Socialist Party and DEMOKRATSIYA of the 
Union of Democratic Forces; the largest-circulation 24 CHASA 
daily, the private dailies KONTINENT, DENYAT, STANDART NEWS, 
EXPRESS, PARI, NOVINAR, OTECHESTVEN VESTNIK and the daily of one 
of the major trade union amalgamations, TRUD. The 15 newspapers 
and the private radios stopped covering the work of the National 
Assembly and the government last Wednesday [23 March], 
protesting against the failure to include the VAT amendment bill 
in last week's parliamentary agenda. In solidarity, national 
television and radio have also cut down their parliamentary and 
cabinet reports. The Bulgarian News Agency (BTA) and some 
provincial newspapers also back the protesters' demands. 
NARODNA ARMIYA, the daily of the Defence Ministry, was the only 
one to come out today. 
  Unless parliament holds an extraordinary sitting, the 
problem 
cannot be solved before Wednesday [30 March]. The amendments to 
the VAT Act were approved by the parliamentary Economic 
Committee. The parliamentary Finance and Budgetary Committee 
moved a compromise version, and the stand of the Legislative 
Committee is still expected. Aleksandur Dzherov, chairman of 
the Legislative Committee, said in parliament he will not block 
the bill. Finance Minister Stoyan Aleksandrov, however, 
declared himself against the revision, saying the country could 
survive a couple days without newspapers. This televised 
statement prompted the editors-in-chief of the major newspapers 
to demand Mr. Aleksandrov's resignation. 
  The journalists will go to work, they will attend press 
conferences and other public events -- but will not bring their 
tape recorders. 
  The demands pressed by the protesting editors-in-chief were 
backed by a number of Bulgarian intellectuals, the International 
Confederation of Journalists, the Balkan Confederation of 
Journalists and 40 European publishers. 
  According to recent figures, some three million readers are 
following the Bulgarian press. An express poll conducted among 
Sofianites showed that 60 percent of them support the decision 
of the leading Bulgarian dailies. Since early morning, the 
Bulgarian National Radio has been broadcasting listeners' 
comments and opinions on the issue. 

