Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 15 Feb (MENA)--An official security source in 
the Interior Ministry today denied a report carried last night 
by the French news agency AFP about four persons seriously 
wounded in an explosion yesterday in a commercial district in 
the city of Tanta in al-Gharbiyah Governorate on the central 
Delta. 
  The official also denied information the agency attributed 
to 
the police: that the bomb, which was planted in a shop, was the 
same type found in terrorist dens in the al-Zawiyah al-Hamra' 
neighborhood of Cairo early this month. The official pointed 
out that the French agency said that the Islamic Group has 
decided to avenge the death of its seven members in al-Zawiyah 
al-Hamra' and that the group has carried out five operations, 
the last of which was an attack on a bus carrying Romanians and 
Egyptians in Asyut yesterday. He remarked that certain foreign 
news agencies tried to portray the operation as an attack 
against a tourist bus to blow the incident out of proportion and 
misrepresent the state of security and stability. 
  The official noted that the agencies carried the distorted 
report in spite of the fact that a security source in the 
Interior Ministry had issued a statement refuting it. The 
source said in his statement that preliminary inspection 
affirmed that the person who fired at the bus had no intention 
of hurting anyone and that he only wanted to get back at the 
company that owns the bus for dismissing some of its workers. 
  The official affirmed that the AFP report is groundless and 
that the truth was spelled out in a detailed Interior Ministry 
statement. That statement explained that as merchant Sa'id Ahmad 
'Ali, a junkyard owner, was loading a truck with junk from his 
shop bound for the Iron and Steel Factory in Musturud a piece of 
junk exploded. Seven passersby sustained superficial wounds, 
were taken to the hospital for first aid, and were later 
released. The statement added that the explosion resulted from 
an artillery shell, a leftover from the war. 
  The source noted that AFP added to its report what other 
foreign news agencies called "a statement by terrorist groups," 
as though it wanted to arouse threats by terrorist groups. It 
did so despite earlier announcements by the Interior Ministry on 
various occasions that terrorist elements are being hit, that 
the security agencies now have the initiative, and that the 
agencies will not hesitate in waging a deterrent confrontation 
until the last terrorist is eliminated in Egypt. 
  The security official warned that the Interior Ministry will 
take legal measures against these reports, which are even more 
serious than the criminal acts committed by terrorists because 
they aim to hurt Egypt and its status and civilization. 
  The official added that the Egyptian press and the Egyptian 
news agency, MENA, realized AFP's ill-willed lies and attached 
no significance to them. 
  He concluded that the Interior Ministry can only reiterate 
the credibility and esteem attributed to the honest men of the 
media in Egypt, who stand in the same trench with the security 
organs and all the nationalist and political powers to defend 
Egypt's security. The ministry expresses its appreciation of 
foreign and world news agency correspondents in Egypt who are 
bound by objectivity and honesty and reiterates that it will 
maintain cooperation with them. 

