BFN 

<F P=106> [Text of address by Georgian Head of State Eduard </F>
Shevardnadze; place, date not given -- read by announcer] 
  [Text] The chairman of the Georgian parliament and head of 
state's address to the Georgian Parliament. 
  Along with other complex issues the issue of a fight against 
crime still remains an object of major concern to the 
authorities. Taking into consideration the geography of crime, 
criminal circles, and forms and character of crime, we can admit 
that we are facing a large-scale process of the criminalization 
of the society. To stop this has become a task of paramount 
importance. Reasons creating conditions for crime to grow 
require separate consideration. It must be noted that we cannot 
regard this as a local occurrence but as a matter related to 
processes accompanying the breakdown of state and social 
institutions of one system and the formation of new political 
and social relations. 
  Presently, the authorities have to make all efforts in order 
to secure normal living and working conditions for the people. 
This cannot be achieved without introducing serious changes in 
a fight against crime. In addition, it is necessary to 
implement an adequate legal policy which will primarily be based 
on a well- considered and systematic legislation. 
  In Georgia, like in all post-socialist states, a process of 
establishing a national legislation is under way. Various 
commissions are involved in work. However, the preparation of 
codified laws needs time. It is necessary that the Parliament 
select concrete problems, attach more attention to the forms and 
sorts of crime which have become a matter of extreme danger for 
the community. A struggle against these requires administrative 
and legal regulation. I regard it as a task of major urgency to 
have the following laws drafted and passed: 
  1. (The law) on the fight against terrorism and banditry; 
  2. (The law) on liability for forming illegal armed units 
and participating in those; 
  3. (The law) on the fight against organized crime. 
  4. (The law) on the fight against corruption. 
  5. (The law) on measures to fight business related to 
drugs trafficking. 
  6. (The law) on measures to ensure control and social 
rehabilitation of persons returning from places of confinement. 
  7. (The law) on liability for blocking transport routes. 
  8. (The law) on legal protection of law-enforcement bodies 
and courts of law. 
  9. (The law) on foreign economic activities. 
  In addition, drafting of new criminal, criminal procedure, 
penalty implementation, and administrative infringements codes 
has to be expedited. 
  I would like to inform the parliament that the Cabinet of 
Ministers and the Justice Ministry in particular, appropriate 
structures of law-enforcement bodies, academic offices and 
individual experts have been working hard in order to establish 
a legal basis for fighting crime. They have drafted many laws 
which will be soon ready to be considered in parliament. A few 
have already been submitted. 
  To fight against crime is an urgent requirement of the 
national progress. By failing to protect public tranquillity as 
well as to establish legislative and administrative institutions 
for this, the authorities impede political, economic and 
cultural development. Juridical, executive as well as 
legislative authorities cannot fail to apprehend this regularity. 
  The text of this address has been provided by Kontakt news 
agency. 

