BFN 

  [Text] Foreign affairs officials have expressed concern 
over reports that police and naval officials from the People's 
Republic of China have been involved in half of nearly 100 cases 
of piracy in the South China Sea, an area where various states 
in the region, including the Philippines, have conflicting 
territorial claims. 
  Official reports reaching the Department of Foreign Affairs 
[DFA] disclosed information from the Hong Kong Government that 
47 out of 98 "attacks on shipping" during the past 18 months 
have been traced to Chinese officials. 
  The information was formally relayed by the Hong Kong Marine 
Department to Admiral Thimio Mitropoulos, chairman of the United 
Nations International Maritime Organization [IMO] Safety 
Committee. 
  The Hong Kong confidential papers pointing to China as being 
responsible for the attacks were compiled from distress messages 
picked up by Hong Kong's Rescue Coordination Center since 1992, 
the report to the DFA said. 
  "About 47 attacks have clearly pointed to Chinese officials' 
involvement, identifying police, customs, naval, and army 
officers, right down to serial numbers of patrol vessels," the 
report added. 
  Hong Kong had wanted to expose China's alleged involvement 
in 
piracy in the South China Sea to international attention during 
Mitropoulos' recent visit to the crown colony. 
  But the report noted that information on piracy cases 
involving China was deleted from an earlier report by Hong Kong 
to the Mitropoulos committee, with Hong Kong's foreign office 
and security branch intervening to ensure that the marine 
department did not mention any Chinese involvement. 
  Great Britain and its colony, Hong Kong, along with China, 
are members of the UN International Maritime Committee. 
  Foreign affairs officials, who spoke on condition of 
anonymity, said that countries with overlapping claims to the 
Spratly Islands in the South China Sea, have chosen "not to 
react" to the report, since this may be a source of instability 
in the region. 
  "The Philippine Government, on the other hand, would prefer 
to have more proof to determine whether the attacks were carried 
out by Chinese officials or by renegade Chinese," they said. 
  The sources noted that although the acts of piracy occurred 
outside the Philippines' sea-lanes in the South China Sea, 
China's illegal activities may "disturb the equilibrium" in the 
region. 
  They added, major shipping nations, such as Japan, Norway, 
Greece, and other countries in Europe, through big fleet owners, 
should take the initiative in asking the IMO to "take 
appropriate action" against China. 
  The Philippines, the sources admitted, lacks naval and air 
facilities to monitor piracy in its own waters, including the 
portion it is claiming in the South China Sea. 
  Besides triggering another wave of concern over regional 
stability, the piracy cases attributed by Hong Kong to China may 
further strain relations between them. 
  Hong Kong's governor, Christopher Patten, has proposed 
several constitutional revisions aimed at giving greater 
democracy to the crown colony it reverts to China in 1997. 
  Patten's proposals, which included giving voters the right 
to 
elect the majority of its legislators in 1995, have irked China. 
Hong Kong's expose on China's alleged piracy is the latest in 
the series of irritants between the colony and the mainland. 
  Earlier, China's insistence to push through with its joint 
oil exploration of a portion of the South China Sea with the 
cooperation of the U.S.-based Crestone Energy Corp. has renewed 
tensions in the region. 
  Vietnam had claimed that the area China wants to explore is 
part of its continental shelf. 
  Philippine officials have expressed concern over the brewing 
feud. 

