BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Paris AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI in Arabic on 29 
April publishes an approximately 2,500-word report filed from 
Sanaa by Sa'id al-Qaysi asserting that Yemen has become a haven 
for "Afghan Arabs," and that they are under the protection of 
Hashid, the largest and most powerful Yemeni tribe. 
  Al-Qaysi's report quotes an unidentified Arab observer's 
statement that a hilly area near the Port of al-Hudaydah in 
Yemen leads to a large encampment of Afghan Yemenis and Arabs. 
The observer says this camp "is used as a communication or 
transitional station to host Afghan Arabs who come through 
al-Hudaydah Port, or for travelers assigned with missions 
abroad." 
  Al-Qaysi asks: "What evidence is there of official 
sponsorship of terrorism?" The same observer answers: "On one 
visit to Sanaa's main street you will discover for yourself that 
there are scores of offices for Afghan Arab officials. These 
offices operate under the cover of commercial, media, or public 
relations companies, as well as other professions." 
  The observer adds: "The confessions of terrorists arrested 
in Egypt indicate that some of them received money and 
instructions from Sanaa, and others received forged documents 
from Yemen. Egyptian authorities made official contacts with 
Sanaa about Afghan Arabs, and this was announced at that time." 
  Al-Qaysi also assesses the role of Shaykh 'Abdallah Husayn 
al- Ahmar, leader of the Hashid tribe -- and speaker of the 
House of Representatives and head of the Yemeni Reform Grouping 
[YRG], which he describes as a political facade for the Muslim 
Brotherhood. He argues: "YRG members are the political cover for 
extremists. Since the YRG and the Hashid are the same thing, 
then the Hashid tribe is the sponsor of the Afghan Arabs." 
  The Arab observer says there are no Afghan Arabs in Yemen's 
southern sector. He says that, in the past, two camps there 
belonged to the Jihad Organization. The first camp, located in 
the al-Maraqishah mountains area, was supervised by Yafi' 
tribes, and the second was in Hadhramaut. The two camps were 
closed in November 1993. 
  The observer says: "Aden Governor Salih al-Siyali visited 
Cairo and told Egyptian authorities that the two camps were 
closed, and that the men in these camps moved to a guest house 
in eastern Yemen, which belongs to the Murad clan, one of the 
Hashid clans, and to another guest house in the central area, 
under the supervision of Shaykh 'Abd-al-'Aziz Yasin, one of 
Hashid chieftains." 
  The writer quotes an unidentified analyst, who says: "Some 
ruling wings want to employ Afghan Arabs in the conflict in 
Yemen in a bid to entrench the hegemony of the northerners, and 
subsequently the Hashid, over the resources of the south." 
  According to this analyst, "Afghan fingers are clearly 
visible in the limited military operations that took place in 
the areas where the northern forces, especially the al-'Amaliqah 
Brigade, are deployed. These fingers were also clear in the 
harassment of the southern brigades that are deployed in the 
north." 
  The report concludes with a review of the history of Afghan 
Arabs in Yemen, beginning in 1981 with the arrival of an 
Egyptian teacher identified as Muhammad Ibrahim Sharaf. 

