BFN 

<F P=106> [By A.R. Wilkie] </F>
  [Text] You could be forgiven for thinking that China's 
leftist ideologues had finally withered away in the white heat 
of capitalism which has swept the country in the past two years. 
Economic theory and practice seem to have far more to do with 
market forces than with Marx, particularly since the senior 
leader, Deng Xiaoping, called in early 1992 for accelerated 
reform. But some analysts believe that the leftists -- as China 
dubs orthodox Maoists -- are just biding their time. 
  "The leftists will launch a comeback soon," says one Chinese 
analyst, formerly a senior party official. He predicts leftists 
will take advantage of public dissatisfaction about lay-offs, 
corruption and inflation to criticise Deng Xiaoping's 
capitalist-style reforms. 
  China's post-1949 history has been a series of radical 
swings 
between left and right. Rarely has the leadership managed to 
steer a genuinely middle-of-the-road path for long. 
  If the leftists were able to successfully exploit popular 
dissatisfaction to stage a comeback, people like the Prime 
Minister, Li Peng, and Party General Secretary, Jiang Zemin -- 
who have sat firmly on the ideological fence -- could well sway 
back towards leftism. 
  In a commentary last month, the pro-leftist journal Zhenli 
de 
Zhuiqiu (The Pursuit of Truth) criticised the mainline 
party-controlled media for its failure to examine critically the 
growing gap between rich and poor: "By mainly reporting on 
successes and rarely reporting on problems, it will be 
impossible for the cadres and the people and the party and the 
government to stand together and exert themselves to solve the 
problems." In contemporary leftist-speak, "solving the 
problems" is a code for slowing down or -- better still -- 
halting market reforms. 
  In what appears to be an effort to protect Deng Xiaoping's 
legacy, some journalists say they have been ordered to report 
even less on economic and social problems in the run-up to the 
anniversary of June 4th. 
  Laying bare the continuing battle between leftists and 
rightists, the Zhenli de Zhuiqiu commentary also revived the 
phrase "bourgeois liberalisation". This term was extensively 
used in media attacks on student activists in 1987 and 1989, 
though it has since been largely dropped from the mainstream 
official press in an effort to present to the world an image of 
a government less obsessed by ideological feuds. 
  Within the party, however, its currency as the 
characterisation of the ideological enemy has never ebbed. 
"Bourgeois liberalisation is still the biggest threat on the 
ideological battlefront," said Zhenli de Zhuiqiu, in a direct 
challenge to Deng's 1992 statement that it is leftism that posed 
the biggest threat. It said the media must be mobilised to 
criticise bourgeois liberalisation, as it did effectively in the 
aftermath of June 4 1989 (the Tiananmen massacre), otherwise 
there would be "inestimable suffering". 
  In the long-term, as the former senior party official 
explains, leftists are far less of a threat to the Communist 
Party than are rightists. "No matter how leftist people are, 
they would never oppose the Communist Party," he says. 
  For some years, the figurehead of the leftists has been the 
79-year-old former central committee propaganda chief, Deng 
Liqun. Other easily identifiable members of this faction are 
also mainly active in the field of propaganda and culture, 
people like a former acting minister of culture, He Jingzhi, and 
writer-critics like Lin Mohan, Zang Kejia and Yao Xueyin. But 
this group also has powerful backers at every level of the 
party, including a senior leader, Chen Yun, and a former party 
organisation chief, Song Ping. 
  "Not only can the leftists get their views in print, in fact 
they control 80 per cent of the Beijing media," says the former 
senior party official. 
  The most important leftist journals include Dangdai Sichao 
(Contemporary Trends), Zhongliu, or Mainstream, which is 
published by the Guangming Daily newspaper and Zhandi 
(Warfront), published by the left-leaning Beijing municipal 
Communist Party committee. These publications have a small but 
influential readership. Reformers may roll their eyes at the 
extremism of the rhetoric, but they recognise that the journals 
must have powerful backers. 
  Superficially at least, these journals support Deng's 
reforms, quoting the ageing Chinese patriarch almost as 
frequently as Marx and Engels. But a closer look reveals some 
pointed criticisms. Certainly leftist writers have ignored 
Deng's instructions not to worry about whether something is 
"capitalist" or "socialist". This, in fact, is the focus of 
much of their debate. 
  One subject which has drawn particular attention in the 
leftist journals is privatisation of state industries and 
whether this can be compatible with socialism. These articles 
belie the claims that ideological factions no longer exist, or 
else that leftists and rightists have reached a consensus on the 
way ahead for the economy. 
  "The private economy in its essence is not surnamed 
`socialist', but in the present stage of socialism developing 
the private economy in a suitable manner is beneficial to the 
development of socialism," says the April 20 edition of Dangdai 
Sichao. 
  So far, so good -- Deng Xiaoping could not have put it 
better. But then the article goes on to argue that socialism 
cannot treat ownership as sacred. 
  "Once you have recognised that private ownership is sacred, 
then you would have to recognise that exploitation... is sacred 
in a socialist society... once you have recognised that private 
ownership is sacred, then you have to recognise that the private 
economy is sacred no matter what... and that all efforts by 
socialist countries in the past or the future to try to wipe out 
or reform the private economy are sacriligious. If this 
happens, then socialist theory would be completely overthrown." 
The logic here may be shaky, but to leftists like Deng Iiqun, 
the threat is real. 
  In early 1992, just as Deng Xiaoping was touring the south 
preaching neo-capitalist revival, Deng Liqun wrote in the 
Guangming Ribao: "We are stressing the long-term struggle 
against peaceful evolution, infiltration and subversion ... we 
must persist to the end, even if we have only one person left." 
  The leftists may appear to be down at the moment, an 
embattled minority railing in vain against the capitalist 
heresies that have transformed post-Mao China. But it would be 
a mistake to count them out. 

