BFN 

<F P=106> [Anna Tomforde report: "Possession of Cannabis is Legalised </F>
in Germany"] 
  [Text] Germany's Constitutional Court legalised the 
possession of small amounts of hashish or marijuana yesterday. 
  The decision follows a growing number of cases in which 
lower 
courts have refused to enforce laws banning the possession and 
use of cannabis. 
  It brings Germany into line with other European countries 
notably Holland. "It is an important legal and political signal 
because it marks the withdrawal of criminal law from sections of 
drugs policy," Wolfgang Neskovic, a Lubeck judge, said yesterday. 
  It was his court which, in 1991, refused to sentence a woman 
accused of smuggling 1.12 grammes of hashish to her husband in 
prison. 
  "The ruling only adjusts the legal situation to reality," 
one 
expert said yesterday. 
  It calls on Germany's federal states to harmonise laws on 
drug possession, which vary widely between conservative and 
social democrat-ruled states. In the future, possession of 
"small quantities of cannabis for occasional personal use" will 
not be punishable. Trading and possession of larger amounts will 
remain punishable by fines. 
  Interior ministry figures show that 1,207 kg of hashish were 
confiscated in Germany in the first three months of this year, 
double the amount seized during the same period in 1993. 
  Professor Winfried Hassemer of Frankfurt university said the 
hashish ban had encouraged a thriving black market and led to 
"enormous profit margins" for organised crime. 
  While some commentators warned yesterday that the ruling had 
neglected the "damaging social repercussions" of hashish use, 
others stressed that alcohol and nicotine were far more serious 
hazards. 
  The point was also taken up by the Constitutional Court, 
which recognised that the dangers inherent in alcohol abuse 
"equalled and sometimes even exceeded" those of cannabis 
consumption. But, the court added, the difference was that with 
alcohol "intoxication is not the prime aim". 
  Statistics show that Germany has 3 million alcoholics, 
800,000 people dependent on medication and 120,000 drug addicts. 

