Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Passages within quotation marks are recordings of King </F>
Husayn's remarks in English] 
  [Excerpts] His Majesty King Husayn has met with William 
Perry, the U.S. secretary of defense designate, at the U.S. 
Pentagon. [passage omitted] 
  During His Majesty King Husayn's meeting with 
representatives 
of the Arab American societies, his majesty praised the efforts 
made by Arab Americans to promote and entrench a better 
understanding of current Arab issues: 
  [Begin King Husayn recording, in Arabic] I am extremely 
happy 
to have this opportunity to welcome the dear ones at this 
meeting. [end recording] 
  His majesty spoke about the successive developments in the 
region and the world, and about the world's recent focus on our 
region's issues. He stressed that Jordan has always been 
exerting efforts to achieve a lasting and comprehensive peace, 
and to arrive at a solution to the Palestine question, which is 
the crux of the conflict in the region. 
  "We have begun to address many elements there to see what 
progress, hopefully, we will make, because as far as a peace 
treaty is concerned, we feel that it comes at the end. It is a 
crowning achievement of resolving every problem that we have, 
and not before, as it has been suggested time and again. You do 
not ratify peace and then begin to negotiate the terms, the 
items, or the issues that have to be covered and addressed. 
And, obviously, we have always been committed to the cause of a 
just, comprehensive peace, that we hope and pray that we will 
see as a result of coordination and major efforts being made, 
and progress on all the other tracks as well, particularly as 
regards Syria and Lebanon together with Jordan as the 
Palestinian dimension moves on its own, again supported by 
everything we can give and do. So, we hope it will come 
together somehow. I have been very impressed during this visit, 
and throughout this past period by my contacts with the 
administration, particularly the President, by his being a man 
who has an interest, a concern, who seems to know all the 
details, and has come to know them in a very short space of time 
of his assuming responsibilities at a time when the United 
States has so much that it is involved with the world over. And 
I know that they are sincere and genuine in trying to help see 
us achieve an objective for future generations to live in peace 
and in security in the entire region. Today, I think is just a 
beginning of another phase of the negotiations. Let's hope that 
they are addressed seriously and with determination and 
goodwill. And let's hope that at the end of the day we can 
achieve our objective of a just, lasting, and comprehensive 
peace in our region, which would be our legacy that we will 
leave for future generations to enjoy beyond us." 
  His majesty answered the audience's questions which focused 
on Jordan's role in the region and the world. 
  "Beyond that, Jordan in the region is trying to work to 
bring 
the Arab world together again, hopefully, and this time, 
hopefully, on strong foundations that can last in the future of 
trust, and confidence, and cooperation. It's moving in the 
right direction. We may not always be very popular as regards 
democracy, or understood. We have a free press, a free 
press--you know what it means here, and it causes me some 
headaches as well, but this is our way. This may not be 
understood by all. I don't think that democracy is a threat. 
It should be a source of strength, and I hope that the example 
itself will, in time, be such as to convince our other brethren 
that this is the only way, that people have to share in shaping 
their future, that they will, God willing. 
  "And therefore, we will have the kind of world that it is 
our duty to try to create for generations to come. So, it is a 
difficult moment. 
  "On another level, we are involved in, practically all the 
UN 
peacekeeping missions in the world. And we are happy that we 
are a corner of stability in the region, but we are also playing 
our role to the best of our ability elsewhere. In the former 
Yugoslavia, we are building up to over 3,000 Jordanian troops 
now with the United Nations. And we have been in four other 
areas as well." 
  Regarding what Jordan hopes from the ongoing Arab-Israeli 
peace talks in Washington, King Husayn said: 
  "So we are talking about the delineation and the demarcation 
of these territories, the setting up of a group to deal with 
that as it affects Jordan in terms of the area. Mainly we have 
a small problem in the north, but we are talking about an area 
from the Dead Sea to al-'Aqabah. And our position is very, very 
clear against any possible suggestion of: Can Jordan lease 
land, we can't lease land. This was occupied after '67 by 
creeping movement under the guise of security or whatever. It 
is quite a sizeable piece of land. So, we want to settle that, 
that to revert to our sovereignty, and that beyond that when 
that is certain we can look at the whole rift valley as an 
economic unit and then see exactly what can be done. Sovereignty 
over our territories is one of the essential parts to begin with. 
  "We have the question of water, that is a very, very 
important element as well. We have to decide, all of us, 
exactly what are the rights of all to whatever resources are 
available. We believe that all the resources that are available 
are short of what is needed in a very short space of time. 
Obviously, in a context of peace, we can find other sources in 
the future, but we have to establish exactly what these rights 
are right now, so that we can move ahead. 
  "And the third element obviously has to do with people and 
their rights, including the question of the reunification of 
families. We still have so many people that have the right to 
return legally and are still unable to do so, who have left from 
time to time, over the years. And I hope that this will be 
addressed as well. Beyond that, obviously we will look at the 
bigger picture regarding the future with all its dimensions, 
economic or otherwise." 
  Answering a question about the idea of forming a 
Jordanian-American business council -- which was proposed by his 
royal highness the crown prince during his recent visit to the 
United States -- his majesty welcomed this initiative saying: 
  "As far the Jordanian-American business council, we've heard 
about it, and I've endorsed it and I'm fully supportive of it. 
And also the elements of what you've put across, sir, we're 
perfectly ready and happy." [passage omitted] 

