Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Vladimir Stolypin, candidate for deputy to </F>
Gosduma, ``Bureaucrats Are Impeding Market Relations--Isotopes 
Could Be Painlessly Sold to the West.'' Conversion by Nikolay 
Ulyanov; first paragraph is NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA introduction] 
  [Text] Quite a lot has already been said and written about 
the problems of converting enterprises and institutes in the 
defense industries. Enterprises that produced tank engines are 
converting to production of metalware, aircraft parts 
manufacturers are setting up shops to produce synthetic socks. 
In general, some solution is being found in each specific case. 
But what is to be done about respecialization of associations in 
the atomic energy system, has any positive experience been 
gained in this field? This and other questions are answered by 
Vladimir Stolypin, recently chief of the laboratory for systems 
analysis in economics at the Institute of Atomic Energy imeni 
Kurchatov, and presently a candidate for deputy to the GOSDUMA. 
  Question: Do you think there is any possibility of 
switching high-tech industries that serviced our atomic science 
for decades to peacetime tracks? 
  Answer: Of course, there are possibilities. And 
they are revealed when one gains understanding of what is needed 
on the market so as to convert, relatively painlessly, but of 
course not without investment, many sectors and relevant 
industries and advance with our products to the international 
market. 
  Let me cite an example. We all know of the pioneering work 
carried out by Soviet nuclear physicists on isotopes separation. 
This is related to the fact that highly enriched uranium was 
needed, and technologies were developed within the limits of 
this project that are still in the fore of worldwide science. It 
would seem that, at least in part, these technologies could be 
used to obtain ultrapure stable isotopes that are in enormous 
demand on the world market. This is the simplest method of 
conversion, since production has already been set up; we only 
need to establish small marketing services to explore the demand 
market and offer this product. Stable isotopes are not products 
for wartime use, and they are used in the West chiefly for early 
detection of diseases. Most serious foreign clinics have 
instruments that operate on the basis of stable isotopes. 
Suddenly there is a paradox: export is banned. 
  Question: Why? 
  Answer: Bureaucrats believe that, since the 
Institute of Atomic energy was concerned with these matters, 
whatever it does is subject to additional permission through the 
pertinent agencies. 
  Question: To what agencies are you referring? 
  Answer:At first, to the Ministry of Atomic Energy, 
then government bureaucrats who previously worked in the 
Ministry of Industry. For example, Chernomyrdin has a deputy who 
endorses documents concerning atomic matters. And all 
bureaucrats will impede the sale of the products of conversion 
operations in order to retain for a longer time control of this 
direction of work. 
  Question: Aside from stable isotopes, what other 
developments of the Kurchatov Institute may be considered for 
export? 
  Answer: This is not an easy question, and it 
should become the subject of meticulous analysis. Obviously, 
there can be no question of exporting uranium, we have saturated 
the market with it to such an extent that the problem now is how 
to limit its sale, even for energy purposes. Even now, we can 
sell with great success the technologies for recovering 
ultrathin film, ultrapure filters, etc. We could also trade in 
products made of titanium and zirconium, for which there is a 
great demand on the world market. But with the disintegration of 
the Union, Russia was deprived of the possibility of mining for 
titanium and zirconium ore, which used to come from the Ukraine 
for the needs of Soviet industry. Enterprises dealing with 
processing these ores have actually shut down. The government 
should invest enough funds for speedy development of Russian 
titanium and zirconium deposits, and prevent the break of 
technological chains, thereby multiplying export capital! But 
the government has allocated barely enough to carry out 
scheduled geological exploration. 
  Question: Now a question that is not directly 
related to the topic of our conversation, but that has a bearing 
on conversion of the defense industry. It is probably not by 
chance that you have decided to run for office in the 
North-Western District of the capital, where the percentage of 
residents working in defense plans is considerably higher than 
in Moscow as a whole? 
  Answer: You are absolutely right. One could even 
arbitrarily divide the district's residents on the basis of 
their involvement in specific defense fields. Khoroshevskiy 
Rayon consists of research organizations related to the defense 
industry. Tushinskiy Rayon, to machine building organizations 
that service defense. I believe that my experience and knowledge 
in the field of conversion of high-tech industries are not 
unimportant to my supporters. 

