Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Arturo Gomez Salgado] </F>
  [Text] Fernando Perez, president of the Mexican Association 
of Purchasing and Materials Management Executives, has estimated 
that 47 percent of the nation's firms are still facing serious 
productivity problems, adding that it will be very difficult for 
them to reach improved production levels within the next two 
years. Perez warned that NAFTA will trigger the closing of more 
small and micro-businesses. 
  Perez asserted that those who want to remain in the market 
will have to accept a substantial reduction in profit margins, 
which averaged about 30 percent until about a year ago. Perez 
stressed that new market strategies and aggressive competition 
will force most businesses to operate with single-digit profit 
margins at best. He added that the challenge lies in being more 
productive and competitive, which requires radical 
transformations that many companies will not be able to make. 
  Perez asserted that the time to reduce prices based on 
reductions in personnel has ended, and he noted, "it is crucial 
to promote programs that are imminently productive and that 
involve eliminating losses and the squandering of manhours." 
  He argued that because of problems rooted in years of 
operating within a closed economy, many industrialists will not 
be able to meet the challenges posed by NAFTA. He added that 
their final fate could be their virtual elimination in the face 
of increasingly aggressive competition and progressive 
diversification of quality products and decreasing prices. 
  Perez reiterated that those companies that want to survive 
will, above all else, have to merge with similar suppliers of 
capital and vanguard technology and accept, from now on, 
single-digit profit margins. 
  Perez believes the national economy is tending toward 
stabilization, although he admitted it is experiencing some 
volatility. He added that the economic slowdown, the lack of 
liquidity, and recent political instability helped trigger a 
30-percent drop in business purchases. Perez admitted that 
political instability persists, and he added that this is why it 
will not be until after the 21 August elections, and once all of 
the macroeconomic variables are accurately defined, that 
investment in all sectors will be truly reactivated. 
  Carlos Campos de la Vega, a consultant for Mexico's 
Nickerson 
Company, says large corporate inventories that have reached 30 
percent in many cases present a large problem. Campos expressed 
his support for greater diversification of products to promote 
competition. In addition, he indicated that if radical changes 
are not made within production lines, small and 
micro-businesses, which unfortunately show the greatest 
opposition to the commercial opening, will continue to vanish. 
  Both Perez and Campos spoke within the context of the topic: 
"The Effects of NAFTA on Mexican Businesses." Both agreed that 
such opening will generate benefits, which will result in 
greater productivity and competition, but that it will also 
involve costs, such as growing unemployment generated by the 
economic slowdown and the closing of hundreds of small and 
micro-businesses which cannot face the challenges of greater 
productivity and competition. 

