Language: <F P=105> Italian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Alberto Meomartini, managing director of the </F>
Italian national gas corporation, by Fabio Pavesi; place and 
date not given: "Methane Candidates Itself as the Sourcer for 
the Year 2000" -- first six paragraphs are L'IMPRESA AMBIENTE 
introduction] 
  [Text] Since there are abundant resources of natural gas 
and it is a versatile fuel, it is now in first place in the 
Italian energy portfolio. Nearly 50 billion cubic meters are 
consumed and this covers 25 percent of the national energy 
requirement. It holds a place of honor after petroleum, that 
has been won over 20 years of continual progress. The demand 
has in fact increased to its present level from 13 billion cubic 
meters in 1970. 
  Further leaps ahead are foreseen for the immediate future. 
According to forecasts made by SNAM [National Gas Pipeline 
Company], at the turn of the century about 75 billion cubic 
meters should be available to meet the domestic requirement. 
  The growth in the use of this source of energy has been 
determined by its characteristics of flexibility and high 
efficiency. It should not be forgotten that the environmental 
variable, which has become ever more important, has been one of 
the factors that has contributed to both the success and the 
multiplicity of uses of natural gas. In fact the combustion of 
methane liberates neither sulfur dioxide nor particles and 
assists in reducing (for the same amount of energy used) the 
emissions of carbon dioxide, nitrogen oxides, and volatile 
organic compounds. Although three quarters of the consumption of 
methane in Italy is destined to civil and industrial use, the 10 
years from 1980 to 1990 have seen the use of methane for the 
generation of electricity triplicate, and this is the sector 
where the environmental advantages of the fuel should open up 
further new opportunities for development. 
  The opportunities for the future use of methane in the road 
transport sector should also be stressed. Last July Fiat and 
SNAM signed an agreement for the perfection of an engine that is 
exclusively powered by methane. 
  The agreement, which provides for an initial funding of 10 
billion lire, assigns the definition of the logistic and 
organizational aspects of the operation to the corporation that 
forms part of the ENI [National Hydrocarbons Corporation] group. 
The medium-term goal of the operation is that a quota of 
vehicles for personal and public transport should have methane 
engines. 
  In short, there are many initiatives underway that will lead 
to a further increase in the demand for gas. 
  L'IMPRESA AMBIENTE discussed these subjects with SNAM 
Managing Director Alberto Meomartini. 
  [Pavesi] Let us start with the methane automobile. The 
largest national producer of automobiles, and the public 
corporation that essentially manages methane throughout Italy, 
have formed an alliance to create a revolutionary engine. Is 
the gasoline era coming to an end? 
  [Meomartini] No, without a doubt. There is no risk that 
gasoline will become obsolete, neither at present nor in the 
future. It would be better to say that from now on 
methane-powered vehicles will no longer be confined to the 
realms of utopia. This is the real meaning of the agreement 
that we have stipulated with Fiat. It is the signal that there 
are spaces in elected areas, in this case urban traffic, where 
the use of methane could provide an excellent concrete answer to 
environmental problems. In fact, the combustion of methane 
means increased efficiency and therefore energy saving and 
contained levels of polluting emissions, such as in the case of 
carbon monoxide, or no emission, as for sulfur dioxide and 
particles. 
  [Pavesi] Is this valid for all road vehicles? 
  [Meomartini] Theoretically, yes. However, it is necessary 
to go ahead gradually. It is clear that for automobiles and 
private transport in general, there are some rigid elements that 
are not easy to overcome, such as refueling, and autonomy over a 
distance. The agreement with Fiat focuses on public transport, 
starting with taxis and company fleets as far as automobiles are 
concerned, and also buses, of course. Iveco already produces 
buses that are exclusively powered by methane. We do not think 
that it is as important to talk about large numbers today as it 
is to talk of the high symbolic value that is behind this 
initiative. And even if we should quantify the phenomena, let 
us not forget that public transport has noteworthy incidence on 
the global level of pollution within the city. 
  [Pavesi] I suppose that the costs of these prototypes are 
not competitive. 
  [Meomartini] The cost of the vehicles will initially be 
higher. If however we look into all the dynamics of 
costs-benefits we discover that this is a half truth. On the 
other side of the balance we must put the high energy efficiency 
of the methane engine and the low cost of this fuel, as well as, 
obviously, the lower costs for the environment, that we should 
all be taking into account at last. They are all positive 
variables within the complete management plan. At Ravenna, 
where five methane-powered buses are already circulating, the 
verdicts of the administration and the population on this first 
experiment are more than flattering. 
  [Pavesi] Are you working on anything else? 
  [Meomartini] A series of contacts with the public 
administrations are underway. We are thinking of an agreement 
between Iveco and SNAM and the Emilia Romagna Region on a 
significant substitution, within a specified time, of the entire 
fleet of buses in circulation. The biggest mistake in this case 
as in other cases is to think that public opinion is the only 
retarding force against the introduction of innovative products 
onto the market, such as methane-powered vehicles. 
  Results are only obtained by starting with a constant 
comparison in which the public sector party, who is the real 
manager of the initiative, is not left alone. 
  [Pavesi] Let us come to the traditional uses of methane. How 
much has the environment contributed to the increase in 
consumption of this energy source? 
  [Meomartini] If, by the environment, we do not only mean 
minor pollution, but also the saving of resources, I would say 
that this variable has had a very important influence on the 
development of its uses. In the past natural gas was often 
considered and used only as a substitute for other fossil 
sources. In the course of the years, research has produced a 
great improvement in efficiency and energy output. 
  And this is a plus that has been appreciated more and more. 
If we add to this a combustion process that produces levels of 
pollution that are lower than those of other energy sources, the 
circle is completed. 
  [Pavesi] What form will the scene take in the year 2000? 
How will natural gas compare with other energy sources? 
  [Meomartini] Italy has reserves of over 300 billion cubic 
meters and produces between 16 and 17 billion cubic meters a 
year, which forms the basis, this quantity not having varied for 
many years. We are counting on being able to increase the flow 
of gas coming from abroad, that today accounts for about 70 
percent of the total requirement. This, thanks to an increase 
in the availability of gas from Algeria following the 
installation of a second gas pipeline across the Mediterranean 
that will allow an increase in the supply from the present 13-14 
billion cubic meters to 19 billion cubic meters in 1995, which 
becomes 23 billion when the gas purchased directly by ENEL 
[Italian Natini] The development of the consumption of natural 
gas is a worldwide characteristic. However, we cannot imagine 
that our projects can grow without limits. The entire energy 
market must have its own equilibrium, represented by balanced 
relationships between the various sources. Methane is to be 
used where it is economical and technologically more convenient. 
  In this balanced view, the greatest obstacle is that of 
fiscal politics, which through the multiplication of levies, 
weighs heavily and therefore penalizes. Another problem that 
arises during the laying of gas pipelines is that of the 
environmental norms. We are still not formally subject to an 
evaluation of the environmental impact. Despite this, the 
network of norms in our country is particularly complicated and 
bureaucratic, so much so that sometimes it really slows work 
down. It is a pity, because we in SNAM have a great and 
consolidated tradition of environmental conservation. It is 
enough to think of the gas pipeline for importation across 
countries such as Austria, the Netherlands, Germany and 
Switzerland, that as far as environmental severity is concerned 
are definitely second to none. 

