Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Moscow, Jan. 18 (YONHAP) -- The Golf II class 
submarines that the Russian fleet is selling to North Korea can 
carry ballistic missiles, Western defense analysts in Moscow 
said Tuesday. 
  A senior officer of the Russian Pacific Fleet was quoted as 
saying that Russia signed a contract with Pyongyang to sell 10 
Golf II submarines in a report in a Japanese newspaper Sunday. 
  The Golf II class was outfitted by the Russian Navy with 
ballistic missiles and North Korea could load its recently 
modified Nodong-1 scud missiles on the submarines if they were 
delivered intact, the analysts said. 
  Golf II submarines were manufactured until the late 1980s 
and 
are an improvement on the Fox-Trot class vessels already sold to 
North Korea and excel the submarines currently owned by the 
communist country, they said. 
  Russian Navy officers say the submarines were sold on 
condition that they are used for scrap, but North Korea may try 
to recycle them for military purposes. 
  The Russian Defense Ministry kept silence on the submarine 
kind and sales condition on Monday, but denied a report by the 
TOKYO SHIMBUN. 
  The Foreign Ministry acknowledged the contract to South 
Korean diplomats in Moscow, but assured them that the submarines 
were sold as scrap like ordinary exports. 
  It has not been revealed whether Russia was selling just the 
hulls or included the engines, and it is a serious matter if the 
latter were included, the defense analysts said. 
  Navy public relations officers affirmed that the submarines 
to be sold to North Korea would be dismantled under the 
observation of Russian military experts so that they cannot be 
used for anything but scrap. 
  But as its submarines are outdated and obtaining spare parts 
is very difficult, North Korea may cannibalize the Russian 
submarines to use the parts in their own submarines, the 
analysts said. 
  Because the Golf II and Fox-Trot classes are more modern 
than 
its submarines, North Korea's submarine technology will improve 
even if the Russian vessels arrive dismantled, they said. 
  Japan is said to be seriously worried because the Golf II 
submarines can carry ballistic missiles. In addition to the 10 
Golf II submarines, Russia has sold and delivered four Fox-Trot 
types to North Korea, according to the TOKYO SHIMBUN. 

