Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "How to Clean a Purifier"] </F>
  [Text]The sorry state of ecology makes even natural 
foodstuffs less and less suitable for consumption. And industry 
has to carry out increasingly thorough purification of such 
food. In particular, milk is usually treated with ion-exchange 
resins. These sorbents have the remarkable capacity to absorb 
numerous impurities: radionuclides, pesticides, heavy metals, 
and even excessive acidity, thus transforming ``poor'' milk into 
milk that is quite suitable for boiling. 
  Until recently, only small batches of milk intended for 
small 
children were submitted to such treatment, but after Chernobyl 
its' use increased dramatically in a number of oblasts. Then 
there appeared the problem of disposing of radioactive waste, 
which is quite sizable with use of this technology. Ion-exchange 
resins must be cleaned periodically in salt solutions, which 
then become the radioactive waste, which is quite significant 
(about 10 percent of the volume of treated milk) and hazardous 
(because of the high cesium-137 content). 
  The Institute of Physical Chemistry, Russian Academy of 
Sciences, together with the All-Union Research Institute of the 
Dairy Industry were able to "take care of" radioactive salt 
solutions by including their treatment in the technological 
process. For this purpose, a new sorbent was developed, a 
modified zeolite that selectively binds expressly cesium-137. 
True, it becomes radioactive waste after use, but its volume is 
one-fiftieth of the level in salt solutions. 
  The modified zeolite can also be used for direct removal of 
cesium-137 from milk. This is particularly valuable for farmers 
who do not handle large batches of milk, but have enough time to 
inactivate it for a somewhat longer decontamination. Especially 
since, in this case, no special equipment is required. The 
sorbent does not get clogged with either protein or fat. The 
treatment method has been tested at the Moscow Medical Academy 
imeni I. M. Sechenov and its use is recommended. 
  It is technologically simple and inexpensive to manufacture 
the modified zeolite. The base material, naturally occurring 
zeolite, is available in sufficient amounts in the nation. But, 
unfortunately, there is no manufacturer as yet. 


