BFN 

<F P=106> [By Debbie Kuo] </F>
  [Text] Taipei April 1 (CNA) -- Premier Lien Chan Friday [1 
April] called United States threats to impose trade sanctions 
against Taiwan for failing to protect endangered species 
``unfair'' and ``regretful.'' 
  U.S. President Bill Clinton has yet to make a final decision 
on the sanctions, which are mandated under the Pelly amendment 
to the Fishermen's Protective Act of 1967. Any sanctions would 
go into effect 30 days after approval. 
  The ROC [Republic of China] Foreign Ministry confirmed that 
the U.S. National Security Council had forwarded to President 
Clinton a recommendation to sanction only Taiwan under the Pelly 
amendment. 
  Lien said it is unfair that the U.S. is seeking to 
selectively impose the sanctions, targeting only Taiwan and not 
Mainland China or South Korea. 
  The premier said the U.S. Government did not take into 
account wildlife conservation efforts made by Taiwan's 
government and people. 
  The U.S. has paid no attention to Taiwan's quick and 
effective reactions to comments and accusations from world 
conservation organizations, Lien said. 
  Lien added that Taiwan has done much more than many other 
governments and international groups in protecting endangered 
species. 
  Moreover, the government is currently expanding crackdowns 
on 
illegal trade in rhino horn, tiger parts and other endangered 
animals and species in addition to enacting a revised wildlife 
protection law and promoting Taiwan's efforts in the world 
community, Lien said. 
  He called for the people in Taiwan to correct their 
misguided 
ideas about the effects some endangered species have in curing 
diseases. ``Don't sacrifice the country's image for medical 
cures or gourmet food,'' Lien said. 
  Meanwhile, Sun Ming-hsien, chairman of the Council of 
Agriculture, said the U.S. is targeting Taiwan alone for trade 
sanctions despite a decision by the Convention on International 
Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) last week to postpone any 
decision on sanctions against Taiwan, Mainland China and South 
Korea until November. 
  He called U.S. threats against Taiwan a ``violation of 
international justice.'' 
  Sun said Taiwan will continuously and undauntedly 
communicate 
with the U.S., telling the Americans that Taiwan has done much 
more than Mainland China and South Korea in wildlife protection 
and conservation. 
  Sun (?said] that he has not ruled out resignation to take 
responsibility for the U.S. sanctions, (?if) approved. 

