Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by President Juan Carlos Wasmosy before a joint </F>
session of Congress in Asuncion on 1 March] 
  [Excerpts] Honorable congressmen, I come before you, the 
representatives of the people, to fulfill a constitutional 
responsibility according to which I must give an account of the 
executive branch's performance, particularly for the almost 200 
days of administration by the government I am honored to preside 
over. 
  It is not the first time I have spoken before this honorable 
Congress. I spoke before it during my inauguration on 15 August 
1993 and again on 12 October 1993, that time to offer my 
solidarity and constitutional and legal guarantees to the 
honorable senators and deputies who felt threatened by the 
regrettable incident we are all very well aware of. 
  First, I will make an analysis of the general state of the 
nation, making clear the state of the administration I 
inherited. Then I will talk about specific plans and projects 
being implemented or that will be implemented in the near 
future, full details of which are included in the account and 
specific area plan. 
<H5>  Guidelines </H5>
  I have said many times in our country and abroad that the 
Republic of Paraguay is living -- like almost every other Latin 
American nation -- in a new era, the real sense of which must be 
interpreted in order to stem fears and abort the dangers that 
sometimes seem to loom threateningly above us and are often 
encouraged by misunderstanding and impatience. 
  The euphoria with which we expressed our happiness for the 
freedoms we won during the government of General Andres 
Rodriguez -- today an illustrious senator for life -- and the 
democracy we are starting to build continue to be accompanied by 
the negative effects of underdevelopment with its frustrating 
burden of intolerable poverty and its chronic and suffocating 
lack of capital investments. 
  The inequality that characterizes our political, economic, 
and social structures is the hurdle burdening our creative and 
productive forces and obstructing and making difficult our 
access to standards of living more in accordance with our human 
condition. 
  However, these same social structures also have given 
strength to the century-old struggle of our people -- and 
finally helped to victory -- against the autocracy that 
maintained the state of inequalities and our permanent 
backwardness, and to our struggle against annoying 
discriminations and irritating privileges. 
  The path of peoples who never renounced their freedoms and 
stubbornly fought to develop their democracies has been long and 
full of hardships. But that path also granted them the 
tranquility of consolidated institutions, progress earned with 
hard work and strict and conscious discipline, well-being that 
is a product of joint efforts, and the participation in its 
benefits. 
  That is the road we Paraguayans chose because we are a 
people 
who love freedom, because we are a people who want to live in 
democracy, because we have an unrestrained wish to overcome 
poverty, and the disposition to work hard to develop our society. 
  This decision, which is the same adopted by countries 
seriously determined to face the struggle against poverty, 
recognizes the need to dismount the old, obsolete, and unfair 
structures of our present-day society and replace them with 
structures proper to a modern and essentially humanist society. 
<H5>  The Political Question </H5>
  We inherited a country used to strong governments, a country 
that did not know of freedoms and democracy, and was 
characterized by distorted institutions, administrative 
negligence, and extended corruption in an obscure period of 
inquisition, our own so-recent middle ages. 
  But we also inherited the commitments to build the Paraguay 
of tomorrow that we are building on the strong foundations of 
honesty with new airs of freedom and with the steel of our old 
and permanent courage, which makes us the owners of a history 
full of heroes and unforgettable events. 
  Once the anachronistic structures have been removed, we 
still 
will need to complete and consolidate the new institutional 
system, requiring deep legal changes. 
  Perhaps the situation in which the president of the Republic 
finds himself is sufficient proof of this need or shortcoming: 
Article 184 of the Constitution says this report must be read on 
1 March while Article 238 says it must be offered on 1 July. 
  This example lacks, of course, the relevance of the 
misunderstandings that our different government branches have 
often had and that are really artificial. I will come to talk 
with this Congress' honorable members as many times as necessary 
to try to solve these misunderstandings, and I reiterate that 
the doors of my office will stay open for talking and working 
with the honorable legislators. 
  The very hard task of correcting, updating, and completing 
our legislation must be speeded up so that our process can have 
a very vital ingredient: security. A security in which peace 
and order are the products of the effective implementation of 
the freedoms recognized by the Constitutions and the laws. 
  Security and facilities for all types of transactions. A 
security that must become, in the end, a synonym of stability 
and trustworthiness. 
  Fortunately -- we must congratulate ourselves for it -- 
Paraguayan political leaders and the honorable senators and 
deputies were able to express all their patriotism and goodwill 
when accepting the democratic agreement that we signed at 
Government Palace on 13 January, where we reconciled our 
different opinions and moved ahead in the already unpostponable 
reorganization of the judicial branch. 
  The significance of this agreement, however, goes beyond 
its concrete objective and becomes not only a guiding element 
but also a method we should definitely use to reach agreement on 
the differences that will inevitably and necessarily emerge. 
  The Multiparty Board of the Governability Pact, which is 
made 
up of important political forces, is an experiment to have a 
mechanism that will gather and study proposals by complementing 
the government's action to make them into immediate, medium-, 
and long-term projects. 
  Naturally, these actions will not disregard the executive 
branch's exclusive and unrenounceable right to run the country. 
  It would be ungrateful not to point out here that the fluid 
and permanent communications I maintain with Congress and the 
actions of the vice president of the Republic made this 
political agreement possible. 
  The fruitful relations the vice president and I are 
maintaining with the different political organizations have made 
the creation of the Governability Pact possible. 
  The lack of democracy in the past left us an inheritance of 
accumulated vices affecting the character of our institutions. 
This inheritance is embedded as an invisible evil in the wounds 
left open in the heart and minds of everyone. 
  Only through our daily practice and good training will we be 
able to gradually change the attitudes and methods that are 
still affected by arbitrary decisions, ignorance, fear, lack of 
action, and privilege seeking. 
  The struggle for democracy is a daily demand that we open up 
to freedom; there must be responsibility toward democracy, 
respect for its rules, and the commitment not to make democratic 
rules into simple instruments seeking the survival of the ideas 
and vices that nourished the old regime's spirit. 
<H5>  National Defense and Public Security </H5>
  The first results obtained from the reorganization and 
restructuring of the public forces made up of the Armed Forces 
and the police, the renewal of their high leadership, and the 
professionalization and gradual improvement of the personnel's 
work conditions are encouraging. 
  The nation's Armed Forces under the command of Gen. Andres 
Rodriguez fulfilled a significant historic role, and we should 
never forget that they were the participants of change when they 
were able to listen to and interpret the people's demands. 
  The nation's Armed Forces are engaged in reorganizing and 
redirecting their operational and development plans in order to 
adjust themselves to the new Paraguayan situation. 
  Their priority objective is to improve their effectiveness 
in 
the military field based on the professionalization and training 
of their human resources to improve their operational 
capabilities in order to fulfill their constitutional mission. 
In order to do that the following actions in the area of human 
resources were taken: 
  Improve the third-level education of the Military College 
through the signing of an agreement with the Catholic University 
of Asuncion's Academic Association. 
  Train and improve the military cadre through scholarships 
from friendly countries with which we maintain military exchange 
programs. 
  Permanent special training of the cadre at all levels 
through 
the different courses offered by the Armed Forces training 
institutes. 
  Mandatory military service is the means by which the Armed 
Forces completes their cadre to carry out their constitutional 
mission. Based on new guidelines, the training programs have 
been reorganized, emphasizing social and moral education, 
medical and dental attention, adult education against 
illiteracy, and basic training for the conscripts. This has been 
well received by the population as shown by the massive presence 
of conscripts for military service. 
  In the field of military justice, the military courts are 
fulfilling their constitutional function with efficiency. 
  The laws related to military matters and those referring to 
the Armed Forces structure and organization will be changed in 
order to better answer the dynamic needs of the service. 
  The Social Communication Center was created at all levels 
with the advice of competent national and foreign professionals. 
  The Armed Forces, which are aware of the structural changes 
demanded by technological development, are engaged in a profound 
reorganization of personnel, materiel, and the redistribution of 
their area of influence. The justification for this is worth 
mentioning: 
  1. Strengthen the Armed Forces to appropriately face the 
challenge of the 21st century. 
  2. Rational use of human and material resources. 
  3. Change the heavy structure for a more functional and 
flexible one. 
  4. Exploit the Armed Forces' deterrent power by supplying 
them with the technological means to carry out their mission. 
  5. Allow a rapid transition to an active defense 
organizational structure. 
  In order to achieve the aforementioned objectives, military 
units are being relocated in order to streamline and improve 
their operation in the quest for better control, coordination, 
communication, and economy. This measure requires a 
reprogramming of the Armed Forces' real estate assets. 
  Thus the Army Headquarters has moved from its old site on 
Venezuela Street [in Asuncion] to new and modern premises in 
Mariano Roque Alonso. The Military Training Institutes Command 
(CIME) and six of its components are operating on the premises 
of the old Arsenal. 
  The Joint Staff's reorganization to fit the role of advisory 
body for the commander of military forces allowed it to reduce 
from the nine departments it originally had to four, thus 
cutting bureaucratic red tape and releasing military personnel 
for reassignment elsewhere in the country. 
  The Military Forces Command and its General Staff have a 
balanced proportion of officers from each branch of service, 
which paves the way for the exchange of information necessary to 
set the Armed Forces' strategic course. 
  By effectively combining its resources with those of Dinac 
[National Directorate for Civil Aviation] for air traffic 
control and detection, the Air Force will be able to efficiently 
discharge its constitutional mission of protecting the 
sovereignty of the nation's air space. Resources are being 
combined in order to economize. 
  Armed Forces resources allow it to carry out a yearly 
average 
of 90,000 medical appointments, 3,600 surgical operations, and 
to provide conscripts with approximately 4,000 prostheses per 
year. [passage omitted] 
  The Paraguayan Navy owns the country's largest shipyard and, 
according to Law No. 70/55 dated 31 March 1955, it is authorized 
to render services to third parties. 
  Using funds obtained from such services, the Navy recently 
launched two vessels capable of carrying vehicles and personnel. 
These ships were built at Navy shipyards by Paraguayans alone, 
which helped save foreign currency and train specialists and 
technicians. 
  It should be pointed out that for the third consecutive year 
Navy Radio, which is part of the Inter-American Naval 
Telecommunications Network, has been chosen best station of the 
year among its peers from the other American countries. 
  I would like to express my satisfaction over the favorable 
reaction to the general call to fight crime, and I urge the 
people and the news media not to justify actions taken outside 
the framework of the law. One should always bear in mind that 
poverty is not a license to break the law. 
  Through the National Police Law this administration is 
changing the role of this institution and restoring its image of 
service to the people. This law paves the way for the 
reorganization of the National Police and allows it to purge its 
cadres, promote its best men, and specialize its personnel. 
  The executive branch is committed to giving the National 
Police all the necessary support, as has been demonstrated by 
the recent delivery of equipment aimed at giving policemen the 
protection they deserve to carry out their mission: bulletproof 
jackets and individual firearms. In the very near future the 
National Police will have hundreds of police cars, 
four-wheel-drive vehicles, 50 motorcycles, a communications 
network, and the helicopters that are essential for the job. 
  I hope, along with the rest of the citizenry, that we will 
soon have a highly professional National Police, agile and 
well-equipped to fight organized crime, which is a worldwide 
scourge on our society. 
  Your Honors are no doubt aware of the burning and urgent 
need 
to review and update our criminal laws, the laws that can help 
reconcile the objectives of the central government, departmental 
governments, and municipalities, and the laws that have to do 
with the allocation of resources or these entities. 
  The draft Criminal Code of Laws that the executive branch 
has 
withdrawn from Congress currently is the target of a broad and 
democratic debate in which some 30 organizations, including 
universities, are participating. 
<H5>  The Role of the State </H5>
  The state must without fail become the most active, 
enthusiastic, and zealous promoter of this process. Naturally, 
in order to fully comply with this essential task, the state's 
role must be reoriented and restructured in keeping with the new 
Constitution and the short-, middle-, and long-term objectives 
it has been entrusted with. 
  The draft bill on this subject we will send to Congress in 
the short term is fully inspired by the will to reinstate a real 
republican quality, that is, the property of everyone. 
  Only in this manner will the state attain the confidence, 
support, and perhaps the love of our people. Only in this manner 
will the best available human resources join the administration. 
Only in this manner will we attain the level of excellence 
required for the government's superior and meaningful mission. 
Only in this manner will we manage to replace the costly, 
inefficient, and shapeless state apparatus we inherited. Only in 
this manner will we attain a strong and respected government. 
  This is why we organized a data base of the professional 
capability of public employees, including their expertise, age, 
family status, post, and seniority. We already are using this 
data base to prepare human resource policies for the public 
sector. 
  Simultaneously, based on profuse reference material that had 
to be prepared beforehand, we prepared a draft bill to replace 
the Public Employee Statute. This constitutes another element to 
promote the state transformation process we seek. 
  As an example, the president of the Republic periodically 
receives a "Situation Report" on the performance of the main 
economic variables and a "Quantitative Report on the Execution 
of the Central Government Investment Budget," which are very 
useful in making decisions. 
  The "Priority Criteria for Public Investment Projects" and 
the "1994 Government Public Investment Program" already have 
been defined while a Five-Year Plan is being prepared. 
  The fact that I mention these basic instruments for 
administration greatly demonstrates the poor and regrettable 
conditions in which democracy took control of the state. 
<H5>  The Economic Matter </H5>
  Within the context of globalization, competitiveness has 
internationalized and is becoming increasingly more demanding. 
  We, as a nation and a system, have the duty of adapting to 
this context, following the best strategies necessary for our 
reality. The following information will demonstrate to you some 
of the most relevant aspects of our economy and the direction we 
are giving it. 
  In the macroeconomic field, the GDP increased 3.7 percent. 
This is a greater increase than the one in the last two years. 
  Economic reactivation will be spurred through better 
harvests, and the GDP could increase by more than 4 percent in 
1994. This will promote sustained growth in subsequent years. 
  The 20 percent inflation rate in 1993 was the result of a 14 
percent increase in the dollar exchange rate, a 23.5 percent 
increase in the money supply, and cautious economic behavior 
during the election period. The 1994 macroeconomic guidelines 
are aimed at curbing inflation through fiscal balance and a 
moderate expansion of the money supply to strengthen the 
atmosphere of reliability for investors. 
  The high 3.1 percent population growth index per year 
demands 
the creation of more jobs. High harvest production rates for the 
main agricultural products plus the first results of 
agricultural diversification in 1994, like grain, corn, 
vegetables, and other crops, will improve economic activity and 
determine the increase of demand for labor. 
  Public and private investments were scarce as a result of 
the 
slow execution of public programs and the dwindling of private 
initiative. Public investments dropped from 2.7 percent to 2.5 
percent of the GDP while private investments dropped from 22.4 
percent in 1991 to 20.2 percent in 1992 and 20.0 percent in 1993. 
  It is estimated that public investments will increase to 4 
percent of the GDP in 1994. The government will introduce new 
measures this year to promote private investment such as the 
creation of medium- and long-term financing mechanisms and the 
promotion of joint national and foreign investments. It is 
estimated that the private investment projects that will be 
channeled through the different ministries will amount to more 
than $250 million, while the investments authorized in 1993 
thanks to Law No. 60/90 will continue being developed. 
  Rural development in general and agricultural 
diversification 
in particular are the priority subjects of this government 
policy. Evidence of this is that through the new Agricultural 
Financing Program the government has, for the first time, 
disbursed on time 350 billion guaranies allowing agricultural 
diversification and facilitating the praiseworthy efforts of the 
peasants. [passage omitted] 
  Agriculture had a significant recovery during 1993 compared 
to the previous year and production grew 4.4 percent. This 
growth compares favorably with 1992's 2.1 negative growth. 
  The improvement was due mainly to the increased production 
of 
soybean, which totalled 1.7 million metric tons, cotton in 
branch with 430,000 metric tons, wheat with 360,000 metric tons, 
sunflower with 33,000 metric tons, corn with 650,000 metric 
tons, and other agriculture products. 
  The export of agricultural products produced 72 percent of 
the hard currency earned by the country. Livestock and forestry 
produced 23 percent. This means that agriculture and forestry 
produced 95 percent of our total registered exports during 1993. 
[passage omitted] 
  The industrial sector has maintained an interesting rate of 
capital investments, absorbing 32 percent of the total of 420 
billion guaranies channeled in accordance to Law No. 60/90 on 
investments. 
  In order to face the growing competitiveness of the world 
market and Mercosur's [Common Market of the South] challenge it 
is necessary to give more dynamism to our industrial 
reconversion process. In order to assist companies in this 
endeavor the government created the Industrial Development Fund, 
which will act as a second-level bank to channel internal and 
external medium- and long-term financial resources to industrial 
concerns through the private financial system. 
  This fund will have resources of up to $300 million that 
will 
represent investments from our internal savings, the assistance 
of multilateral financial institutions (IDB, BIRD 
[Inter-American Development Bank, World Bank]), and financial 
aid from various countries' government agencies. The funds will 
be assigned to finance activities capable of producing 
nontraditional exportable products. 
  We will consolidate the mechanism for protecting industrial 
and intellectual property rights through patent and trademark 
laws and strong actions to eliminate forgeries and illegitimate 
copies. 
  The implementation of a $12 million IDB credit line to 
assist 
small companies will allow the Industrial Development Service 
(SEI) and MIC [Industry and Commerce Ministry] regional offices 
to add financial to technical assistance. Such assistance will 
be extended to artisans through the National Service for Artisan 
Development. 
  The central government closed the 1993 fiscal year with a 
balanced budget. The consolidated public sector, including 
public companies, ended the year with a surplus of 1.6 percent 
of the GDP. 
  This means that the public administration's budgetary 
situation as a whole improved substantially during 1993, 
particularly as of August. 
  The new government implemented important control measures to 
improve revenues. As a result, the average monthly fiscal 
income, which totalled 132 billion guaranies up until 15 August, 
increased to 175 billion guaranies in the following months, that 
is, a 33 percent increase. 
  The implementation of the national budget was largely behind 
schedule before 15 August, but we recovered during the rest of 
year. 
  By mid-August, budget disbursements represented 53 percent 
of 
the total disbursed during 1993, that is, the average 
disbursement was 90 billion guaranies per month. The rate of 
disbursements increased to 126 billion guaranies in the last 
part of the year, allowing the government to fulfill a large 
percentage of its budget schedule and permitting us to close the 
year with the financing of 96 percent of the budget scheduled 
for financing with ordinary resources and 78 percent of the 
budget scheduled for financing with Itaipu Binational royalties 
and compensations. [passage omitted] 
  The transformation of public companies into private 
companies, in addition to providing better service to consumers, 
also will bring fiscal savings. 
  The savings from the elimination of subsidies and credits to 
public companies, as well as the income to be received from the 
transfer of the companies to the private sector, will be used in 
public health, education, and agriculture. 
  The urgent need for privatization can be seen in the 
indicators showing how the budget is sacrificed to financing 
inefficient companies. 
  Maintaining the Paraguayan Railway System demands a big 
budget that is 3.831 billion guaranies for 1994. 
  Every year the state pays the State Merchant Fleet's foreign 
debt. In 1994 it will pay more than $5 million in addition to 
the $81 million already paid in the past. 
  The assets for the bidding on the State Merchant Fleet are 
11 
billion guaranies, but it will be revalued to reflect its real 
value in order to encourage investors for its privatization. 
  Paraguayan Airlines Inc. [LAPSA] needs state contributions 
each year, which in 1993 amounted to $16 million. A demand by 
some creditors has recently compelled the state to pay $2.1 
million, while overdue and unpostponable obligations amount to 
approximately $5 million. 
  LAPSA's monthly operational losses amount to $1.3 million. 
Liabilities to be paid by the state amount to $42 million. The 
executive branch called for special congressional sessions for 
urgent study of a special law authorizing the transfer of 80 
percent of company shares to the private sector, reducing the 
state's liabilities by approximately $20 million. 
  We have listened to the following question many times: 
Should the state produce rum? The former Apal [Paraguayan 
Alcohol Administration] is being liquidated. It was converted 
into a corporation, Canas Paraguayas, Inc. (Capasa). 
  The state owns 100 percent of the shares of Flomerpasa 
[Paraguayan Merchant Fleet, Inc.], LAPSA, and Capasa. On 28 
March, I received these companies' shares, which will be 
deposited in the Treasury's General Directorate. 
  Flomerpasa delivered shares for 8 billion guaranies, Capasa 
for 29 billion guaranies, and LAPSA for 22 billion guaranies, 
for a total of 59 billion guaranies. 
  The Privatization Council's Executive Directorate has called 
local and international consulting firms for the preliminary 
bidding for designing the privatization strategy of each of 
those enterprises. The process includes valuation of assets and 
the preparation of the list of conditions for the call for 
offers. 
  More than 92 consulting firms have responded, and their 
proposals will be rated by the council under the control of the 
Bicameral Privatization Commission and the nation's comptroller 
general. The IDB will finance the consulting services with 
nonreimbursable credits from a Japanese donation. The first call 
for offers for privatization is scheduled for July. 
  The executive branch cooperated with the drawing up of a 
bill 
amending Privatization No. Law 126/91, with a view toward 
issuing regulations for Article 111 of the Constitution, 
assigning 10 percent of the capital of the enterprises that will 
be privatized for employees and workers and 10 percent for the 
directly involved sectors, facilitating the purchasing of shares 
under special, preferential conditions. 
  The monetary supply grew 223.5 percent compared with 1992 as 
a result of the increase in international reserves and the money 
supply's expansion, which was caused mainly by the withdrawal of 
deposits in the Social Security Institute and other state 
enterprises from the Central Bank of Paraguay. 
  Legal reserve restrictions were lifted in order to provide 
credits to farmers. In 1993, bank rediscounts dropped 47 percent 
compared with 1992. Rediscounts no longer exist. They were 
replaced by financing from the private banking system. 
  The money supply grew 20.3 percent, totaling 981 billion 
guaranies. Savings deposits grew 27.6 percent, totaling 780.809 
billion guaranies, while foreign currency deposits grew 1.2 
trillion guaranies, which is equivalent to $640 million, which 
amounts to a 53 percent increase. Banks have large dollar 
deposits for financing this year's crops. For cotton and soybean 
harvesting, banks provided credits worth 382 billion guaranies. 
  Bank loans to the government declined substantially in 
1993, as compared to the significant growth of domestic loans to 
the public sector in 1992, which was prompted by large foreign 
debt payments. 
  In February 1993 the National Treasury received from the 
Central Bank an advance of 125 billion guaranies to help the 
state pay various obligations. This amount has been largely 
reimbursed by the current administration. At this point public 
sector debts to the Central Bank total 1.2 trillion guaranies, 
while public sector deposits at the Central Bank amount to 226 
billion guaranies. 
  Bank loans to private enterprises have increased by 42 
percent. This significant increase of bank loans to private 
enterprises was prompted mostly by the cash flow generated by 
Paraguayan Social Security Institute [IPS] deposits in the local 
banks, increased deposits from other public institutions, and 
the growth of private deposits, including those in foreign 
currency. 
  The most recent figures from the National Development Bank 
[BNF], the bank that is most directly involved in the financing 
of productive activities, reveal that 343 billion guaranies have 
been loaned out. Of this amount, 70 percent went to agriculture 
and livestock, 23 percent to industry, and 7 percent to trade. 
  The National Workers Bank [BNT] is giving clear signs that 
it 
has turned into a strong corporation that is leaving its mark on 
the financial market. During the past fiscal year its net 
profits totaled 3.6 billion guaranies (an increase of 204 
percent). The balance of its loan portfolio surpasses 116 
billion guaranies (an increase of 40 percent). 
  Socially oriented loans totaling more than 27 billion 
guaranies were granted to 6,818 worker families (an increase of 
70 percent). Cooperatives were given almost 6 billion guaranies 
in loans. As part of its social project the BNT also 
contributed to the administration's agrarian policy by settling 
636 families on more than 5,000 hectares of land that belonged 
to the bank. [passage omitted] 
  Foreign accounts improved in 1993. The balance of payments 
yielded a surplus of $87 million as compared to the $347 million 
deficit in 1992, the year in which a large portion of the 
foreign debt was paid. The large foreign trade deficit was also 
reduced in 1993 due to an increase in exports, which brought in 
$729 million. 
  The balance of payments will be further strengthened in 1994 
by the growth of exports, which are expected to total $1 
billion, and by the projected inflow of foreign capital. 
  Foreign loans disbursed in 1993, mainly by international 
organizations, amounted to $115 million, thus registering a 26 
percent increase. 
  As of this year, the national government will be granted 
considerable financial support to finance rural development, 
environmental protection, the betterment of public health and 
education services, and the strengthening of other areas of 
social interest. 
  International credits for funding projects in the two-year 
period extending from 1994 to 1996, formalized and about to be 
approved, add up to $1.4845 billion. They will be earmarked as 
follows: $518.9 million for rural development, $288.8 million 
for health care and education, $54 million for housing 
development projects, $576.6 million for infrastructure (roads, 
electricity, communications, and transport), and $46.2 million 
for institutional development. 
  This important financing, together with the funds 
appropriated for these ends in the national budget, will boost 
our country's social and economic development. 
  International reserves totaled $698.4 million to 31 December 
1993, thus registering a 14.4 percent increase. 
  Our country's external debt dropped to $1.2175 billion in 
December 1993. Our debt service obligations are current, with 
the exception of some payments that are under way. 
  The underlying causes of our present problems show that it 
will be absolutely essential to reach a frank, open, and 
well-devised agreement between the private and public sectors to 
overcome the barriers that hamper domestic growth. 
  The executive branch will draft a budget that guarantees 
fiscal balance, including an efficient policy on spending and 
investments and an appropriate allocation of funds. We base 
ourselves on the presumption that discipline and monetary 
stability are the bases of macroeconomic order. 
  Permit me to remind you that to that effect we have already 
submitted to Congress bills that are very important for 
reforming and strengthening the financial system, like the 
Central Bank charter bill and the stock corporation bill, which 
by modifying the conditions for the establishment of the said 
corporations will contribute to speeding up the deregulation 
process. 
  In the course of this year's session of Congress, the 
executive branch will submit the following bills, on: banks, 
duty-free zones, mutual funds, tax reform, reforestation, 
discounting of industrial assets, insurance, petroleum and 
hydrocarbons, trust funds, leasing, and investors' by-laws. 
  The considerations put forward in the present report can be 
summarized in the following strategy: 
  On the one hand, state reform, which by doing away with the 
privileges and concessions that characterized past policies, 
will enable efficiency and the solution of our social problems. 
On the other hand, the privatization of the economy will grant 
the private sector an increasingly leading role in the 
production of goods and services. This will be made by 
furthering environmentally sound technologies that increase 
productivity and enhance the quality of life for all citizens, 
especially those in the social strata and regions that have for 
centuries been excluded from the benefits of social and economic 
development. 
<H5>  The Social Situation </H5>
  Our most difficult heritage -- all of us know this -- is 
poverty, unemployment, and educational inequality, with their 
painful burden of injustice and frustration and their harmful 
consequences of beggary and crime. 
  Ours is a small community living in a generous land, which 
is 
generous because of its size, of the quality of its soil, and 
its abundant natural resources. 
  We should have long ago become a model society living in 
well-being. Yet some essential factors of our territory still 
remain unknown to us. 
  We are still working on the preparation of maps for the 
classification and use of soils, for drainage, infrastructure, 
and zoning. 
  We are still distributing land without the basic data from a 
land survey registry, the preparation of which we are promoting, 
after awarding the respective contract through an international 
call for bids, with World Bank financing. 
  That is why I would like to reiterate before this honorable 
Congress that education is a true obsession for me. This 
obstinate idea stems from the fact that I am convinced that the 
limitations of our educational system are, beyond all doubt, the 
biggest barriers that we have to overcome in order to achieve 
development. Consequently, education is our first strategic 
choice, because we consider it a vital factor for the production 
of wealth. [passage omitted] 
  Another inherited obligation compels us to provide drinking 
water, highway infrastructure, electric power, sanitary 
services, and medical assistance to many towns. As you, Messrs. 
Deputies and Senators, know, our resources are scarce, and have 
so far been improperly allocated and improperly used, despite 
the corrective measures that we have begun to adopt. 
  I am in no way trying to sing a litany of pessimism and 
hopelessness to this honorable Congress. 
  What I did decide to do, however, is -- in keeping with 
constitutional principles -- to avoid siren songs, and to speak 
frankly about the general situation in the Republic and about 
the restrictions that we have to face, so that all of us may 
become aware of the magnitude of the commitment that we have 
assumed. [passage omitted] 
  In the labor area, the Ministry of Labor and Justice broke 
with a negative tradition of disagreement and sterile 
confrontations, beginning a new system of relations between the 
state, the employers, and workers, based on dialogue and accord, 
in search for agreements leading toward more harmonious social 
development. 
  The government's openmindedness, and the cooperation of 
employers and workers, are built upon fluid communications with 
the labor and management centrals, whose positive results are 
reflected by the following figures: 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Approved Collective Contracts:        |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Between August 1992 and February 1993:|12                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Between August 1993 and February 1994:|35                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Favorable balance:                    |23                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Legalized Unions:                     |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Between August 1992 and February 1993:|58                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Between August 1993 and February 1994:|126                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Favorable balance:                    |62 [as published]                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  It should also be noted that among the unions that were 
legalized after 15 August 1993, 65 belong to the public sector, 
thus attesting to the freedom of association prevailing in that 
sector. 
  Efficient government action in this area led the United 
States to exclude Paraguay from the list of countries that were 
sanctioned for labor violations in the General System of 
Preferences. [passage omitted] 
  The problems of the social sector, however, are not limited 
to education, health, housing and social security, which are 
obviously essential for human development. Problems in this 
area also include poverty and the most vulnerable sectors of 
society, such as women, minors, the handicapped, and indigenous 
people. 
  The concentration of economic activities in the hands of the 
state, far from promoting fair distribution of wealth and of the 
results of work, is a factor for backwardness, for concentration 
of income, and for progressive marginalization for a vast sector 
of society. This has happened in Paraguay, and it is the 
darkest and most painful side of our situation. [passage 
omitted] 
  A nation that neglects its children cannot even envisage 
its future, let alone a happy one. Our social reality is marred 
by the painful existence of street children, of unprotected and 
abandoned children. 
  Nearly 50 percent of our population is in the under 20 age 
bracket; 26,000 children and teenagers are working on the 
streets of Asuncion and in the metropolitan area; and 2 percent 
of the children living in Asuncion are in a high risk situation. 
Eighty five percent of these children attend school 
irregularly, while the remaining 15 percent do not attend school 
at all. 
  The temptation to think about adopting relief measures 
appears to be irresistible -- and we are in fact thinking about 
that. We should not deceive ourselves, however, because the 
solutions we all want will be achieved only through economic 
growth and development. 
  There are 484,189 handicapped individuals in our country. 
This figure accounts for 10 percent of our overall population. 
  Being handicapped should not be an insurmountable obstacle 
for anyone to join society and the job market. In this respect, 
the public sector has set an example by hiring handicapped 
individuals, and the private sector should do the same as long 
as these individuals also do their part in training for 
production. 
  We are giving special attention to the priority requirement 
of supplying land and the respective deeds to indigenous 
communities. 
  As we have seen, education and public health programs 
envisage special projects intended for indigenous groups so 
that, without reneging on their culture, they may be integrated 
into society with the knowledge required by any modern country. 
  To deal with these and other social problems we have 
proceeded to reorganize many institutions having jurisdiction 
over these areas. 
  Regarding the public housing program, we have appointed a 
new 
management team to overcome the financial crisis we had 
inherited. 
  I am referring to the main public institution charged with 
meeting the demands of public housing. The government has 
appointed a new administration team to overcome the financial 
crisis left by the previous one. [passage omitted] 
  Another current issue is the one concerning the Social 
Security Institute (IPS), which is being criticized by several 
sectors, including unions of IPS workers themselves. An 
investigation is currently being conducted at the IPS Central 
Hospital, and studies aimed at gathering current data are being 
made with the cooperation of the United Nations and the IDB. 
  It is expected that all this will result in profound 
structural changes and markedly improved services in the short 
term. 
  Regarding the rural situation, we may also notice that we 
are 
still experiencing problems stemming from an outdated, obsolete 
structure. We are currently experiencing conflicts in some 
areas, and are hearing strong demands from those asking for land 
and for better prices for agricultural products. 
  We are taking action. We are studying projects for 
implementing a true agrarian reform, which would not be limited 
to a simple distribution of land. We have changed both the 
leadership and the approach of the Agrarian Reform Institute. 
We have expanded technical and financial support. We 
successfully fought cotton plagues. We have applied a policy of 
dialogue and negotiations. 
  We must openly and clearly state here that the state in 
Paraguay can no longer intervene in the economy. Yes, this is a 
state that wants to play a guiding role in promoting productive 
activity and competition, which must be governed by the free 
market rules. 
  Based on these rules we will meet the challenge of 
increasing 
production and productivity to be able to enjoy comparative 
advantages regarding prices, especially regarding export 
products, but without neglecting those items intended for 
domestic consumption. 
  It is in this fashion that we will achieve progress and 
prosperity in rural areas. We will not achieve all this by 
granting subsidies, the trademark of paternalist systems, which 
will only result in maintaining old, unjust, and almost feudal 
structures for property and production, when our needs and 
aspirations for modernization call for new techniques and for 
adequately trained and well supported farmers. 
  I will not adopt demagogic measures that could perhaps bring 
short-lived euphoria, but which would ultimately have nefarious 
consequences for the entire population. 
  With great dedication, we will proceed in our endeavor to 
create the appropriate conditions for achieving the major 
objectives for the rural sector outlined in our government 
program. 
  Within the framework of complete press freedom, I ordered 
that the press be granted total access to official data and 
information. The Social Communications Secretariat has been 
clearly instructed to facilitate -- as much as possible -- the 
work of reporters. 
  It goes without saying that it behooves a government with a 
democratic vocation and above-board behavior to act in this way. 
  The press have a fundamental role in our historical process, 
and a great responsibility in times of transition, when they 
have to fulfill several tasks -- to inform the public so that we 
citizens may know what is happening in our country; to uncover 
events and situations that affect the public interest; and to 
guide public opinion with wisdom and presence of mind, which is 
perhaps the most difficult task. 
  I think that the government is doing its share. We are 
making every effort to strengthen democracy with sincerity and 
frankness. 
  The press, like all sectors, need to improve their members' 
training. And yet I do not intend to judge the work of the 
press. Time, the master of history, will judge them. 
  We have attempted to enumerate the social problems that 
weigh 
heavily on so many people. 
  The task ahead is truly arduous, as my honorable friends may 
have already noticed. 
  This task will be long and will entail much sacrifice. It 
will require a concerted effort by all of us, in acting 
resolutely to substantially modify all the restraining variables 
that we have briefly included in this address. Otherwise we 
will stagnate and will not be able to achieve development. 
  Inspired by this conviction, we established the Coordinating 
Council for Social Development by decree on 21 February 1994. 
We charged this multisectorial council to coordinate 
strategies, efforts, and wills with a view to solving social 
problems and helping the country achieve development. 
  I do not wish to close this subject on the country's social 
problems without having conveyed my heartfelt appreciation for 
all the help Paraguayan churches have given me whenever I 
requested their cooperation. 
  I have proof of the great spirit of tolerance -- a nearly 
sublime one -- that informs these pastors' actions, in the face 
of the frequent lack of understanding with which people respond 
to the self-giving and sacrifice they offer us every day. 
[passage omitted] 
<H5>  Our Relations With the World </H5>
  Relations between states have always been given top priority 
by every government, not because the other businesses of any 
public administration are less important, but rather because 
foreign relations by their very nature have very special 
characteristics conditioning their exercise. 
  This is why it is of paramount importance to assess every 
step to be taken in foreign policy with seriousness, common 
sense, and composure. 
  Paraguay is recovering the characteristics of a democratic 
state, which enable it to comfortably hold talks either with 
nations with which we have friendly ties or in international 
forums. The executive power, which by constitutional mandate 
has the laborious task of conducting the country's foreign 
policy, wishes to live up to this honorable duty. I will spare 
no efforts or initiative to achieve the effective insertion of 
our country onto the different stages upon which our destiny is 
at stake. 
  I attended the UN General Assembly and the OAS Permanent 
Council, to report on the Paraguayan political reality and on 
our foreign policy objectives at these important world and 
regional forums. 
  I also participated in the Rio Group Summit in Santiago, 
Chile, to discuss with the other presidents ways to tackle the 
problems confronting the vast region we belong to. 
  We are especially interested in maintaining, strengthening, 
and boosting our relation with our neighboring countries by 
furthering an uninterrupted, cordial, and highly creative 
dialogue. 
  Among the most salient bilateral issues discussed with our 
neighbors, let us mention the following: the Pilcomayo River; 
the Yacyreta and Corpus [hydroelectric dams] with Argentina; the 
enhancement of our relations with Bolivia; Itaipu [hydroelectric 
dam], the cornerstone of our relations with Brazil; the 
Paraguay-Parana Waterway; and the Tiete-Parana highway. 
  Following a virtual suspension of construction work at 
Yacyreta, the Paraguayan and Argentine Governments have decided 
to reactivate the project on the basis of the gradual filling of 
the reservoir in stages, administrative rationalization, and a 
total reassessment of its economic and financial profile. This 
has enabled the unblocking of foreign financial aid, which in 
turn will be instrumental in making the first turbine -- which 
will operate at an elevation of 76 meters above sea level -- 
operational in September this year, once we resolve aspects that 
have to do with the necessary expropriations and resettlement. 
[passage omitted] 
  The Corpus Christi [hydroelectric dam] project is well 
located geographically for supplying energy to Argentina, 
Paraguay, Uruguay, and Brazil within Mercosur, and represents a 
regional electrical energy integration axis. 
  In keeping with the trend toward the privatization of public 
enterprises, the governments of Paraguay and Argentina agreed to 
promote the Corpus project through concessions to the private 
sector. 
  The adverse results of the work carried out on the Pilcomayo 
River to control the retrogression of the river channel created 
a situation of great concern with the Argentine Republic, 
involving a total diversion of the waters toward Argentine 
territory. This situation lasted two years. 
  Busy diplomatic negotiations have been conducted to have 
this 
irregularity soon corrected. [passage omitted] 
  The Paraguayan and Argentine delegations met in Asuncion on 
29 and 30 November and on 1 December. Following busy 
negotiations and a good understanding between the two countries, 
an agreement was signed. It was agreed to pursue studies, 
projects, and work on the River Plate basin to guarantee an 
equal distribution of the waters and prevent the retrogression 
of the river. [passage omitted] 
  As part of this program provisional corrective work will be 
implemented this year. To this end, access roads and the 
infrastructure for camps and warehousing of materials are being 
built now. 
  Concerning our efforts in the international arena, I would 
like to especially emphasize one of these. I believe, 
gentlemen, that we have marked the end of a long history of 
estrangement from the Republic of Bolivia. We have definitely 
overcome the obstacles that had prevented a close relationship, 
and have also achieved a period of spiritual neighborliness. 
  Integration overcomes disruptions and divisions. Now 
Paraguay and Bolivia can develop projects of great importance 
for the two countries. The waterway, the geopolitical key to 
the River Plate, the sound and equal use of the Pilcomayo River, 
the gas pipeline, the various methods of exchange between two 
complementary economies, and the Transchaco Highway link are 
some of the issues uniting Paraguay and Bolivia within prospects 
for friendship and progress. The restoration of the Chaco War 
trophies, symbolic of this new relationship between the two 
countries, was approved by this Congress. Our relationship will 
be further enhanced with Bolivian President Gonzalo Sanchez de 
Lozada's visit in a few days. 
  Concerning Itaipu Binational, my administration paid due 
attention to its financial situation during the second half of 
1992 and the first half of 1993. Itaipu Binational pledged to 
honor its obligations with the Paraguayan Government, involving 
"royalties" and compensation for the supply of energy. It is 
worth mentioning that the Itaipu royalties represent the second 
most significant source of income for the Treasury. 
  Our credit totaled about $138 million by 30 July 1993. 
Additional credits would have become due in subsequent months, 
thus aggravating Itaipu's payments crisis. 
  Special and personal negotiations were conducted before 
Brazilian authorities who, as a response and within the 
framework of mutual cooperation, allowed Itaipu to establish an 
adjusted payment schedule. Remittances to Paraguay, totaling 
about $153 million, were resumed between 16 August and December 
1993. 
  In January we collected the rescheduled debts for 1990, 
1991, 
and 1992. 
  The Paraguayan and Brazilian Governments focused their 
attention on the irregular situation of the Itaipu Binational 
administration, prompted by the refusal of our country's 
Congress to approve the statutes proposed in 1991. Through 
notes signed on 20 December the Paraguayan and Brazilian 
Governments agreed on provisionally reinstating the 1986 Statute 
(Annex A) until the High-Level Contracting Sides decide to 
implement a new Statute, whose negotiations are scheduled to 
conclude before 31 December 1995. 
  Following productive talks with the presidents of the two 
congressional chambers, bloc leaders, foreign relations 
committee chairmen, and leaders from all political parties, an 
agreement was signed. This agreement is now being discussed by 
you, and it has already received approval in one of the chambers. 
  I am resolutely in favor of integration at various levels, 
passing through all the stages that are required to achieve it 
and without being detrimental to our own interests. 
  With regard to Mercosur, during the presidential summit held 
in the city of Colonia, Uruguay, in January, I said Mercosur is 
destined to promote economic development, which will contribute 
to strengthening our democracies and achieving a balanced social 
system. 
  I also pointed out that, as practice indicates, the 
deadlines 
established in the Asuncion Treaty are too short for the 
ambitious objectives that are pursuing. 
  We have made great efforts, promoting the free traffic of 
people, goods, services, and capitals, but we still have not 
properly encouraged an economic and social convergence among the 
four countries, which have policies that are far from 
convergent, have disparate economic potentials, and must 
harmonize their macroeconomic and area policies. 
  Paraguay thus proposed creating a Solidarity Program 
[Programa de Solidaridad] that would favor the member states 
whose economies are less developed, so as to encourage a 
regional redistribution of resources and facilitate the member 
states' integration into Mercosur. 
  I also assign high priority to the "Parana-Paraguay" 
waterway, which will be extraordinary not only thanks to its 
impact on commercial traffic, but thanks to its political 
significance as a factor for strengthening the friendship among 
River Plate basin countries. 
  I assign a similar significance to the river integration 
project involving the Parana and Tiete Rivers. We fully 
appreciate and support this project. We will never repent of 
increasing the means of communications among our territories. 
For centuries we suffered retrogressive estrangement. In this 
era of high technology, it is a favorable time to regain the 
opportunities that we missed. 
  Drug trafficking: an unpleasant but unavoidable subject. 
The government has officially undertaken the commitment to 
fight, with every means it has at hand, the production and 
consumption of and trafficking in drugs and psychotropic 
substances, in all their forms. 
  The great economic power of the underworld is the main 
obstacle in the struggle against drug trafficking. 
  We will resort to our meager resources in order to fulfill 
our commitment. We hope to enjoy the cooperation of those 
countries equally engaged in fighting this scourge. 
  I will now refer to a subject that has drawn the attention 
of 
the people and members of this Congress. 
  I am talking about the "Strong Highways 94-S-PA" project, 
which was supposed to be carried out in San Pedro Department by 
U.S. servicemen together with members of the Paraguayan Public 
Works and Communications Ministry. 
  The proposal to implement this project was carefully 
assessed 
by competent Paraguayan organizations, but unfortunately it will 
not be carried out, due to lack of time in coordinating this 
project in keeping with the terms of the Constitution. The 
background on the project was submitted to the president of the 
honorable Congress. 
  As for the offer to carry out the joint military maneuvers 
"United Forces 94" and "Unitas 35," the executive branch will 
not object to their implementation under the same terms of 
previous years, and as long as the constitutional requirements 
are fulfilled. 
  We hope to continue enjoying U.S. technical cooperation and 
assistance in further training our Armed Forces. 
  As I greet the heads of foreign missions I cannot but help 
mention the support my government received, right from the 
beginning, from the entire international community and 
international organizations. 
  I want to especially mention the member countries of the 
Southern Cone, Spain, Germany, the United States, Japan, the 
United Nations, the OAS, international financial organizations, 
the IDB, the World Bank, and the IMF. Also the EEC, now the 
European Union. 
  Paraguay has a new approach regarding the rest of the world. 
We have emerged from our isolation. Despite our landlocked 
situation, we acknowledge the new map of the world and the new 
relationship among nations. 
  The executive branch seeks to maximize its relationship with 
all the countries of the world. Within this context I have made 
several trips abroad to shorten distances, recover and start 
relationships, and especially, open new prospects for our 
economy and commerce. 
  It is not only the government that must take this new 
approach. This is why every time I go abroad I am accompanied by 
delegations of legislators and representatives of the working 
class, the business sector, the church, the political parties, 
and Paraguayan society in general. 
  In very little time we have traveled thousands of 
kilometers. 
We have visited several countries. We have met with the main 
world leaders. What have we accomplished? That the world today 
has a new idea of Paraguay. 
  Messrs. Senators and Deputies: 
  This is a time for changes and for courage. 
  It is a time of challenges in a changing world, in which 
history gains speed and reorganizes the political maps, a time 
of changes in which each country must reassess its prospects, 
and open new paths toward new opportunities. 
  The current times demand that we be fully aware of the 
historic moment we are experiencing. There is no room for 
isolation, for projects undertaken alone, for arbitrary 
decisions; there is only room for discipline. These days demand 
generosity and hard work to build the great and modern Paraguay 
we seek to bequeath to our children. 
  The fatherland stands above any differences. 
  The nation stands above the conflict of ideas and different 
viewpoints of the world. Coexistence, despite our differences 
and contradictions, builds democracy and the identity that is 
expressed in a single feeling of love for Paraguay. 
  Those of us responsible for governing the fatherland are 
here 
simply through circumstance. But we must be capable of facing 
the challenges we encounter, and of building the Paraguay to 
which we aspire. 
  Messrs. Senators and Deputies: 
  You and I are both responsible for actions that, although 
they take place in different fields, must necessary complement 
each other, because the fatherland needs firm, homogeneous, and 
coherent guidelines to attain the common objectives of all 
Paraguayans. 
  Messrs. Congressmen, representatives of the Paraguayan 
people: 
  Human life is marked by mixed feelings. On the one hand a 
feeling of love for our fellow men, and on the other the 
irresistible impulse toward evil. 
  Human life is a constant battle to overcome one's own 
weaknesses and strive for success. The real masters, those who 
are even stronger than the rulers of the people -- those who 
rule over themselves -- will defeat deception and injustice. 
  I invite each and every one of you to start this struggle 
designed to control our impulses and to work united to serve our 
people. Time flies, and our needs cannot wait to be fulfilled. 
  If this attitude is always necessary, it is particularly 
necessary in the Paraguay of today. We have reached a 
crossroads: One path draws us back to the past, and the other 
leads us toward the future to which we aspire. It is up to us 
not to slip back into the past. It is up to our courage and 
good faith to advance, to advance with hope. 
  The hope of society requires calmness, rationality, 
perseverance, and the united efforts of all in order to 
materialize. Democracy represents the institutional framework 
of hope. Democracy allows us amend mistakes without having to 
go back to the starting point, but by continuing along 
institutional paths leading to the achievement of our objectives. 
  Let us not forget that peace requires order, and stems from 
the perfect balance between charity and justice. 
  Gentlemen: 
  As I greet you, I thank you for listening to me. Please 
allow me, humbly, to recall what a Catholic saint taught us: 
Let us work as if everything depended on us, and let us pray as 
if everything depended on God. Thank you. 

