BFN 

<F P=106> [By Wu Yunhe: "Survey of Service Sector To Help Plan Labour </F>
Force"] 
  [Text] An ongoing nationwide survey of China's service 
industry, scheduled for completion by year's end, is expected to 
produce key guidelines for the country's redistribution of its 
huge labour force, a senior official has said. 
  China's service industry, which is far from fully-developed 
and lags behind the fast-growing economy, is widely viewed as 
the major outlet for the millions of surplus urban and rural 
labourers in this country of 1.2 billion people. 
  This unprecedented examination of the service sector, 
launched last August and involving some 3 million people 
compiling data at the grassroots level, has achieved initial 
success, a conference was told on Saturday [4 July]. 
  Its progress is being closely watched by the government, 
which believes the results will enable it to assess the 
potential of the country's service industry and plan its future 
development, according to Vice Premier Zou Jiahua. 
  Speaking at a national telephonic conference held in Beijing 
on Saturday, Zou noted that he believes the nationwide survey 
will reflect the real conditions of the country's service sector. 
  It queries all individual businesses and service companies 
operated by the government, industrial and agricultural 
enterprises, military units and private, business people. 
  The survey covers conditions of transportation, finance, 
insurance, telecommunications, real estate information, 
technology and education. 
  Computerized data processing and information analysis is the 
major task this year for the survey, which is being jointly 
conducted by the State Planning Commission and the State 
Statistics Bureau. 
  Zou pointed out that this will be the country's third type 
of 
major national survey, in addition to the population census and 
the industrial survey completed a few years ago. 
  Analysts say the government's effective macro-economic 
control of the service industry will help in relocating the 
country's surplus labourers. 
  At present, more than 25 percent of the country's industrial 
employees are considered surplus according to production needs, 
they added . 
  Meanwhile, another 100 million farmers also are considered 
surplus because they have no land to farm. 
  Government officials say the nationwide survey is a prelude 
to developing a socialist market economy system. 
  Zhang Sai, director of the State Statistics Bureau, said 
China needs to build various free-trade markets involving the 
production materials, finance, technology, business information 
and real estate sectors. 
  He noted that the survey is vital to improving the service 
industry which will in turn attract more foreign investment, 
technology, equipment and talent. 
  Furthermore, the survey is expected to establish advanced 
statistics systems that can guide the service industry and 
economy in the future. 

