Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Petr Shevchenko: "`To Arms!' Such Calls Are </F>
Already Ringing Out Among Miners of Ukraine"] 
  [Text] Lugansk--At the end of last September seven miners 
of the Zolotoye mining administration went down their last 
dead-end passage. Methane mixed with coal dust that had burst 
into one of the deep workings raged more terribly than a flame 
thrower through the drift at a depth of about 700 meters. Once 
again the coal was paid for with human lives. Once again the 
president of Ukraine conveyed his condolences to the families of 
the deceased. Once again because it was on this same land in the 
Donbass that an even more terrible tragedy occurred a little 
more than a year ago. At the Sukhodolskaya-Vostochnaya mine near 
Krasnodon--there was a number of smaller accidents. Quite 
recently there was a blast furnace explosion in 
Dneprodzerzhinsk. There were victims and there were burials. 
  Completely by accident, of course, the death of the miners 
at 
Zolotoye coincided with the peak of the political struggle in 
Ukraine and Russia. The struggle around power and for power. 
Above and below. In the capitals and in the provinces. The 
mining village of Zolotoye, covered with coal dust, is in the 
provinces. You cannot get any farther out. And the mining 
administration here, a part of the Pervomayskugol association, 
of course, does not make much difference either economically or, 
certainly, politically. But the mining city of Pervomaysk, which 
has administrative jurisdiction over Zolotoye, occupies quite a 
prominent place on the political map of Ukraine. In the red hot 
sociopolitical environment poorly insulated wires cause sparks 
here time after time. 
  The thing is that while parliament and the president of 
Ukraine are going back and forth over the referendum on 
confidence in themselves and the decision as to whether or not 
it would be worthwhile to reelect local authorities at the same 
time, in Pervomaysk there was no doubt about the latter. Because 
in the middle of the summer, driven by the desperate leaders of 
the city's Independent Trade Union of Miners (NPG), Yuriy 
Arkhipchuk and Sergey Galyautdinov, the striking miners simply 
forced the entire body of deputies to put their mandates on the 
table. True, the ispolkom [executive committee] remained, but 
without the city council. It is difficult to say whether the 
city's residents were seriously affected by their absence but 
new--early--elections to the presidium of the Supreme Council of 
Ukraine were scheduled--for 26 September. That is, the day on 
which the now revoked referendum was to be held. The situation 
with the reelection of city deputies in Pervomaysk should have 
revealed many tendencies. 
  The results of the political experiment, which is unique to 
Ukraine, provide abundant food for thought. Because early 
elections in this rebellious city (where regularly, once every 
half year, after noisy public hunger strikes and other protest 
actions the local bureaucratic idols are overthrown and where, 
one might say, the mood is determined by their own provincial 
Walesas, where the very radical NPG wields an extremely great 
deal of influence) actually flopped--of the 120 candidates from 
the "first round" only 29 became deputies. Of the 35 nominated 
by the NPG--only three. Of the eight representatives of 
Rukh--not a single one. In the 84 electoral districts the 
elections in general were declared void and few more than 
one-fourth of the voters appeared at the precincts. 
  Whatever you may say, Russia and Ukraine are different 
countries. When the leader of one abolishes his parliament and 
by an arbitrary decision schedules elections for a new one, the 
leader of the other persuades the members of parliament to 
personally schedule their own solemn internment. And if in the 
former case there appears a band of malcontents and they start 
shooting, in the latter the process takes place fairly 
peacefully and it is as though everyone is even slightly 
satisfied. Or they give that appearance. 
  Except, perhaps, the miners, who are not satisfied and they 
do not give that appearance. Beginning in 1989 they have been 
persistently throwing a wrench into the works first of the Union 
and now of the sovereign leaders, endlessly complicating with 
their unpredictable steps the political schemes concocted by 
supreme and local authorities, the coal "generals," and all 
kinds of parties and movements there. 
  On the first Monday in October, when the gunfire had 
subsided 
and the president of Ukraine was hastening to analyze what had 
happened in the neighboring state, in remote provincial Lugansk 
there was a meeting of the regional council of strike committees 
of Donbass (RSSKD). The meeting, as always, was loud, 
tension-filled, and discordant. But the people, who had come 
from all corners of the coal region, firmly agreed on one thing: 
Their intention to hold early elections to parliament, the local 
councils, and the presidency. They would continue to gather 
signatures for holding a referendum on the resignation of the 
leaders of Ukraine, insisting on fulfillment of all points of 
the protocol signed in conjunction with the government on 17-18 
June. In the meeting of the RSSKD one could feel in the air a 
kind of actually revolutionary impatience, from which it 
followed that those in attendance had finally become sick and 
tired of exchanging "papers" with the powers that be, and 
somehow accidentally it came out that the miners were being 
provoked to rebel, that the Moscow version of events could quite 
possibly be repeated here in the east of Ukraine. And it must be 
admitted that the most hot-headed of "meeting regulars" spoke of 
weapons (incidentally, this was not the first time). They spoke 
during the hours when the barrels of rifles had not even cooled 
off in neighboring Russia, whose border is just a stone's throw 
away from here. 
  The chairman of the coordinating council of worker 
committees 
of Lugansk Oblast, Stepan Savyuk, in a conversation with me 
later fervently confirmed: "These `to-arms' attitudes are 
actually extremely widespread among miners. It would seem that 
the miners' reserve of patience has been completely exhausted." 
  The worker movement in Ukraine is the largest and best 
organized. At its base, as was expressed earlier, is the miner 
community, who are accustomed to obeying their superiors, have 
largely grown up under orders from brigade leaders, are 
relatively more disciplined in their work and in rallies, and 
react sharply to deception and injustice. And this community has 
not become a clearly formed political force in recent years and 
has not finally determined its party orientation. It would even 
be more correct to say that it finds party affiliation 
emphatically alien and shuns it. At least that has been the case 
up to this point. The most intelligent of the leaders, having 
recognized the futility of purely strike methods of the workers' 
struggle for their rights and a decent existence, are trying to 
direct things into a civilized channel--toward the creation of a 
party. So far, incidentally, unsuccessfully. 
  During the summer, when the miners who went out onto the 
squares of the cities of the Donbass were joined by many branch 
trade unions and trade union federations, for a moment it seemed 
that a Ukrainian "Solidarity" was being born. But in just a 
couple of weeks it was understood that the miners led by the 
former nomenklatura would drop out of the bloc that was being 
formed. And that is what happened. After the termination of the 
campaign for gathering signatures for holding the referendum, 
the miners again went one on one against the authorities--and 
alone amongst themselves. It is not out of place, however, to 
note that while defending the "rights of all workers," the 
miners again accepted the Greek gifts from the government in the 
form of higher wages, tax benefits, abolition of fines for 
exceeding the consumption funds at enterprises... And the rest 
of the population was given what they had before--high 
inflation, rapid growth of prices and...their deep antipathy 
toward the miners grew stronger. 
  Many politicians are still both secretly and openly seeking 
friendship, if only temporary, with the miner movement. And, 
probably, also the authorities--directly or through certain 
third parties. Many people are making reference to the movement 
and many are proposing alliances. The directors' lobby is also 
trying to squeeze its melody out of this instrument. For 
everyone understands that this is the force that will (as has 
happened before) decide the outcome of the elections in the east 
and hence also the fate of Ukraine as a whole. It is impossible 
to cast this reality aside. Can they utilize it? Or, taking into 
account the movement's amorphous quality, cast it aside anyway? 
It is all a matter of where and how the comma is placed. 
  It would seem, however, that neither the current president 
nor the parliament nor the government will succeed in winning 
the sympathies of the miners under any circumstances. The have 
gone too far in the direction of mutual hostility. 
  Parties which are dwarf-like in numbers and influence do not 
stand much chance of utilizing the miners either, although 
attempts are being made. In its memorandum the Lugansk branch of 
the Ukrainian Republican Party, for example, even considered it 
possible to turn to "strike committees as the only really 
organized force in the region." 
  The Liberal Party which, judging from many indications, is 
financed by powerful commercial structures, is acting more 
appropriately. The Liberals have even contrived to conclude an 
agreement for mutual cooperation with the Donetsk strike 
committee. 
  What and who are left? Strange as it may be, the communists 
and socialists, who as far back as two years ago, promised to 
return to power "on a wave of popular dissatisfaction." The 
crest of the wave is higher than ever before, and these parties 
are gradually racking up points. Sociologists have recorded an 
appreciable growth of sympathies for communists and socialists 
who (together) are prepared to hand over the votes of almost 
one-fourth of the voters in the elections. The Communist Party 
of Ukraine enjoys solid authority from every fifth one of 
the...miners who were questioned. If one adds that more than 40 
percent of the voters gave a positive assessment to the summer 
strikes in the Donbass and the strong-arm methods of struggle, 
and that among miners they make up almost three-fourths, it is 
clear as can be: The fuel mixture is practically ready. It is 
not difficult to guess what can happen when the "only real 
force" joins with the most disciplined and structured of the 
parties we know about. Even the Bolsheviks in the "to cast aside 
impossible to use" formula places the punctuation marks 
according to all the rules of revolutionary punctuation. 

