BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Bratislava PRAVDA in Slovak on 14 April 
on page 2 carries a 600-word TA SR report entitled "Personnel 
Changes Contemplated." The report deals with a meeting of the 
Coalition Council on 13 April, which discussed the situation in 
the mass media and hinted at possible changes in the TA SR 
management. Bratislava REPUBLIKA and Bratislava SLOVENSKY 
DENNIK in Slovak on 15 April both publish reactions by TA SR 
Director General Dusan Kleiman to his possible removal from 
office. 
  The Bratislava PRAVDA report on the 13 April meeting of the 
Coalition Council quotes Vladimir Miskovsky, chairman of the 
National Democratic Party-New Alternative [NDS-NA] Club of 
Deputies, as having said that, at the meeting, "the coalition 
partners considered whether the present TA SR management 
provides sufficient guarantees that the problems of the agency, 
particularly those associated with the publication of the daily 
REPUBLIKA, will be resolved." Miskovsky notes that, while his 
party insists on the replacement of the TA SR management, "the 
position of the Party of the Democratic Left [SDL] is more 
restrained," which "slows down the solution to this problem." 
The report continues: "Asked whether the name of the candidate 
for the post of TA SR director general is known, Vladimir 
Miskovsky said that the candidate will be nominated by the 
political grouping around Prime Minister Jozef Moravcik and that 
the NDS has already expressed its almost definitive agreement 
with this candidate. The Christian Democratic Movement, too, 
has expressed its preliminary agreement, and only the SDL has 
asked for time to think the matter over." Miskovsky reportedly 
did not want to disclose the candidate's name. 
  Bratislava REPUBLIKA in Slovak on 15 April on page 3 carries 
a 250-word unattributed report entitled "Liquidation of an 
Inconvenient Daily." According to the report, TA SR Director 
General Dusan Kleiman denied any "violation of legal regulations 
in the management of TA SR property" and argued that the true 
motives for the plans to recall him are "to silence the daily 
REPUBLIKA and to retaliate, for political reasons, against the 
TA SR management." In his opinion, the present methods are the 
same as "those our generation experienced at the beginning of 
normalization [reference to period after crushing of Prague 
Spring reform movement by Warsaw Pact troops in 1968], when the 
first thing the normalizers did was liquidate inconvenient 
newspapers and inconvenient journalists." He stresses that "the 
planned intervention against the management of the agency 
demonstrates also before foreign countries the dependence of the 
mass media on the government and the encroachment upon the right 
to freedom of speech by those in power." 
  Bratislava SLOVENSKY DENNIK in Slovak on 14 April on page 2 
carries a 500-word ARTERIA-STA-signed report entitled "Revenge 
for the Publication of REPUBLIKA." In the report, Dusan Kleiman 
reiterates that he would regard his possible removal from office 
as "politically motivated." He also affirms the TA SR 
management's efforts to transfer the publishing rights for 
REPUBLIKA to a private entity, in view of REPUBLIKA's gradual 
transformation into an "opinion-forming daily." In this 
context, the report notes: "According to Kleiman, the problem of 
REPUBLIKA dwells in its debt of 18 million korunas [Sk]. The 
entities with which the TA SR has been having talks about 
REPUBLIKA--the Slovak Heritage Foundation, Danubiaprint, and 
some financial institutions--are ready, according to Kleiman, to 
pay for the daily's name, the value of which has been put at 
Sk13.225 million and to take over about Sk7 million of 
REPUBLIKA's debt. No entity is ready, as he said, to take over 
REPUBLIKA for the price of its name, if it has to cover its Sk18 
million debt at the same time, because, in that case, it would 
be impossible to guarantee its profits for a number of years to 
come." 

