BFN 

<F P=106> [By Sofia Wu] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, April 29 (CNA)--The exodus of 
labor-intensive industries to Mainland China and Southeast Asia 
has taken its toll on Taiwan's export business, the Council for 
Economic Planning and Development (CEPD) said Friday [29 April]. 
  Exports grew a marginal 0.4 percent in the first quarter of 
this year, far lower than the originally targeted 4.6 percent 
growth. Outbound shipments in the first two weeks of April also 
dropped 8.1 percent as compared with the same period last year. 
  Responding to the lackluster trend, the CEPD said it has 
decided to lower the export growth target for this year to 5 
percent from the previously-set 7.2 percent. 
  K.C. Li, director of the CEPD's Economic Research 
Department, 
attributed the slow export growth to several factors: 
  -- The exodus of labor-intensive industries to Mainland 
China 
and Southeast Asian countries has curtailed Taiwan's exports of 
furniture, toys, textiles and footwear. 
  -- Growth in exports of high-technology or high value-added 
products is too slow to make up for decreases in labor-intensive 
exports. 
  -- Sales to the mainland have declined since Beijing 
implemented economic austerity programs in the second half of 
last year. Moreover, many Taiwan-owned companies on the mainland 
have opted to purchase needed raw materials there instead of 
Taiwan to save transport costs. Growth in mainland-bound 
shipments slid from last year's 28 percent to only 9.5 percent 
in the first quarter of this year. 
  However, Li said further study is needed before concluding 
that Taiwan's export trade faces the threat of recession as a 
result of the exodus of labor-intensive industries. 
  Li pointed out that despite a slowdown in exports, other 
major economic indicators showed signs of improvement in the 
January-March period. For example, overall industrial 
production rose 5.9 percent from the year-earlier level. 
Textile production increased 5.93 percent, chemical output 
climbed 16.4 percent, petrochemical production advanced 8.25 
percent, electronics and computer output also registered gains. 
  Li said domestic demand accounted for 54 percent of total 
sales in the first quarter, while foreign demand made up 46 
percent. 
  As export orders received in the first quarter rose 5.39 
percent from the year-earlier level, Li said outbound shipments 
will gradually regain momentum in the coming months. 
  With domestic and foreign demand increasing and industrial 
output growing, Li said, the country will still be able to 
register at least 6 percent economic growth this year. 

