BFN 

<F P=106> [Telephone interview with Hasan Abu-Libdah, deputy director </F>
general of the Palestinian Economic Council for Reconstruction 
and Development; place not given; by Ziyad Halabi, in the 
studio, on 4 May -- recorded] 
  [Halabi] Good evening, Mr. Hasan Abu-Libdah. 
  [Abu-Libdah] Good evening to you. 
  [Halabi] After yesterday's signing of the 
Israeli-Palestinian agreement, we thought it would take 
immediate effect, but this has not happened. Why? 
  [Abu-Libdah] There is more to the matter than mechanics. 
Logistical and technical requirements must be secured before any 
kind of meaningful implementation takes place. 
  [Halabi] Can you elaborate on the impediments that seem to 
be holding up immediate implementation? 
  [Abu-Libdah] We have been discussing security and political 
considerations with the Israelis. Logistically and technically, 
we need to make sure, in the relatively short time we have 
before the transfer of power, that we familiarize ourselves with 
the inner workings of the system. Let's not forget that over 
the past 27 years, the majority of the departments whose control 
will devolve to us have been under near total Israeli control. 
Whereas until now we have been marginally and peripherally 
involved in the running of things, we now find we have to 
administer things ourselves. It is, therefore, natural that 
there are obstacles to a successful administration. I hope, 
however, that the transfer of power will take place relatively 
smoothly. 
  [Halabi] Are you attributing the delay to a lack of 
practical Palestinian experience? 
  [Abu-Libdah] Very much so. It is no secret that, despite 
the fact that several thousand Palestinians have staffed various 
departments of the Civil Administration in the occupied 
territories, they did not hold top managerial positions. The 
challenge for the Palestinians who will staff the civilian 
departments that will become the backbone of the self-rule 
authority is to take over as managers and legislators. We have 
ahead of us a tough challenge, which we think we will eventually 
tackle successfully. 
  [Halabi] What about the time challenge? Is three months 
enough before the agreement is implemented and the Palestinians 
take over? 
  [Abu-Libdah] In my opinion, the transfer of power will take 
a long time. The mechanical transfer should not take more than 
three to four weeks. However, in my opinion, the departments in 
which there will be a transfer of power cannot be properly 
described as Palestinian before certain conditions are met. One 
of these is a structure devised from a Palestinian perspective. 
It will take some time before it will be possible to describe 
the government agencies as 100 percent Palestinian in form and 
content. However, the mechanical transfer of power and the 
institution of new agencies should not take that long. I think 
the PLO can handle an immediate transfer of power, but it seems 
the political leadership in Tunis has decided the transfer of 
power can wait for another three weeks -- not the three months 
that you have mentioned -- during which time certain logistical 
and technical hurdles will, hopefully, have been surmounted. 
  [Halabi] Dr. Hasan Abu-Libdah, deputy director general of 
the 
Palestinian Economic Council for Reconstruction and Development, 
thank you. 
  [Abu-Libdah] Thank you. 

