Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Third of an unknown number of installments: "Special </F>
article" by special correspondent in Washington Tsu Hsing-fu 
(2612 1630 4395): "China Will Not Beg for MFN Treatment -- 
Written on the Eve of Christopher's Visit to China"; first and 
second installments published in the 9 March China Daily Report] 
  [Text] Washington, 9 Mar -- A Senior U.S. Official 
Meets With Wei Jingsheng on the Sly 
  Over the past week and more, China and the United States 
have 
again engaged in a battle of words over the human rights issue. 
During a recent visit to Beijing, a senior official of the U.S. 
Government arranged a meeting with Wei Jingsheng behind the back 
of the Chinese Government. The Chinese side has lodged a 
protest with the U.S. Government on this issue. In response to 
the recent moves made by the Chinese public security authorities 
to hold people like Wei Jingsheng and Wang Dan in temporary 
custody, the U.S. Government has again threatened to cancel 
China's MFN trading status. The purpose of the Chinese police 
in summoning people like Wei Jingsheng and Wang Dan is to convey 
a message to the United States and the U.S. Secretary of State 
Warren Christopher, who is scheduled to arrive in Beijing for a 
visit on 11 March: Do not take China for a weak country which 
can be easily bullied; do not take for granted that China will 
kowtow to the United States on the human rights issue in order 
to retain its MFN trading status. 
  To the common citizens of China, the present period is one 
in 
which they are enjoying the greatest freedom ever in traveling 
and expressing views for the past several decades. As a matter 
of fact, the political practice whereby people inform against 
each other has already been wiped out in China and people are no 
longer warned or put into prison for grumbling or raising 
well-intentioned criticism against the Chinese leadership. So 
long as the common citizens refrain from violating the law, from 
translating their anti- government remarks into action, or from 
being hell-bent on ingratiating themselves with foreigners, the 
Chinese police will not take the trouble to find fault with them. 
  In the past, the Chinese people's freedom of travel was 
considerably restricted. Without residential registration, 
people would find it very hard to have a long stay in another 
place, let alone find a job in another city. Today, all these 
restrictions have been abolished and people do not need 
residential registration to find a job or do business across the 
country. Neither did the Chinese people enjoy any freedom in 
choosing jobs in the past. Today, people can quit and change 
their jobs if they feel dissatisfied with their present jobs or 
units. In earlier days, people had to go through strict 
examination and approval formalities if they wanted to study 
aboard or emigrate to another country; yet nowadays, the 
relevant authorities will not place any obstacles in front of 
such people provided that they are eligible to apply and have 
sufficient financial backing. 
<H5>  China's Crime Rate Is Lower Than That of the United States </H5>
  Some Americans who know China well said emotionally that the 
social progress China has attained recently actually has a more 
extensive and farreaching significance than the release of a few 
dissidents. As a matter of fact, China has done better than the 
United States in certain human rights fields. If it has 
self-knowledge, the United States really needs to be 
introspective about what it has done in the past. Compared with 
the United States, China has fewer homeless people; enjoys a 
lower crime rate in murder, rape, and robbery; and has a smaller 
proportion of prisoners. China has many good qualities in terms 
of human rights. 
  Democracy seems to be the development trend for the whole 
world and is irresistible from a long-term point of view. 
However, the form and speed of a country's democratic process 
should be determined by the country's cultural traditions and 
concrete national conditions. China must not indiscriminately 
copy the forms of democracy currently in practice in the United 
States and the West. 
  To the vast numbers of the Chinese common citizens who have 
just resolved the problem of having sufficient food and clothing 
and are heading for a fairly comfortable life, human rights and 
democracy are just like decorative ornaments. Totally different 
from the handful of dissidents in China to whom American 
journalists, human rights organizations, and a few U.S. Senators 
have paid much of their attention, the overwhelming majority of 
the Chinese people are most concerned about the economic 
prosperity of the country, a clean and industrious 
administration, stable commodity prices and social order, and 
better private lives. 
  The United States Attempts To Facilitate the 
Emergence of an Opposition Party in China 
  Facing the demands of the United States on the human rights 
issue, the Chinese side has tried hard to accomplish all it can, 
yet will never do anything which is not attainable at the 
present stage. China's reluctance to make major moves on U.S. 
human rights concerns stems from two worries. Firstly, China is 
worried that the U.S. human rights demands will turn out to be a 
bottomless pit. For example, the United States may ask China 
today to release a couple of people and China sets them free 
according to realistic conditions; yet tomorrow, the United 
States may again demand the release of more and later start 
urging China not to arrest anyone while releasing prisoners. As 
a matter of fact, the real intention of the United States in 
imposing human rights pressure on the Chinese Government is to 
facilitate the emergence of an opposition party in China which 
will put on a rival show against the government. Not that the 
leaders of the Chinese Government do not want to expedite the 
pace of political reform because China's modernization drive can 
only succeed when political and economic reforms are carried out 
at the same pace; they are just worried about the possible 
emergence of major social turmoil inside China. China is a 
multinational country which has a big population and a weak 
economic foundation; moreover, because of their generally low 
cultural quality, many people still cling to the deep-rooted 
remains of the feudal ideology. As a result, China has found 
its political reform far more difficult than economic reform. 
Under such circumstances, if anyone pursues quick results in 
political reform, major turmoil is bound to break out in China. 
The Chinese Government and people shiver with fear when looking 
back at the anarchist state brought by the full "democracy" 
during the "Great Cultural Revolution" as well as at the thought 
of the present chaotic situation and tragedies in the former 
Soviet Union, Russia, and Eastern European countries. 
<H5>  Political Reform Takes Time </H5>
  The U.S. Government also admits that a strong, stable, and 
democratic China is beneficial to the interests of the United 
States. If it really wishes to see a strong, stable, and 
democratic China, the United States ought not to impose an 
unduly heavy pressure on China at a premature time. Imposing an 
unduly heavy pressure is tantamount to trying to make people do 
something which they do not wish to do. Since democracy can 
only be built on the basis of social stability and economic 
development, the Chinese Government has regarded it as an urgent 
task to dilute ideological awareness and firmly seize favorable 
international opportunities to bring about further development 
to its economy. This is a wise decision and the Chinese people 
all show their approval with their hands up. A high-degree 
economic reform will inevitably bring about political reform; 
however, political reform in China takes some time and one 
should not expect to reach the sky in a single bound. 
  So long as U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher aims 
his China visit at seeking common ground on major issues while 
reserving differences on minor ones, at building up mutual 
trust, and at expanding the foundation of cooperation between 
the two countries, I believe that his visit to China will be a 
success. Therefore, there is no need for the United States to 
give up eating (granting MFN status to China) for fear of 
choking (human rights). 

