CSO 

  [Text] New Delhi, May 3--The much-awaited project to 
upgrade the MiG-21 BIS [multirole] is likely to be undertaken 
with Russian assistance, the Minister of State for Defence, Mr 
Mallikarjun, indicated in the Rajya Sabha today. The 
negotiations with the Russians were over and a letter of intent 
was being issued, he said. 
  The Minister offered scanty details of the project in which 
both the Israelis and the United States expressed an interest. 
Mr Mallikarjun said that with modern avionics and other 
equipment, the re-vamped MiG-21 would once again assume its role 
as a frontline combat aircraft. 
  Mr Mallikarjun strongly defended the short-listing of the 
British Aerospace Hawk and the French 
Alphajet would meet the Indian Air Force's 
requirement of an Advanced Jet Trainer. 
  The Minister, however, did not mention the time-frame within 
which the final decision would be taken. He said the negotiating 
committee would seek to obtain the AJTs [Advanced Jet Trainer] 
at the most favourable price. 
  He further said that the negotiations were being conducted 
on 
the basis of bids submitted in March 1992. He declined to 
comment on the allegation of a Rs 1,000-crore [rupees] bribe 
that had been made by Mr G.G. Swell (M.P.). He said he "totally 
disagrees with the respectable, honourable M.P." 
  Prior to the short-listing of the Hawk and 
Alphajet, Mr Mallikarjun said, the IAF [Indian Air 
Force] had evaluated all other options available, in 1985. The 
evaluation had included studies on Spanish, German, Italian, 
U.S., and Czech aircraft. None of them met the prescribed Air 
Staff Requirement. 
  The Russian MiG-80, which was scheduled to be unvailed this 
year, was still on the drawing board. Nobody could say how long 
it would take for commercial production to commence, nor were 
its capabilities established. In contrast the Hawk 
and Alphajet were "proven" and used in the training 
role by several forces. 
  Discussing modernization plans for the Army, he said that 
the 
T-72 tank, which had now been totally indigenized, would be 
upgraded. While most of it would involve the use of 
sophisticated Indian equipment, some items might have to be 
imported. 
  The Minister spoke of frigates, destroyers, and off-shore 
patrol vessels being produced in domestic shipyards for the 
Navy, and said the time had come to plan construction programmes 
for the future since shipbuilding takes time. 
  However, the proposals for an indigenous replacement of the 
defunct INS [Indian Navy Ship] Vikrant and the continuation of 
the HDW [Howaldtswerke Deutsche Werft] sub-marine project, at 
Mazagon Docks, were not mentioned. 
  Mr Mallikarjun said that in future the third and fourth line 
servicing of the carrier-based Sea Harrier fighters would be 
done in the country, instead of sending them abroad for major 
servicing. 
  Development of infrastructures and Operation Seabird to set 
up a base at Karwar and the Naval Academy, at Ezhimala in 
Kerala, was continuing. 
  While several members had described the budgetary outlay of 
Rs 23,000 crores as inadequate, and he conceded that it was not 
much more than the revised estimates of Defence expenditure for 
1993-94, Mr Mallikarjun drew attention to the resource 
constraint and said: "We have to meet the needs with whatever is 
available." 
  The Minister agreed that the Research and Development 
Organisation had a key role to play but rejected the view that 
the Rs 80-crore reduction in its budgetary provision, for 
capital expenditure, had meant an overall slash in its funding. 
That amount had been re-appropriated under the revenue 
expenditure head. 
  Noting that members had compared India's Defence expenditure 
of 2.5 percent of GDP with the 7 percent of Pakistan, the 
Minister declared that the percentage of GDP was not a proper 
index, nor was there any point in trying to match anybody else. 
India's allocations were "need-based," he said. 


