Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ssava Jankovic; "pool" item] </F>
  [Text] Knin, Feb 16 (TANJUG)--Veritas, a non-government 
organization of the Bosnian Serb Republic (RSK), has published 
sections of a document containing proof that regular Croatian 
Army troops had over the past two years killed and butchered at 
least 140 Serb civilians and 48 RSK police prisoners in three 
locations alone. 
  Veritas revealed only a part of the collected evidence on 
the 
massacre of the Serbs in the territory of the ex-Yugoslav 
Republic of Croatia. Some of the evidence was obtained by the 
U.N. Protection Force and has already been sent to the 
International War Crimes Tribunal. 
  In keeping with the Vance plan, RSK was in 1992 proclaimed a 
U.N. Protected Area (UNPA) until a political solution is reached 
in the dispute between Croatia the RSK. 
  RSK was proclaimed by the local Serbs within the 
administrative borders of the ex-Yugoslav Republic of Croatia in 
parts where they are in the majority and in response to 
Croatia's secession from the former Yugoslav Federation and the 
harassment of the Serbs by the Croatian authorities. 
  The documents testify about the mass crimes committed by the 
Croatian Army during its aggression on RSK on June 21, 1992 (on 
the Miljevac plateau), and on January 22 and September 9, 1993 
on the Ravne Kotari area (operation Maslenica), i.e. on the Serb 
villages of Citluk, Divoselo and Pocitelj in Lika (Medak pocket). 
  The Croat aggression on Citluk, Divoselo and Pocitelj left 
71 
Serb civilians dead. The bodies of 52 were later handed over to 
the Serbs, while the reminder was found by the U.N. Protection 
Force (UNPROFOR) after the Croat forces were driven away from 
the razed and burnt villages. 
  "I did not find any sign of either human or animal life ... 
The destruction was complete and intentional," said UNPROFOR 
commander for Former Yugoslavia, General Jean Cot, after touring 
the ruins of the Serb villages. 
  Pathology reports show that the victims had been killed from 
close quarters. Some bodies had as many as 20-30 bullet wounds, 
while a number were butchered. 
  In operation "Maslenica," the Croatian Army also refused to 
spare the civilians, women, children and the elderly, killing 44 
Serb civilians, including 27 women. 
  On the day of the aggression, one half of the Benkovac 
region 
(RSK territory) - 16,000 people - fled their homes in 
kilometre-long columns. That day, 109 feeble old people died en 
route. 
  On the Miljevacki plateau, the Croatian Army brutally killed 
48 imprisoned Serb policemen from the Knin area by first 
severing their limbs and ears, and then pushing them into 20 m 
pits in the Drinovci village. 
  The bodies of the Serb police were butchered to such an 
extent that identification of 16 was virtually impossible. 
  Seventeen Serb fighters managed to survive the Miljevac 
massacre. Jovan Mirkovic (46) from Kovacici, near Knin, says 
that in the Sibenik prison the prisoners were tortured with 
electricity, and starved and beaten. 
  "They kicked and threatened us for three nights in a row. I 
was told my eyes are good for target practice," says Mirkovic 
who had three ribs broken and was bruised all over. 
  In Gospic, city in Croat territory, the Croat police on the 
night of October 16 arrested and took in an unknown direction 
some 150 prominent Serbs. The bodies of 24 were returned in 
January 1992, while the whereabouts of the others remains 
unknown. 
  The killing of the Gospic Serbs was conducted by Tomislav 
Mercep, a senior official in the Croatian Interior Ministry. 
  Savo Strbac, the director of Veritas and a lawyer, says that 
the truth about the atrocities against the Serbs committed after 
Croatian President Franjo Tudjman came into power, is finding 
its way into the world with difficulty. 
  "No-one wanted to receive and broadcast to the world the 
clear proof about who is the aggressor and who the victim in 
this war," Strbac says. 

