Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Kroekkrai Chiraphaet, director-general of the 
Department of Business Economics, said the post-Uruguay Round 
liberalization of Thailand's financial sector will be based on 
bilateral negotiations -- not multilateral talks as is generally 
understood. 
  "Anybody who thinks that the negotiations must be conducted 
at the multilateral level is day dreaming," he said. [passage 
omitted] 
  Yet it appeared that Finance Minister Tharin Nimmanhemin 
took 
the stand that Thailand would only use multilateral forums in 
its attempt to reach agreement on the liberalization of 
financial services within the context of the General Agreement 
on Tariffs and Trade. 
  Tharin did tell Bentsen, however during talks at the 
Government House on Tuesday, that Thailand would be considering 
plans to allow foreign banks to operate ATM [automatic teller 
machine] services, to allow foreign firms to own up to 49 per 
cent of securities firms once they had split off their finance 
operations, and to allow offshore banks to expand their presence 
upcountry. 
  Bentsen was apparently happy with the Thai proposal and 
indicated that talks on financial services could be put back on 
track in the GATT forum. [passage omitted] 
  But Kroekkrai said in the post-Uruguay Round it is 
impossible 
to negotiate multilaterally on these issues because that would 
involve talks with 117 countries in varying states of fiscal 
maturity. 
  "Suppose we want to open up financial services talks with 
Laos, we have to bilaterally negotiate with that country. It is 
impossible to agree to anything in broad terms which cannot be 
grasped in concrete terms. Whoever thinks like this is 
daydreaming," he said. 
  MR Chatumongkon Sonakun, director-general of the Revenue 
Department, said following completion of talks on financial 
services, Thailand will have to make drastic adjustments in its 
tax procedures to cope with the complicated business 
transactions of foreign financial institutions. 
  "Offshore banking under the BIBF [Bangkok International 
Banking Facility] has already given us a good headache. The 
Revenue Department will have to improve our system. We have to 
be ready," he said. 

