Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] 
<H5>  STA </H5>
  On 30 August, STA announced its budget estimate request for 
next fiscal year. The nuclear energy related portion is 
&yen;189,206 million from the general account (a 3.1&percnt; 
increase 
from the preceding fiscal year) and &yen;141,124 million from 
the special account for electric power resource development (a 
.4&percnt; increase from the preceding fiscal year), for a total 
of 
&yen;330,331 million (a 2.1&percnt; increase from the preceding 
fiscal 
year). Next fiscal year, efforts will be made toward new 
developments in plutonium use and nuclear fuel recycling, such 
as the beginning of full-scale construction of a recycling 
equipment testing facility (RETF) and manufacturing of equipment 
for the demonstration advanced thermal reactor (ATR) fuel 
fabrication development facility, international problems 
regarding nuclear non-proliferation will be addressed and public 
relations concerning nuclear energy will be enhanced. 
  STA's total budget request is &yen;617 billion (a 
6.1&percnt; 
increase), the first time it has gone to the &yen;600 billion 
level. Nuclear energy related allocations are 53.5&percnt; of the 
total budget request (it was 55.7&percnt; in the preceding year). 
  Looking at the budget request in terms of institutions, the 
Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute (JAERI) accounts for 
&yen;108,745 million, a 5.2&percnt; increase. About &yen;22 
billion 
has been requested for nuclear fusion research. Of this, about 
&yen;8.2 billion is allocated for cooperation in the engineering 
design activities of the International Thermonuclear Fusion 
Experimental Reactor (ITER) project, which will be going into 
its third year, and about &yen;10.3 billion is for JT-60 
operational control. 
  Also, a contribution of about &yen;11.3 billion to the high 
temperature test reactor (HTTR) will be made with the goal of 
reaching criticality in FY98. About &yen;5.9 billion is 
requested for the large-scale radiation (SPRing-8) facility, 
which is being built jointly with the Institute of Physical and 
Chemical Research. Shared use of part of this facility is 
scheduled to begin in FY97. About &yen;2.2 billion is requested 
for decommissioning of the nuclear-powered ship Mutsu and about 
&yen;2 billion is requested for future R&amp;D on nuclear-powered 
ships. 
  The Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Development Corporation 
(PNC) has requested a total of &yen;153,522 million, a .2&percnt; 
increase, from the general account and the diversification 
account of the special account for electric power resource 
development. 
  The portion from the general account is &yen;52,663 million 
(2&percnt; increase), and about &yen;10.9 billion is allocated 
for 
fast breeder reactor (FBR) development. About &yen;1.8 billion 
has been allocated to the ``Joyo'' upgrade remodeling (Mark III) 
project and about &yen;5.8 billion is for preparations for tests 
to study the characteristics of coolant flow methods for the top 
entry type reactor, which is said to be the reactor type 
selected for the demonstration FBR, and for technical 
confirmation tests in connection with large-scale structural 
design. 
  In addition, about &yen;1 billion has been allocated for 
development of FBR reprocessing and other reprocessing 
technologies, and about &yen;4.5 billion is for development of 
high level radioactive waste (HLW) disposal technology. 
  The amount requested from the diversification account of the 
special account for electric power resource development is 
&yen;100,859 million (.7&percnt; decrease). The decrease is due 
to the 
fact that the construction cost (about &yen;42.9 billion) of the 
``Monju,'' which takes up about half of expenditures, is about 
&yen;5.7 billion less than the preceding fiscal year. The major 
portion of expenditures for ``Monju'' construction costs will 
end in FY94. Additional requests are for about &yen;6.9 billion 
for RETF construction and about &yen;3.5 billion for HLW 
processing technology. 
  The budget request for the National Institute of 
Radiological 
Sciences (NIRS) is for &yen;13,249 million (19.8&percnt; 
decrease). Of 
this, about &yen;6.7 billion will be committed to projects at 
the heavy particle ray cancer treatment center. clinical testing 
that will begin this fiscal year will be continued. About 
&yen;1.4 billion has been allocated to begin construction of new 
hospital buildings and a center for international common use of 
heavy particle ray clinical equipment will be designed. 
  The allocation for the Institute of Physical and Chemical 
Research (IPCR) is &yen;8,978 million (30.4&percnt; increase). 
About 
&yen;6.3 billion is for cost of construction of SPRing-8, which 
is being built jointly with JAERI. About &yen;2.2 billion has 
been requested for heavy ion science comprehensive research. 
  On the other hand, &yen;5,194 million (32.7&percnt; 
increase) has 
been allocated for public relations related costs from the 
electric power resource siting account. The public relations 
budget increases every year, and in FY94, public relations work 
concerning plutonium use and FBRs will be enhanced. Subsidies 
for nuclear power generation facility safety training and grants 
for social welfare of regions surrounding nuclear power 
generation facilities will be created from the electric power 
resource siting account. 
  Furthermore, consideration is being given to establishing 
the 
``safeguards center'' (provisional name) as a base for 
safeguards related activities at the fuel cycle facility in 
Rokkasho-Mura, Aomori Prefecture, and FY94 will be the first 
time that an allocation has been made for this project. Other 
new allocations are for a survey of the effects of ocean dumping 
of radioactive waste by Russia, transporting measures for the 
return of waste, and expenses for consultations on a system for 
Asian nuclear energy cooperation. Efforts also are being made to 
increase support for nuclear safety in Russia and eastern Europe. 
<H5>  MITI's Budget </H5>
  MITI submitted its estimated budget request for FY94 on 31 
August. The nuclear energy related budget items included 
&yen;287 million from the general account (about 4&percnt; 
increase 
from preceding fiscal year), &yen;93,209 million from the siting 
account of the electric power resource special account (about 
1.3&percnt; increase), &yen;29,268 million from the 
diversification 
account of the electric power resource special account (about 
1.8&percnt; decrease), and &yen;382.5 billion as the Japan 
Development 
Bank (JDB) quota of fiscal investments and loans (about 3&percnt; 
increase). 
  The estimated budget request, reflecting the new 
administration's policies, is aimed at promoting a strong 
nuclear energy policy based on six principles: enhancement of 
safety measures, provision of information and other public 
relations measures, technological developments in areas such as 
sitings, nuclear fuel cycle, and new reactor types, and 
promotion of international cooperation. 
  In view of the new administration's policies, safety 
measures 
will continue to be one of the emphases of MITI's policies. Of 
these safety measures, special emphasis will continue to be 
placed on testing to confirm reliability of advanced light water 
reactor (LWR) technology, human error prevention measures and 
severe accident countermeasures. Total allocation will be almost 
&yen;30 billion from the electric power resource development 
special account. Through these measures, MITI plans to work to 
raise the people's understanding of safety. A new endeavor will 
be to spend &yen;200 million to begin reliability confirmation 
testing of an advanced control rod drive mechanism as part of 
reliability confirmation testing of welding and other areas 
affected by heat, which will be carried out whenever concrete 
progress is made on the advanced boiling water reactor (ABWR). 
Also, MITI will input &yen;1.2 billion, double the FY 93 amount, 
into reliability confirmation testing, to confirm the margin of 
safety against the flow excitation phenomenon, which was 
discovered when there was trouble with the tubing in the steam 
generator of the Number 2 Mihama plant. The building of testing 
equipment will begin. 
  The highlight of the siting promotion measures is the 
creation of a &yen;2.5 billion grant for measures to promote 
important electric power resource sitings that require 
countermeasures. To strengthen earlier site measures, a grant 
was requested for management and maintenance of public 
facilities, which will be applied to the recently reviewed 
important electric power resources requiring countermeasures. 
Initially, around five locations will be selected to receive 
coverage under the grant. Additionally, the FY93 &yen;3.9 
billion subsidy to support the nurturing of industries in 
regions where electric power resources are located has been 
increased to &yen;5.37 billion to support stepped up promotion 
of industries in regions where sites are located. MITI also 
plans to provide generous support to promote social welfare 
measures in regions surrounding sites by substantially 
increasing the grant for social welfare measures for regions 
surrounding nuclear power facilities from &yen;50 million in 
FY93 to &yen;490 million in FY94. MITI intends to ensure a 
budget of over &yen;60 billion for such siting related measures. 
  In view of the new administration's policies, public 
relations measures will continue to emphasize disclosure of 
information. MITI is aiming for yet another increase, from 
&yen;6.6 billion in FY93 to &yen;8.7 billion in FY94. Special 
emphasis will be given to public relations measures aimed at 
overseas audiences concerning the use of plutonium, but 
multimedia public relations measures will be developed for 
domestic consumption as well. For this purpose, MITI is 
requesting an increase, from &yen;4.08 billion in FY93 to 
&yen;5.77 billion to cover the expense of consignment of 
electric power resource siting promotion surveys, etc. 
  As for promotion of the nuclear fuel cycle, to ensure 
funding 
for the commencement of full-scale facility construction, 
including start of construction of the reprocessing facility and 
construction to expand the enrichment facility, MITI has 
requested a substantial increase in the JDB quota of fiscal 
investments and loans, from &yen;290 billion in FY93 to 
&yen;382.5 billion in FY94. 
  MITI also has requested an allocation from the JDB's nuclear 
energy quota for funding support to build a domestic mixed oxide 
(MOX) fuel fabrication enterprise. This was requested for the 
first time in the preceding fiscal year, but was held over 
because of lack of sufficient progress in the project. This was 
included in the request for FY94 on the assumption that the 
project will enter the stage of concrete progress, such as a 
decision on the lead enterprise. 

