Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Ankara--The Human Rights Association (IHD) reported 
on Monday [7 March] that 16 people held in police custody had 
been killed under mysterious circumstances in Turkey this 
February while 29 people who had allegedly been detained by 
security forces were missing. The IHD, in its monthly report 
for February which was made public Monday, claimed that the 
human rights situation in Turkey is deteriorating rapidly and 
said the country is living through a "human rights disaster." 
According to the report, the government, which came to office 
with the claim that it would legislate democratic reforms and 
improve Turkey's human rights picture, has proven incapable in 
this respect and has lost its credibility. 
  The report said that in February alone 877 people had been 
taken into custody, 18 publications confiscated, three 
associations raided and the Green Party closed down. It said at 
the moment there were 68 journalists and writers being held in 
prison because of their views while nine had been released from 
jail in February. According to pending court cases, journalists 
and writers risk prison sentences of up to a total of 664 months 
and fines in the range of TL [Turkish lira] 1.05 billion. In 
February, journalists and writers had been sentenced to prison 
terms totalling 109 months and were fined TL 1.11 billion. The 
IHD report also claimed that 17 villages in the Southeast had 
been evacuated by force in February. 
  It added that in February, 15 party offices and association 
buildings had been bombed. 
  The IHD also reported that in the last month, there had been 
a total of 39 mystery killings while 34 civilians had been 
killed in various incidents. Police arrested 153 people 
throughout the month. 
  The report also mentioned that three of the people reported 
missing in its January report had been accounted for and were 
under police custody. Criticizing the lifting of the 
parliamentary immunities of eight deputies and their subsequent 
detention, the report said, "You cannot have democracy by 
banishing deputies and silencing the people's rights to express 
themselves." 
  The legitimacy of the upcoming local elections in 
southeastern Turkey was also questioned by the report since the 
pro-Kurdish Democracy Party (DEP) has withdrawn from the polls. 
The report also said that the human rights situation in Turkey 
is now reaching crisis proportions and stressed that such a 
situation would not exist in any parliamentary democracy which 
is both a member of the United Nations and the Council of Europe. 

