Language: <F P=105> Finnish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jukka Perttu: ``Collaboration With Norwegians </F>
Produces Results More Quickly''] 
  [Text] Researcher Anatoly Vinogradov of the Kola Science 
Center criticizes the Finns not being action-minded when mutual 
efforts are made to solve Kola Peninsula environmental problems. 
``Working together with the Swedes, but especially the 
Norwegians, produces results much more quickly,'' compared 
Vinogradov. 
  He gave a presentation at the Foreign Policy Institute 
seminar on Friday [18 November]. The theme of the seminar was 
environmental cooperation in Finland and neighboring areas. 
Experts from Norway, Finland, Sweden, Estonia, Russia, Germany, 
and Japan had convened at the Gustavelund Convention Center in 
Tuusula. 
  Vinogradov's criticism was that much is promised at the 
government level, but then at the company level, profits are 
sought. He also presented a colorful environmental magazine that 
has been created as a joint project of Kola-Norwegian-Swedish 
cooperation. 
  Vinogradov argued that pollution in Kola does not harm the 
environment in Norway and Finland. 
  Ilkka Luotamo from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs borrowed 
Vinogradov's map and used an overhead projector to present it to 
the audience. The immense environmental problems in the St. 
Petersburg area and Karelia will also demand Finnish resources. 
Norway's interest, on the other hand is in the Kola Peninsula, 
where the boundary between the two countries is, Luotamo pointed 
out. 
  Researcher Heidi Hiltunen disputed the assertion that 
pollution coming from the Kola Peninsula would be harmless to 
Lapland. 
  According to Vinogradov, there are too many people in the 
Kola Peninsula when compared to the tolerance capacity of the 
environment--the density of population is many times greater 
than in Lapland. For that reason, relocating retirees, for 
example, in the south, in the St. Petersburg region among other 
places, has been begun. Between 10,000 and 20,000 people move 
south from the Kola Peninsula annually. 
<H5>  Finland Is Primary Source of Support for Estonia </H5>
  ``At this point Finland is the greatest provider of 
environmental support for Estonia,'' said director Tonis Kaasik 
of the Tallinn department of the Stockholm Environmental 
Institute. Almost all of the investment help in environmental 
matters has come from Finland. 
  The Nordic countries have divided the region into zones of 
responsibility, and aiding Estonia has been given to Finland. 
  Of foreign environmental aid, half has gone into protecting 
water resources, and about one-fifth into protecting the 
atmosphere. 
  When Finland, Sweden, and Denmark invest in cleaning up the 
water in Estonia, this investment reduces the pollution burden 
on the Baltic Sea more efficiently than if the same amount were 
used somewhere in the Nordic countries. 


Distribution of Environmental Aid Received by Estonia in Millions of Markkas 

             Investments      Research      Training      Other      Total 

Finland      42.84            3.47          3.67          0.14       50.12 

Denmark      --               17.85         3.90          --         21.75 

Sweden       0.13             10.29         0.13          --         10.55 

United       --               3.53          --            --         3.53 
States 



