BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, April 22 (CTK) -- Slovak Premier Jozef 
Moravcik remains ready for a meeting with Hungarian Premier 
Peter Boross if the meeting contributes in some way to solving 
mutual problems, Moravcik told CTK today. 
  On Thursday [21 April] the Hungarian Foreign Ministry 
expressed regret that Slovakia appeared to have no interest in a 
working meeting of the two premiers. Ministry Spokesman Janos 
Herman said Bratislava had set unacceptable conditions for such 
a meeting. 
  "We specified no conditions for the meeting with Premier 
Boross," Moravcik said today. "We were interested in a 
communique being issued. It would be enough for us if the 
Hungarian side expressed the political will to accept our 
request: To explicitly confirm the pledge to guarantee present 
borders," the Slovak Premier emphasized. 
  The form of the expression was open, and Slovakia was keen 
to 
accept even the loosest formulation, he said. He said he felt 
the guaranteeing of borders was self-evident and could not cause 
anybody a problem. 
  He rejected the claim that Slovakia had decided to wait 
until 
the September elections were over before contemplating a meeting. 
  "From the point of view of solving our problems we do not 
regard parliamentary elections as an obstacle. We don't attach 
special significance to them. Whatever happens in the elections 
in Hungary or here, the governments on either side still have to 
resolve existing problems, which are of vital importance to both 
sides," Moravcik said. 
  "Both countries want integration in the European Union. But 
no international community is going to gladly grant membership 
to states between which some open questions exist," because 
those imported problems might stir trouble within the 
association, he said. Slovak-Hungarian talks were in the 
objective interests of both sides and would also develop 
bilateral trade, he said. 
  Slovakia and Hungary have not signed a treaty guaranteeing 
the inviolability of present state borders and the status and 
rights of the Hungarian minority. Another difficulty is the 
opening of new border crossings, which Bratislava thus far has 
made conditional upon the signing of a readmission treaty 
returning illegal migrants. 
  Furthermore the states have taken their quarrel over the 
Gabcikovo-Nagymaros hydroelectric project on the Danube to the 
International Court of Justice at The Hague, and the two 
countries have still not reached agreement on the division of 
the Danube waters between the old river course and the Gabcikovo 
canal. 

