BFN 

<F P=106> [Announcer-read report over video] </F>
  [Excerpts] The Council of Europe Ministerial Committee 
meeting has ended in Strasbourg. Zerrin Ozkazanc from the 
Turkish Radio and Television [TRT] team in Strasbourg reports 
the following: 
  [Ozkazanc] At the meeting Turkey has extended its full 
support to the applications made by Albania and the countries in 
the Caucasus to become members of the Council of Europe. 
[passage omitted] 
  In a statement to the TRT after the meeting, Foreign 
Minister 
Hikmet Cetin said that with the protocol signed today the 
European Human Rights Declaration will have a new structure that 
will be more comprehensive and effective. He added that Turkish 
workers, who are faced with racism and xenophobia especially in 
Germany, should be accepted as national minorities. He made the 
following statement to the TRT on membership applications to the 
Council of Europe and the expansion of the Council: 
  [Cetin] Within the framework of this expansion, we explained 
that we view Russia's membership in the Council of Europe 
positively. We also explained, however, that in addition to 
Russia there are countries such as Ukraine and Moldova and that 
relations with these countries should be developed in that 
direction as well. The membership of the countries in the 
Caucasus, which we consider to be part of Europe, depends, to a 
great extent on the solution of the disputes in that region. On 
this issue, we explained that Armenian attacks should definitely 
be stopped and repelled because so long as foreign territories 
are occupied and so long as the principle of changing borders 
through the use of force remains valid membership is extremely 
difficult. Council of Europe principles should, therefore, be 
implemented in that region. I have also said that the Council 
should cooperate with and aid the regional countries, namely 
Azerbaijan, Armenia, and Georgia, to help them become ready for 
membership. 
  Meanwhile, I also explained that Albania is especially 
important, that there are great changes in that country and that 
Albania wants to become a member. I said that this hope should 
be granted to Albania. 

