BFN 

  [Excerpt] Lao PDR [People's Democratic Republic] Prime 
Minister Khamtai Siphandon and Prime Minister Kang Song-san of 
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) expressed 
satisfaction over the growing relations of friendship and 
cooperation between the two countries. 
  This was said at a banquet hosted on the evening of June 3 
at 
the National Assembly Hall by the Lao Prime Minister in honour 
of his visiting DPRK counterpart. 
  Among those attending the banquet on the Lao side were 
Deputy 
Prime Minister and President of the Committee for Planning and 
Cooperation Khamphoui Keoboualapha, Foreign Minister Somsavat 
Lengsavat, National Assembly standing members, ministers and 
members of the Lao Committee in Support of the Peaceful 
Reunification of Korea. 
  Prime Minister Khamtai Siphandon said in his speech, "while 
visiting your beautiful country in December last year, I was 
very pleased to have seen its continued growth. Within 46 years 
alone, the Korean people boosted their spirit of self-reliance, 
building their own strength based on the Juche [self-reliance] 
idea and overcoming various difficulties and obstacles, hence 
enabling the DPRK, once a poor and backward country, to become 
the socialist one with increasingly advanced agriculture, 
industry and technical science." He added that these 
achievements were evidence of the capable and wise leadership of 
the Workers' Party of Korea with the Korean people's Great 
Leader Kim Il-song as the head. 
  He also said that the current visit by the DPRK government 
delegation came at a time when the Lao people were focusing 
their efforts on implementing the comprehensive renovation 
policy of the party as well as the state socioeconomic 
development plan for the period towards the year 2000, designed 
to further build and develop the people's democratic regime and 
raise the living standard of the people, making the country 
stronger and wealthier. He stressed that the task was certain to 
be successful thanks to the unity of the Lao people, who are 
one-minded and resolute in advancing along their chosen path, 
and to valuable experience gained from more than ten years of 
national defence and development combined with support from 
close and distant friendly countries. 
  He said, "this afternoon, we both expressed our will to 
further work towards closer and more fruitful friendly relations 
and cooperation between the Lao PDR and the DPRK." The Lao Prime 
Minister also confirmed Laos' consistent support for the Korean 
people's just cause of safeguarding and building their socialist 
fatherland on the northern part and of reunifying their country 
by peaceful means as well as making the Korean peninsula a 
peaceful, stable and nuclear-free zone. 
  On his part, Prime Minister Kang Song-san expressed deep 
thanks to the Lao government for extending warm hospitality to 
him and his delegation during their visit. He said, "we visited 
your country to further strengthen the relationship and 
cooperation between our two countries." He added that in recent 
years, delegations in more fields from the two countries have 
met and visited each other, he said. 
  The DPRK Prime Minister added, "we are very pleased to have 
visited the Lao PDR, a fraternal country, and to have seen with 
our own eyes actual achievements your people have scored in the 
task of building the new regime. Now the Lao people have greatly 
achieved the implementation of the socioeconomic development 
till the year 2000 for the prosperity of the country under the 
correct leadership of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party." 
  Speaking of the national development in his country, he said 
the Korean people are now realizing a policy of turning 
agriculture, industry and trade into priority areas, and are 
striving to achieve peaceful reunification of their country 
through setting up a federation based on the principle of 
national independence under the clear sighted leadership of both 
Great Leader Kim Il-song and Dear Leader Kim Jong-il. 
  He also said that from now on they would do their best to 
step up solidarity and friendship with the people of Asia as 
well as with the people of Laos. [passage omitted] 

