Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by journalist Pavel Zybin: ``Do We Need </F>
Antarctica?''--first paragraph is IZVESTIYA introduction] 
  [Text] With the arrival of autumn, when the time to send 
the next Antarctic expedition on its way is coming, many people 
are asking themselves this question over and over again. Is it 
not too great a luxury for the country, whose economy is 
experiencing far from the best of times, to allow itself such 
expensive projects? 
  In the words of Valeriy Kalatskiy, first deputy chief of the 
Federal Service of Russia for Hydrometeorology and Environmental 
Monitoring, even from a purely economical standpoint it is 
necessary to preserve the Russian scientific stations in 
Antarctica. 
  Such enormous work has now been done that for Russia it is 
more advantageous to complete it and not to give it up and then 
start all over again. At the Vostok continental station a hole 
2,751 meters deep has already been drilled, unique scientific 
data, the value of which it is difficult to overestimate, have 
been obtained. So much money has already been invested in this 
project that if the station is shut down, the losses will prove 
to be greater than the assets which it remained to invest. 
  This year Rosgidromet [the Federal Service of Russia for 
Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring] is not receiving 
the full financing of the expedition. However, life is making it 
incumbent to enter the market, scientists are not only going 
about with an outstretched hand. In accordance with bilateral 
understandings with the United States it is succeeding in 
financing in part the research in Antarctica. Another two 
intergovernmental agreements with Chile and Italy on the 
conducting of research in Antarctica with the use of the Russian 
scientific and material potential have now been prepared. It is 
a matter, first of all, of the Vostok station--one of two that 
are located in the center of Antarctica. These agreements are 
making it possible to partially finance the expedition. And 
nevertheless there is not enough money, because financing is 
being carried out with a delay. The prices for fuel, for 
example, have increased by nearly tenfold, while the indexing of 
expenditures is being carried out with a coefficient of 1.8. 
  Now five operating stations out of eight remain. But it is 
necessary to recover somehow from the situation. If in the 
immediate future it is not possible to settle the question of 
financing, the Vostok station will have to be shut down, 
inasmuch as there is practically no fuel left there. Precisely 
the question of the delivery of fuel is now ``bringing to a 
standstill'' the entire expedition. 
  But Vostok is a unique station. If we lose it, we will lose 
not only the material support of foreign partners, but also 
scientific data, which are so necessary. Work is being performed 
here under the ozone layer monitoring program, the deep drilling 
of the glacial cover, which here is nearly the greatest on 
earth, is being carried out. 
  These data are necessary for the making of a forecast, on 
the 
basis of which decisions on the reaction of the decrease of the 
ozone layer and the change of the climate, behind which lie 
enormous material expenditures on the scale of the country, will 
be made at the state level. But this is not so much a scientific 
question as it is an economic one. 
  One must also not forget that as a result of geological 
research in Antarctica mineral deposits were discovered. To 
ignore this means not to care about the future, to say nothing 
of the international obligations of Russia and our prestige. 


