CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Rolf Helmueller: "Electric Drives for Local </F>
Public Transportation Vehicles--Automatic Single Push-Button 
Battery Exchange--Automated Charging Stations to Allow Scheduled 
Service by Battery-Driven Busses"] 
  [Text] Automated battery exchange stations make it 
possible to use battery-operated busses for scheduled service. 
Electric busses can be used for scheduled service only if these 
exchange station are designed so that they require no physical 
strength and a bus driver can use them without difficulty. Bob 
Lee, technical director of "Neoplan" Gottlob Auwaerter GmbH, 
Stuttgart, is convinced that this is possible. At the 
conference, "Electric Drives for Local Public Transportation 
Vehicles" in Aachen on 24 March, he stated that this system 
provides the technology for 24-hour service. 
  He also stated that the mobility of the battery-charging 
stations which "Neoplan" developed together with battery 
manufacturer Varta is the key for scheduled bus service using 
electric busses. The charging station can be placed at any 
location and require only a few square meters of space. Due to 
their container format they can be relocated by any truck 
suitable for container transport, Bob Lee explained at the VDE 
conference in Aachen. This makes it possible to use this lead 
traction battery with armor-plate technology and electrolytic 
conversion wherever it is needed. According to the vehicle 
manufacturer's managing director even a change in the bus route 
layout would not be a problem. The limited range of scheduled 
busses,, as well as the recharging time of 5 to 6 hours, would 
not be a factor with the new mobile system. 
  A typical scheduled service cycle, for instance, covers 
approximately 140 km per 10-hour day. According to Bob Lee, no 
currently available standard battery is able to provide the 
necessary power without a recharging time of several hours. Even 
quick and partial charging methods require downtimes which are 
not acceptable for scheduled bus service. 
  With the battery exchange system presented the bus will 
drive 
approximately 40 km--approximately seven trips on a 5-km long 
route--and then stop at an exchange station positioned along the 
route. Two roller band arms from the station will be attached to 
the bus. When the driver pushes a button, the empty battery is 
taken up by the roller bands and moved from the bus to an empty 
charging bay in the exchange station. When another button is 
pushed a charged battery is transported into the bus. "This does 
not take longer than a stop at a gas station", states Dr. Rainer 
Bittihn, head of systems development in the Varta industrial 
batteries division, Kelkheim. He explained that this is the 
reason why the complete system consisting of bus battery and 
exchange system has met with broad acceptance among operators 
and bus drivers during many actual demonstrations. 
  In its standard version the battery exchange container with 
a 
footprint of 2.5 x 6.0 m can accept up to four batteries which 
will be charged simultaneously. Two two-level shelves and a 
lifting table on a loading area are provided. A separate room 
houses a corresponding number of chargers and the water supply 
for the "Varta-Aquamatiksystem." As an example, five batteries 
are required to ensure uninterrupted service of two busses from 
6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
  According to Rainer Bittihn this concept can also be used 
for 
the local distribution of goods. Smaller, battery-driven trucks 
would accept the goods from heavy trucks or trains at centers 
close to downtown and distribute them throughout the city. The 
centers could also be used as exchange stations. According to 
battery expert Bittihn, the prerequisites for such a system are 
already present; to put it into practice requires "nothing but 
the commitment and decision by politicians". 


