SUMMARY 

                             Beijing has gone on the record with a "serious protest" over 
Washington's decision to cut import quotas for textiles from 
China for its illegal transshipments of textiles.  Although the 
measured language of the 7 January authoritative protest 
indicates that Beijing does not want to poison the atmosphere of 
Sino-U.S. relations, subsequent low-level media commentary on the 
U.S. decision suggests that Beijing plans to take a tough line at 
the upcoming round of textile talks, which begin on 15 January. 
It also appears that Beijing may be willing to accept 
deterioration in other trade areas with Washington if the textile 
talks do not go well. 
                      END SUMMARY 
   Beijing's special concern over Washington's action was conveyed 
in a "serious protest (yanzhong kangyi)" lodged by a spokesman of 
the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation (MOFTEC) 
to register its objections to the U.S. decision to significantly 
cut import quotas for Chinese textiles (Xinhua, 7 January).  In 
the past, Beijing has generally responded to U.S. decisions to 
take trade actions against China by issuing either just a 
"protest" or a "strong protest."  For example, Beijing used a 
"strong protest" to denounce Washington's August 1993 decision to 
impose economic sanctions on China for violating the Missile 
Technology Control Regime (MTCR) and selling missile technology 
to Pakistan (Xinhua, 27 August 1993), while the August 1984 
announcement by the U.S. Custom Service of new "country of 
origin" rules affecting Chinese textiles, which Beijing denounced 
as a "clear violation" of the Multi-Fiber Agreement, was 
"protested" in a letter from the PRC Ambassador to the United 
States to the U.S. Government (Xinhua, 19 August 1984). 
   While the current "serious protest" clearly reflects Beijing's 
desire to formally register its objections to the quota cuts, the 
contents of Beijing's authoritative response appears to reflect a 
desire to limit the damage to the bilateral relationship.  For 
example, the language of the 7 January "serious protest" was 
relatively mild, merely characterizing the U.S. decision as 
"irresponsible" and eschewing the harsher language used in last 
summer's protest, which said that the U.S. decision to impose 
economic sanctions on China for violating the MTCR would "break 
or destroy (po huai)" Sino-U.S. relations.  The 7 January protest 
also failed to use formulations customarily employed in Chinese 
protests over the past decade--"harmed (sunhai)" or "seriously 
harmed (yanzhong sunhai)"--to assess the impact of the U.S. 
decision on bilateral ties.  Instead the current protest noted 
only that the decision would "seriously influence (yanzhong 
yingxiang) Sino-U.S. economic and trade" ties.  While the protest 
threatened "appropriate retaliatory measures," it also 
underscored China's willingness to first try to resolve the 
problem through negotiations. 
   Tough Line Reaffirmed 
   The circumspection evident in Beijing's authoritative response to 
the U.S. quota cuts has been lacking in the harder hitting, 
lower-level media commentary indicating that China has not 
tempered the tough line on the United States it took last summer. 
For example, a 7 January Xinhua report assessing the decision 
quoted an official of the Chinese National Textile Council as 
characterizing Washington's "headstrong action" in cutting 
China's quota's as a "kind of power politcs, coercing the Third 
World countries with its economic supremacy."  The tough line on 
Sino-U.S. ties was also evident in a 9 January "commentator's" 
article in MOFTEC's paper Guoji Shangbao that called the U.S. 
decision "unwise" and warned that United States "should not 
imagine" that its actions can "force China to yield," noting that 
the Chinese people have "never bowed to any external pressure." 
A "special article" carried by the PRC-owned Hong Kong-based 
press agency Zhongguo Tongxun She on 14 January went even further 
in criticizing the decision.  Describing the upcoming Sino-U.S. 
textile negotiations as a "final showdown," the article said that 
the negotiations had only a "fifty-fifty" chance of success. 
Scoring the United States for "brandishing the big stick of 
hegemonism" and trying to "overpower" China before the talks 
begin by dealing Beijing a "head-on blow," the article warned 
that China is not a "weakling" and is "unlikely to give into 
American pressure."  The article went on to suggest that Beijing 
is willing to accept a deterioration in Sino-U.S. trade, stating 
that if the United States cuts China's quotas then the PRC will 
"retaliate by stopping or reducing the purchase of American 
agricultural and industrial products." 
(AUTHOR:  HEBBEL.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
CHINA ANALYSIS TEAM, (703) 733-6097.) 
EAG/BIETZ CS 14/2106z jan 

