Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Li Peng: "Implement the System of Mayor's </F>
Responsibility for Making the `Vegetable Basket' Project a 
Success"; originally published in the 1994 issue No. 6 of 
QIUSHI; Beijing XINHUA Domestic Service in Chinese at 0230 GMT 
on 16 March transmits a service message noting that the article 
is Li Peng's speech at the national "vegetable basket," grain, 
cotton and edible oil work conference on 27 January 1994] 
  [Text] Beijing, 16 Mar (XINHUA) -- The party Central 
Committee and the State Council have always attached great 
importance to rural work and have adopted a series of measures 
to strengthen rural work in these years. The party Central 
Committee held a rural work conference in October 1993 and 
arranged for the 1994 rural work. Generally speaking, our 
present situation of agricultural production and market supply 
is good. We have reaped bumper harvests for several consecutive 
years. In 1993, while only the outputs of cotton and sugar 
crops decreased, the outputs of grain, oil-bearing crops, meat, 
eggs, and aquatic products increased and the "vegetable basket" 
work yielded remarkable results. Total supply of farm products, 
particularly food, which suffered long shortages in the past, 
has become relatively ample. Particularly since the 
establishment of the special grain reserve system in 1990, the 
state has had a sizable amount of reserve grain in its hands. 
The governments at all levels have attached great importance to 
the "vegetable basket" work in these years. The market supply 
of agricultural and sideline products is stable and big problems 
are unlikely. The broad masses of the people in both urban and 
rural areas have personal experience of these achievements and 
are satisfied with them. 
  However, despite such a good situation, since last November, 
some problems occurred in the supply of grain, edible oil, and 
nonstaple food in some regions. Rice prices in some southern 
areas increased by a fairly large margin, and a trend of large 
increase in vegetable prices occurred in some large and medium 
cities. Then, the commodity price increases spread from these 
areas to many other areas across the country, caused a bigger 
reaction among urban residents, and attracted the great 
attention of the party Central Committee and State Council. We 
worked on these problems for a time, strengthened macroeconomic 
regulation and control, and marketed some state reserve grain. 
Excessive grain and edible oil prices have dropped and the 
vegetable prices' increasing trend has been curbed. Why these 
problems happened is a question which merits our pondering. 
There are many causes for these problems. In addition to 
objective causes, such as an unsound market system, I think that 
the biggest lesson we have learned is that our leaders at 
various levels lack a clear understanding and experience in 
whether or not it remains necessary to exercise macroeconomic 
regulation and control under the new situation of relaxed price 
controls. The development of a socialist market economy does 
not mean the complete decontrol of commodity prices. Both our 
own and foreign experience prove that large commodity price 
increases are detrimental to reform and development. This 
conference is held to unify our thinking and understanding, sum 
up experience and lessons, and take a further step to make the 
"vegetable basket" work and the grain, cotton and edible oil 
work meet the requirements of socialist market economic 
structure. 
<H3>  1. Governments at all levels should be very much concerned 
about and pay attention to improving the people's living 
standards. </H3>
  In the economic work during the course of advancing to a 
modern, powerful socialist country, we should always pay 
attention to two major tasks -- the task of feeding the people 
and the task of construction -- and correctly handle the 
relationship between the two. Feeding the people means solving 
the people's livelihood problems, which is a major task that 
governments at all levels must perform well. We must unify our 
thinking and understanding with this task in mind; strive to do 
good "vegetable basket," grain, cotton, and edible oil work; and 
maintain a sufficient market supply and relatively stable prices. 
  Our government is the people's government, and the purpose 
of the people's government is to wholeheartedly serve the 
people. To be concerned about the people's vital interests at 
all times is bound duty of our governments at all levels. 
Grain, cotton, edible oil, and nonstaple food are the basic 
necessities of the people's livelihood. We used to say fuel 
wood, rice, edible oil, salt, soy sauce, vinegar, and tea were 
our seven daily necessities. Today, we should add vegetable as 
another necessity and as the top necessity. At present, the 
income of most of our people in both urban and rural areas is 
still quite low and their food expenses still account for a 
large proportion of their total consumption expenses. Under 
such a situation, the prices of grain, edible oil, meat, 
vegetables, eggs, aquatic products, and other major food items 
have a direct bearing on the people's consumption level. If 
food prices are too high, urban and rural residents will have to 
increase their basic living expenses and reduce other spendings, 
and their actual living standards will be affected. 
  Our party and government are the representatives of the 
people's interests. We should take constant improvement of the 
people's living standards as the objective of all our work. 
Since we are elected by the people, we should protect their 
interests. A very important one of the three causes in the 
"conduciveness to three causes" stressed by Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping is improving the people's living standards [the other 
two are developing the productive forces of our socialist 
society and strengthening the overall capacity of our socialist 
country]. The governments at all levels should first strive to 
meet the basic needs of all the people, and then keep improving 
their living standards. Only after we solve well the problem 
concerning the people's livelihood which they are most concerned 
about, will they support us and listen to what the party and 
government say. The solution of the problems concerning the 
production and supply of vegetable, grain, cotton, and edible 
oil is indeed a very important matter and we must not treat it 
lightly. 
  To correctly handle the relationship among reform, 
development, and stability is the principle which we must pursue 
to do good "vegetable basket," grain, cotton, and edible oil 
work. To maintain social stability is the precondition for 
deepening reform and promoting development, while to do good 
"vegetable basket," grain, cotton, and edible oil work is of 
great significance to maintaining social stability. This is a 
year in which we will take a major step in reform of economic 
structure. A smooth proceeding of the reform requires us to 
maintain social stability and reassure the people. A sharp 
commodity price increase will make people worry, cause social 
instability, obstruct the smooth proceeding of reform, and 
affect the overall situation of economic development. While the 
broad masses of the people are the main force for reform, no 
reform can succeed without the people's support. Of all 
commodities, what the people could feel most directly is the 
fluctuation of major food prices, such as those of grain, edible 
oil, meat, vegetable, eggs, milk, and aquatic products. We must 
make great efforts to maintain a relative stability in the 
prices of grain, edible oil, and major nonstaple food so as to 
consolidate and enhance the current social situation of 
stability and unity. 
  In deepening reform, we must simultaneously consider the 
interests of all strata in urban and rural areas. Reform 
conforms to the fundamental interests of the broad masses of the 
people, and they have indeed enjoyed huge practical benefits of 
reform in the last decade and more. However, a fact during the 
course of reform is that not every strata and everyone enjoys 
the same interest and benefit at the same time. For this 
reason, we in our work should show special concern for those who 
have not yet become well-off, or even are still leading a quite 
difficult life. To further arouse the peasants' enthusiasm for 
production, it is necessary to properly raise the purchase 
prices of grain and cotton, and the higher prices will benefit 
the peasants. However, higher prices of agricultural and 
sideline products will yield a certain impact on some low-income 
urban residents, particularly the workers and staff members of 
those enterprises that have completely or partially suspended 
production, students of colleges and secondary vocational 
schools, retired personnel, and people in poor regions and 
disaster-stricken regions. Governments at all levels should take 
effective measures and make efforts to help the low-income 
people overcome difficulties in livelihood and ensure that their 
basic needs in life are met. 
  2. Ensure an Ample Supply of Commodities and Build a 
Big Circulation Setup 
  Developing production and enlivening circulation are basic 
conditions for maintaining an abundant supply of nonstaple food, 
grain, cotton, and edible oil in the market and for maintaining 
the relative stability of prices. Developing production 
constitutes the foundation for ensuring the supply of nonstaple 
food, grain, cotton, and edible oil. In other words, vegetable 
plots are the guarantee for filled shopping bags. Due to the 
restraints of natural conditions, it is impossible for a given 
locality to be self-sufficient in everything. Localities, large 
and medium-sized cities in particular, must foster the idea of 
large-scale production. They should -- while increasing the 
necessary capacity for self-sufficiency -- develop regional 
cooperation, build production bases through coordinated efforts, 
and forge stable relations between production and marketing in 
order to ensure balanced market supply, make up shortfalls in 
off seasons, and optimize the product-mix. We must not make the 
mistake of neglecting it all year round and starting panic 
buying everywhere when a shortfall in supply emerges, triggering 
price hikes in the market. Localities must set aside special 
funds for construction of nonstaple food, grain, cotton, and 
edible oil production bases, increase input, and speed up the 
pace of construction. Modern technology -- including plastic 
sheeting, the use of straw compost to fertilize farmland, 
sprinkling and trickle irrigation, mechanized hog and chicken 
farming, fish farming, manufacturing of compound feed, the use 
of solar energy, and introduction of fine strains from other 
regions or overseas -- should be utilized in building the 
production bases. We should increase output, improve quality, 
reduce cost, and improve efficiency by way of technical progress. 
  While working vigorously to develop production, we must 
establish a big commodity circulation setup and an operating 
mechanism promoting overall balance, free flow of goods, and 
flexible operation. Nationwide, the problem facing us today is 
not shortages but a lack of transport capacity to ship the goods 
to the marketing regions in a timely fashion, creating 
overstocking in producing regions and shortages in marketing 
areas. Governments in all localities must attach importance to 
the construction of transportation, storage, preservation, and 
other basic circulation facilities to facilitate the shipment of 
vegetables from the south to the north, and grain from the north 
to the south and from the central regions to the west. We must 
truly ensure the free flow of commodities and closely link 
production regions with marketing regions. The Ministries of 
Agriculture and Internal Trade, and other relevant departments 
must continue their support for engineering projects related to 
the "vegetable basket" with funds, technology, and materials. 
Governments in all localities must take further steps to remove 
all kinds of obstacles to circulation and sternly crack down on 
gangsters and thugs in the transportation sector. Except for a 
small number of essential checkpoints approved by the provincial 
government, all other checkpoints must be dismantled. Railway 
and other transport departments must give priority to the 
shipment of farm products. Large and medium-sized cities must 
create conditions to attract out-of-town vegetable growers to 
market their produce in the city by ensuring their safety and 
fair trade. 
  3. Develop Agriculture and Sideline Product Markets, 
and Improve Market Administration 
  To do a good job in the production and supply of nonstaple 
food, grain, and edible oil, it is necessary to pay attention to 
market construction and the establishment of a network which 
combines agricultural product markets, centered on wholesale 
markets, with retailers. This important experience was gained 
by some of the large and medium-sized cities which have achieved 
results in building "vegetable basket" projects in recent years. 
Today, China has a considerable number of wholesale markets 
that are playing a positive role. However, the development of 
agricultural product markets still falls short of the needs of 
economic development and the people's livelihood. A lot remains 
to be done. Governments at all levels should upgrade, expand, 
or perfect the existing wholesale markets in a planned way and 
build a number of regional wholesale markets of agricultural 
products. The state plans to build several central-level 
wholesale markets for agricultural products in key producing 
regions and major cities in the next few years. We will try to 
build a network of wholesale markets composed of central, 
regional, and local wholesale markets, and develop a unified, 
nationwide market to bring about nationwide circulation of 
commodities. 
  Under the conditions of decontrolled operations, governments 
at all levels must pay particular attention to market 
management. Lifting controls to enliven operations does not mean 
washing our hands of the operations. In terms of the 
characteristics of production and marketing, agricultural 
products -- sideline products in particular -- involve 
considerable risks; on the other hand, they are essential, 
sensitive commodities in the market that have a direct impact on 
the people's livelihood. As such, they are unlikely to remain 
stable if left to the spontaneous regulation of the market 
alone. For this reason, the more restrictions are lifted to 
enliven the market, the greater efforts we should make to 
improve market administration. 
  Lack of a standard system for market transactions, lack of 
market order, and assorted deceitful practices that are found in 
the marketplace -- these are conspicuous problems facing the 
agricultural product markets in many localities and in large and 
medium-sized cities. These harmful factors have severely 
affected normal trading in the market. We must adopt effective 
measures to solve them. We must sternly crack down on illegal 
elements who manipulate the market, speculate or jack up prices, 
produce or sell substandard or fake merchandise, entrap people 
or swindle them, or commit other illegal acts. We should cut 
down the intermediate links in the chain of circulation to the 
benefit of the producers and consumers. Industrial, commercial, 
public security, railway, and transportation departments must 
closely coordinate with each other to take concerted action and 
ensure a notable improvement in market order and maintain a good 
market order indefinitely. 
<H3>  4. Put in Place Effective Means for Exercising Macroeconomic 
Regulation and Control </H3>
  The degree of maturity of the market economy is closely 
linked to macroeconomic regulation and control. A mature market 
economic system must have efficient ways to exercise 
macroeconomic regulation and control to meet the needs of 
economic development. It is entirely correct to lift price 
controls. Under no circumstances, however, should we let up 
macroeconomic regulation and control. In exercising 
macroeconomic regulation and control, we use chiefly economic 
and legal means, but that does not rule out administrative means 
when necessary. At present, the following three tasks should be 
grasped in the regulation and control of farm products in our 
country: 
  First, it is necessary to establish a reserve system of 
grain, cotton, oil, meat, and sugar. Agricultural output is 
affected by whether and supply often goes up and down. It is 
therefore necessary to store up appropriate reserves to regulate 
supply and balance market supply and demands. The recent 
fluctuation in grain prices taught us this importance lesson: 
"With grain in our hands, our hearts will not panic." It tells 
us how important it is to have grain reserves. Grain is a daily 
necessity and grain prices have a broad impact. A sharp rise in 
grain prices will lead to price rises in other commodities. 
When we have ample grain reserves, we will be able to stabilize 
prices. This time grain prices across the country were brought 
down after the State Grain Reserve Administration sold only a 
limited amount of grain. The central and local authorities 
should establish a reserve system of grain, cotton, oil, meat, 
and sugar with determination. More efforts should be made to 
improve the administration and use of reserves. It is necessary 
to make a distinction between policy reserves, and operational 
and working reserves. 
  Second, it is necessary to establish a risk fund system for 
grain and sideline products. A decision in this regard was made 
at the Central Conference on Rural Work and the National Work 
Conference on the "Vegetable Basket" last year. According to 
the decision, all the savings of central and local authorities 
from the abolition of subsidies for grain, meat, and vegetables 
should be channeled to the grain and nonstaple food risk fund. 
Moreover, more capital should be raised from other sources to 
expand the system to an appropriate scale. The risk fund should 
serve as a mechanism and be used in a rollover cycle way so that 
it can grow continuously. The risk fund should be used mainly 
to stabilize prices and protect the producers' interests. 
  Third, it is necessary to establish a system of supervising 
and controlling agricultural and sideline product markets, and 
to improve information networks for agricultural and sideline 
products. Good information can help promote production and set 
people's minds at rest. Correct information can be used by the 
government as a scientific basis for enforcing effective 
macrocontrol. Since November last year, the sale price of grain 
and edible oil rose by a great extent in some locales and people 
rushed to purchase food products. One of the lessons we learned 
was that concerned departments did not foresee the problem and 
did not take prompt action. Commercial and grain departments 
should consider the work of watching the market and stabilizing 
prices as their constant task. They should play the state 
commercial outlets' role as the main channel of supply at 
critical moments. In the course of implementing the new tax 
system, the financial and taxation departments should study ways 
to formulate measures to assist state- owned and collective 
enterprises engaged in the operation of grain, edible oil, and 
other supplementary food products; and actively support them in 
fulfilling the tasks of stabilizing commodity prices and 
ensuring ample supply of foodstuffs in the market. 
<H5>  5. Further Implement the Mayors' Responsibility System </H5>
  Judging from the characteristics of commodities, we can see 
that meat, poultry, eggs, and vegetables are different from 
grain and edible oil. Grain and edible oil can be stored for a 
long time, transported to and from distant places, and can even 
be imported to adjust the market situation. Supplementary food 
products are mostly fresh and perishable items, and cannot be 
stored for a long time. People want to use them daily. The 
characteristics of supplementary food products tell us that the 
solution to the problem of supplementary food products must 
mainly fall on local governments. I have repeatedly stressed the 
"vegetable basket" problem should be tackled by governments at 
various localities, especially large and medium cities, and the 
system of linking mayors' job responsibility to targets should 
be implemented. Making proper arrangements for people's daily 
life is a mayors' primary duty and the most important thing in 
stabilizing the whole situation. When a city cannot provide 
residents with ample "vegetable basket" commodities at 
relatively stable prices, we will not question the provincial 
governor or vice mayors but will investigate the mayor. This is 
because a mayor is the highest administrative official in a city 
and has the means and power to adjust the use of manpower, 
materials, and funds to guarantee the production and supply of 
supplementary food products. This point should be included in 
the system of linking mayors' job responsibility to targets. We 
should evaluate the mayors' work each year and report the 
evaluation results to city people's congresses and the people. 
  How can a mayor do a good job in the "vegetable basket" 
project? The most important thing is to ensure an overall 
balance of demand and supply of supplementary food products. 
Various large and medium cities should take up responsibility 
to ensure an overall balance of demand and supply. It is 
necessary to ensure a balance of demand and supply in normal 
times, and it is even more necessary to ensure a balance of 
demand and supply of supplementary food products in off seasons. 
We should see to it that peasants are enthusiastic about 
producing vegetables because they obtain relatively high 
benefits. The problem is that we should, through the market 
mechanism, link vegetable farmers with consumers and ensure free 
circulation of supplementary food products. When we talk about 
seeking an overall balance of supply and demand, we do not mean 
large and medium cities should all be self-supporting. Various 
cities should develop production to strenthen their 
self-sustaining ability and can make up for inadequacies by 
obtaining supplementary food products from other places through 
market mechanisms. Mayors of large and medium cities should 
effectively shoulder this responsibility, take the initiative to 
do a good job, and discover and solve problems in a prompt 
manner. We must never wait and solve problems after they happen 
because in this way our losses will be too large. It is 
necessary to guarantee the area of required vegetable gardens 
and strictly forbid wanton occupation of them. At present, some 
cities occupy too many vegetable gardens for other purposes and 
do not build new ones as replacements. 
  This is the main reason for the short supply of vegetables 
in some locales. We must solve this problem as quickly as 
possible. In city planning and establishing economic 
development zones, we should try our best to avoid the use of 
existing vegetable gardens. If we must utilize existing ones, 
we should till and cultivate new gardens and then use them. In 
building bases for producing supplementary food products, 
various large and medium cities should, according to needs, 
establish stable cooperation with other places in producing and 
marketing supplementary food products. In solving the problem 
of vegetable production, it is necessary to gradually form a 
pattern of laying stress on producing vegetables on the 
outskirts of cities, using suburban areas as supplementary 
vegetable production bases, and adjusting supplies with other 
localities. 
  We must be determined to establish a fund for building 
vegetable production bases, a fund for price risk, and a fund 
for building refrigeration storerooms and other facilities. 
When we can ensure the availability of these three kinds of 
funds, we shall be able to guarantee an ample supply of 
vegetables and relatively stable prices in the market. The 
raising of those funds should mainly depend on various locales. 
So long as we strictly control the scale of capital 
construction, open less development zones and build less real 
estate projects, we will not have much difficulty in raising 
these three kinds of funds. 
  Not long ago, Comrade Jiang Zemin emphatically pointed out: 
Party committees and governments at all levels should attach 
great importance to the "vegetable basket" project and work 
related to grain, cotton, and edible oil. I am convinced that 
so long as the whole party and governments at all levels attach 
great importance to the work and mayors pay personal, close 
attention to the work, we can certainly improve it further. 

