BFN 

<F P=106> ["Declaration" by the spokesman of the party of Democratic </F>
Kampuchea (DK) dated 4 April; place not given -- read by 
announcer] 
  [Text] 1. The meaning and substance of Vo Van Kiet's visit 
to Phnom Penh can be seen as a dog with its tail amputated. 
Honey words were used to affirm Vietnam's respect for 
Cambodia's sovereignty and to describe the traditional bonds of 
friendship between Vietnam and Cambodia, which have coexisted 
since time immemorial. Many sweet words were also exchanged 
here and there to express greetings. Moreover, a joint 
Vietnamese-Cambodian communique was signed to set up technical 
groups to discuss the border problem and the problem of ethnic 
Vietnamese in Cambodia, with particular emphasis on the presence 
of 50,000 Vietnamese nationals at the Cambodian-Vietnamese 
border. 
  2. What is the small and the large significance of the 
above-mentioned substance? 
  In the smaller sense, it showed that Vo Van Kiet tried to 
woo 
the two-headed government and some segments of international 
opinion that do not clearly understand the Cambodia dilemma. He 
did that with honey words, but deep down he tried to bury and 
conceal problems vital to the survival of the Cambodian nation 
and race. 
  The substance and meaning of this visit could also be very 
profound. Cambodia is currently halfway toward becoming the 
second Kampuchea Kraom [Cambodian territory annexed by Vietnam]. 
We are in possession of many critical pieces of evidence 
similar to Kampuchea Kraom: 
  a. The Vietnamese war of aggression against Cambodia is 
continuing. 
  b. UNTAC [United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia] 
did not control the aggressor Vietnamese forces in Cambodia. 
Consequently, Vietnam could ship Vietnamese nationals and 
Vietnamese troops into Cambodia at will. 
  c. The communist Vietnamese puppet authorities installed by 
communist Vietnam in 1979 remain totally intact and completely 
unchanged. This means that 99 percent of the authorities in 
Phnom Penh remain in place, as do 100 percent of them in the 
countryside. 
  d. Not a single word has been said about the treaties and 
agreements signed between the Vietnamese and their puppets 
between 1979 and 1991, before the Paris peace accord. These 
treaties and agreements chopped off tens of thousands of square 
kilometers of Cambodian territory. 
  e. There are now nearly 4 million ethnic Vietnamese in 
Cambodia, with more coming in. This is half of Cambodia's 
entire population. Such a phenomenon is unprecedented in the 
world. The communist Vietnamese are swallowing up Cambodia with 
impunity and no one has mentioned it. 
  f. The Vietnamese can cross the land border, territorial 
waters, and sea border back and forth freely through Ratanakiri, 
Mondolkiri, Kratie, Kompong Cham, Svay Rieng, Prey Veng, Kandal, 
Takeo, Kampot, and the sea. They have come in by land, via the 
rivers, by sea, and so on. A portion of the Vietnamese have 
come to live permanently in Cambodia, while others come in and 
out daily to fell Cambodian logs, catch Cambodian fish and 
shrimp, and dismantle and take away Cambodian houses, behaving 
just as if they were in Vietnam itself. 
  This is the profound significance of the problem. It 
concerns the survival of the Cambodian nation and race. 
Cambodia is halfway toward becoming another Kampuchea Kraom. 
  3. Through the above-mentioned substance of Vo Van Kiet's 
visit to Phnom Penh, the Cambodian nation and people clearly see 
that, on the one hand, it was an attempt to woo with honey 
words, and on the other hand, it directly concerned the very 
survival of the Cambodian nation and race. Therefore, the 
Cambodian nation and people believe that these issues must be 
solved. If the aggressor Hanoi Vietnamese wish to coexist 
peacefully with the Cambodian people and consider each other 
good neighbors, the aggressor Hanoi Vietnamese must clearly 
settle all the above-mentioned issues. Moreover, all of these 
issues concern not only the survival of the Cambodian nation and 
race but also the stability of the region as a whole. If 
Cambodia is halfway toward becoming the second Kampuchea Kraom, 
or if it already is another Kampuchea Kraom, and if the war 
continues as it is, the countries in the region surely cannot 
accept it. 
  If Cambodia and the Cambodian people oppose it, the 
countries 
and peoples in the region will also oppose it. 
  [Signed) The spokesman of the party of Democratic Kampuchea 
  [Dated] 4 April 1994 

