Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Ivo Grycz: "Democrats"] </F>
  [Text] Gone are the times of the founding of mass parties 
and movements that were born in the hectic atmosphere of 
meetings and whose main goal was represented by a single slogan 
or person. The democrats who after the revolution formed a 
monolithic bloc fighting against something are now searching, 
after the completion of the historic democratic and state legal 
composition processes, for their significance in the decisive 
process of transformation of the state's economy. 
  It is paradoxical how four years after the revolution there 
appears a party for which the ideal of the free citizen is the 
central theme. The creation of the Alliance of Democrats 
testifies to the need to search for dialogue, partnerships, and 
tolerance in politics. At the constitutional congress of this 
Alliance, we would have searched in vain for two rows of desks 
for the chairman and his advisers, delegates bargaining over 
permits for mom-and-pop stores, cheap populist shouting, and the 
shooting down of those in opposition. The tasteful Knazko 
management located the congress in the attractive environment of 
the Hotel Forum, but, in the discussion hall, there was not a 
trace of elitist snobbery--only a serious and material attitude. 
  If we should look for the central idea that forces citizens 
to get back into politics, I guess the most interesting one 
would be the warning by the chairman of the Alliance of 
Democrats, M. Knazko, who sees the method of privatization as 
practiced by the government as a tool for acquiring political 
power. "It is unacceptable that the process whose distributive 
consequences predetermines the social structure for several 
generations should not take place in a transparent environment 
in which there is strict control in maintaining the rules that 
have been agreed upon; it cannot be in an environment of 
Mafia-like spheres of protection in dividing up the state 
property. Underrating the need for the transparency and correct 
nature of this operation can create serious social and political 
tensions." 
  An important feature of the Alliance is also its lack of 
historical boundaries. It rejects a historical interpretation 
and sees the state as an expression of the individuals. From 
this viewpoint, the approach to foreign policy should also 
constantly be derived from a view of what the individual steps 
will bring to the free individual, the citizen. 
  This noncollective and nonnational view of statehood speaks 
of the liberal expression of the Alliance. But the actual 
relationship to statehood distinguishes it from the 
organizations that are historically unreconciled with the 
breakup of the federation, the KDS [Conservative Democratic 
Party] and the DS [Democratic Party] and also the leftist SDSS 
[Social Democratic Party of Slovakia]. The Alliance also wants 
to get rid of historicalizing the subject of the Slovak state in 
politics because it is just this approach that prevents, for 
example, the KDH [Christian Democratic Movement] from closer 
cooperation with the right-wing parties. At the congress, there 
was not a single attack against the HZDS [Movement for a 
Democratic Slovakia] or the SNS [Slovak National Party]--that 
is, the parties of the governmental coalition--to be heard. By 
doing this, the Alliance itself got rid of its resentments, 
which were attributed to it in connection with the breakup of 
the HZDS. Its criticism of the government is to the point and 
always starts from the viewpoint of the legal guarantees of free 
operations in all spheres. The Knazko criticism of the triune 
nature of the government on the financial market is in this case 
grandiloquence. The government is the creator of rules, is 
responsible for keeping to them, and, at the same time, is the 
co-owner of monopolistic financial institutions. According to M. 
Knazko and the Alliance, it is not possible under such 
conditions to have an effectively functioning monetary market, 
which makes a solution more difficult in the fields of 
privatization, indebtedness, and a rational allocation of 
resources. 
  In addition to speeches by a number of foreign guests and 
partners from all of the important Slovak parties (with the 
exception of the HZDS), President M. Kovac also spoke to the 
delegates to the congress. And one must say that he did not 
spare sympathetic remarks. He brought up the question of full 
citizenship, which was the motive force for the development of 
the Western democratic countries. "Citizenship also means 
respect for a person, his vital interests, his creative and 
entrepreneurial activities," said the president. "I get a lot of 
signals that our public institutions so far have not 
incorporated this imperative of the liberal culture." 
  What can we add to this? I guess only that we already have 
democracy and democrats, but we also have a lot of mom-and-pop 
stores and their owners. What we lack is just the alliance of 
the democrats against the tobacconists. It is possible that we 
have begun to search for it at the congress of the party that 
has "Alliance" in its name. 

