Language: <F P=105>Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Yu Mi-yong, chairwoman of the Central Guidance 
Committee of the Korean Chondoist Association, today, released 
the following press statement condemning the South Korean 
authorities for preventing the Panmunjom contact of the 
Chondoist representatives of the North and South for the 
North-South joint commemoration of the 100th anniversary of the 
1894 Peasants War. 
  Press statement by Yu Mi-yong, chairwoman of the Central 
Guidance Committee of the Korean Chondoist Association: 
  Twentieth March marks the 100th anniversary of the 1894 
Peasants War. The ideals "Reject the West and Japan" and 
"Promote national interests and welfare of the people" which our 
Tonghak [Eastern Studies] believers and compatriots from all 
walks of life upheld in the 1894 Peasants War today inspire a 
love for the fatherland and nation among the Chondoists and all 
the fellow countrymen in the North and South. 
  Out of a desire for the North-South joint commemoration of 
the 100th anniversary of the 1894 Peasants War, as agreed 
between me and O Ik-che, head of the South Korean Central Office 
of Chondoism, I sent a telephone message to our counterpart in 
the South on 24 January and proposed a contact of working-level 
Chondoist representatives in Panmunjom on 3 February. 
  If this contact is held and if, as a result, the North and 
South jointly commemorate the 100th anniversary of the 1894 
Peasants War, this will no doubt contribute to ensuring that our 
fellow countrymen will oppose outside forces' intervention, 
achieve national unity, and achieve reunification in the 
nineties. 
  The Chondoists and brothers and sisters in the North and 
South welcomed our proposal that the Chondoist representatives 
of the North and South hold a contact in Panmunjom and expected 
that such contact would take place. However, the contact the 
Chondoist organizations of the North and South agreed on last 
year and have since sought to hold could not be held because of 
the South Korean authorities' unjust intervention and hindrance 
maneuvers. I express my grave regret for this and sternly 
condemn the South Korean authorities' crime -- of preventing 
Panmunjom contact of the Chondoists of the North and South -- 
before all the fellow countrymen. 
  The South Korean rulers aborted [yusan sikigo] the Panmunjom 
contact and prevented the North-South joint commemoration of the 
100th anniversary of the 1894 Peasants War this time. This is 
in no way justified. 
  For the Chondoist organizations of the North and South to 
hold a contact to jointly commemorate the 100th anniversary of 
the 1894 Peasants War is part of the independent civilian 
dialogue. And, the authorities have no reason to intervene, and 
must not do so. 
  However, without knowing its own place, the puppet South 
Korean authorities unhesitatingly committed an arrogant, 
uncourteous act of intervening into even the contact of the two 
sides' Chondoist representatives and having the two sides' 
agreement -- to hold contact in early February -- scrapped. 
  Moreover, the South Korean authorities used the nonexistent 
nuclear issue as an excuse to prevent a national event for 
upholding the patriotic spirit which the peasants and other 
uprisers displayed 100 years ago. We cannot but say this is a 
very shameless sophism. 
  They linked the commemoration to the so-called nuclear 
issue. 
This clearly shows they are making every effort to break up 
[pagi] the Panmunjom contact of the Chondoists of the North and 
South and prevent all the fellow countrymen from jointly 
commemorating the 100th anniversary of the 1894 Peasants War. 
  They prevented the contact of the Chondoists of the North 
and 
South for holding functions on the 100th anniversary of the 1894 
Peasants War, in which a pannational struggle was waged under 
the ideals "Reject the West and Japan" and "Promote national 
interests and welfare of the people." This again clearly shows 
the so-called civilian regime is a fascist regime and a 
treacherous group in every way. 
  As public opinion at home and abroad has already denounced, 
the Kim Yong-sam ring prevented reunification soccer games of 
university students of the North and South, prevented a while 
ago the visit to express condolence on the death of Reverend Mun 
Ik-hwan, a patriot who aspires for reunification, and even 
obstructed the joint holding of functions on the 100th 
anniversary of the 1894 Peasants War which was fought to defend 
national spirits. This proves the Kim Yong-sam ring is an 
antinational brigandish group [panminjok burhandang] that has no 
courtesy and does not pay due respects to the ancestors. 
  The Kim Yong-sam ring prevents visits and meetings among 
fellow countrymen, even while bringing outside forces, against 
whom fellow countrymen have a grudge, into South Korea. Those 
political swindlers reign over the South Korean Chondoists and 
people. This is a shame no one can tolerate. 
  The puppet Kim Yong-sam regime, which South Korean people do 
not trust, must be removed and overthrown [chegodoeoya hamyo 
tagodoeoya] as a matter of course. 
  I expect the South Korean Chondoists and people from all 
walks of life will have no illusion about the puppet Kim 
Yong-sam regime, display high patriotic spirits just like the 
participants in the 1894 Peasants War, overthrow [tado] the Kim 
Yong-sam ring, which turns its back on the nation and lives 
while licking at outside forces' hands, and build a genuine 
independent, democratic regime. 

