BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by 'Adil Hammudah: "The Government's Absence"] </F>
  [Excerpts] [Passage omitted] Terrorism, which disfigures 
Egypt's image, did not only expose the harshness and crudeness 
of the enemies of the country at home and abroad it also exposed 
the government's impotence, absence, and inability. 
  Terrorism has exposed the erosion of government bureaucracy, 
the accumulation of its mistakes, the conflicts of its members, 
and its failure to control its parties. Every official does 
what he likes. He is only concerned about himself and his 
position. As long as the danger is far away from him, others 
can go to hell. As long as he thinks that he will escape with 
his own skin, he does not mind if the flood engulfs everyone 
else. 
  The recently uncovered case proves that terrorists are 
acting 
freely, taking advantage of the government's absence. Arms and 
explosives depots surround the capital and the government is 
unaware. Underground prisons are built by the extremists in 
preparation for the kidnapping and imprisonment of hostages to 
be traded for their leaders in prison, and the government is 
unaware. Terrorists disguised as municipal workers dig 12 meters 
under Salah Salim Street in a sensitive area in preparation for 
filling a tunnel with explosives, and the government is unaware. 
Neither the Cairo governor nor the neighborhood leaders, the 
pertinent ministers, or the prime minister had any knowledge. 
Where were all these officials? Why haven't we brought them to 
account? Why hasn't any one of them submitted his resignation? 
What is the crime for which they should be brought to account 
if not this one--the crime of neglecting the security and safety 
of society. I think that this crime is equal to high treason. 
I am not exaggerating. 
  The government is busy levying money and inventing methods 
to 
collect fees and taxes. It is not concerned that the poor are 
becoming poorer, the wretched are becoming more wretched and 
miserable, and investment and commercial activity will come to a 
standstill. Increasing the fees and taxes beyond a certain 
point will lead to tax evasion, and eventually the revenue will 
decrease. Is making the people suffer one of the ministers' 
hobbies, even if the government loses some of the revenue it 
used to collect? 
  If poverty, unemployment, stagnation, and corruption are 
some 
of the factors that promote extremism, aren't we entitled to 
call on the attorney general to apply the terrorism law against 
the government and turn the Prosecution Office into a supreme 
military court? 
  If terrorism is the result of deviating religious 
thinking--as repentant terrorist 'Adil 'Abd-al-Baqi said in his 
stunning television confessions--what has the government done to 
correct this deviation? Has it persuaded the al-Azhar scholars 
to stand with it? Has it discussed with them their hardline 
positions--not against terrorism, but against those who are 
confronting terrorism? Has the government been angered by the 
recent statement of the Islamic Research Institute, which 
accused the opponents of terrorism of being extremists and 
called on them to leave the arena to them, to the al-Azhar 
scholars? [passage omitted] 
  The enemies of terrorism are threatened by the bullets of 
extremism and the al-Azhar statements, and the government is 
doing nothing about it. [passage omitted] 

