BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "YSU Radio News" newscast] </F>
  [Text] Eduardo Sancho and the rest of the ERP [Peoples 
Revitalizing Expression] and National Resistance deputies in the 
Assembly expressed their opinions on the other parties that 
still make up the FMLN [Farabundo Marti National Liberation 
Front), saying they are not political or mature. 
  [Begin Joaquin Villalobos, ERP secretary general, recording] 
The image of the FMLN that emerges is troublesome, because it 
depicts us as authoritarian, as calling attention to a deputy 
who dares to vote differently from the majority. Just imagine 
what would happen if in the United States the Republicans and 
the Democrats who always vote together were told that they would 
be thrown out of the party. Or say this were to happen in 
France or Austria or any civilized country. 
  We call on our companeros in the leadership of other 
organizations to reinitiate discussions to try and devise a new 
internal agreement that defines the terms of the FMLN alliance. 
There have always been differences in the FMLN. There are two 
persuasions. During the war the differences were not as obvious 
because we had to be united. Once the war ended and things 
opened up at the parliamentary level, we no longer had to accept 
circumstances where they could impose a majority or minority by 
three to two. Then differences became more noticeable. 
  It's no big deal; it's just democracy. That's what's 
happening. We think that political identity is as important as 
maintaining the alliance within the front. We think discussions 
should be held within the FMLN on the issues on which we differ, 
for example the apparent versus the genuine acceptance of the 
market economy and private property, the position on the 
existence of the Armed Forces, and the validity or invalidity of 
Marxism-Leninism, all of which are basic topics on which we have 
differences, not on other things. 
  It's as if it's a sin if there are talks with ARENA 
[Nationalist Republican Alliance] or if someone from ARENA votes 
for the FMLN or if someone in the FMLN votes for ARENA. That's 
illogical. Whoever cannot understand this should go back to the 
mountains. [end recording] 
  For his part, Eduardo Sancho said that at this time there 
cannot be two positions, noting that the party's political line 
needs to be defined because people want the country to be 
democratized and want the peace agreements to be fulfilled. 
  Both men described as irrational the possibility that the 
party might expel some members. 
  [Begin Villalobos recording] We do concede that this is an 
emotional issue. It isn't politically or legally rational. 
There is no basis for it. I think the problem is that it's 
difficult for fellow party members to accept the situation. 
  We took a historic step on Sunday. We sent an important 
signal to the majority of the people in this country. We are 
not happy with the changes in this country. They didn't want to 
accept that. This is the main point. What impact will this have 
on our international relationships with democratic parties that 
are used to these kinds of things? 
  One of these days we will see some FMLN member penalized 
because he voted differently. But this the most normal thing in 
the world. This is impossible, both politically or legally. 
There is no basis for this in the statutes. 
  We will not leave the FMLN just because we favor modernizing 
the left. We are the FMLN. We are not intellectuals. We did 
not study Marxism in Costa Rica. We went to the front to work. 
We learned in prison. We survived difficult situations 17 
times. We are all full-fledged members of the FMLN. We each 
have an I.D. and a historical identity. We who fought on the 
streets will now fight politically. We are proud of our past. 
In the name of the FMLN, I participated in the historic 
meeting. It was I who proposed this banner and this name. 
Eduardo and I made the most important proposals in the 
negotiations. You are familiar with the military strategy and 
know what everyone says about where it originated. [end 
recording] 

