BFN 

  [Text] Ulaanbaatar, June 18 (OANA-MONTSAME) -- The 
newspaper "ARDIYN ERH" informs that the President of Mongolia P. 
Ochirbat has congratulated the President of Portugal Mario 
Soares on the occasion of the national holiday of Portugal 
sending the latter a telegram and that at the spring session of 
the Mongolian parliament it is keeping on discussing the draft 
law on mineral resources of Mongolia. 
  The newspaper publishes the information concerning the 
sitting of the constitutional court of Mongolia, which 
considered the claim by citizens S. Batdorj and T. Oldzboi 
accusing members of the Great State Hural S. Dzorig and T. 
Elbdzgborj of violating a number of provisions of the 
Constitution and drew proper decision. The constitutional court 
decided that member of the parliament S. Dzorig has violated the 
provisions of the Constitution. His being guilty was 
corroborated by the facts having been established clearly, it 
said. 
  The constitutional court considered there are no reasons to 
consider also the issue referring to T. Elbegdorj because he was 
relieved of the duties of a member of the parliament according 
to his own request. 
  A year has passed since the inauguration ceremony of the 
first president of Mongolia having been elected nationwide took 
place. In this connection President P. Ochirbat was invited as 
a honorary guest by the newspaper "ARDIYN ERH" being the central 
official press of Mongolia. "It is man that must be in the 
centre of the state policy of Mongolia" this was a title of the 
interview granted by him to the newspaper the first part of 
which was published in today's issue of the newspaper. 
  "In my opinion the major factor of the successful 
development 
of Mongolia is a well-educated and informed man. Therefore in 
the centre of the state policy should be man. This is one of 
major priorities of my policy as head of state, notes P. 
Ochirbat. We are concentrating our efforts and attention on 
that how this task should be accomplished. For instance, there 
have been worked out the main lines and conceptions of state 
policy concerning demographical, children, youth and women's 
issues as well as the matters referring to veterans and invalids. 
  On the other hand, the president went on to say, if the 
centre of the state policy is being man then the government and 
state should take care of his living and working conditions, 
provision him with proper nourishment, housing , health care and 
related services. In this sense we worked out a comprehensive 
projects of conceptions of state policy on food issues, food 
programme and the law on food and submitted them for 
consideration to the Mongolian Government and parliament, he 
pointed out. 
  The newspaper "DZASGIYN GADZRYN MEUEE" informs that the 
prime 
Minister of Mongolia P. Jasray has received the ministers of 
food and agriculture, that of trade and industry, finances, of 
full power, geology and mining industry, the head of the 
national development department and of the administration of the 
government and charged them with assignments concerning the 
solution of issues having been put forth by the heads of 
administration of the Dundgobi and Omnogobi Aymags and a number 
of somons of the two aymags relating to the government. 
  The newspaper publishes the directive by the prime minister 
of Mongolia on setting up a Mongolian national committee on 
celebrating the 50th anniversary of the United Nations 
organization. As was decided, the national committee should be 
functioning under the guidance of the minister of external 
relations of Mongolia T. Gombosuren. 
  The newspaper carries an interview of its correspondent with 
the [words indistinct] administration of the Government of 
Mongolia J. Sereeter taking part recently in the seminar held in 
Germany under the schemes of the German Foundation for 
International Development. As was noted by J. Sereeter, the 
Foundation for International Cooperation is interested in the 
development of cooperation with Mongolia in many spheres. 
  The newspaper also publishes an interview with the head of 
the society "Mongol Bichig" D. Dorligjab. In his interview he 
paid a lot of attention to the issues of resurrection of the 
Mongolian national script and its applying in keeping the state 
official business documentaries instead of that based on 
Cyrillic being currently used. 
  The newspaper "DZASGIYN GADZRYN MEUEE" under the permanent 
heading "The World News" carries a number of information 
concerning the international affairs. The newspaper "MONGOLYN 
HODUU" gets its readers acquainted with the news of the 
Mongolian countryside. The newspaper gives some materials 
referring to the day-to-day activities and life of the herdsmen 
and farmers. The newspaper also publishes an article touching 
upon the issues concerning the growth in the number of the 
camel. According to the author of the article D. Tsebeenjab 
dealing with the camel study the annual reduction in the number 
of this animal is dictated by the reduction in the growth rate 
of the population. During 1991-1993 some 44 thousand head of 
camels were raised which is by 18 thousand less than three years 
before 1990 the author notes. 

