Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Rafael Medina] </F>
  [Excerpts] The attorney general of the republic, Jorge 
Carpizo MacGregor, gave notice that "no one will deter us" in 
fighting the drug trade, and claimed that "this battle is for 
the nation's health." He also made a steadfast commitment to 
implement the arrest warrants issued for the members of the 
Tijuana Cartel, including the brothers Benjamin, Ramon, and 
Javier Arellano Felix, thereby to eliminate one of the most 
powerful rings engaged in drug trafficking. 
  The nation's attorney general declared: "We shall continue 
to 
intensify our unrestricted battle against organized crime, 
particularly the drug traffic; because this battle is for the 
health of our children and youth, and for the nation." He 
provided details on the capture of Francisco Rafael Arellano 
Felix, who is now confined in the maximum security federal 
prison at Almoloya de Juarez, in Mexico State. [passage omitted] 
  Carpizo MacGregor revealed that the institution, backed by 
the society, the National Institute to Combat Drugs, and even 
international authorities, is conducting "an extensive 
investigation to locate and apprehend those who are now 
fugitives from justice." 
  Describing the capture of the oldest Arellano Felix brother 
as a victory for Mexico, he claimed that the war against the 
drug trade can be won only if the government and society act 
together. He noted that such cooperation, through anonymous 
reports, contributed greatly to that operation, during which 
Luis Enrique Cortes Zatarain, Tomas Adan Velarde Espinosa, 
Benjamin de la Pena Farias, and Diego Gonzalez Martinez were 
captured as well. [passage omitted] 
  The assistant attorney for branch agencies and inspection, 
Mario Ruiz Massieu, in turn, explained: "Arellano Felix had been 
subject to three previous criminal suits: in 1978, with his 
wife, for crimes against health; again in 1988, for the same 
crimes; and a year later, for carrying a weapon reserved 
exclusively for use by the armed forces." He added that, in all 
three instances, the subject managed to evade the action of the 
courts, because one of the orders for his formal imprisonment 
was revoked and, on another occasion, the case records were 
lost. Despite this, the accused himself declared that he had 
been acquitted by a federal judge in Tijuana. 
  In the assistant attorney's opinion, Ramon, Javier, and 
Benjamin Arellano Felix are the heads of the so-called "Tijuana 
Cartel." He said that the PGR [Office of the Attorney General of 
the Republic] has now fully identified the members of that 
family who, although not directly linked with the drug traffic, 
have been aiding their relatives in money laundering and in 
managing the enormous fortune that they possess. [passage 
omitted] 
<H5>  Espionage Team To Learn Police Action </H5>
  During this investigation, culminating in the capture of one 
of the Arellanos, it was discovered from the seizures made of 
communications equipment and systems that the drug traffickers 
had been following the activity, not only of the municipal and 
state police, but also of the federal force, step by step, using 
monitors. 
  Their equipment, of the most sophisticated type, besides 
tapping phone calls anywhere in the country, also managed to 
enter the authorities' restricted frequencies. In this way, the 
traffickers were learning first-hand about the action being 
planned against them. 
  Ruiz Massieu commented: "Through this discovery, it has been 
proven that drug traffickers listen to and tape conversations of 
PGR public servants. There is further evidence of this in the 
case of several employees of the newspaper EL MANANA, in 
Reynosa, Tamaulipas, who were remanded, and in the case 
involving the Ochoa Bali Hai restaurant. In the confiscated 
vehicles, cassettes with tapes of our officials' conversations 
were discovered, and some of the spies even attempted to imitate 
their voices." 
  He remarked that, in view of this situation, the authorities 
have changed the codes and frequencies used by the PJF [Federal 
Judicial Police]. [passage omitted] 
  Ruiz Massieu added that the exhaustive investigation of the 
Arellano Felix brothers, presumed to be the material 
perpetrators of the murder of Cardinal Jose Jesus Posadas Ocampo 
and of six other persons, has made it possible to capture and 
remand scores of members of various drug cartels. He commented: 
"At the time of his arrest, in order to procure his release, 
Francisco Rafael attempted to bribe the police agents with 
$100,000. As a result, he was also remanded for the crime of 
bribery in the degree of an attempt." [passage omitted] 

