BFN 

<F P=106> [Mia Doornaert report: "Sweden and Finland Bring Extensive </F>
Peacekeeping Experience to PFP"] 
  [Text] By joining NATO's Partnership for Peace (PFP) today, 
Sweden and Finland mainly have their eye on cooperation 
regarding peacekeeping missions. However, that is not the only 
reason why PFP is so popular with the two Nordic countries. In 
their capacity as neighbors of Russia, and as states bordering 
the Baltic, both countries attach great importance to 
elaborating a pan-European security system. The PFP is open to 
Russia. As the PFP does not imply the possible expansion of 
NATO, it does not draw a new line through Europe, and 
consequently it leaves the status of the Baltic republics of 
Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania unclear. In so doing it is 
responding to the pan-European concern regarding the Nordic 
countries. 
  By offering the PFP, NATO is giving all CSCE countries a 
program for cooperation from which they may make a choice, 
depending on their desires and constraints. What Sweden and 
Finland will bring with them is extensive experience regarding 
participation in peacekeeping missions, one of the PFP's 
cooperation programs. At the same time, this will offer them a 
platform for cooperation with NATO that fits in with their 
policy of nonalignment. 
  "Sweden is probably the record-holding participant in UN 
peacekeeping missions," said Pierre Schori, spokesman for 
foreign policy in the social democratic opposition party and the 
man being tipped as the next foreign minister if his party is 
included in the government after next September's elections. 
Finnish blue helmets, too, have, and are still, widely 
deployed. 
  The blue helmets are not dispatched on an improvised basis. 
For instance, Sweden has a special training center where 
participants in UN peacekeeping missions receive adapted 
training. Among other things, they are acquainted with the 
topography of the area to which they will be sent. There is 
already both a plan and a budget for making this center 
available to the PFP and for training mixed groups of foreign 
soldiers there. 
  Bo Huidt, the director of strategic studies at the Military 
Academy in Stockholm, pointed out that such cooperation in 
association with the PFP is not entirely new for Sweden. "In 
fact, we are already applying the PFP philosophy in the former 
Yugoslavia," he said. The UN peace mission in Bosnia indeed 
has close links with NATO because it were ultimatums set by the 
Alliance that ended the attacks on Sarajevo and the siege of 
Gorazde. 
  Sweden, along with Norway and Denmark, is participating in a 
Nordic battalion of blue helmets in Bosnia. UN commanders in 
Bosnia, especially General Francis Briquemont, have expressed 
their concern about that battalion, which was given a very 
precise assignment, meaning that its deployment was not flexible 
enough for the UN commanders. 
  Michael Sahlin, the Swedish permanent under secretary of 
state for defense, is familiar with that problem: "I have 
discussed this problem with the Belgian Government and with 
General Charlier, the Belgian chief of staff," he said. 
  "The Nordic countries were among the few nations prepared to 
allocate troops to protect the six so-called safe areas 
established by UN Security Council Resolution 836. I understand 
that the commanders want the greatest possible flexibility on 
the ground, but in the eyes of our parliaments, the sending of 
blue helmets must clearly be seen to fit in a context of UN 
peacekeeping. We had to point out an area associated with 
Resolution 836. The Danish contingent of the Nordic battalion, 
in particular, had a binding mandate from its parliament." 
<H5>  No Peacemaking </H5>
  Within the framework of the United Nations, the CSCE, and 
PFP, Sweden wants to continue making an active contribution to 
peace missions. At the same time, it became clear in a series 
of talks with the security establishment in Stockholm that 
nonaligned countries meant peacekeeping, not peacemaking. In 
Sweden, there are far greater reservations regarding actions in 
which the United Nations or CSCE should actively impose peace, 
say, on an area under conflict or a country that has fallen prey 
to internal violence, by resorting to armed force. The Nordic 
blue helmets were given a strict mandate precisely because the 
UN mission in Bosnia overstepped the mark of "peacekeeping." 
  There is widespread support in the country for active 
participation in peacekeeping missions. However, virtually all 
the dialogue partners admitted that both the press and the 
public would come up with critical questions if, say, 10 Swedish 
blue helmets were killed in one go in Bosnia. So they have 
great understanding of the horror in Belgium at the murder of 
the paratroopers in Rwanda. 
  "Since the beginning of last century, Sweden's policy of 
neutrality has kept the country out of all wars. We are not 
used to losing soldiers in combat," one top diplomat said. 
  Even in many countries which have been involved in wars this 
century, despite all the emotional appeals, the willingness of 
public opinion to see compatriots killed in conflicts, whether 
near or far from home, is extremely limited. 
  The new PFP members are bringing with them valuable 
experience in peacekeeping, which is not something that should 
be underestimated. However, they are just as reluctant as most 
other countries belonging to NATO and PFP, including Belgium, 
when it comes to making an effort to turn the CSCE or PFP into a 
machine for imposing peace under force of arms in areas of 
conflict within the CSCE, ranging from Bosnia to Central Asia, 
by way of Upper Karabach. 

