Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Leaders of Japan and the United States are </F>
urged to hold High-Dimensional Talks"] 
  [Text] Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa will depart for 
Washington on the evening of 10 February to meet with President 
Bill Clinton in a Japan-U.S. summit -- without knowing when the 
Japan- U.S. economic framework talks will come to a conclusion. 
The meeting at the White House on the morning of 11 February, 
local time, will be the prime minister's third summit with the 
President, after one in New York and another in Seattle last 
year. What will come out of it being so difficult to predict, 
the Foreign Ministry officials who are involved in preparing for 
it said, "We have no idea what will happen there." 
  The two governments in the framework talks are supposed to 
make reports on progress of negotiations every half year with 
respect to "macroeconomics," "structural and sector-by-sector 
talks," and "global scale cooperation." As far as 
"macroeconomics" is concerned, the prime minister will be 
hand-carrying a gift -- the nation's largest economic stimulus 
package including tax reductions for 6 trillion yen, but no 
headway is being made in the "sector-by- sector talks" dealing 
with the priority areas, such as the government procurement, 
insurance market, and automobiles and auto parts. 
  In particular, the dispute between the United States which 
demands setting specific numerical targets market shares and 
Japan which objects to it, saying such numerical targets would 
lead to managed trade is still there where it started. 
  The framework talks are now expected to drag on until the 
last moment before the summit meeting. On some of the things 
like the automobiles and auto parts, it is even possible that 
the top leaders will have to make a political decision 
themselves. 
  In the previous two meetings, the United States did not push 
difficult demands on Prime Minister Hosokawa. That was because 
the economic consultations were still under way, and the United 
States thought it would be to its benefit to back up the new 
administration which was supposed to be all for a "reform." The 
United States is beginning to have doubts about the basis of the 
Hosokawa coalition government and the leadership of the prime 
minister himself. 
  WASHINGTON POST reporter Howard Cohen [name as published] 
wrote recently: "The people close to President Clinton now feel 
they might have overestimated Prime Minister Hosokawa, or at 
least misjudged his ability to fulfill his pledge on market 
liberalization." 
  As if in comformity with such atmosphere in the United 
States, Foreign Minister Hata has been set to attend the meeting 
between the two top leaders. Recently when U.S. Trade 
Representative Mickey Kantor came to Japan, he said "I would 
like to talk with a politician who has real power," and then met 
with Foreign Minister Hata. As seen in that instance, it 
appears certain that the United States is beginning to question 
where the real policymaking power resides in Japan. 
  There is no doubt that a show performance will be played out 
to plant an impression that the summit itself has been a 
"success." But the problem is whether deep-rooted distrust -- as 
observed in the words of the two countries' negotiating 
officials -- can be removed. 
  Just as the Clinton government has no comprehensive policy 
on 
Japan, the Hosokawa government has no policy on the United 
States. All that is happening is that the bureaucrats in the 
forefront of the negotiations are clashing with each other over 
their national interests and reputations. While people were 
unaware as their eyes were focused on domestic affairs, the 
situation in the Japan-U.S. relations has developed into a 
rather critical one. 
  It is unfortunate for the two countries to turn economic 
issues into political issues. We hope that the two top leaders 
-- now more than at any time -- will hold a meeting of high 
dimension [kojigen] with long-term future in their perspective. 

