Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Polish Industry and Trade Minister Marek Pol </F>
by Andrzej Woyciechowski at the Radio Zet studio in Warsaw on 
the "Guest of Radio Zet" program--live] 
  [Excerpt] [Woyciechowski] Radio Zet's guest today is 
Industry Minister Marek Pol. Good morning to you, sir. 
  [Pol] Good morning. 
  [Woyciechowski] Miners in Silesia have been on strike since 
this morning. What do the miners demand from you, and what are 
you willing to give them? 
  [Pol] First of all, from what the organizers of the strike 
are saying, the miners are on strike over general issues--that 
is, regarding Solidarity's nationwide demands--and what I say is 
that [hesitating] the answer is always the same: Appropriate 
boards have been set up for talks with the government, and the 
purpose of the boards is to come to agreement over national 
demands by the trade unions and what they want to accomplish for 
the working class. It so happens that the trade unionists are 
not very eager to speak during sessions by the trilateral 
commission or by groups with the participation of the government 
and the trade unions that are negotiating social issues--they 
are much more eager to be heard in the media than during such 
meetings as I just mentioned. What they want is that real 
earnings be increased and that the Agreement on State-Owned 
Enterprises be implemented. When it comes to specific 
enterprises, the most frequent scenario is that, for instance, 
the specific enterprise's earning situation is the real reason 
for having a strike in that company. Then, when it deals with 
the nation, it is of course relatively easy to [words 
indistinct]... 
  [Woyciechowski, interrupting] In a word, the strike is 
simply about money? Is that the case, or does it also have a 
political nature? What is your assessment of [words 
indistinct]... 
  [Pol, interrupting] I mean, my view is that the intentions 
of the strike's organizers are political in many cases, but when 
it comes to the employees themselves, well, they make a decision 
to join the action because, on the one hand, they are told that 
no one wants to speak to trade unionists, which, by definition, 
stirs up emotions because that would be proof of the 
authorities' arrogance. Second, they are on strike because life 
in general is very hard for many people in Poland, including 
those in Silesia. So that provides quite good grounds for 
having a strike. 
  [Woyciechowski] But can one say that the strike is of a 
political nature? I mean, from your standpoint, not just as 
industry minister but also a leader of the Union of Labor? 
  [Pol] You know, when I watch the escalation of the trade 
unions' measures and the way they are being organized, as well 
as the kinds of regions where strikes are being organized or at 
least where such attempts are being made--I mean in the 
infrastructure, which is the most vulnerable, and also taking 
into account the fact that the strikes are being organized in 
very many cases in areas where poverty is not the worst at 
all--I think that in many cases one would have to apply a 
political label to these measures. I think the measures are a 
kind of politics vis-a-vis the current government. 
  [Woyciechowski] What could be the reason for the trade 
unions to organize political strikes? Is it to bring down the 
government? 
  [Pol] It is hard for me to answer that question with 
precision. You should rather ask the trade unionists about 
that. But it is a fact that this question remains: What next? I 
mean, after the government is brought down. 
  [Woyciechowski] [Words indistinct] some kind of a new 
government. That has always been the case. 
  [Pol] Frankly speaking, given the current political 
configuration in parliament--after all, the elections defined 
the parliament's composition this way--I cannot quite imagine 
any further attempts at an aggregation. Besides, my feeling is 
that any subsequent government would have to face precisely the 
same problem. After all, there have been governments in the past 
that were organized and established by Solidarity, and then the 
Solidarity trade union recalled those governments or influenced 
their recall because it could not see any possibility for 
cooperation anymore. Right now, we have a government that 
Solidarity definitely did not establish and a strike measure 
after four months--actually, very strong measures against the 
government's policies began after three months....[Pol pauses] 
All in all, I cannot quite imagine and I do not know whether the 
organizers of the strikes are asking themselves the question of 
what next. 
  [Woyciechowski] You mean what will happen next? Mr. 
Minister, could you give the miners a raise? If you were to do 
so, they would most probably cease their strike action. 
  [Pol] I mean, I am afraid they would not cease their strikes 
anyway because [words indistinct]... 
  [Woyciechowski, interrupting] But if the raise were to be 
substantial? 
  [Pol] A great number of the mining companies are reportedly 
on strike today--we will find out later what really 
happened--and a majority of the mines managed to gain some 
raises in the recent time period, first of all as a result of 
negotiations because only part of the mines were on strike and, 
in a majority of them, managements of the companies or of the 
mines somehow managed to come to agreement with the miners in a 
sensible manner, despite the fact that there are nine to 11 
trade unions in each mine. So I am quite surprised by the 
participation in the strikes of those mines that secured raises; 
in some cases, it is another in a series of strikes in a 
relatively short period of time. As for whether the minister or 
the government could give raises, generally speaking, the 
government's task is to formulate a policy that would allow for 
a gradual increase of earnings in a company. But, in practical 
terms, a company's economic policy is determined by the manager 
and the management because the manager is charged with the 
responsibility of whether the company will survive for the next 
few months or years, and whether it will be a permanent 
workplace for... 
  [Woyciechowski, interrupting] However, you certainly have 
several telephone numbers in your notebook. You might call 
several mine directors and tell them to increwages. They would 
surely increase the wages because I am sure they are a little 
afraid of you, Mr. Minister. Why are you not doing that? 
  [Pol] I suppose that if I tried to exert that kind of 
pressure, some of the more reasonable directors would submit 
their resignations and others would perhaps act on such a 
suggestion; this would mean, however, that I would have to take 
on the responsibility for the functioning of this or that 
enterprise for several months or even years. The problem is, no 
one from Warsaw is able to take on the responsibility for the 
functioning of such an enterprise. Apart rom that, no one is 
formally entitled to do that. The right to run an enterprise in 
line with the art of the economy is possessed by the board of 
directors of that given enterprise. 
  [Woyciechowski] Those miners also demand that the debt 
burden of mines and steelworks be lessened. This decision is 
certainly up to you. What does the process of lessening the 
debt burden of mines mean? 
  [Pol] This means restructurization, which is the key word. 
The indebtedness of an enterprise, reaching some kind of an 
agreement with creditors... 
  [Woyciechowski, interrupting] Who are the creditors? 
  [Pol] They are most often other enterprises in Poland... 
  [Woyciechowski, interrupting] Which are also owned by the 
state? 
  [Pol] Both state and private companies, individual persons, 
the state budget, the budgets of gminas [smallest administrative 
units]... 
  [Woyciechowski, interrupting] And all of these mines, or 
almost all of them, are simply indebted, they have some enormous 
debts to pay? 
  [Pol] Enormous debts... 
  [Woyciechowski, interrupting] And what does the lessening of 
the debt burden mean... 
  [Pol, interrupting] The overall indebtedness of these mines 
exceeds 50 trillion zlotys. This is nearly as much as the 
state's budget deficit right now. The lessening of the debt 
burden means reaching agreements with the creditors. Because 
they are very numerous, it is the state's or the government's 
duty to prepare a law that would make this technically possible. 
There exists such a law; it is a settlement law. It is today a 
special law for state enterprises and state partnerships. It 
entails the possibility of bank settlement procedures with 
creditor enterprises, which in practice means the following: If 
over 50 percent of the creditors or creditors that have loaned 
more than 50 percent of the entire debt agree to limit the debt 
of the mine or a group of mines, such an agreement is 
implemented and concerns all of the creditors, even those that 
have not agreed to that. In practice, this means considerably 
less severe conditions... 
  [Woyciechowski, interrupting] That simply means that the 
debt will not be paid off? This reminds me of the operation 
that Poland is trying to perform with Western banks. 
  [Pol] Exactly. Unfortunately, in the case of the mines, the 
debt reductions are much greater than...[Pol pauses] Or the 
abandoning of the demand that the debt be repaid is much greater 
than in the case of Poland's debts. In that case, it often 
exceeds 50 percent. To make a long story short, the state must 
create the necessary conditions and laws to implement this. 
Now, the very operation of lessening the debt must be performed 
by the enterprises themselves. The government, especially the 
Industry Ministry, provides aid to enterprises that are 
experiencing problems... 
  [Woyciechowski, interrupting] Does that mean that it 
provides financial aid to them or comforts them... 
  [Pol, interrupting] It either provides them with good 
companies that know how to prepare such documents... 
  [Woyciechowski, interrupting] That means that it sends good 
lawyers? 
  [Pol] Yes, it sends good lawyers, good cooperators. 
Sometimes it almost forces the managers of a given enterprise. 
All of this entails a lot of work... 
  [Woyciechowski, interrupting] You can force them to do 
something, after all, then? 
  [Pol] Yes, I can. It so happens that, as far as mining is 
concerned, we force them, in a sense, but also standardize the 
proceedings in the case of coal partnerships. All of the coal 
partnerships have already found themselves in the process of 
lessening the debt burden. I will not conceal the fact that the 
judges who supervise those proceedings are probably a little 
alarmed when they hear the information about the miners' strike; 
it so happens that on strike are those enterprises that in 
courts of law will want to reach an agreement with their 
creditors--that is, enterprises that have not gone on strike. 
[passage omitted] 

