BFN 

<F P=106> [Frans Boogaard commentary: "Europe Will Have To Get Used </F>
To Delors Likely Successor"] 
  [Text] The new European Commission (EC) will have to get 
used to it. Instead of a president who sets clear lines, a man 
whose ideas roam widely; instead of a president who grants his 
colleagues a large measure of autonomy, a man who says: "Shall 
I look at this with you?" 
  Yet the differences between the retiring "Mister Europe," 
French Socialist Jacques Delors, and his likely Christian 
Democrat successor Ruud Lubbers are less than they may at first 
appear. 
  Both are able to bring enthusiasm and initiative to their 
task, to bridge differences and, within the limits of their 
office, bring uncooperative ministers or Councils of Ministers 
around to their way of thinking. And both of them want to do 
more than stand at the head of a body which, according to the 
rules, should restrict itself to submitting proposals and 
implementing decisions. 
  They also share a financial and economic background, Delors 
was finance minister, Lubbers was economic minister, and the 
belief that economic growth, partly through lower labor costs 
and technological innovation, is necessary in order to 
effectively combat unemployment and to restore European 
competitive strength. 
  Although Lubbers will be formally nominated for the 
position, 
his public stance is that the Brussels job is not so necessary 
for him and that he would be perfectly content to let it pass to 
any other suitable candidate. 
  In the meantime, Lubbers is already strengthening his 
position six weeks before his candidacy is to be considered by 
European government leaders. Internally, he has made it clear 
that if they are seeking an "administrateur," which has slightly 
derogatory connotations in French, they may do better to 
approach his Belgian colleague Jean-Luc Dehaene. 
  If on the other hand, they want a manager then Lubbers is 
available. In this way too Lubbers, who is 55 on Saturday [7 
May], gives the impression of sharing the same views as Delors, 
who during his 10 years as Commission president was equally 
opposed to the role as figurehead. 
  At a time when Europe suffered from a lack of efficiency, 
Delors produced his famous policy document, which provided for a 
reorganization of European agricultural policy, more funds for 
the Union, and more support for the poorer member states, 
followed two years later by detailed plans for far-reaching 
economic and monetary cooperation. In this way Delors helped to 
ensure that the structural sclerosis threatening the Union was 
transformed before too long into a kind of euphoria. Delors' 
successor is facing a similar challenge, but one both more 
difficult and more complex. 
  Union enlargement to include new member states, the 
institutional reform which this will inevitably bring (more 
working languages, more ministers, more commissioners and more 
members of parliament), the sharp rise in unemployment, 
decreasing commitment to the southern countries, and stagnating 
integration, in the area of asylum policy and monetary and 
economic cooperation for example, all serve to make the word 
"challenge" into much more than the formal pledge which is usual 
when taking office. 
  Time is short for Lubbers. He has already perfected his 
language skills. Lobbying is no longer necessary, as nearly all 
the government leaders already know him very well. But for 
Lubbers too, producing a work programme in less than three 
months which will get the Union back on the rails remains a 
considerable task. 
  Especially as Lubbers in his nearly 12 years as prime 
minister has, at least on paper, formulated few concrete ideas 
on Europe's future, and certainly for someone who is now 
expected to further build upon the rich inheritance of such 
architects of Europe as Schumann, Monnet, and De Gasperi. 

