Language: <F P=105> Czech </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Marie Susterova: "Laws in the Czech Republic Are </F>
Tough on Foreigners"] 
  [Text] Close to 80 million foreigners headed for the Czech 
Republic in 1993. The majority of them came for a brief visit 
or as tourists. Although they can extend their stay to up to 
six months, the law does not permit them to work in the Czech 
Republic. It permits only foreigners who have long-term or 
permanent residence in the Czech Republic--for example, 
foreigners who have obtained the statute of refugee in the Czech 
Republic--to work. 
  Approximately 46,600 foreigners with long-term residence and 
31,000 foreigners with permanent residence live in the Czech 
Republic. This is apparent from the Foreign Nationals 
Registration Office (CP) record of 31 December 1993. They are 
mainly Poles, Vietnamese, and Ukrainians; however, in the past 
two years, people from Germany, the United States, Greece, and 
Austria have also shown an interest in long-term residence in 
the Czech Republic. To what, then, do our laws entitle them? 
Mirka Polova, of the CP Secretariat, says that long-term 
residence for the purpose of employment, business, education, or 
medical treatment is permitted. The foreigner can make the 
arrangements for the permit in his own country or when he 
arrives in the Czech Republic. As opposed to our practices, a 
foreigner who travels to the West or the United States to work 
must expedite the necessary documents in his own country. The 
foreigner attaches to his application in the Czech Republic 
confirmation that he has accommodation and a work permit. 
Long-term residence is granted for 180 days and can be 
repeatedly extended as long as the foreigner is studying, 
conducting business, or working in the Czech Republic. 
According to the law, the state is not obliged to grant 
permanent residence even to a foreigner who has been living here 
continually for a long time. According to M. Polova, this is a 
shortcoming that should be resolved in the future. The previous 
law was more charitable to foreigners. After 10 years of 
continuous long-term residence in the Czech Republic, it 
entitled them to apply for Czech citizenship. These foreigners 
pay for health care in the Czech Republic and they have no claim 
to social support from the state. 
  Permanent residence is granted to foreigners in order to 
unite families and, quite exceptionally, for humanitarian or 
foreign policy reasons, M. Polova explained to LIDOVE NOVINY. 
Foreigners with authorized permanent residence have, in 
essence, the same rights as Czech citizens. However, as opposed 
to them, they cannot vote, apply for property to be returned in 
restitution, or take part in coupon privatization. 
Nevertheless, they do have a right, for example, to 
unemployment benefit. After five years of permanent residence, 
they can obtain Czech citizenship. The resettled Czechs from 
Chernobyl, for example, are in this category. 
  We will publish information later about the foreigners who 
apply for asylum in the Czech Republic. 

