Language: <F P=105> Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Today we will start with Chinese Prime Minister 
Li Peng's meeting with foreign and domestic reporters. Chinese 
Prime Minister Li Peng, and four deputy prime ministers, met 
with foreign and domestic reporters in the People's Great Hall 
in Beijing on 22 March. The reporters participated in coverage 
of the Chinese National People's Congress and political 
consultative meeting. Prime Minister Li Peng and deputy prime 
ministers expressed thanks to the reporters for rapid reporting 
of the events during the period of meetings, and answered 
questions raised concerning some issues. [passage omitted] 
  Concerning PRC-U.S. relations, Prime Minister Li Peng said 
that China consistently attached importance to PRC-U.S. 
relations and has always been ready to and has made efforts to 
improve them. China will continually make efforts to do so in 
the future. However, since China is a sovereign state, it will 
not bargain on the basis of certain rule. [passage omitted] 
  Touching on the nuclear inspection issue on the DPRK, Prime 
Minister Li Peng said that China always called for a solution to 
the North Korean nuclear inspection issue through negotiation, 
and that if a step is taken in a manner of applying pressure, it 
will further complicate and strain the situation on the Korean 
peninsula. Moreover, such a step will be disadvantageous to 
peace and security in this region. 
  Prime Minister Li Peng pointed out that the DPRK changed its 
attitude of disagreement concerning inspection by the 
International Atomic Energy Agency to agreement. This proved 
that the two sides can gradually attain their (?purposes) 
through negotiations. 
  He said that in the event that the issue of nuclear 
inspection of North Korea is referred to discussion at the UN 
Security Council, China will maintain its consistent position 
that the problem should be solved in a reasonable manner through 
dialogue and negotiations without applying pressure. [passage 
omitted] 

