BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by King Norodom Sihanouk at national reconciliation </F>
day meeting with monks and laymen in the Royal Palace on 4 May 
-- recorded] 
  [Excerpt] [Passage omitted -- condemnation of recent attack 
on peace march in Battambang] I would like to recall that I have 
appealed for a cease-fire many times before, not just today. I 
also supported the previous peace marches, and I clearly 
appealed for an end to fighting, for peace in the interest of 
the motherland and the people. I have launched consecutive 
peace plans. These plans have been rejected one after another. 
They [the warring parties] only lend lip service to me. They 
invariably claim that they love Samdech Sihanouk and -- after I 
become king -- respect and venerate King Sihanouk, but they have 
never listened to me. They have never done what I wish them to 
do. They always find this or that excuse to carry on the war, 
which poses a serious danger to our nation. 
  I have never been happy with this war. For this reason, I 
have just launched another plan. I know it will be rejected 
again. This new plan is about a roundtable. This table is 
perfectly round. The palace has produced a roundtable that is 
completely round, waiting for Samdech Chea Sim, Samdech 
Ranariddh, Samdech Hun Sen, and His Excellency [H.E.] Khieu 
Samphan to sit around it. Yet, this cannot be realized. Why? 
It is like this: Although in the past the obstacle was raised 
by the Royal Government and Parliament, now the Royal Government 
and Parliament have accepted all the conditions I set for peace, 
nonviolence, and the end of war. These conditions are: 
  1. A cease-fire everywhere, in all directions with all 
forces 
observing a complete standstill to ensure 100 percent peace for 
the people. Take, for example, the areas near Battambang town, 
at Treng, or near Thailand, at Poipet and Sisophon, both sides 
must stop fighting and observe a standstill. No one side is 
considered a winner or a loser. Their troops must be 
immobilized. They must not be taken out of their current 
positions. Consequently, no one has any pretext to charge that 
the king is siding with this or that party. No one will lose or 
gain anything. Everyone stays where he is. 
  2. Two generals from the Royal Government and two other 
generals chosen by Khieu Samphan or the party of Democratic 
Kampuchea [PDK] will be sent to meet the king in the Royal 
Palace to work under the king's command. The king will order 
them to observe and oversee this cease-fire so it would be a 
concrete and not just an empty cease-fire in words alone, a 
complete cease-fire everywhere. Teams of one general with 
another general representing the king will go everywhere by 
helicopter, plane, car, or boat in Cambodia to ensure peace in 
all provinces, districts, and communes. 
  3. Once such peace is ensured, a roundtable will be held. If 
Phnom Penh is believed not neutral, I propose that the 
roundtable be held in the palace of King Norodom Sihanouk near 
Pyongyang, the DPRK. The place is called Lake of Longevity. 
There is a lake in front of that palace just as there is the 
Tonle Sap River, Chattomuk -- the river juncture -- in front of 
our palace here. That palace is fronted by a lake and is 
surrounded by mountains. It is a very pleasant site. Our 
venerated supreme patriarch present here once visited it and 
knows that is is a very pleasant place. Should the two supreme 
patriarches wish, they may go and give some sermons to the 
attendants of the roundtable over there. This would be most 
desirable, and they may go along with me. 
  Therefore, we have a specific plan. Now, Samdech Krompreah 
Norodom Ranariddh and Samdech Hun Sen representing the Royal 
Government and Samdech Chea Sim representing Parliament -- the 
three samdeches who are leaders of the Kingdom of Cambodia -- 
have sent me an official letter clearly stating their full 
unconditional support for King Norodom Sihanouk's latest plan. 
They have said that they will fully follow the king's 
instructions. 
  Just before I came here to pay my respect to you, venerable 
monks, and greet all of you, my children, I received a multipage 
letter, a very long letter. Any one of the venerable monks, the 
elders, or the media who wishes to get a copy of this letter, 
please contact H.E. Truong Meali or H.E. Keo Putreaksmei, who 
are present here. 
  This confusing document does not tell exactly what the PDK 
really wishes to say. This is the letter signed by H.E. Khieu 
Samphan, chairman of the PDK. In this letter he does not reject 
the king's plan, but neither does he say he fully supports it. 
After beating around the bush for a moment, he concludes by 
accusing Vietnam, saying that this war and the subsequent 
suffering of our people stem from the Vietnamese. So, he puts 
all the blame on the Vietnamese. Secondly, verbally, that is, in 
writing -- of course, he cannot use any weapons to do so on 
paper -- he seriously attacks this side, meaning Samdech 
Ranariddh and Samdech Hun Sen of the Royal Government. 
  If the war between the two sides goes on, our Buddhist 
religion, our kingdom, motherland, people, and nation will soon 
be extinct because of endless killings. Moreover, if we become 
weak, our neighbors will take the opportunity to swallow our 
land little by little and subjugate us until we lose not only 
independence but also our territorial integrity. Presently, you 
-- venerable monks, nuns, elders, brothers, children, and 
grandchildren -- should know that our territorial integrity, our 
land and maritime territory is shrinking perilously. Our 
borders that under Sangkum Reas Niyum were vast now have shrunk 
so much because some neighboring countries -- let us not name 
them -- have not stopped infringing on our land and gradually 
moving the border markers into our country. 
  [Excerpt] We now have lost countless square kilometers of 
territory as a result of that action. Not only one but two to 
three countries are taking advantage of our squabblings, our 
fratricidal disputes to gradually grab and swallow our 
territory. Venerable monks, they have already annexed a big 
chunk of our land. If we refuse to end the civil war, they will 
one day swallow all of our country. One day, venerable monks, 
only Phnom Penh will be left, the rest of the country grabbed by 
other countries. As for our sea, the same thing is happening to 
it. The maritime borders of the Sangkum Reas Niyum era are no 
longer recognized. This shows that we are very weak, that we 
are not as strong as we were under Sangkum Reas Niyum. For this 
reason, we are losing our territorial waters to other countries. 
They are grabbing our sea little by little. Soon, there will be 
no sea left. Not just the fish but the sea will be lost, and we 
will be landlocked. 
  If the gentlemen of the Khmer Rouge and those of the other 
side are bent on fighting each other, it means that all of you 
are traitors because you will be responsible for the demise of 
our nation. The nation will not succumb right away. It will 
die a slow death that will take 10 or 20 years. This is because 
the other countries are swallowing our territory little by 
little every year. We will have only Phnom Penh left in 10 or 20 
years. After Phnom Penh, there will be nothing left. 
  Therefore, I would like to say that the demonstration that 
you -- venerable monks, nuns, elders, and compatriots -- are 
staging today is a very g?od thing. We must arouse the 
conscience of the warriors, urging them to stop fighting and to 
agree to solve the problem at the roundtable. I am very 
flexible toward the Khmer Rouge. I am telling them that if they 
do not want to hold the roundtable in Phnom Penh, they are 
invited to go to the palace near Pyongyang, which is also 
Cambodian territory. This palace was donated to me by President 
Kim Il-song of the DPRK as a territory of Cambodia. So, the 
honors will be preserved 100 percent if we go to that palace. 
  However, in his letter that I received this morning -- 
although in the past he was glad to hear the name of that palace 
mentioned -- H.E. Khieu Samphan is not happy at all now. He 
says he wants to go somewhere else more neutral. Where is the 
place that is more neutral? Where does he want to go? Does he 
want to go to his allies' place? That place would not be 
neutral at all. If he wants to meet in a place belonging to a 
country that sides with him, he is not asking for a neutral 
venue. The same thing applies to this side. If the gentlemen 
on this side want to meet in a country that sympathizes with 
them, they are not asking to meet at a neutral venue. A neutral 
venue is one that sides with no party. 
  As for me, I am neutral brecause I am the parent of the 
whole 
Cambodian nation. I am the parent not only of the Royal 
Government and Parliament but also of the Khmer Rouge. These 
children, though they do not listen to me and keep on killing 
and murdering, are also my children because they are fellow 
Khmers. I have never disowned them. The Phnom Penh side has 
demanded that Parliament adopt a law proclaiming the Khmer Rouge 
outlaws [preceding word in French and repeated in English], 
rebels that we must reject from society. I have opposed this 
law and refused to sign it because I want to keep the door open 
for reconciliation. If this law is passed, there is no hope of 
reconciliation. If such a law is promulgated, there will be 
fighting and killing until Cambodia drops dead. 
  Therefore, I would like to appeal to the Khmer Rouge to 
think 
hard and stop painting everything as Vietnamese. You should be 
aware that the fighting is taking place between Khmers. Do not 
use the Vietnamese as an excuse to block out peace. Presently, 
the Khmer Rouge are gaining. They are winning battles. This 
means that if they keep fighting they will win more. This is 
because the government army is finished because too many of its 
troops are demoralized. The officers seem to be all right, but 
the rank and file has no incentives. They are lowly paid, and 
some months they receive no pay at all. In the battles they see 
that they are fighting only fellow Khmers and not soldiers of 
any aggressive nations. Moreover, they know they are getting 
nothing out of the war. They experience only misery and death. 
Even in death they do not know for whom they die. Are they 
dying for the nation? Most of them do not believe that they are 
dying for the nation in the current war. So, the soldiers who 
shoulder the brunt of the fighting are demoralized. There is no 
way to win a battle with demoralized soldiers. The Khmer Rouge 
knows that the soldiers on this side have a low morale. They 
take the advantage by launching heavier attacks and forcing the 
government troops to pull back. When retreat becomes debacle, 
they will capture Battambang town, Poipet, Sisophon, Samraong 
Chongkal, Tbeng Meanchey, and so on and one day they will be 
able to seize Angkor Wat and Angkor Thom as they did in 1976. 
They will push ahead and seize Pursat and Kompong Thom. 
  So, they see that they are gaining ground. Of course, they 
dare not say no to the king's new plan because the king is the 
only one who still befriends them -- who else is on good terms 
with the Khmer Rouge? No one on this side. So, fearing total 
isolation, they do not say no in the letter, but they do not say 
yes, either. They neither reject the king's plan nor accept it. 
Therefore, it is a stagnant situation. 
  In conclusion, I have the following to say to succinctly 
inform you: 
  First, I will carry on the peace effort. Venerable monks, I 
am still sick. A few days ago, French and Cambodian doctors 
took samples of my blood for examination. They found out that 
my health is not good. My white blood cell count is dangerously 
low. My illness has recurred because of fatigue. The daily 
work program to which I have submitted myself since my return 
has been too taxing and as a result the cancer has recurred. 
Moreover, the clogging of my blood vessels has also worsened. 
So, my Chinese doctor has ordered me to return to the hospital 
as soon as possible. He said I cannot wait for another three or 
four weeks. He asked me to go as soon as possible. 
  [Excerpt] Therefore, I am not in very good shape. I might 
die in the very near future. So, what I wish to tell you is 
this: Until my death, I will not desert you; I will continue to 
struggle and get peace for you at all costs to defend our 
independence and territorial integrity and keep our country 
alive, not only for just a dozen more years but for generations 
to come, so that our great- grandchildren can live on Cambodian 
soil as in the time of Sangkum Reas Niyum. 
  Moreover, I would like to tell you frankly, venerable monks, 
that no one is paying much attention to Sihanouk. Now, it 
appears that these warriors seem not to be listening to even the 
venerable monks. To whom will they listen, then? This is why I 
have begged the two venerable supreme patriarches, Samdech Preah 
Pouthiveang, and Samdech Preah Mongkol Proettheacha to help me. 
Yesterday, I listened to the very nice and enlightening sermon 
by Samdech Preah Mongkol Proettheacha. Please, help make 
appeals over the radio and on television, urging the conscience 
of Khieu Samphan and the PDK to agree to the roundtable. If the 
Khmer Rouge does not want to come to Phnom Penh, then convince 
them to go to the palace in North Korea. Make them hurry. The 
longer the delay, the worse it will for all of us. Venerable 
monks, please help me. 
  [Words indistinct] there is also the United Nations to turn 
to. However, it might not agree to come and help us because it 
has helped us once already, at great expenses and with minimal 
success. The Khmer Rouge does not listen to them. If I call on 
the United Nations to come and help us, maybe they will not 
come. Anyway, I will try writing to UN Secretary-General Butrus 
Butrus Ghali, asking the United Nations to consider sending a UN 
force to help bring about reconciliation. Maybe they will not 
come because they are faced with so many other serious crises in 
the world, such as Bosnia-Herzegovinia and other hot spots where 
fighting is even more serious than in our country. The United 
Nations is busy with these problems, and maybe it does not have 
enough money and manpower to help us. Nonetheless, after 
attending this meeting, I will prepare a letter to the United 
Nations asking it to consider beefing up its presence here. 
Presently, there are 30 UN troops in Cambodia, but they are 
nearing the end of their mission. The other day, they came and 
bid me farewell. If we have more UN troops -- not for fighting 
but for reconciliation -- it would be good. However, the Khmer 
Rouge, who did not listen to them before, surely will not listen 
to them now if they come back. 
  So, we come to the conclusion that the Khmer Rouge listens 
to 
neither Sihanouk nor Samdech Preah Khousananda [leader of the 
peace march]. Now we are left with only the two supreme 
patriarchs, Samdech Preah Mongkol Proettheacha, Samdech Preah 
Pouthiveang, and Samdech Preah Khousana -- five top monks -- to 
try to persuade them through various media. However, if the 
Khmer Rouge does not listen to you, then we will be in a 
difficult situation. They say they believe in the king, but 
they do not listen to him. On this side, too -- to be frank -- 
they did not listen to me before. It is only after they 
suffered defeat under heavy Khmer Rouge blows that they seem to 
be paying any attention to me. However, this kind of attitude 
is not right: When they win they do not listen to me; it is only 
when they lose that they listen. With this attitude we cannot 
solve problems. Win or lose, you should listen to me. Only 
with this attitude can we solve problems. 
  No, I am not being acrimonious against or angry at the 
children on the Phnom Penh side, but to be frank, venerable 
monks, the children on the Phnom Penh side also do not listen to 
me. They claim to be reverential to me, but they do not listen 
to me. They were so boastful when they won some battles. Now 
that they are losing, they say they venerate the king and would 
follow all his instructions. This is serious. Both sides have 
serious flaws; neither is praiseworthy. Therefore, I ask both 
sides to think it over. Forget about who wins or loses, for in 
both cases it is Cambodia, it is the people who are the losers. 
How can we say that the people are the losers? It is because 
they are the ones who suffer misery, devastation, and 
separation. The people make up 99 percent of the population, 
and how many of you are there on both sides? It is not fair for 
just a few persons to plunge the whole nation into misery. It is 
time for both sides to think hard about that. 
  For example, this side said yesterday that they were winning 
battles again -- I do not know whether their claim is true. I 
am afraid if they are really winning they will become boastful 
again and stop listening to the king. My advice to them is: Do 
not indulge in such a game. Win or lose, just ignore it. The 
only thing that you should keep in mind is this: What can we do 
to avoid Cambodia becoming extinct in the next 10-20 years? You 
must have pity for the people, for the venerable monks, and for 
the 99 percent of the population that is suffering because of 
you. So, I demand that the bigshots on both sides stop behaving 
that way. [applause] 
  Venerable monks, I am not angry, but I have to shout a bit 
loudly to make myself heard in case they are deaf. [laughter] 
No, I am not angry, venerable monks. They are all my children. 
How can I be angry at them? However, I need to make them hear 
me. When they no longer enjoy the fanfare of victory, they say 
they hear me. When they do not want to hear me, they claim to 
be deaf. Sometime they say my words enter their heads through 
one ear and exit through another. They are never caught. I 
thus appeal to both sides to stop behaving erroneously. They 
should accept the Buddhist teachings and listen to the voice of 
Samdech Preah Khousananda in his peace march. If they listen to 
the chants of the venerable monks and uphold their sermons, 
peace and happiness will be ours. Thank you. [applause] Long 
live Buddhism! 

