BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Ambassador Muhamed Secirbegovic, </F>
Bosnia-Herzegovina's permanent representative at the United 
Nations, by Reha Atasagun in New York; date not given -- 
recorded, in English with superimposed translation into Turkish] 
  [Text] [Atasagun] Mr. Ambassador, what are the latest 
reports reaching you from Gorazde? 
  [Secirbegovic] The Serbs continue to attack. In the evening 
hours, the situation became more quieter. I believe that the 
Serbs will try to occupy the entire city at dawn. No progress 
has been made in the talks. Every promise the Serbs make will 
be to prevent or at least delay a Western air operation. 
  [Atasagun] Following conflicting reports about an air 
operation, it was understood that the NATO planes did not carry 
out an air strike. Do you think that the United Nations and 
NATO are unwilling to carry out an air strike? 
  [Secirbegovic] There definitely is a reluctance. We learned 
that the UN force asked for air support. NATO did not supply 
it. We were told that weather conditions were unsuitable. 
However, I know that there is reluctance. This stand is the 
result of the extremely nationalistic attitude the Russians have 
recently adopted. I really do not understand the stand of NATO 
and of the Western forces. First, they were defeated by Bosnian 
Serbs and the fascist forces in the Balkans. They were placed 
in an embarrassing situation. 
  [Atasagun -- to viewers] Ambassador Secirbegovic believes 
that an intensive NATO air attack might force the Serbs to 
withdraw. Otherwise, thousands will die and the United Nations 
will entirely lose its credibility. If Gorazde falls, the 
United Nations will not have any role to play in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. Then, the Serbs will be able to constantly 
threaten NATO and the United Nations. The ambassador also 
stresses that even if positive steps are taken toward lifting 
the arms embargo on Bosnia-Herzegovina, it is too late for 
Gorazde. 
  [Secirbegovic] The Westerners who promised to defend us told 
us that we do not need weapons. Now we are waiting to be 
massacred like a herd of sheep. The UN Security Council must 
convene and ensure that either of these two steps are taken: 
Either the Western countries and NATO will fulfill their 
promises and defend the Muslims in Bosnia-Herzegovina, or the 
Muslims will regain their right to have weapons in order to 
defend themselves and to prevent the recurrence of similar 
developments. 

