BFN 

<F P=106> [By Wang Yong: "Gatt Chief's Visit May Open Doors"] </F>
  [Text] Peter Sutherland, who deftly wound up the prolonged 
Uruguay Round of Gatt talks in Morocco last month, is taking on 
what might be another historic task as he undertakes his first 
trip to China this week. 
  As director general of the General Agreement on Tariffs and 
Trade (Gatt), Sutherland's impending visit could well be a 
stimulus to China's access to the World Trade Organization, said 
a senior Chinese official. 
  "Although he may not produce a breakthrough in the process 
(of China's re-entry into Gatt), his visit is important in 
itself," Long Yongtu, Assistant Minister of the Ministry of 
Foreign Trade and Economic Co-operation (Moftec), said in an 
interview with Business Weekly. 
  Sutherland was invited by Moftec Minister Wu Yi, and in 
Beijing will attend a high-profile international seminar on 
China's foreign trade development, which runs from Monday to 
Friday. 
  "We attach great importance to Sutherland's visit and regard 
him as a senior adviser to China in its earnest efforts to 
rejoin Gatt," Long said. 
  Although he did not venture to guess what advice Sutherland 
would provide to China, Long said it will be certainly 
"constructive and revealing ones" because Sutherland is a 
seasoned negotiator who has clear understanding of both the 
latest international trade rules and China's particular 
situation. 
  Sutherland's visit comes one and a half months before a new 
round of the Gatt Working Party on China is to be held in Geneva 
and meetings between China and the United States, as well as 
European Community on China's access to Gatt. 
  At the international seminar in Beijing, former U.S. 
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger will lecture on China's trade 
development and on Sino-American relations. 
  "As a mastermind of the establishment of Sino-U.S. 
diplomatic 
relations Kissinger will deliver important speeches which would 
be beneficial to both countries, which are endeavouring to come 
up with a proper pattern of bilateral relations," Long said. 
  Long will be visiting Washington early next month to 
negotiate the terms of China's re-entry into Gatt "We're ready 
to work very hard with our U.S. colleagues, but we do hope they 
will be as practical and realistic as the European Union. 
  "China's priority is to ensure social stability and economic 
development. It will never sacrifice this prerequisite for 
access to Gatt," Long said. 
  The European Union (EU) has recognized that China, with a 
population of 1.1 billion and more than 40 years of a planned 
economy, can not become a market economy overnight. So it has 
agreed to allow China a transitional period following its access 
to Gatt to gradually meet all Gatt rules. 
  He urged all Gatt members to support and facilitate this 
historical transition. 
  "If China undergoes a smooth transition from a planned 
economy to a market one, it will be a great contribution to the 
world in terms of both economic theory and practice," he said. 
  "China has been relentless in its pursuit of economic 
reforms, and has adopted an earnest and down-to-earth attitude 
in its Gatt negotiations," he added. 
  "The fact that China has signed the final act of the Uruguay 
Round of Gatt talks speaks volumes about China's commitment to 
the new multilateral trade rules." 
  Long said that signing the final act "created an important 
condition for China to become a founding member of the World 
Trade Organization." The WTO is to replace Gatt next year. 
  But Long pointed out that China is under no illusions that 
trade protectionism would fade with the new multilateral trade 
regime in place. 
  "We hope the major Gatt contracting parties will commit 
themselves to the new rules and honour fair play," Long said. 

