BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by K. Kiriakidhis] </F>
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] Analyzing the contents of UN 
Secretary General Butrus Butrus-Ghali's report and the positions 
of the Cypriot Government on the new facts and options that 
result from the report, President Glavkos Kliridhis has made an 
important and instructive statement. 
  Kliridhis described paragraph 62 of the Butrus-Ghali report 
as the most significant. According to that paragraph, before we 
retreat to any of the alternatives that are mentioned in the 
report, we could hold negotiations, even an international 
conference, to find answers to some principles that must govern 
a solution. He added that an international conference does not 
have the same limitations as the UN Security Council or veto 
rights (unanimity) over a decision. The president also noted 
that in his report the UN secretary general mentions five 
options, but does not recommend them. On the contrary, he 
added, the UN secretary general ruled out some of them and 
warned "do not take this course because it will be fruitless." 
Kliridhis stressed: Therefore, Butrus-Ghali is clearly telling 
the Security Council that continuing a dialogue would lead 
nowhere, so another way to overcome the Cyprus issue must be 
found. 
  Referring to continuing the talks on the confidence-building 
measures [CBM's], Kliridhis commented on two of the 
alternatives, noting that this procedure exists "only 
theoretically" because the Turkish Cypriot side has no political 
will for a solution. He also ruled out talks on the substance 
of the issue because he sees no possibility of success. He 
said: On the other hand, to resume the CBM's process would 
require concessions by both sides. So, it is up to us whether 
this will happen or not. 
  Commenting on Butrus-Ghali's report, President Kliridhis 
noted the following basic points: 
  a) The efforts over many years to resolve the Cyprus issue 
did not bear fruit because the Turkish side lacks political will. 
  b) The UN secretary general ascertained that continuing this 
procedure, either by discussing the substance of the Cyprus 
issue or the CBM's, will not lead to a solution but will lead 
nowhere as long as one of the interlocutors has no political 
will for an agreement. He stressed that he considers the report 
positive, but added that a report is not a solution to the 
Cyprus issue. 
  Answering questions on the possibility of appealing to the 
UN 
General Assembly, Kliridhis said the appeal could include his 
demilitarization proposal, the issue of the settlers, or the 
possibility of an international conference that would determine 
the framework and principles for a Cyprus solution. He 
reiterated that it can no longer be argued that an appeal to the 
General Assembly would affect the talks negatively because there 
are no talks anymore. 
  President Kliridhis confirmed press reports that the Turkish 
side had submitted a proposal for partitioning Famagusta, but 
said that he rejected it unreservedly. The proposal was made at 
the Vienna talks; and Gustave Feissel, the UN secretary 
general's alternate special representative in Cyprus, conveyed 
it to Kliridhis by telephone. According to the proposal, the 
Turkish side was "willing" to "give up" the part south of 
Dhimokratias Street and Ayios Memnonas if it could take the part 
north of Dhimokratias Street and the port (and colonize it with 
Turkish Cypriots). 

