Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on regional drug seizures and arrests related to drug 
trafficking monitored through 6 February. Source is cited in 
parentheses after each item. 
<H5>  Colombia </H5>
  On 28 January, police in Medellin captured Italian citizen 
Roberto Penussia as part of operation Angelo II, which was 
carried out jointly among Italian, British, and Colombian police 
forces. Penussia is described as "the main link between the 
Italian, Japanese, and Turkish drug trafficking mafias." (Santa 
Fe de Bogota EL NUEVO SIGLO in Spanish 29 Jan 94 p 1) 
  Colombian antinarcotics police on 30 January seized three 
tons of pressed marijuana, ready for export, in Fundacion 
Municipality in Magdalena Department. Police say there has been 
a sharp increase in marijuana plots in Colombia. In another 
operation in Putumayo Department, near the Ecuadoran border, 
police destroyed a cocaine processing facility. There were no 
arrests in either case. (Paris AFP in Spanish 1906 GMT 31 Jan 94) 
  On 3 February, Army soldiers from the "Juan Bautista Solarte 
Obando" jungle Battalion No. 49 discovered 45 hectares of coca 
leaves in Puerto Boyaca, Putumayo Department. The crop was 
destroyed in front of officials from the Attorney General's 
Office and the Prosecutor General's Office. Two cocaine 
processing laboratories were also destroyed. (Santa Fe de Bogota 
EL NUEVO SIGLO in Spanish 4 Feb 94 p 14A) 
  On 6 February, narcotics agents seized 10 kg of cocaine 
which 
was ready to be flown out from Cartegena on a commercial flight. 
The source said the drug was found on a food distribution cart 
in the Rafael Nunez International Airport, ready to be placed on 
a U.S.-bound Avianca plane. (Mexico City NOTIMEX in Spanish 1755 
GMT 6 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Costa Rica </H5>
  Guido Bolandi, one of Golfito's main drug traffickers, has 
been captured by narcotics police along with other gang members. 
A house was raided in the Bella Vista neighborhood and 
Bolandi's femal companion, surnamed Arias Chacon, was 
apprehended together with two men identified by the surnames 
Campos Chacon and Brenes Arias. Crack, marijuana, and cash was 
found. Bolandi has another pending case involving cocaine 
trafficking between Panama and Costa Rica for distribution in 
the cantons of Corredores, Coto Brus, and Golfito. (San Jose LA 
REPUBLICA in Spanish 30 Jan 94 p 11A) 
<H5>  Ecuador </H5>
  On 1 February, narcotics police arrested four Spaniards--two 
men and two women--in the airport attempting to fly to Madrid 
with 22 kg of cocaine. (Mexico City NOTIMEX in Spanish 2014 GMT 
1 Feb 94) 
  Customs Military Police have seized 30 kg of cocaine found 
aboard the vessel Bluemenan Reefer in Puerto Bolivar. The 
vessel had sailed from Peru and its final destination was 
Hamburg. The drug was concealed in a crewmember's cabin. The 
vessel flies the Maltese flag but has a Filipino crew. 
Crewmembers Venancio Abarquel, Norman Zanabria, Cesareo 
Madadaro, and Morris Urdea were arrested in addition to 
Ecuadoran citizen Eduardo Batallas. (Paris AFP in Spanish 0136 
GMT 5 Feb 94) 
  Local media report that Ecuadoran Hugo Guerron Almeida, who 
was arrested on 20 January for presumed links with an 
international drug organization, is an active-duty lieutenant 
colonel in the Ecuadoran Air Force. Guerron was arrested two 
weeks after 17 police officers were arrested for involvement in 
another international drug organization. According to EL 
UNIVERSO newspaper, Guerron was accused of shipping more than 
one-half ton of cocaine hidden in coffee and banana exports. 
(Madrid EFE in Spanish 1814 GMT 5 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Guatemala </H5>
  The Finance Police have uncovered and destroyed another huge 
marijuana plantation with an estimated value of more than 5 
million quetzales in an agricultural cooperative located in 
Libertad, Peten. (Guatemala City PRENSA LIBRE in Spanish 29 Jan 
94 p 22) 
<H5>  Honduras </H5>
  Agents of the National Investigations Directorate in San 
Pedro Sula seized 68 kg of cocaine on 31 January. During the 
operation, the agents arrested a presumed Spanish drug 
trafficker who was identified as Antonio Garcia Garcia. 
(Tegucigalpa LA TRIBUNA in Spanish 2 Feb 94 p 14) 
<H5>  Mexico </H5>
  The Attorney General's Office said today that 14.4 tons of 
marijuana were seized by Mexican police in various operations 
conducted in the states of Baja California, Nuevo Leon, 
Chihuahua, and Baja California Sur. The police also arrested 
eight presumed drug traffickers in the said operations. (Madrid 
EFE in Spanish 2248 GMT 2 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Panama </H5>
  According to a police report, on 28 January a fisherman 
turned over to police 24 packages of cocaine that he found 
floating along Santa Marta Beach, Colon Province. (Panama City 
EL PANAMA AMERICA in Spanish 3 Feb 94 p 8A) 
<H5>  Venezuela </H5>
  The Judicial Technical Police (PTJ) have dismantled a drug 
trafficking network and seized one and one-half tons of cocaine 
through searches conducted in industrial areas of Guarenas and 
Maracay, Aragua State. So far, agents of the PTJ Drug Division 
have arrested four suspected members of the organization, which 
reportedly has exported about 4 tons of cocaine since 1987. 
(Caracas EL NACIONAL in Spanish 4 Feb 94 p D8) 
  The PTJ seized assets in the amount of 1 billion bolivares 
to 
a dismantled drug organization, which was operating in Caracas, 
Maracay, and Guarenas. (Caracas EL NACIONAL in Spanish 3 Feb 94 
p D10) 
  The National Guard today seized some 60 kg of cocaine in 
Merida. The two Colombians who were carrying the drug were also 
captured. (Caracas Venezolana de Television Network in Spanish 
1550 GMT 1 Feb 94) 

