BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, April 19 KYODO -- The cabinet of Prime 
Minister Morihiro Hosokawa approved Tuesday [19 April] a draft 
amendment to legislation that would partially lift curbs on 
foreign lawyers wishing to practice law in Japan, government 
officials said. The draft will be submitted to the Diet later 
in the day and go into force within a year from its 
parliamentary endorsement. 
  It would conditionally authorize the management of a joint 
law firm between Japanese and foreign lawyers, while keeping a 
ban on the personnel hiring of Japanese lawyers by foreign 
lawyers. 
  The draft would also allow such joint law firms to employ 
Japanese or foreign lawyers to provide consultation services on 
Japanese and foreign laws. 
  However, the proposed legislation would continue to bar 
foreign lawyers from arguing both criminal and civil cases in 
Japanese courts. 
  The amendment will also soften the current law's principle 
of 
mutual benefits, thereby authorizing lawyers from countries that 
ban Japanese lawyers' activities to practice law in Japan, 
although such practices would have to be approved by the justice 
minister on a case-by-case basis. 
  The amendment calls for qualifying foreign lawyers, who have 
practiced law for more than five years in the country where they 
obtained their license, to practice law in Japan. 
  It will also soften the five-year requirement by allowing 
such lawyers to count up to two years of practicing law in Japan 
as a legal trainee as part of the five-year requirement. It 
would allow foreign law firms that launch joint law firms in 
Japan to use the same corporate names in Japan that they use in 
their countries of origin. 
  The amendment was sketched out in response to demands by the 
United States and the European Union, which have been urging 
Japan to decontrol its regulations on foreign lawyers' 
activities. The proposed legislation constitutes a key part of 
a government package of market-opening and deregulation measures 
that was announced in February. 

