Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Mr Adams and a Calmer Accounting"] </F>
  [Text] Everything that British ministers said yesterday 
about Gerry Adams's visit to the United States was true. Yes, 
it was a publicity bonanza, just as Douglas Hurd claimed. Yes, 
he did the whitewash job of which Sir Patrick Mayhew complained. 
Yes, he resorted to a smokescreen of evasions and falsehoods as 
alleged in a hard-hitting series of comments from Downing 
Street's new press briefing team. Ken Maginnis got it right 
when he wrote yesterday that the cause of terrorism has been 
elevated and that of democracy diminished. 
  But there are also other true conclusions to draw from the 
48-hour visit, and they pull in rather different directions. In 
the first place, there is the extent to which Britain has 
provided Mr Adams with a megaphone by its own actions. The 
British broadcasting ban on Sinn Fein -- which would almost 
certainly be unconstitutional in America -- directly contributed 
to the American celebration of Mr Adams. His cachet was 
increased merely by the fact that he was able to present himself 
-- accurately -- as the man the Brits are trying to gag. That 
and the fact that Mr Adams had been barred for two decades from 
the U.S. gave a radical chic credibility which carried him 
easily through two days of largely uncritical attention. 
  Yet, at the end of the visit, has Mr Adams come back with 
American endorsement in his pocket? On the contrary, he returns 
with a rejection from the same administration which allowed him 
to visit the country in the first place. The most important 
concrete developments to emerge from Mr Adams's two days in New 
York are President Clinton's call for Sinn Fein to embrace the 
Downing Street declaration and his explicit abandonment of his 
1992 campaign pledge to send an American peace envoy to Northern 
Ireland. It may or may not be true, as Mr Maginnis alleges, 
that the President sent a wrong signal to the world by giving Mr 
Adams his visa. But it is indisputable that Mr Clinton has now 
sent the right signal to Mr Adams. 
  Last but not least, there is the knot into which Mr Adams 
may 
be tying himself. Attempts to equate the Sinn Fein leader with 
Nelson Mandela, George Washington or even Yasir 'Arafat are 
rightly offensive to constitutional politicians. None of Mr 
Adams's followers is denied the vote. He does not speak for a 
disenfranchised majority or even a disenfranchised minority. 
But we need to look beyond the rhetoric to the context it 
creates. Mr Adams, in his own deceiving way, talked nothing but 
peace as he passed from interview to interview. "We're going to 
have peace not in 20 years, not in 40 years, but in our time," 
he said as he left New York. If that is what be believes, then 
there is only one way that it can happen -- and it rests in his 
own hands. 

