Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, February 22 (KCNA) -- Comrade Kim 
Chong-il, supreme commander of the Korean People's Army [KPA], 
highly praised the exploit of a KPA non-commissioned officer 
Hong Kyong-ae who died after saving her revolutionary comrades, 
and saw to it that the title of heroine of the republic was 
awarded to her and her platoon called "Hong Kyong-ae platoon". 
  At a critical moment she safeguarded portraits of the great 
leader President Kim Il-song and the dear leader Comrade Kim 
Chong-il at the platoon barracks and saved her revolutionary 
comrades, unhesitatingly laying down her life. 
  Comrade Kim Chong-il, with his benevolent care, sent gifts 
to 
her parents, praising them for having brought up a fine daughter 
for the country. 
  In December last year, he sent a 70th birthday table to 
twice 
hero of the republic Yi Hak-mun, not forgetting the day. 
  Comrade Kim Chong-il is a great brilliant commander who 
deeply trusts people's army soldiers as his comrades and loves 
them deeply. 
  Saying he must go everywhere there are People's Army 
soldiers, he has visited many posts of the KPA and shown deep 
concern for their training and life. 
  Twenty odd years ago, he called at an anti-aircraft 
artillery 
position of the people's army where he saw the training of 
soldiers and acquainted himself with their living conditions, 
asking them whether there was any inconvenience to them. And he 
had a warm- hearted conversation and posed for a photograph with 
them. 
  One summer day, he directed the training of seamen, sailing 
through the rough sea aboard a torpedo-boat. 
  Many stories about the loving care shown by the supreme 
commander to people's army soldiers are told among them. They 
include the stories that one rainy evening, Comrade Kim Chong-il 
put his own raincoat over a people's army soldier and set up a 
mobile sentry-box and, learning that a soldier, who was a son of 
a fallen fighter, did not know the fate of his younger brother 
with whom he parted during the fatherland liberation war, he 
took a measure to find his brother. So, the people's army 
soldiers deeply respect Comrade Kim Chong-il as the supreme 
commander of the Revolutionary Armed Forces and their father and 
write letters to him, vowing loyalty and filial piety to him. 
  In recent years, KPA officers, Yi Chang-ung and his six 
brothers and one sister, Kang Myong-il and his four brothers and 
many other soldiers sent letters to him, making their loyal oath 
to be revolutionary soldiers who will safeguard Comrade Kim 
Chong-il in the forefront with arms. 
  He read the simple letters of his soldiers one by one and 
sent them reply letters carrying his trust in and love for them. 
  Some time ago, Mun Chong-hwa, head of a chair of Kim Il-song 
University of politics, at the last moments of his life, left a 
will asking his students to faithfully attend supreme commander 
Comrade Kim Chong-il, the life and soul and destiny of the 
Korean nation. 
  The People's Army soldiers are unshakably determined to 
throw 
themselves into water and fire if the supreme commander orders 
them. 
  The noblest trust, unity and harmony between the supreme 
commander and his soldiers are the source of the invincible 
might of the Korean People's Army. 

