BFN 

  [Text] Brussels -- Chancellor Helmut Kohl and his Social 
Democratic challenger in the next Bundestag elections, Rudolf 
Scharping, have advocated the enlargement of the European Union 
[EU] in Brussels today. A few days before the decision by the 
European Parliament on the accession treaties with Austria, 
Sweden, Finland, and Norway, Kohl sent a letter to the Socialist 
Group in the European Parliament, pleading for a "yes" vote. 
  Scharping appealed directly to his party friends in Brussels 
to make use of the "opportunity for Europe." At the close of 
his two-day visit to Brussels, he stressed that he does not want 
to abandon the "basic orientations" of German foreign policies. 
  In his letter, which is available to DPA, to the head of the 
Social Democratic Group in the European Parliament, Jean-Pierre 
Cot, Kohl emphasized the "extraordinary significance" of the 
decision on 5 May "for the entire work of European unification." 
Addressing skeptics who only want to make a decision on the 
acceptance of new members if the European Parliament is granted 
more rights, Kohl wrote: "You can rest assured that I will do 
everything to ensure that, with a view to the 1996 government 
conference, a working group is installed consisting of 
representatives of the governments and members of the European 
Parliament with the participation of the Commission." 
  The heads of state and government of the "Twelve" want to 
set 
up a working group at their summit meeting in Corfu in June to 
prepare the reform of the institution as the Union grows. The 
reform is to be adopted in 1996. 
  The Social Democrats -- the largest group in the European 
Parliament -- proceed from the premise that majority of deputies 
will support the enlargement -- "in spite of justified 
criticism," as Klaus Hoensch, the deputy leader of the Social 
Democratic Group, added. 
  After meetings with Commission President Jacques Delors and 
NATO Secretary General Manfred Woerner, Scharping stressed in 
Brussels that "there is no need for questioning the basic 
orientations of German foreign policy just because of the 
election campaign." He also advocates European integration, a 
"particularly friendly relationship with the United States," 
NATO as an "indispensable element of security," and reliable 
cooperation with neighbors in the East. 

