BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by "P.S.": "Bank Credits; So Far, No Revival"; </F>
accompanying diagram not included] 
  [Text] The recent lowering of the central bank's 
interest rates caused credits offered by Polish banks to get 
cheaper, often times significantly. Economic growth and a 
revival in economic activity causes an increased need for 
financial means. NOWA EUROPA has asked the representatives of a 
few banks which are leaders among credit-providers, about the 
level of interest in credits on the part of potential 
customers. 
  The lowering of interest rates took place only recently, so 
it is too soon to talk about trends, Andrzej Dorosz, director of 
Pekao SA's Credit and Guarantees Department, told NOWA EUROPA. 
One should also not draw too far-reaching conclusions after a 
few months of this year. But one could mention an increased 
level of interest shown by large economic units in high 
investment credits. Measures for providing credits to the 
population are also developing--the bank introduced that service 
relatively recently. These are standard loans which are 
dependent on salary levels. 
  Polska Kasa Opieki-Bank Panstwowy [PKO BP] is Poland's 
largest credit-provider (almost 60 trillion zlotys last year). 
Faced with an increased interest in credits on the part of both 
enterprises and the population, as well as faced with growing 
competition, the bank has been widening its array of offers more 
and more. For instance, in the case of housing credits, PKO BP 
is most eager to see those customers, who need money to complete 
their investments. We have an asymmetrical credit portfolio 
which is dominated by multi-year housing credits of a specific 
nature, Janusz Ostaszewski, PKO BP's press spokesman said. We 
have not reported a revival since the beginning of the year. 
Providing credits is not an area where changes would take place 
fast. A lowering of interest rates does not cause an immediate 
increase in the level of interest shown in these interest rates. 
With installment purchases by the population in mind, noncash 
credits have been prepared. Credit repayment for purchasing 
cars has been extended to four years. 
  The large portfolio of Bank Gospodarki Zywnosciowej [BGZ], 
is 
a result of the difficult situation in agriculture and in the 
processing industry, rather than being a result of economic 
expansion, said Leszek Wisniewski, BGZ's deputy chairman. The 
situation has been imposed on us--we have no intention of 
extending the measures to those sectors of the economy which are 
not the strongest ones. I am not optimistic when it comes to 
those sectors. True, there are several stronger sectors, but 
the majority is weak, for instance the sugar industry, or the 
grain and milling industries. We report no revival, and the 
level of interest in investment credits is very minor. It is 
the same case with preferential credits--loans for buying out or 
restructuring farms, or for modernization of the processing 
industry, have interest rates which are as low as 23 percent. 
  During the first four months of this year, the structure of 
credits granted by the Powszechny Bank Gospodarczy in Lodz, has 
changed, said Bogdan Jachowicz, the bank's press spokesman. The 
contribution of central investments increased from 77.7 percent 
at the end of the year, to 79.4 percent. The number of credits 
for socialized enterprises has decreased slightly: from 10.8 
percent down to 10.2 percent, and when it comes to nonsocialized 
enterprises, the decline was from 10.5 percent to 9.3 percent. 
Credits for the population increased by 0.1 percent--up to 1.1 
percent. 

