CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Aleksey Vladimirovich Yablokov, head of </F>
Interdepartmental Commission of Security Council on 
Environmental Issues, by Vadim Karpov; date and place not given: 
"Aleksey Yablokov: `It Is as If We Are Living in a Garbage 
Dump!'"] 
  [Text] The country is experiencing an exceptionally 
frightening crisis (in addition to all the rest). The world 
around us is expiring. Nature is dying. Are there any rivers 
where the water can be drunk without fear? Are there any meadows 
which have not been ruined by chemicals and acid rain? Is there 
any place at all where we can breathe just one whiff of truly 
clean air? What lies ahead, and what is our present situation? 
These were the questions with which our interview of Aleksey 
Yablokov began. He was B. Yeltsin's adviser on ecology until 
recently, and he now heads the Interdepartmental Commission of 
the Security Council on Environmental Issues. 
  Karpov: It does not seem that long ago that there 
were environmental rallies and demonstrations throughout the 
country. They damned the bureaucratic system and tormented 
administrators. "Hands off," "We will defend".... Now we do not 
hear a thing.... 
  Yablokov: I cannot deny the obvious decline of 
interest in ecology, but why should we be surprised by this? 
People have other problems: prices, crime, political 
instability.... They worry about staying alive, about having 
enough to eat, and about surviving bloody massacres.... 
  Meanwhile, the average lifespan has decreased dramatically 
in 
recent years. It was 70 years in 1986, but now it is 65. One of 
the main reasons is the dismissal of environmental problems, and 
it is sheer insanity--even in these insane times--to remain 
silent. I am already 60. According to Russian standards, I have 
no more than 10 years left, but if I lived in America or in 
Switzerland, I could look forward to another 15-18 years. Is 
this a significant difference? There I would live long enough to 
play with my great-grandchildren, but the people in some cities 
here can only hope to make it to retirement age.... 
  Why is our average lifespan so short by civilized standards? 
I can explain. From 50 to 60 percent of our longevity depends on 
socioeconomic circumstances. Malnutrition and poor eating 
habits, stress, smoking, alcohol.... More people are dying of 
suicide than of ischemic heart disease. Traffic accidents are 
killing more people than cancer. The state of our health is 
20-30 percent dependent on environmental conditions and only 7-8 
percent dependent directly on health care. 
  Are our objectives clear? We have to build highways, improve 
transportation systems, and regulate traffic more effectively. 
We have to fight against alcohol abuse and against the poisoning 
of food with harmful additives. We have to protect ourselves 
from radiation, heavy metals, and dioxins.... 
  Around 16 percent of our territory is in a dangerous 
ecological state, and that is where more than 20 million people 
are living. Now we have another problem: An abundance of toxic 
waste from the West is heading in our direction. It is thousands 
of times cheaper to dispose of it here, and that is why it is 
coming here through legal channels and, in the majority of 
cases, through illegal ones as well. We have no strict laws to 
control this, and the laws we do have are not being enforced.... 
It is as if the whole country is living in a garbage dump and is 
doomed to degeneration and extinction. 
  Karpov: But Russia is on the verge of 
disaster--the non-payment crisis, the endless debts, work 
stoppages, bankruptcies.... Any fine could drive a whole 
industry to its knees. 
  Yablokov: I cannot deny that. If you were to go 
abroad, you would see how clean and neat everything is there. 
Everything is well-kept, without any industrial chaos, because 
each piece of land has an owner, and the owner pays for each 
meter. 
  Obviously, fines would not solve the problem. Not right 
away. 
But there is another option: An enterprise director is asked to 
reduce harmful atmospheric emissions in the next two years. 
Until that time, the payment of the fine is deferred, so to 
speak. He can think about it, ask for suggestions, try different 
solutions.... At the end of the two years, if there are no 
changes for the better, please pay the fine. This is already 
being practiced in hundreds of cities. And it is essential that 
the fines be spent exclusively on environmental projects. 
  These are two methods of control on the governmental level, 
but there is also a third: compensation for damages to property 
and health. In principle, this is a declared right. As usual, 
however, no specific mechanism has been developed for this: 
People do not know how and where to file claims and how to 
calculate the amount of compensation. 
  Karpov: The effectiveness of the "mechanism" also 
seems dubious. How many attempts have been made, and how many 
articles have been published in the press, to prove that the 
most harmful emissions are connected with specific enterprises? 
All of it has been futile. The managers of production units 
always talk their way out of it. 
  Yablokov: Yes, it is true that proving this is 
difficult, but it is not impossible. A few well-publicized 
trials will teach them a lesson. You could say it would have an 
intimidating effect. 
  Karpov: How? 
  Yablokov: By letting them know that each of us, in 
principle, could demand any amount of compensation, and that 
this could absolutely ruin the polluting enterprise. All 
enterprises in the West are living under this Damoclean sword, 
and this forces them to clean up their operations. 
  Karpov: But you are not a foreigner, Aleksey 
Vladimirovich, and you know what people here think of hazardous 
production units. They act upset, but then they go back to work 
in, for instance, the radioactive shops so that they can earn 
higher wages, get an apartment, and retire a few years earlier. 
Women give birth to sick children who suffer from asthma and 
allergies, they also get sick, and then they die prematurely, 
but they have other concerns--the prices of sausage and 
furniture. 
  Yablokov: Yes, sadly enough, that is our 
mentality. In the Chernobyl zone, after decontamination the 
local residents took the radioactive soil home so that they 
could keep collecting "funeral benefits".... All of this calls 
for persuasion, explanation, convincing arguments.... 
  Karpov: By the time we convince them, there will 
be nothing but mutants left in the country.... 
  Yablokov: If we do not want to admit that we are 
living in a pile of crap--excuse the expression--we deserve the 
life we have. We are showing contempt for ourselves and for the 
future of our children and grandchildren. 
  Then why should we worry about the drop in the birth rate 
and 
the reduction of our population? Do you know that almost 60 
percent of our infants are unhealthy?! Only one out of every 
nine or ten adolescents is healthy. 
  How did we reach this point? This happened because the USSR 
acted like a besieged fortress for decades. All of its energy 
and resources were used for defense. Under 20 percent of "their" 
workers are employed in industry, and it is probable that only 
one out of every twenty is working for the "defense 
establishment," but in our country one out of every two workers 
is employed in production and one out of every five is connected 
with the "defense establishment." Only 18 percent of our labor 
force works in the service sector, but "over there" it employs 
half of the labor force. 
  Karpov: It seems as if the Aral and Caspian seas 
were forgotten after the breakup of the USSR.... 
  Yablokov: Not quite. As soon as the CIS was 
formed, the republics concluded an ecological agreement. They 
reached an agreement on monitoring and the exchange of 
information, and also on mutual financial support. At that time, 
in 1991, they decided to conclude separate agreements on the 
Aral and Caspian seas. The agreement on the Aral Sea was signed, 
and the agreement on the Caspian is being negotiated. Lake 
Baykal has not been forgotten either: A large representative 
commission has been set up on the governmental level. 
  The Azov Sea has become a sewage pit in recent years. More 
and more beaches have been closed, and the fish are dying. We 
cannot do anything about the Azov Sea without the cooperation of 
Ukraine.... An agreement is being drafted at this time. An 
international agreement was concluded by Turkey, Bulgaria, 
Ukraine, Russia, and Georgia to save the Black Sea. 
  The move to the market has already made some changes for the 
better, if only because administrators now have to count their 
money. Not long ago, several chemical combines were using 
petroleum-based paraffin in the production of protein and 
vitamin concentrates. There was public indignation.... 
  Karpov: I remember how the CPSU Central Committee 
used to convene journalists for meetings with branch managers 
and how they would use charts and diagrams to prove that 
criticism was unfounded, that there was no danger, and that all 
of this was a figment of the reporters' imagination. 
  Yablokov: Yes, all of the proof boiled down to the 
argument that our agriculture and animal husbandry would 
collapse without these concentrates. Now the market has forced 
them to calculate their costs and realize that it is more 
profitable to sell the paraffin. The receipts from a tonne of 
raw material can pay for two tonnes of soybeans. A tonne of 
paraffin, meanwhile, produces only 700 kilograms of protein and 
vitamin concentrates. In addition to everything else, however, 
there was the departmental factor, and there was always the 
strategic defense objective of absolute self-sufficiency, so 
that we would never need help from anyone else. In the 1960s the 
Politburo ordered the development of agriculture for the 
satisfaction of all of our own food requirements, and that was 
the start of the reliance on protein and vitamin concentrates. 
They were supposed to lift agriculture out of the pit. 
Incidentally, nuclear power engineering also began to be 
developed here as a "by-product," because we needed nuclear 
weapons. We needed plutonium for bombs, and it comes from the 
irradiated fuel of nuclear power plants. 
  In the 1950s they started telling us how important 
pesticides 
were for heightened productivity. By 1988 they had increased 
pesticide applications to 2 kilograms for each hectare of plowed 
land. We know the results: bare store counters and millions of 
tonnes of imported grain. Now we cannot afford to buy 
pesticides. Applications are only one-fifth or one-sixth of the 
previous amount, but this has not reduced the yield. 
  We do not plan to buy any grain this year. Better storage 
methods have reduced the amount of waste products in the garbage 
heap. The economy works. Just five or six years ago we never 
even imagined anything like this. 
  All of this is good for the environment. We do not have to 
use as much land for crops or to flatten marshes and country 
roads with tractors for the augmentation of our plowed areas. We 
can start restoring our forests, creeks, and springs. 
  Karpov: Meanwhile, the land is also becoming 
private property. Do you have any fear that it will be sold to 
rich people with no intention of plowing the land or planting 
anything? 
  Yablokov: Of course I do. In the Security Council 
we recently discussed the threat posed to national security by 
the depletion of soil fertility. We discussed the more 
intelligent use of land resources. Today the restoration of the 
fertility of our anemic soil is our number-one objective. A 
presidential directive on this is being drafted. 
  Karpov: But you cannot go into a private forest or 
reach the sea on a closed beach.... 
  Yablokov: You are wrong. You can go into any 
forest in Europe or America, sometimes even without the consent 
of the owner (as in Switzerland). There are restrictions, of 
course: You cannot chop wood or build fires.... Some of these 
restrictions extend to the owners of the forests. As far as the 
sea coast is concerned, the shore in most countries is public 
property, and there are laws against building anything on the 
beaches or making them inaccessible. 
  Karpov: You were the president's adviser on 
ecology. Did you have many meetings with Boris Nikolayevich? 
  Yablokov: Unfortunately, they were too infrequent 
last year. That is one of the reasons I asked the president to 
release me from my duties as an adviser and give me more freedom 
to take action. 
  Karpov: Did you get this freedom? 
  Yablokov: I think so--as the chairman of the 
Interdepartmental Commission of the Security Council on 
Ecological Security. Our commission can discuss any aspect of 
environmental security, and it is our job to analyze the state 
of the environment in the country and draw the proper 
conclusions. We have already drafted some interesting proposals 
in conjunction with the Ministry of Defense on the creation of 
ecological forces. In conjunction with the Russian Federal 
Oversight of Nuclear and Radiation Security and the Ministry of 
Atomic Energy, we drew up proposals on the improvement of 
radioactive waste handling and disposal. There are also 
proposals on the prevention of ecological terrorism and all 
types of accidents and disasters. 
  Karpov: The president recently published an edict 
on the state strategy of environmental protection. Will it help 
in improving the situation? 
  Yablokov: The new Constitution grants the 
president the authority to define the basic guidelines of 
domestic and foreign policy. The edict was compiled in 
accordance with this. It is of colossal importance: It defines 
the principal guidelines of Russia's actions to secure 
ecologically safe development under market conditions and to 
protect the human living environment. It assigns priority to the 
restoration of environmentally distressed regions and to 
Russia's participation in the resolution of global environmental 
problems. 
  Now it is the government's turn--it is supposed to propose a 
specific plan of action in two months. 
  Karpov: What are you hoping for? 
  Yablokov: I hope we can use new technology and new 
economic relations to climb out of the environmental quagmire. 
You know that the whole world views us as a slovenly neighbor. 
We are dirty, and we are polluting everything around us. We have 
no choice at this time: If we do not surmount our environmental 
problems, we will die. I still think we can surmount them. 

