Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 20 (XINHUA) -- Chinese President 
Jiang Zemin and Vice Premier Zhu Rongji had separate discussions 
with visiting Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa on 
furthering Sino-Japanese relations and other issues here today. 
  According to a Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman, Jiang 
praised Hosokawa for focusing seriously on bilateral ties and 
for actively promoting Sino-Japanese friendship. He also 
expressed the conviction that Hosokawa's visit will be useful in 
enhancing the bilateral ties. 
  He noted that the rapidly developing Sino-Japanese ties over 
the past 22 years following the normalization of diplomatic 
relations between the two countries have entered into a new 
period of "all-round development." 
  Jiang said that China and Japan have their own strong and 
weak points; therefore they are partners in cooperation. "So 
long as the leaders of our two countries have a clear 
understanding on this, the two sides can surely foster a long 
and sustained relationship of mutually beneficial cooperation," 
he stressed. 
  He also believed that it is a historical trend for China and 
Japan to live in peace from generation to generation. 
  Discussing international issues, Jiang said that under the 
turbulent international situation of today, a rare chance has 
emerged in Asia, which now enjoys relative stability and fast 
economic development. 
  He continued that as the 20th century is approaching to an 
end, the leaders of the Asian countries must answer a question 
of major importance, namely, what kind of Asia will they take 
into the 21st century. 
  Jiang said that the Chinese leaders, while concentrating on 
domestic issues, will foster better coordination and cooperation 
with Japan. 
  China, Japan and other Asian countries should make joint 
efforts to keep long-term stability in the continent and to 
establish a new international order under which countries, big 
or small, rich or poor, can live in peace and deal with each 
other on an equal footing, Jiang said. 
  This is Hosokawa's second meeting with Jiang, following 
their 
meeting in Seattle last November. 
  Hosokawa told Jiang that his meetings with Premier Li Peng 
and Vice Premier Zhu Rongji show that the two sides have 
identical or similar views on many issues. 
  He said that he was confident that Japan and China will 
build 
a forward-looking relationship of long-term and stable 
cooperation. 
  Hosokawa conveyed the Japanese emperor's invitation for 
Jiang 
to visit Japan. Jiang thanked the emperor and asked Hosokawa to 
convey his good wishes to the emperor and empress. 
  Zhu Rongji met with Hosokawa and his wife and hosted a 
luncheon in their honor earlier today, thanking the Japanese 
Government and people for their hospitality accorded him during 
his recent visit to Japan. 
  Hosokawa said that he was very pleased to meet Zhu again. 

