BFN 

  [Text] Hanoi VNA June 19 -- An agreement on a USD [U.S. 
dollars] 100 million credit to Vietnam was signed in Bangkok on 
June 16 between representatives of 14 Thai and foreign banks and 
several international financial organizations and a 
representative of Vietnam. 
  With this loan, for the first time Vietnam has opportunity 
to 
mobilize commercial fund from international private capital 
market. The five-year credit carries a two-and a half year grace 
period and repayment is to be made every six months with an 
interest bases on the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) 
plus 2.25 percentage points. 
  This credit will be used for the development of electricity, 
cement and production in Vietnam. 
  Present at the signing ceremony were Thai Prime Minister 
Chuan Likphai, Thai Finance Minister Tharin Nimmanahemin, 
governor of the Vietnam State Bank Cao Sy Khiem. 
  Addressing the event, Thai finance minister pointed to the 
importance of this event, saying that `it paves the way for 
Vietnam's further access to international financial market'. 
  He praised the achievements Vietnam recorded during its 
renovation process, and stressed: `In the past few years since 
the adoption of the `Doi Moi' policy, reform efforts undertaken 
by the Government of Vietnam have yielded impressive results. 
This is amply illustrated by the fast growth of the domestic 
economy, lower inflation, healthier external balances and 
strengthened international reserves position. Five years ago, 
few people imagined that Vietnam would reach the present stage 
of development in such a short span of time....Vietnam's 
take-off process has been irrevocably put in motion and the 
future course is very promising'. 
  For his part, the governor of the Vietnam State Bank, Mr. 
Khiem said: `The signing of this loan syndication marks a 
significant achievement in our effort to gain access to 
international market. In tandem, it also signifies the 
transformation of Bangkok into a funding centre whereby Thai and 
foreign banks as well as finance companies may come together and 
syndicate loans of this nature in support of other countries. 
From now on, through this market, Vietnamese financial 
institutions as well as enterprises are given an opportunity to 
mobilize funds needed for the development of the economy'. 
  Addressing the event, Thai Prime Minister Chuan Likphai 
said: 
`This loan agreement marks a new era which sees the commercial 
financial market effectively opened for the Socialist Republic 
of Vietnam. It is remarkable that within a short period of a 
few years after Vietnam has re-oriented its economy towards the 
market system, Vietnam is now being fully reintegrated into the 
international community. 
  `The successful conclusion of this first loan syndication 
for 
Vietnam under the leadership roles of both the Exim [Export- 
Import] Bank and Krung Thai Bank has clearly demonstrated that 
my government has full confidence in the Vietnamese leadership 
and is determined to assist Vietnam in her reconstruction effort 
in every way possible'. 

