BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special article" by Feng Ta-fu (7458 1129 1381): "United </F>
States To Extend MFN Status to China"] 
  [Text] A debate on whether or not to extend Most Favored 
Nation [MFN] status to China has been going on in U.S. political 
circles since early this year. 
  U.S. Ambassador to China Stapleton Roy has said he believes 
that "China's human rights condition is gradually being 
improved," and "the most effective way to resolve the dispute 
with China is through in-depth diplomatic dialogue." He 
explicitly advocated "doing away with the practice of linking 
China's trade status to its human rights record," saying that 
"such linkage is abnormal." Winston Lord, assistant secretary 
for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, said that the U.S. 
Government does not want to conduct a debate on renewing China's 
MFN status every year and hopes that this issue will not remain 
the central topic of U.S.-Chinese relations. 
<H5>  None of the Authorities Want To Cancel China's MFN Status </H5>
  Garten [jia teng 0502 3326,] U.S. deputy secretary of 
commerce said: "To my knowledge, none of the officials in the 
Clinton administration hope to cancel China's MFN status. James 
Baker, the White House chief of staff during President Reagan's 
term, said: "There will be tough contention between China and 
the United States, but, in the final analysis, the United States 
will extend MFN status to China." He believed that, should the 
United States fail to extend MFN status to China this year, the 
result would be disastrous. 
  Masters [ma si te 7456 2448 3676,] who was the U.S. 
Ambassador to Indonesia during the Carter administration, 
believed that, should Washington openly put pressure on China 
over the human rights issue, this practice would hardly achieve 
the expected results. They would only be shooting themselves in 
the foot by harming U.S. industrial and commercial interests. 
U.S. Senator Bennett Johnston, Democrat, believes that 
"Sino-U.S. relations are the United States' most important 
bilateral relations." Should Washington cancel MFN status to 
China, that would be "unthinkable." He required President 
Clinton to extend MFN status to China this summer and 
furthermore suggested that he extend it forever or on a 
long-term basis." U.S. Senator Alan Simpson, Republican, 
stated: "The United States has granted MFN status to 160 
countries, including Libya, Iran and Syria; that being the case, 
should such status be refused to China, it would be `absurd.'" 
The U.S. press has maintained that, although the U.S. State 
Department's human rights report states that, last year, China's 
human rights record was "not up to international standards," in 
view of the increasingly louder voices coming from U.S. business 
circles, the U.S. Government should "separately handle" the two 
issues of human rights and MFN status, and Clinton should extend 
MFN status to China. On the issue of permanent or long-term 
extension, the U.S. press has said that the White House has 
quietly and slowly launched a broad offensive to seek support 
for granting MFN status to China, while secretly implementing a 
plan to grant China permanent non-discriminative tariff 
treatment. 
  The U.S. press has reported: "In the U.S. Congress, there is 
extensive support for granting China permanent MFN status." 
  In addition, the U.S. press has most recently reported that, 
although Warren Christopher has repeatedly said that China "has 
failed to make substantial progress" in human rights, he 
expressed that "should Beijing improve its human rights 
condition in the next few months," the United States might be 
willing to consider the practice of extending MFN status to 
China for several years running. 
<H5>  The United States Is Readjusting its Policy Toward China </H5>
  With the continuously growth of China's economic strength 
and 
the continuous elevation of its global standing, China is 
playing an increasingly greater role in international affairs. 
The U.S. Government has come to see that, in the world today, a 
solution to any important international or regional issue would 
be out of the question without China's participation or 
cooperation. That being the case, taking the new start that the 
Seattle Sino-U.S. summit gave Sino-U.S. relations as a turning 
point, the United States has begun to change its policy toward 
China and "pursue a new policy which seeks to strengthen 
economic and political contacts with China" to improve and 
develop Sino-U.S. relations. As ASIAWEEK put it, "more than any 
time before, Clinton believes that placing Sino- U.S. relations 
on a more stable basis falls in line with the greatest interests 
of the two sides." At the same time, some important 
international figures have indicated one after another that the 
condition of Sino-U.S. relations has a great bearing on regional 
and even international affairs and have hoped that relations 
between the two countries would be improved and developed. 
Singapore's senior statesman Lee Kuan Yew said: "The United 
States should regard China as a strategic partner." The 
Japanese Prime Minister Hosokawa believed that "improvement in 
Sino-U.S. relations will be helpful to Asia's stability." In 
addition to approving Lee Kuan Yew's view, Kissinger stated that 
"it would not be logical for the United States to shut itself 
out of China, which is enjoying vigorous economic vitality." 
  Neither Side Gains if Trade Is Suspended 
  That being the case, should the United States cancel China's 
MFN status, which has served as the corner stone of Sino-U.S. 
relations, bilateral relations would not be improved and 
developed; rather, they would be worsened and would retrogress. 
True, canceling China's MFN status would bring certain damage 
to China, but the losses to the United States could be even 
greater. The JIJI Press Agency said, should the United States 
suspend China's MFN status, it would have a great effect on the 
U.S. economy. ASIAWEEK said that, whether or not MFN status is 
extended to China matters a great deal to the United States 
itself. Today, the jobs of approximately 180,000 people are 
directly linked to the $9 billion of U.S. exports to China. 
Furthermore, these two figures might grow rapidly in the new 
few years. The NEW YORK TIMES put it more bluntly: "China's 
economy is the largest one on the rise; Sino-U.S. trade has 
become so economically important to the United States today that 
any threat of suspending such trade would be like the United 
States pointing a gun at its own head while threatening to pull 
the trigger in foreign affairs." 
<H5>  The Tremendous Effects of MFN Status </H5>
  To sum up, the immediate interests of China and the United 
States as well as the imperative of extensive cooperation in 
regional and world affairs call for the continuous improvement 
and development of Sino-U.S. relations. Because MFN status is 
the centerpoint of Sino- U.S. relations, this issue plays a 
decisive role in the success of their bilateral relations. We 
can expect that, although contradictions and differences remain 
between the two countries, as long as there are not any 
accidents, from the viewpoint of the two sides' immediate and 
long-term interests, Sino-U.S. relations will inevitably be 
improved and developed, despite all the ups and downs and 
difficulties ahead. 

