Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Fourth installment of "Report on the Fulfillment of Tasks </F>
of the Slovak Republic's Foreign Policy," delivered by Slovak 
Foreign Minister Moravcik to parliament in Bratislava on 2 
February: "Slovakia in the World (IV)"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  2.1 Relations With Neighbors </H5>
  One of the most important tasks in the bilateral sphere and 
in foreign policy, in general, was the formation and maintenance 
of good relations with neighboring countries. Although our 
cooperation has been gradually acquiring an international 
character, the Czech Republic remained our most important 
partner. The tendency to standardize our mutual relations and 
gradually eliminate the specific features is gaining in strength 
particularly on the Czech side. Certain international 
appearances, however, of the Czech Republic in support of the 
Slovak Republic can be classified as signs of good cooperation. 
  The volume of mutual trade indicates a halt in the original 
decline that followed the partition of the federation. A better 
and broader utilization of the customs union could favorably 
affect the speed and quality of the incorporation into the 
Western integration structures. The Treaty on a Temporary 
License To Conduct Business for Natural and Legal Persons Who 
Conduct Business on the Territory of the Other Republic of the 
Former Federation After 31 December 1993 was added at the end of 
the year to the complex of the treaties signed with the Czech 
Republic so far. On the whole, the division of the property of 
the former federation (98 percent completed) can also be rated 
favorably, although the most recent problems are not getting 
solved as fast as desired. 
  The talks on an umbrella agreement regarding the border 
regime between the Slovak Republic and the Czech Republic have 
progressed slowly because of the difference in approach to this 
issue by the two parties. The problem of setting the amount of 
administrative fees has been solved, however, for the 
applications by citizens for permanent or long-term residence on 
the territory of the other republic. 
  To designate the common border, a Slovak-Czech demarcation 
commission has been established, which managed to define 
successfully the international border between the Slovak 
Republic and the Czech Republic. The last four questionable 
instances in this area are currently being solved. 
  The mutual cultural ties are very close; albeit, the 
reduction of the information flow and the mutual communication 
threatens their firmness. Because Slovakia wishes to continue 
presenting its culture to the citizens of the Czech Republic and 
reinforce the spiritual identity of the expatriate community, 
fundamental steps were taken to initiate the work of a Slovak 
Cultural Center in Prague beginning on 1 January 1994. 
  During the year, several working meetings of representatives 
of the two states at all levels took place, including three 
meetings of the presidents. 
  Despite all endeavors and conciliatory measures by the 
Slovak 
Republic, the mutual mistrust and tense atmosphere in relations 
with the Hungarian Republic could not be overcome. This is 
indicated especially by the approach taken by the Hungarian 
side, which was clearly dictated by the effort to challenge the 
credibility of Slovakia at international forums, the emphasis 
put on the problem of the rights of the Hungarian ethnic 
minority by the unnecessary dramatization of some less 
considerate unpremeditated steps by the Slovak side (the removal 
of signs, for instance), and the fueling of the irredentist 
tendencies of some representatives of the Hungarian parties in 
Slovakia. Hungarian diplomacy used international forums to 
complicate the starting position of Slovakia (CSCE, Council of 
Europe, Central European Initiative), and this stand adversely 
marked the entire development of mutual relations. 
  The decidedly negative interpretation of the construction of 
the Gabcikovo hydroelectric project was successfully vanquished, 
however, and depoliticized by submitting the conflict for 
decision by the International Court of Justice at The Hague. 
The reliability of the arguments by the Hungarian Republic has 
diminished recently as regards the need for the reinforcement of 
the defense and the status of the Hungarian ethnic minorities in 
the neighboring countries--that is, also in Slovakia. 
  Because of the aforementioned tension in mutual relations, 
no 
official highest-level meetings have taken place this year, 
except for some brief meetings of the prime ministers and 
foreign ministers at multilateral forums and the participation 
of our supreme representatives at the funeral of the deceased 
Hungarian Prime Minister J. Antall. 
  The basis for mutual relations with the Polish Republic is a 
good neighborhood without any open problems and joint efforts to 
integrate into the West European structures. Nonetheless, not 
all activities have been conducted according to the expectations 
of both parties, as the Polish partners reckon with a more 
active part on our side. The volume of trade declined, which is 
a result of the restructuring of both economies and also the 
absence of treaties in the economic sphere. A recovery in this 
area should be helped by the opening of new border crossings 
according to the schedule approved by the government in October. 
  A certain revival in our relations can be expected in the 
near future because treaties are ready on cross-border 
cooperation, the small border contact, and we are preparing the 
opening of a Slovak institute in Warsaw. The activity in other 
sectors leaves something to be desired. 
  Of the Polish officials, President Walesa visited Slovakia 
with the Polish foreign minister on the occasion of the 
inauguration of the president. Deputy Prime Minister R. Kovac 
visited Poland. 
  The development of relations with Austria continued its 
favorable trend. Contacts have been vitalized at all levels and 
in all areas because, from the very beginning, the Slovak 
diplomacy has been aware of the specific character of 
cooperation with this country, which is our only neighbor with a 
developed market economy and democratioc traditions, and a 
future member of the European Union. The foreign political 
importance of Austria increased also by many countries 
accrediting their ambassadors to the Slovak Republic in Vienna 
because many foreign observers and journalists also operate from 
there. Moreover, Vienna is the seat of numerous international 
organizations. 
  The official visits by the Slovak prime minister to Austria 
and the Austrian federal president and the foreign minister to 
the Slovak Republic helped in the quest for possibilities of 
cooperation, as did the participation of Slovak officials at the 
international undertakings in Vienna (UN Human Rights 
Conference, Council of Europe Summit, and so forth). 
International ties have also developed briskly, and this was 
reflected in the signing of numerous treaties on cooperation. 
  Austria has become the largest foreign investor in Slovakia 
and the third-largest business partner, but Slovakia has not 
managed to eliminate the mutual trade deficit. The interchange 
between the infrastructures of the two countries has also 
progressed at a slow pace. The feeling of an environmental 
threat to Austria on the part of Slovakia, to which some 
ambiguous statements from our side contributed, remains an open 
question. The problems with filling the post of Slovak 
ambassador to Austria also had an adverse effect on our mutual 
relations. 
  The specific feature of our relations with Ukraine lies in 
the fact that ties were established between two new states with 
a similar state-forming process and political and economic 
problems. In the course of 1993, practically all spheres of 
political, economic, and cultural life became active as the 
appropriate treaties were drafted. The Treaty on Good 
Neighborliness, Friendly Relations, and Cooperation merits 
special mention, as do the treaties on problems concerning the 
state border, including the readmission treaty, and several 
ministerial treaties. 
  We have managed neither to settle the matter of permeability 
of the state border with Ukraine nor to process a concept of new 
border crossings. The border problems have been further 
complicated by the disaster on the Uh River. 
  The Slovak president visited Kiev, and numerous meetings 
took 
place between Cabinet members and their Ukrainian partners. 
<H5>  2.2 Relations With the European Union </H5>
  Another priority of foreign policy of the Slovak Republic 
has 
been and remains the integration into the West European 
political, economic, and security structures. We have advanced 
on the road to this objective by signing the European 
(Association) Treaty on the association of the Slovak Republic 
with the European Union in October 1993. For this reason, we 
have paid extraordinary attention also to the establishment of 
good bilateral relations with individual countries of the 
European Twelve. 
  The relations with our former neighbor, the FRG, maintained 
their somewhat privileged nature. 
  A material framework of the bilateral relations is formed by 
the Treaty on Good Neighborliness and Cooperation Between the 
Czech and Slovak Federal Republic and the FRG, on the basis of 
which an actualization--that is, signing of additional 
treaties--is being discussed. 
  The most significant contact actions have probably been the 
visit by the Slovak president to the FRG, the meeting between 
the foreign ministers, and numerous meetings and talks between 
other ministers. Closer ties have also been formed between the 
parliaments of the two countries. 
  The ties between the Slovak Republic and the individual 
Bundeslaender have been developing well, particularly with 
Bavaria, where the cooperation of individual sectors is further 
advanced within the framework of the Slovak-Bavarian working 
team. The visit by Slovak Prime Minister Meciar to Munich, 
where he also met with Bavarian Prime Minister E. Stoiber, 
confirmed the solid basis for such cooperation. Recently, we 
have registered an increased interest in the Slovak Republic on 
the part of other FRG laender as demonstrated by the visits of 
delegations from Baden-Wuerttemberg and North Rhine-Westphalia 
to Bratislava. 
  In the second half of the year, the interest of the FRG in 
cooperation with the Slovak Republic in the economic sphere 
appreciably increased. This is also corroborated by the 
establishment of a German economic mission in Bratislava and a 
branch office of the Kreditny ustav pre obnovu a rozvoj [Credit 
Institute for Reconstruction and Development] at the FRG Embassy 
in Bratislava. In October 1993, the FRG assumed second place in 
the volume of investment in the Slovak economy and is the 
second-largest trade partner of the Slovak Republic. There was 
very active communication on the level of the business sphere. 
  The compensation to Slovak citizens, former 
concentration-camp prisoners, remains an open question. The 
German side holds a relatively reserved stand and points out the 
complex internal political economic situation. Similarly, the 
question of employment of Slovak citizens working on contract in 
the FRG must be resolved, while an increase to numbers 
comparable with other Visegrad Four countries could not be 
attained so far. 
  During the short time of the existence of an independent 
representation office of the Slovak Republic, we have succeeded 
in building an efficient representation and a wide network of 
contacts. Nonetheless, the appointment of a Slovak ambassador to 
the FRG has not yet been resolved. This state of affairs is 
perceived adversely by the German side, and, to a certain 
degree, it refutes the attained results. 
  The level of mutual relations with France rose after the 
emergence of the Slovak Republic on 1 January 1993. That is 
testified to by the extensive contact activity by members of the 
Slovak Government. The fundamental objective of Slovak foreign 
policy concerning France in 1993 was the use of the potential of 
the declared French political support for the endeavors of 
Slovakia to integrate into the European integration structures 
in the admission into the Council of Europe, the signing of the 
European Treaty on Association of the Slovak Republic with the 
European Union, and the development of high-level bilateral 
contacts. 
  France does not see any difference in the readiness of the 
Visegrad Four countries to join NATO and the Western European 
Union, but for now it will not support their membership in these 
structures. 
  Regarding the Slovak Republic, France points out the 
uncertain political and economic situation, ambiguities in 
legislation, obfuscated privatization, and unsolved problems in 
the sphere of minority policy. 
  In this context, it must be pointed out that the French 
partners are not quite clear about the "rules of the game"; the 
cooperation rules have not been defined, and they feel that they 
are not treated as equals. Following the official visits by 
then Foreign Minister Roland Dumas and Minister Delegate for 
European Affairs Alain Lamassoure to the Slovak Republic, and 
the official visit by the Slovak foreign minister to France in 
1993, the Slovak Foreign Ministry plans for 1994 a meeting of 
presidents and prime ministers of the two countries. 
  Parliamentary cooperation has developed between individual 
sectors--interior, defense, education (Treaty on Cooperation in 
the Area of Youth, Physical Education, and Sport was signed on 1 
November 1993), and others. 
  Despite the cutback in the sphere of technical assistance, 
several projects have been realized in the Slovak Republic in 
1993, particularly in the spheres of education, culture, 
environmental protection, agriculture, and public administration. 
  There are no unsolved issues in the sphere of bilateral 
relations between Great Britain and Slovakia. A significant 
stimulus for the development of the relationship was the visit 
by the prime minister to London on 8 March 1993. He met with 
British Prime Minister John Major; Michael Heseltine, British 
president of the Board of Trade; EBRD [European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development] President Jacques Attali; and 
representatives of the Confederation of British Industry. Other 
significant contacts include the visit by Archibald Hamilton, 
minister of state for armed forces, to the Slovak Republic, and 
several meetings between other ministers. 
  From the political point of view, Great Britain is an 
important partner as a member of the European structures the 
Slovak Republic is interested in joining (European Union, NATO, 
Western European Union). The interests of Britain differ in 
certain instances from those of other members of these groupings 
and often coincide with the interests of the Slovak Republic 
(for example, expansion of the European Union membership, 
liberalization of trade). 
  The assistance provided by Great Britain through the 
Know-How 
fund in many spheres of public administration is considerable. 
  The image of Slovakia in the UK has somewhat improved during 
the year. Although the not-very-good economic situation is 
still pointed out, and the domestic political situation is not 
characterized as stable, the membership of Slovakia in 
international organizations, to which the country was admitted 
during 1993, has been emphasized all the time more frequently. 
  The significant official visits by our top-ranking 
representatives to Belgium confirmed our endeavors to integrate 
into the European and Euro-Atlantic structures. There was the 
visit by the Slovak president on the occasion of the funeral of 
King Baudouin I and the meetings during his visit to NATO, the 
meeting between the Slovak prime minister and his Belgian 
counterpart, and the talks between the Slovak foreign minister 
and his Belgian counterpart. There were ties established also 
between individual ministers. 
  Relations between the two countries can be described as 
problem-free. 
  The development of relations with Luxembourg took a similar 
course. Although the intensity of contacts was not very high, a 
visit by the heir to the throne, Prince Henri, to the Slovak 
Republic took place, and a working visit to Luxembourg by the 
Slovak prime minister. Various important economic and business 
contacts were established on these occasions. 
  After 1 January 1993, contacts with the Netherlands 
generally 
amplified, as witnessed by the official visit by Dutch Foreign 
Minister Kooijmans to the Slovak Republic, which created the 
framework for further development of mutual cooperation. 
Certain favorable shifts in Dutch public opinion regarding the 
Slovak Republic were registered. The Slovak Republic used 
within the framework of the PSO [expansion unknown] bilateral 
noninvestment aid in the amount of 3 million Dutch guilders. 
  The activities of the Foreign Ministry were aimed in the 
relationship with Greece at forming prerequisites for an actual 
support for Slovak endeavors to integrate quickly into the 
European structures with respect to the Greek chairmanship of 
the European Union beginning on 1 January 1994. These questions 
and bilateral relations were on the agenda of the meeting of 
foreign ministers of the two countries in Athens in June. 
  In the course of 1993, fundamental ties were established to 
Spain. Except for the meeting between foreign ministers at the 
48th UN General Assembly, however, no significant contacts took 
place, and the present level of mutual relations is not 
satisfactory. Cooperation in the economic sphere is 
characterized by passivity on both sides and negligible interest 
in developing actual contacts, while such an intensification 
could be interesting for us because of the experience of Spain 
with a transformation of the economy. Contractual relations are 
also stagnating. A certain improvement could be detected in the 
contacts between the Ministries of the Economy, Education and 
Science, and Culture. 
  Our relations with Portugal can be characterized in a 
similar 
manner, despite a certain promise of an improvement by 
occasional highest-level meetings at multilateral forums: a 
meeting between the presidents in Washington, the prime 
ministers in Vienna, and the foreign ministers at the UN in New 
York. A favorable impulse was the visit by the Portuguese state 
secretary of trade to the Slovak Republic. He reported an 
interest of Portuguese enterprises in privatization. 
  Bilateral relations with Ireland have not developed. 
<H3>  2.3 Relations With Other States in Europe, North America, 
and the Commonwealth of Independent States </H3>
  In relations with other countries in Europe, Slovak 
diplomacy 
supported the endeavors for furthering possibilities of contacts 
in both political and economic spheres. In some countries, we 
wanted to create the appropriate framework for launching a 
dialogue and creating opportunities for the expansion of 
contacts in the future. Thus, cooperation was launched with 
Turkey, Cyprus, Croatia, Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic 
of Macedonia -- FYROM], the Baltic states, and the Scandinavian 
countries. In some instances, high-level meetings have already 
taken place. 
  In relations with our traditional partners, we have tried 
to maintain the position of the Slovak Republic, and, if 
possible, use it for mutual support on the international scene. 
All aspects of contacts have been developed with Slovenia, with 
which we are tied by considerable common political and economic 
interests, and with Romania, where a significant progress was 
recorded in our mutual relations, including highest-level 
meetings. As a result of the domestic political situation, our 
contacts with Bulgaria somewhat stagnated. 
  Our relations with the Holy See have improved after our 
president's official visit to the Vatican, and the meeting 
between the Slovak prime minister with the state secretary of 
the Holy See, Cardinal Angelo Sodano. We have also established 
diplomatic ties with the Sovereign Order of Knights of Malta and 
the Republic of San Marino. 
  The contacts with Switzerland are developing similarly well. 
We have established contacts in the economic sphere, 
parliamentary cooperation, and cooperation on the level of towns 
and communities. The representatives of the Slovak Republic and 
Switzerland met unofficially during the World Economic Forum in 
Davos, and the Economic Forum in Crans Montana, attended by the 
Slovak prime minister and several ministers. Slovak Prime 
Minister Meciar met on this occasion with Swiss President Ogli. 
  Regarding the position of both North American states in the 
world political, economic, and security relations, we have 
considered the relations with them a priority. Foreign policy 
of the Slovak Republic toward the United States of America was 
built on the fact that although Slovakia is one of the successor 
states to the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic, it is perceived 
as a new entity that must establish itself on the international 
political, security, and economic scene. The second factor 
affecting contacts with the United States was the influence of 
the United States on the present arrangement of the world and 
its decisive position within the framework of numerous 
international organizations and institutions, which the Slovak 
Republic wants to join, or whose support it would like to gain 
(United Nations, NATO, IMF, World Bank, etc.). This corresponds 
to the frequency of visits by World Bank representatives in the 
course of the year. The Slovak president visited the United 
States on the occasion of the opening of the Holocaust Museum, 
the Slovak prime minister visited there, and so did the National 
Council of the Slovak Republic chairman (three times), the 
Slovak foreign minister on the occasion of the admission of 
Slovakia to the United Nations and at the 48th UN General 
Assembly, and four other ministerial visits. 
  The interest of the U.S. side focused on the sphere of 
economic assistance and cooperation with the Slovak Republic. 
The most important visits from the United States can be 
considered the mixed delegation of the Department of Defense and 
the Department of State headed by Deputy Under Secretary of 
Defense Slocombe, whose members were able to acquaint themselves 
with the orientation of the Slovak Republic in the sphere of 
security policy and the orientation of the Army of the Slovak 
Republic towards a compatibility of the army systems with the 
NATO structures, and the Coordinating Committee for Multilateral 
Export and the IMF expert team missions. 
  The relations with the United States are regulated by some 
30 
treaties, of which 11 have been signed since November 1989. 
  Because of the position of the Slovak Republic as a new 
entity, in addition to the economic indicators, the United 
States is also interested in the protection of human rights 
here, freedom of speech, and minority rights. Despite positive 
signals from the U.S. representatives towards the Slovak 
Republic, in the political sphere, the exceptions in the 
assessment of the sphere of the protection of human rights and 
minorities, media policy, and the privatization process could 
not be completely eliminated (see the CSCE Commission report to 
the U.S. Congress). 
  There are also great reserves in the sphere of cooperation 
with individual states of the United States, where only the 
framework treaty with Maryland facilitates a broader economic 
cooperation than the current one. 
  A problem of the Slovak Republic from this point of view 
is, in particular, the lack of coordination of information flows 
abroad. The latent apprehensions about the development of 
democracy in the Slovak Republic are contributed to also by some 
statements and measures by the highest representatives of the 
Slovak Republic in the sphere of human rights and media policy. 
  Despite the status of Canada in the world, the Slovak 
Republic's relations with this country at the highest level, as 
well as relations with the Canadian representative mission, 
which is based in Prague, have been only sporadic. That was 
due, in particular, to the perception of the Slovak Republic as 
the destroyer of the common state and to the drawing of 
parallels with the efforts of Quebec to gain independence within 
the framework of the Canadian federation. 
  The Slovak Republic is perceived in Canada as a politically 
integral part of the group of Visegrad Four, though one that is 
economically weaker, and one responds with understanding to the 
efforts of the Slovak Republic to become integrated into West 
European structures. 
  In May 1993 the Economic Development Corporation (EDC), the 
most important Canadian economic organization guaranteeing 
Canadian exporters' credits, included the Slovak Republic among 
high-risk countries and refused to provide guarantees, thereby 
virtually halting trade exchange. This suspension [of export 
credit guarantees] has jeopardized the implementation of many 
projects. This EDC attitude changed only at the beginning of 
November, following the September 1993 visit by a delegation of 
Slovak bankers headed by the governor of the Slovak National 
Bank. In 1994 it is therefore possible to expect a revival of 
economic relations and the provision of credits by Canadian 
banks. 
  Cooperation at the level of government departments should be 
based on a clear definition of the Slovak Republic's priorities 
not only vis-a-vis Canada as a whole, but also vis-a-vis 
Canadian provinces, many of which assume a more active approach 
than federal bodies. 
  The following contacts took place in the course of 1993: the 
Slovak Republic was visited by Otto Jelinek, minister of 
national revenue, and several government ministers and Ivan 
Gasparovic, chairman of the National Council of the Slovak 
Republic, paid a visit to Canada. 
  In view of the political and economic situation of the 
countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States [CIS], 
Slovak foreign policy approached relations with them 
pragmatically, with emphasis on the development of mutually 
advantageous economic and trade relations and the effort to 
recover some of our claims in these countries. 
  Proceeding from the new conditions in the two countries, the 
Slovak Republic was building relations with the Russian 
Federation on the basis of equal partnership. On the whole, we 
have succeeded in following up on the positive aspects in 
historical relations between the two nations. 
  The fundamental aim in building new relations with the 
Russian Federation was to secure, above all, economic and trade 
relations, which had been greatly disrupted in the preceding 
period. Meeting this target was immensely difficult, due to the 
exceedingly complicated domestic political, economic, and 
socioeconomic situation in Russia. In spite of this, we have 
succeeded in activating mutual relations and raising their 
quality so that these relations can be characterized as good 
partnership in all areas. Economic relations, in particular, 
have been raised to a good level. 
  A number of contacts was realized in the course of 1993. 
President Boris Yeltsin's visit to Bratislava, in particular, 
was an event that should become an important factor for the 
further development of mutual relations. The Treaty of Friendly 
Relations and Cooperation was signed during the visit. 
  Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar paid important visits to 
Moscow in March and in August 1993, which were devoted mainly to 
questions of economic cooperation. The Agreement on Economic and 
Scientific-Technical Cooperation between the Governments of the 
Slovak Republic and the Russian Federation and the Memorandum on 
Questions of Slovak-Russian Trade and Economic Cooperation were 
signed in 1993. Following up on Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar's 
visits, First Deputy Prime Minister of the Russian Federation O. 
Lobov and Deputy Prime Minister Y. Yarov paid visits to the 
Slovak Republic. 
  Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Slovak Republic Jozef 
Moravcik paid a visit to the Russian Federation in March 1993, 
as a member of Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar's delegation, and 
this visit was reciprocated by the visit of Andrey Kozyrev, 
minister of foreign affairs of the Russian Federation, to 
Bratislava. 
  Mutual working visits by other ministers of the two 
countries 
were important. 
  With regard to relations with other CIS republics, no 
activities were developed at the highest level and at 
ministerial level and no visits at these levels were carried 
out. In 1994 it is necessary to reckon with the development of 
activities with, in particular, Belarus, Tajikistan, and 
Kazakhstan. 

