Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] HANOI, March 4 (AFP) -- Vietnam has warned a Roman 
Catholic bishop to stop his "illegal activities" and step down 
from a senior church post in Ho Chi Minh City as his appointment 
was not approved by the government, a report said Friday. The Ho 
Chi Minh City municipal government issued a statement saying 
that Huynh Van Nghi's appointment as a supervising bishop was 
"unilateral, improper and without consultation with the 
Vietnamese government." 
  Vietnam has rejected Nghi's appointment to the supervisory 
post, saying he should be given the more senior position of 
deputy and successor to the southern city's ailing archibishop 
in place of another priest who is a nephew of a former South 
Vietnamese president. City officials have denounced what they 
called "a Vatican plot" to have Bishop Nguyen Van Thuan, the 
nephew of former president Ngo Dinh Diem, become the next 
archbishop of Ho Chi Minh City in place of Nghi. The row has 
been at the centre of tensions between Hanoi and the Vatican 
over the appointment of priests to top posts, as the government 
here has insisted that it has the right to veto any selections. 
  Despite a warning last year to stop acting as supervising 
bishop, Nghi had continued in the job, prompting the city's 
People's Committee to call in the priest "to point out to him 
his infringement," the statement said. "The laws cannot be 
continuously ignored," the statement said, according to a report 
in the Saigon Giai Phong newspaper. 
  Thuan was originally appointed deputy archbishop before the 
communists took over the then Saigon in 1975. He was not allowed 
to take up the post and has been in exile in Rome since 1992. 
The Vatican however is insisting that Thuan should eventually 
take over from the octogenarian Archbishop Nguyen Van Thuan, who 
is in poor health. 
  In an interview with a Catholic newspaper published this 
week, Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet said the dispute with the 
Vatican centred on Vietnam's "national sovereignty" and ruled 
out a compromise on the choice of clergy. Kiet also defended his 
insistence that priests join a government umbrella organisation 
for social groups and religions, saying the authorities had the 
right to prevent religious problems arising. 
  The Church's development here under French colonial rule and 
Pope John Paul II's stand against communism have fuelled 
government suspicions of Catholics, who number around seven 
million people, or 10 percent of the population. Vatican 
officials have accused Vietnam of trying to turn Asia's second 
largest Catholic community after the Philippines into a 
state-sponsored church outside of the control of the normal 
church hierachy. 
  Protests by Buddhists in several cities have added to 
government concerns that a relaxation of controls on religion in 
recent years may lead to social unrest. 

