CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Viktor Petrov, doctor of geological and </F>
mineralogical sciences, under the rubric "Fuel": "There Will Not 
Be Another Tyumen. A New Approach to Resource Use Should Sustain 
the Probable Economic Growth With Oil"] 
  [Text] The development of the world economy has been 
accompanied by the continuous growth of production and 
consumption of mineral resources. Oil consumption has been 
growing at the fastest rate. At the beginning of the century, in 
1900, oil production in the world came to 20.1 million tonnes. 
Subsequently, it doubled every 10 years for 70 years, coming to 
2.248 billion tonnes in 1970. The rate of growth of production 
and consumption later diminished to 1-1.7 percent; in 1991, the 
volume of consumption came to 3.150 billion tonnes. World 
production and consumption of gas have grown by 2.5-2.7 percent 
annually in recent decades, coming to 1.9 trillion cubic meters 
in 1991. 
  The former USSR would have been unable to attain superpower 
status without creating its own mighty mineral and raw-material 
base and the oil-and-gas complex. After development of the 
unique West Siberian Oil and Gas Province, oil production 
doubled between 1971 and 1990, and that of natural gas increased 
by a factor of more than 7.5. The USSR came to rank first in the 
world on these indicators, attaining in 1988 the levels of 624 
million tonnes (including gas condensate) and more than 800 
billion cubic meters, respectively, which accounted for about 20 
percent of the world production of oil and more than 40 percent 
of the world production of gas (Russia accounted for 570 million 
tonnes and 640 billion cubic meters of the above). The inland 
consumption of oil and gas, including exports, was at the level 
of 13-14 percent and 35-38 percent of their consumption in the 
world. 
  An economic crisis (including that in the oil industry), a 
drop in industrial production by a factor of two, the severance 
of relations between CIS countries, the loss of the regulatory 
role of the state in the economy, and the decay of the 
geological service--all of these caused a sharp decline in the 
production and consumption of oil and virtually all other types 
of mineral raw materials after the disintegration of the USSR. 
In 1993, oil production in Russia fell to 340 million tonnes, 
and in the CIS as a whole, to 380 million tonnes (estimated). In 
terms of the level of oil production, Russia was set back to the 
early 1970's. The further declining trend persists. 
  Opportunities for the exportation of oil from Russia and 
some 
CIS countries to foreign states have expanded considerably now 
that foreign-economic activities that had traditionally been 
oriented toward raw materials have been liberalized. Oil exports 
had become sizable as a proportion of the worldwide volume (up 
to 13-14 percent in certain years) earlier, in the 1980's. We 
cannot say that such extensive exports were justified from the 
economic standpoint or that of resource conservation for 
self-supply in the long run. They largely hinged on the policy 
of so-called internationalist duty of the USSR to other 
fraternal states. In addition to "traditional" exports, the 
exportation of oil by enterprises formed with the participation 
of foreign investors is also developing at present in the 
free-market environment. In Russia, more than 40 such 
enterprises are already known in the most significant oil and 
gas-bearing regions of Western Siberia, the Northwest, Urals, 
and the Volga area, and on the shelf of Sakhalin. Joint ventures 
with foreign companies have also been established in Kazakhstan 
at the unique Tengiz fields and on the shelf of the Caspian Sea 
which has good oil prospects. The picture of the development of 
oil fields in the Caspian Sea basin of Azerbaijan is similar, 
despite the fact that the development of marine fields was 
started for the first time in the world precisely here, and that 
local geologists and oilmen have accumulated a wealth of their 
own experience. 
  One would think that this orientation in foreign economic 
activities toward considerable exports to foreign states, whose 
development will get an additional impetus as foreign investment 
increases, proceeds mainly from the completely unsubstantiated 
but widespread notion of the supposedly inexhaustible mineral 
wealth of the former USSR. In the process, the large size of the 
domestic economy, the likely overcoming of the crisis by it, and 
its subsequent development are not taken into account, as well 
as the consequent domestic need for oil, great at present and 
growing in the long term, as the complex world situation in this 
area becomes ever more aggravated. 
  Actually, oil reserves, although large, are not so large as 
to allay serious concern about meeting our own need for oil in 
the immediate future. In Western Siberia which holds about 
one-half of all potential resources and about 70 percent of the 
explored reserves of oil in Russia, and provides 70 percent of 
production, the normal stage of decline in the effectiveness of 
geological prospecting and volumes of output has virtually set 
in. In other old petroliferous regions, the realization of their 
initial potential and the depletion of explored reserves are so 
high (65-85 percent) that a drop in production is objectively 
unavoidable. The technical and economic performance of wells has 
deteriorated sharply in all regions. Declining output is 
characteristic of about 60 percent of explored reserves. The 
size of the discovered fields and the yields of wells have 
diminished sharply. 
  The probability of the discovery of a new Tyumen, or at 
least 
a significant segment of it, on the extensive land mass of 
Russia is theoretically and practically nil. Certain hopes were 
attached to creating a substantial new raw-material base in 
Eastern Siberia (Krasnoyarsk Kray, Irkutsk Oblast, and Yakutia) 
whose hypothetical resources of oil were estimated to be 10 
billion tonnes. However, the quite significant total volume of 
exploration in the area over more than two decades has been 
crowned with modest success, and for now has not confirmed these 
projections. The discovered reserves (about 500 million tonnes) 
are dispersed at several fields with very poor technical and 
economic characteristics. It is now absolutely obvious that 
these fields and probably those to be discovered in the future 
in this region will not influence the prospects for oil supply 
to Russia significantly. It is becoming necessary to reevaluate 
the hypothetical resources of oil in Western and Eastern Siberia 
and a number of other oil and gas-bearing regions taking into 
account the accumulated new factual data on their geology and 
prospects. 
  The continental shelf, mainly that above the polar circle, 
remains the last large oil and gas-bearing reserve. However, for 
now we can speak with confidence about large gas resources that 
have been confirmed by the discovery of unique fields in the 
Barents and Kara Seas. The large hypothetical resources of oil 
may also be proven after exploratory drilling is performed. This 
is why the exploration and study of the occurrence of oil and 
gas on the shelf is already one of the strategic tasks of the 
geological service and science. 
  In addition to the indicated, actually existing problems 
associated with the oil raw-material base, which appear 
particularly acute in the long run, it is necessary to take into 
account in our foreign economic activities the fact that the 
forthcoming stabilization of the economy of Russia and the CIS 
as a whole and its probable subsequent development will 
unavoidably entail the growth of oil consumption. Russia and 
other CIS countries trail well behind the developed countries on 
this indicator. Thus, at the level of 1991, the per capita 
consumption of oil in the CIS as a whole, including Russia, came 
to 1.5 and 1.6 tonnes whereas it came to 2.6 tonnes in states 
with developed economies, including 3.2 tonnes in the United 
States. 
  Nor can the policy of the use of domestic oil resources be 
determined in isolation from the present and, in particular, 
long-term worldwide condition of the oil supply. 
  The growth of consumption of fuel, energy, and other mineral 
resources will remain significant as an objective factor in the 
development of the world economy in the long run. According to 
available estimates, the production and consumption of oil and 
gas--given the indicated rates of their growth in recent 
years--may reach 3.4-3.5 billion tonnes and 2.3-2.4 trillion 
cubic meters as early as the beginning of the 21st Century 
providing, just as it does now, more than one-half of the energy 
used in the world. The currently known estimates of explored and 
hypothetical world resources of oil and gas make it possible to 
say quite definitively that their significance as the principal 
energy resources will persist for at least the next 70 years. At 
the same time, in the long term we should expect the circle of 
oil and gas-producing countries to narrow (mainly on account of 
the industrially developed countries), the trend toward keener 
competition for the sources of this raw material to strengthen, 
and prices for it to increase. This conclusion follows from the 
data on the ratio of the amount of explored reserves to the 
volumes of oil production and consumption for various groups of 
states (as percentages of world volumes as of 1991, without the 
CIS) which are given in the table. 


Level of economic     Reserves          Production          Consumption 
development of 
states 

Developed             6.5               28.0                65.2 

Developing            90.7              65.7                26.7 

With planned and      2.8               6.3                 8.1 
transitional 
economies 


  The economically developed countries meet almost 40 percent 
of their needs for oil out of domestic production and 60 percent 
through other, mainly developing countries. Oil production in 
the developed countries fell five to six percent between 1986 
and 1991, and increased in the developing countries by 23-25 
percent, the overall growth (without the CIS) being more than 12 
percent. 
  Deliveries from the oil-producing developing countries to 
the 
industrially developed countries account for 70-75 percent of 
the worldwide exports-imports of oil which come to 1.4-1.45 
billion tonnes a year (except for the CIS); of this, the United 
States and Japan account for about 35 percent. The United States 
imports from more than 50 countries, but predominantly from the 
OPEC countries (about 60 percent of imports). The latter also 
provide about 75 percent of the entire import of Japan and up to 
60 percent of the import of West European countries. 
  The degree of self-sufficiency of the economically developed 
countries in oil will unavoidably continue to decline in the 
future, whereas the dependence of these countries on outside 
deliveries will increase. Under the circumstances, the developed 
countries that are large oil consumers strive to expand contacts 
involving oil production and delivery with the largest possible 
number of oil-producing countries with a view to increasing the 
reliability of their oil supply in the long term and getting 
leeway for greater maneuvers. For example, legislative and state 
sanctions in the United States are aimed at conserving the 
domestic resources of oil. Thus, the United States has suspended 
exploration and prospecting in the Alaska region and in some 
sections of the waters of the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic 
and Pacific shelf. By 1991, oil production had been reduced by 
15 percent compared to the 1986 level. The foreign policy of the 
United States in some vital regions is also largely associated 
with its current and long-term oil interests. The United States, 
Mexico, and a number of other countries do not allow foreign 
companies to participate in prospecting for oil and producing it 
in their territories. 
  In recent years, the developing countries have been 
producing 
an amount of oil that is almost 2.5 times greater than their own 
consumption. From among them, the OPEC countries hold about 80 
percent of world reserves and turn out about 47 percent of the 
world's production (except for the CIS), including the states 
adjacent to the Persian Gulf (Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, the United 
Arab Emirates, Iraq, Iran) with 75 and 30 percent, respectively. 
  The potential of explored and expected resources of oil in 
the developing countries, especially those belonging to the oil 
and gas province of the Persian Gulf which is unique on our 
planet, is immense. Their role as the main suppliers of oil will 
be enhanced in the long term, all the more so because, unlike 
the CIS, a majority of oil-producing developing countries will 
have favorable opportunities for the export of oil on a large 
scale in the future, too, in view of the relatively small scale 
of their economies and size of their populations, and 
consequently, the low volume of domestic needs. In turn, the 
economically developed countries with a high level of 
scientific-technical progress, which possess an extensive 
foreign-trade potential by virtue of this will, unlike the CIS, 
have a great opportunity to meet their growing needs through the 
imports of oil and other mineral resources in the future, too. 
  At present and in the future, the problem of resource supply 
will unavoidably remain a common problem for the CIS countries 
that are closely tied by an entire set of geopolitical, 
historical, economic, and many other interests. Pooling the 
efforts of these states on the basis of mutually advantageous 
interstate relations could, to a considerable degree, preempt 
the participation of companies from faraway foreign countries in 
the development of oil resources in Russia, Kazakhstan, and 
Azerbaijan. In turn, the accepted agreements with foreign 
investors (based on concessions or production sharing), unlike 
regular exports, result not only in long-term debt obligations 
to export oil but also the loss of a proportion of profits from 
the operation of the fields. These contracts, which are signed 
under pressure from the economic difficulties of the period of 
transition, are short-sighted and run counter to the strategic 
interests of our own oil supply. They also undermine economic 
relations among the countries of the Commonwealth. Instead of 
using the pooled industrial potential, in particular, that of 
defense enterprises, for the retooling of the oil industry, 
foreign companies are being brought in. The need for the 
creation of an economically close union within the framework of 
the still ephemeral Commonwealth is being dictated not only by 
the last three years of the experience of its sovereign member 
states, but also by the processes of economic and political 
unification of many countries which have been underway in the 
world in recent years. The world mineral and raw-material 
situation and the problems of energy supply, primarily oil 
supply, influence these processes considerably. 
  Entering in a headlong manner the world energy market that 
advantageously serves the industrially developed countries 
calls, in the case of the CIS, for a profound analysis and a 
balanced approach. Many specific peculiarities are 
characteristic of Russia and the Commonwealth as a whole, and 
all of them testify to the fact that in the long term, it is 
feasible to rely on their own energy resources. 
  A reasonable and far-sighted approach to the use of 
nonrenewable mineral and raw-material resources, especially oil, 
on the basis of a long-term, profoundly and comprehensively 
substantiated concept proceeding from the optimal combination of 
current and long-range interests, is the most significant 
regulatory function of the state. If such a mineral and 
raw-material policy is absent Russia will not have a clearly 
defined system for its implementation and coordination with 
regard to the CIS countries. The current and future interests of 
Russia and the countries of the Commonwealth require that such a 
state concept be developed in the area of foreign economic 
activities involving mineral resources, and that it be 
thoroughly supported by legislation. Miscalculation and 
shortcomings in the use of our own mineral resources are 
irreparable in nature and are therefore fraught with major 
unfavorable consequences for the history and economy of Russia. 

