Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Javier Rodriguez] </F>
  [Text] Havana, 11 Mar (PL) -- It appears that the U.S. 
blockade on Cuba -- which is harmful to the Cuban economy, which 
the island occasionally sidesteps, and which is being questioned 
in the United States -- is destined to develop growing cracks. 
  According to analysts and observers, the signs pointing in 
this direction are becoming increasingly clear while the Cuban 
economy is showing a modest reactivation, and foreign 
investments in the country are growing. 
  The intense business activities being conducted on the 
island 
and the increase of foreign investors who want to negotiate with 
Cuba to participate in various industrial and service sectors 
are unprecedented in the entire history of the revolutionary 
process that began in 1959. 
  According to official sources, 413 commercial enterprises 
from about 40 countries already have subsidiaries in the 
country, and 129 economic agreements with foreign firms have 
been signed. 
  Right now, buzzwords that touch on production, productivity, 
and the concepts of quality and cost control are being heard not 
only from knowledgeable economists and foreign businessmen, but 
also from workers in the parliaments in the workplace, as well 
as on the job. 
  This setting will gradually, but definitely, lead to a 
cleansing of the domestic finances and to investments that are 
necessary in sectors severely hampered as a result of years of 
U.S. hostility and the disappearance of the European socialist 
bloc. 
  This means that the Cuban people, who have grown used to 
coming up winners in a countless number of difficult situations 
over the past four decades, are now focusing their efforts on 
overcoming an adverse situation characterized by economic and 
supply restrictions imposed by international circumstances. 
  At the same time, important political decisions, such as the 
convoking to "the Nation and the Emigrants" conference in April, 
are being adopted. This is the latest step taken along the path 
of normalizing relations between the government and Cubans 
living abroad. 
  In addition to contributing to the reuniting of families and 
to a certain degree of participation by emigrants in national 
affairs, the meeting is another factor that contributes to 
inspiring trust in the soundness of the current global policy of 
the Antillean nation. 
  Things being as they are, the ongoing blockade imposed 32 
years ago and maintained by successive U.S. governments that 
have wanted to liquidate the Cuban revolutionary process is 
increasingly showing various signs of breaking down. 
  Evidence of this is the increased interest that nations from 
various parts of the world are showing in trading directly with 
Cuba, despite White House pressure and the disgust that such 
trade sparks in the anti-Cuban lobby that functions close to 
U.S. Government circles. 
  The finding of such interest in Latin America -- the region 
of the world of which the island is a part -- has special 
significance, but we also find such interest among the West 
European powers and in countries in Africa and Asia. 
  The increase in visits to Cuba by foreign delegations to 
explore trade relations or to sign agreements, as well as the 
bilateral agreements that have either been signed or are being 
negotiated, are also evidence of what we have affirmed. 
  The role Cuba has played in international forums such as the 
Ibero-American summits and the United Nations, in addition to 
Cuba's stand in defense of Latin America's integrationist 
philosophy, have also harmed the isolationist objectives 
Washington has obsessively pursued with regard to the Antillean 
nation. 
  The crisis of the U.S. blockade is also mirrored by the 
desperation that, according to what AREITO magazine Director 
Andres Gomez has revealed, has overcome the people's calling for 
a hardening of the blockade -- namely, those people who have 
turned their life in exile into a lucrative business. 
  Recently, while grand caravans of solidarity with Cuba 
cruised the United States and Canada to transport aid to the 
island, a costly mobilization by bellicose groups that function 
in the United States was able to gather only a few hundred 
people in Washington. 
  Meanwhile, several legislators have presented at the U.S. 
Congress a bill to weaken the so-called Torricelli Law which 
hardened the conditions of the blockade, and this is another 
factor to be taken into consideration at this moment. 
  Taking into consideration all these factors, it looks like 
modifications are inevitable and that the hopes of those who 
dream of a return to the past in Cuba will collapse. 

