CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Dmitriy Kholodov: "Admiral Chernavin's </F>
`Submarines': Russia Has No Submarine Fleet?"] 
  [Text] The editorial office of MOSKOVSKIY KOMSOMOLETS has a 
memorandum prepared in 1992 by Russian Military 
Counterintelligence and signed by Nikolay Golushko, former chief 
of the Federal Counterintelligence Service. Stamped "Top 
Secret", it unequivocally admits that Russia's submarine fleet 
is not combat effective: 
  "The noise level of nuclear-powered submarines in the 
USSR Navy is 20-30 times higher than those of the Americans, and 
the effectiveness of domestic sonar equipment is more than 25 
times as inferior. Due to these reasons, the U.S. Navy has 
achieved a capability of detecting Soviet nuclear-powered 
submarines with a probability of 0.95 and is able to monitor 
more than 75 percent of the area of strategically important 
areas of the world oceans. The USSR KGB has repeatedly (Nos 
3/8/2458-79 and 3/6/2166-88) informed the levels of authority 
and the Main Military Procuracy about this situation in the 
field of nuclear-powered submarine shipbuilding, but no positive 
changes followed." 
  In the 1960's, the Americans began reducing the noise level 
of their submarines, sacrificing everything. In order to make 
nuclear-powered submarines invulnerable, we began increasing the 
speed and depth of their submerging: We strengthened the hull in 
order to withstand an enemy torpedo strike, as if making an 
ironclad instead of a submarine. 
  "Events of recent years show that having achieved 
strategic superiority, the U.S. Navy is intensifying it despite 
our country's real technical and material capabilities to 
eliminate it. In this situation, in the opinion of a wide range 
of experts, the main responsibility falls on the 
military-industrial complex, the Ministry of the Shipbuilding 
Industry, and also the leadership of the Navy, who in the late 
1970's and early 1980's gave the leadership of the country and 
the USSR Ministry of Defense a false presentation of ways to 
achieve acoustics equality of third-generation domestic 
nuclear-powered submarines with nuclear-powered submarines of 
the U.S. Navy just by replacing auxiliary mechanisms without 
changing their architecture and design as a whole. The actual 
causes of the high noise level of Soviet nuclear-powered 
submarines were ignored." 
  Military counterintelligence worked in vain. This memorandum 
was not useful to anyone. In an interview with KRASNAYA ZVEZDA, 
the commander in chief of the Navy recently stated that "a 
laying-down of the lead ship of an advanced nuclear-powered 
attack submarine took place in Severodvinsk." Experts are 
skeptical about its "advanced nature," maintaining that it is 
only another Sierra-class nuclear-powered submarine, of which 
more than enough have already been built. 
  Construction of advanced nuclear-powered submarines having 
no 
prospects is a classic example of actions by the military 
industrial lobby. In the absence of competition, this lobby is 
virtually all-powerful--any criticism is quickly neutralized. 
You see, it involves money--and big money, and awards for 
creating an allegedly silent new submarine. The 
Sevmashpredpriyatiye Production Association received priority 
financing--such a nuclear-powered submarine will cost taxpayers 
the sum of about 1 trillion rubles. 
  That same memorandum talks about an attempt by an 
"opposition" group of scientists to make a number of changes in 
the strategy of building nuclear-powered submarines. 
  "These proposals were supported by submariners of the 
Northern and Pacific fleets, scientists, and designers and 
confirmed by interdepartmental tests and tactical exercises 
between 1982 and 1986. The experience amassed was analyzed by 
the departments concerned and in 1985 approved by the Navy VTS 
and recommended for introduction into operation. At the same 
time, it should be noted that the commander in chief of the 
Navy, V.N. Chernavin, reacting negatively to these proposals for 
reasons known only to him, by Directive No. 0026 of 28 March 
1987 delayed commissioning... At the same time, the proposals 
were actively supported by Fleet Admiral I.N. Smirnov, who from 
1982 to 1986 personally supervised all work and testing." 
  The commander in chief of the Navy at that time, Admiral 
Chernavin, cut off all the oxygen to new proposals, probably 
because otherwise he would have had to explain the stubborn 
ignoring of the facts since 1974! And the more of these facts 
there were, the higher the classification stamp on the documents. 
  "Competent experts note that all the conclusions of the 
Navy, industry, and science, made in response to appeals to the 
levels of authority by Academician Aleksandrov, Fleet Admiral 
Yegorov (former chief of the Main Staff of the Navy--Author), 
and Captain 1st Rank Kolton during the period 1988-1990, as a 
rule, are flagrantly distorted, and the favorable results of 
research and studies made during the period 1982-1986 are often 
falsified and basically aimed at confirming the earlier unsound 
decision made by Navy Commander in Chief Chernavin, outlined in 
Directive No. 0026-87." 
  For some reason, we began to get the opinion that the 
military-industrial complex was almost the national pride of 
Russia. Meanwhile, the military-industrial complex was infected 
by the same mutation as the entire economy. It is dangerous to 
build illusions--the quality of our nuclear-powered submarines 
is no better than the quality of our automobiles. 
  "The state of affairs with the noise level of domestic 
nuclear-powered submarines is made worse by the lack of an 
effective enemy submarine detection system. In the field of 
sonar equipment, the U.S. Navy surpasses the USSR Navy 
considerably, which has resulted in enemy nuclear-powered 
submarines having the capability of delivering a strike against 
Soviet submarines and remaining undetected as a result of the 
low specifications and performance characteristics of our sonar 
complexes. 
  "The U.S. Navy's submarines detect Soviet submarines at 
distances exceeding the operating range of domestic sonar 
systems by 120-140 km. The sonar systems of surface ships of the 
U.S. Navy are also significantly superior in operating range to 
similar Soviet models. The enemy is 7-12 years ahead of us in 
sonar systems used by naval aviation and 20 years ahead in 
implementing individual technical designs." 
  An analysis of collisions between Russian and foreign 
submarines WITHIN THE RUSSIAN MARITIME ZONE indicates that this 
memorandum is close to objectivity. Our submarines make so much 
noise that they do not even hear the "tail" behind them. 
  In the Barents Sea on 11 February 1992, at the moment of 
surfacing for a scheduled communications session, a Russian 
Sierra-class submarine collided with a massive body, which 
turned out to be the USS Baton Rouge nuclear-powered submarine 
of the U.S. Navy. Our commander, like he was supposed to 
according to known corresponding instructions, evaded from the 
unknown target to a safe depth. 
  There have been a total of 11 collisions. As a rule, they 
occurred several minutes after a sudden change in heading or 
submerged depth by the "deaf" Soviet nuclear-powered submarine. 
For some time now, Russian submariners have been directed not to 
make sudden turns to avoid possible collisions with 
nuclear-powered submarines. 
  "The seriousness of the matter lies not only in the 
fact that the Ministry of the Shipbuilding Industry is removing 
the urgency of the problem of struggling for acoustics 
superiority of our submarines. It is disorienting the levels of 
authority, reporting the approximate equality of the noise level 
of our third- and fourth-generation nuclear-powered submarines 
being built and being designed with U.S. Navy nuclear-powered 
submarines, and thereby is misleading them about the actual 
combat capabilities of our maritime strategic nuclear 
system." 
  The Americans, apparently, already have the noise profiles 
of 
all our nuclear-powered submarines, and observations in the 
combat training zones have enabled them to record noises 
corresponding to bringing Soviet nuclear-powered submarines to a 
missile-launch readiness. 
  Of course, no one plans to fight the Americans. However, 
what 
sense does it make to "forge" nuclear-powered submarines no one 
needs and on which citizens of Russia will perform duty no one 
needs? 

