BFN 

<F P=106> [Aleksey Kirpichnikov report under the "Elections" rubric: </F>
"Shumeyko's Idea May Belong to Burbulis. Discussion of Upper 
Chamber Speaker's Initiatives Continues"] 
  [Text] The country's news agencies are churning out 
reactions to the two most important current events: the soccer 
world cup and Vladimir Shumeyko's initiative on postponing the 
new elections for both Federal Council chambers. 
  Presidential Chief of Staff Sergey Filatov regards the 
proposal of the head of the upper chamber as dangerous because 
the unconstructive opposition may take advantage of the current 
debates to upset the hard-won stability. Mr. Filatov admitted a 
total lack of knowledge of Mr. Shumeyko's intentions. He added 
that having asked the latter why so sudden a proposal, he was 
told that the Federation Council chairman "wanted to see 
society's reaction." 
  Georgiy Satarov, a man who stands even closer to the 
president, described the initiative as logical because a 
postponement of the elections will permit the deputies to 
concentrate on making laws and have a favorable effect on 
society. 
  The best informed of all, which is as it should be, was the 
president's press secretary Vyacheslav Kostikov. He pointed out 
that the idea had long been brewing and the first man to share 
it with him was not Vladimir Shumeyko or Mikhail Poltoranin but 
Gennadiy Burbulis. Thus, Mr. Shumeyko only had to "air" the 
eminent politician's plan. 
  Mr. Kostikov described the idea as "interesting, albeit not 
indisputable." The press secretary believed that the impending 
elections for the Federal Assembly threaten a sharpening of 
differences in society which plays into the hands of "impatient 
politicians." The press secretary's "interest" is also prompted 
by a possible linkage between the extension of the deputies' 
terms (naturally, for "preserving the political equilibrium") 
and a postponement of the presidential elections. 
  Mr. Kostikov made a guess about his boss' reaction to Mr. 
Shumeyko's initiative. The president, the press secretary 
believes, will refrain from public assessments in the near 
future because he values social accord. Mr. Kostikov suggested 
that the top speaker's initiative be submitted to expert 
assessment and discussion by political parties and movements, 
society, and the mass media. Only after the aggregate opinion 
is known would Boris Yeltsin voice his attitude because he is 
"the president of all people of Russia," far from political 
time-serving, Mr. Kostikov underscored. 
  Finally, as Mr. Satarov pointed out, Boris Yeltsin is 
prepared to back the idea of extending the deputies' powers on 
condition they demonstrate productive work. However, unlike 
what Mr. Kostikov proposed, he is categorically against moving 
back the presidential elections. 
  What is "the president of all people of Russia" going to say 
when political parties, movements, society, and the media come 
to him as the boyars did to Ivan IV petitioning him not to 
abdicate? 

