BFN 

  [Text] Johannesburg May 10 SAPA -- The Transitional 
Executive Council [TEC] and Minister of Finance, Derek Keys, on 
Tuesday [10 May] issued a joint declaration of intent for South 
Africa to become a member of the African Development Bank. 
  This follows a series of missions to South Africa by 
representatives of the African Development Bank group since 
1991. The Development Bank of South Africa [DBSA] said it had 
been decided that the republic would officially enter into a 
series of consultations with the African Development Bank group 
on the terms and conditions of South Africa's membership. 
  These consultations would be pursued under the auspices of 
the government of national unity and might eventually lead to 
South Africa becoming a fully fledged member of Africa's premier 
development financing institution, the DBSA said. 
  The group has earmarked between R720-million [rand] to 
R1.26-billion a year over the next five years for financing 
investment projects and programmes to both South Africa's public 
and private sectors, to enhance economic and social development. 
The funds could come in the form of long term loans to finance 
public sector project investments in agriculture, public 
utilities, transportation, education, health and industry, or 
long-term lines of credit to national development banks to 
finance private sector projects or medium- to long-term loans 
and equity investments, in all productive sectors of the 
economy, made directly to the private sector. 
  The DBSA said it was probable a significant portion of the 
group's resources to South Africa would be targeted at 
disadvantaged South Africans. However, it was up to South 
Africa to decide finally on such resource allocation from 
African Development Bank sources. 
  There were also opportunities for South African firms to 
supply goods and services for the execution of the group's 
projects throughout Africa. In addition, South Africa could 
draw on the group's grant-based technical assistance. 
  South African representatives would attend the group's 
annual 
general meeting in Nairobi from May 11 to 13, at which the 
declaration of intent would be tabled. A series of joint South 
African/African Development Bank Group consultations would 
follow the successful adoption of the declaration of intent, the 
DBSA said. 

