CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by D. Khrushchov, F. Ovcharenko, B. Horletskiy, Ye. </F>
Motorin and Ye. Yakovlev: "Keeping Toxic Wastes From Sinking 
Into the Sea"] 
  [Text] Considerable amounts of highly toxic wastes (VTVs) 
from production in various sectors of industry have accumulated 
on the territory of Ukraine. These wastes are located in special 
storage areas on the grounds of the producing enterprises and in 
storage areas of various degrees of preparation outside the 
boundaries of those enterprises, as well as in unequipped dumps 
and random locations of unsanctioned burial areas. 
  Each of those places could be a hazard to the environment. 
The storage areas at the enterprises are most often concrete 
pools that are not safe against leakage as a consequence of 
technological defects, earthquakes, soil settlement and the 
entry of poisons into the atmosphere. Other locations of the 
VTVs are also not safe, with the poisons getting into 
underground and surface waters or carried off by the wind, 
animals and people. 
  Some 102 million tonnes of VTVs each year are produced in 
Ukraine today, with 22 billion tonnes of various types of 
uncategorized class I--IV wastes accumulated in storage areas 
(350,000 tonnes are buried in deep storage areas). 
  What to do with all of this stuff? It must be: 1) 
categorized 
(as much as possible) and 2) isolated. Useful components can be 
attempted to be extracted in recovery operations, with the rest 
used as a raw material, for example, in the production of 
building materials, glass and ceramic dyes. If that proves to be 
impossible, the wastes are immobilized (reducing the degree of 
hazard) by means of solidification, and encased in a matrix. 
  Two types of isolation are envisaged: long-term safekeeping 
and burial (final removal). Long-term safekeeping permits the 
extraction of substances that are preserved for final 
reprocessing to the extent of the development of new 
technologies and (or) burial. Requirements and technical 
specifications for the long-term safekeeping and burial vary. 
Storage areas at the surface, and sometimes the spent workings 
of mines and quarries, can be used for long-term safekeeping. 
  Burial can be safe only in stable geological formations. 
This 
requires the observance of a whole set of strict requirements, 
higher even than those for the burial of RAO--radioactive 
wastes. This is explained by the fact that in the opinion of 
some scientists, RAO loses its activity with the passage of 
time, while many VTVs retain their toxicity forever. 
  There are plants for the reprocessing and recovery of VTVs 
in 
many of the developed countries (United States, Germany, 
Australia and others). Methods of isolating them are being 
realized at the same time. Both surface-type storage areas and 
burial deep underground, chiefly in salt formations (Germany, 
Russia), are being used for this purpose. Both treated (for 
burial) and unprocessed (for long-term storage) wastes are being 
removed. There is experience in Russia in the creation of 
underground spaces using a contained explosion in clays for the 
burial of toxic agricultural chemicals (this method, true, has 
substantial shortcomings). 
  Ukraine scarcely has, or will have, ecologically clean 
technologies for the reprocessing and neutralization of VTVs 
today or in the near future, first and foremost for economic 
reasons. It would thus be expedient to develop technologies 
today for the isolation of VTVs, with their subsequent burial or 
placement into long-term storage. Ukraine has sufficient 
scientific potential to perform that work. Some has already been 
done--a system has been developed for the categorization of VTVs 
in accordance with international principles (based on the 
recommendations of the Basel convention), an information and 
analytical base has been developed and preliminary models have 
been developed for standardized technologies for the 
reprocessing and recovery of VTVs. Three geological regions have 
been designated that are potentially favorable for burial: the 
Ukrainian craton, the Dnipro-Donetsk depression and the 
northwestern Donbass. Plans have been developed for matrices for 
the principal types of VTVs according to the hydrogeological 
systems of the geological formations in which isolation is 
possible, and the fundamental types of isolation sites and the 
basic technologies for building or equipping them have been 
planned. 
  The problem of handling the VTVs--their production, 
gathering, sorting, transport, reprocessing, recovery and (or) 
isolation--should be solved within the framework of a unified 
state program, and on the basis of a scientifically 
substantiated conceptual framework. The creation of such a 
framework would be the first real step toward protecting the 
citizens of Ukraine against toxic wastes. The scientists are 
ready. A collective has already been formed that includes 
prominent scientists and specialists from many 
scientific-research, design and production 
organizations--institutes of geological sciences, geochemistry, 
mineralogy and ore mining/creation, biocolloidal chemistry, 
geography, the State Committee for Geology, Kiev University and 
the Kievproyekt Institute, among others. It is now the turn of 
the government. 

