Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Discussion by Shinyasu Hoshino, chairman of the National </F>
Institute for Research Advancement; Hiroko Ota, Osaka University 
associate professor; Naobumi Ishiguro, chairman of the board of 
directors of the Takugin Research Institute; and Koji Oguni, 
EKONOMISUTO editor in chief; at symposium cosponsored by the 
Takugin Research Institute and EKONOMISUTO in Sapporo Grand 
Hotel, Sapporo City, on 8 September on the theme of "Japan's 
Perspective Toward the Year 2010"] 
  [Text] Now Is a Turning Point 
  [Oguni] First, I would like to begin this discussion by 
having Ms. Ota and Mr. Ishiguro give their impressions as to Mr. 
Hoshino's keynote speech. 
  [Ota] I felt that after all we were at a turning point. I 
would like to add two important points which we will have to 
experience by the year 2010 in the economic field. 
  First, domestically, our productivity has a large dual 
structure. The productivity of manufacturing industries is very 
high, but that of agriculture, banking, services, and 
distribution is low, and this is pushing prices upward. As long 
as this situation continues, it will be difficult to build a 
beautiful national land as mentioned by Mr. Hoshino. In order to 
remove this dual structure, it is first necessary to ease 
regulation. This will compel us to shift from our past emphasis 
on equality of outcome to emphasis on equality of opportunity. 
The cozy, doing-business-side-by-side structure which has thus 
far maintained Japan's stability will be subjected to a 
weeding-out process amid the market principle. 
  The other point is a change in the working mode in this 
connection. The cost-reduction competition based on the 
conventional formula of quick sales at small profits has now 
reached its limit. On the other hand, there are intensifying 
demands by workers for shorter working hours, and an era of 
labor force shortages will come. Because of the inevitable need 
to raise per capita productivity, the system of additional wages 
for overtime work and that of the lifelong employment will 
collapse. 
  [Ishiguro] I agree almost entirely with what Mr. Hoshino 
said. However, as to the aging society issue he mentioned, I 
think that a more serious problem is rather the trend of 
declining births. I somewhat feel that the year 2010 will mark a 
turning point at which the population begins to decrease. 
  Those born around 1950 now make up the largest segment of 
population. They will retire in huge numbers in about 17 or 18 
years. In addition, women's childbearing is expected to decrease 
at a very rapid pace. I think that the errors in population 
forecasts by the Ministry of Health and Welfare are indeed 
shameful. The ministry always overestimates in its forecasts. 
The birthrate is 1.53 children at present, but about three or 
four years ago, the rate for this year was estimated at 1.8 
children. 
  Another point is the centralization of administrative power 
or the issue of one-party rule by the Liberal Democratic Party 
[LDP]. It appears that those issues now face a period of 
sweeping adjustments. All want to work with large enterprises, 
and things are converging only into Tokyo. All these cannot be 
blamed on the central government, but we have chosen them on our 
own. We wanted to put our children in private tutorial schools, 
send them to the University of Tokyo, and have them work at 
central government offices, major banks, or large enterprises. 
We sought such things in the belief that they would unmistakably 
bring us happiness. And we have attained these things. However, 
we are now beginning to cast suspicious eyes on them. 
  [Oguni] Mr. Hoshino, do you have any opinion to give 
regarding the comments made by these two? 
  [Hoshino] Concerning the aging society, Mr. Ishiguro said 
that the declining birth rate was a very important problem. I, 
too, think that the decline in births is a very important 
subject. Nevertheless, the process of women becoming liberated 
is a good thing, is it not? Productivity of the male society has 
reached its limit in a sense. By women's participation, there 
may arise a difference in productivity from now. The declining 
birth rate will continue for some time, but after the passage of 
such an era, Japan may develop into a country like Sweden. The 
question is how we should consider such a course of development. 
Perhaps, for about 20 years to come the declining birth rate 
will deepen, and the aging of society will further intensify 
accordingly. 
<H5>  New Industries To Be Nurtured in Localities </H5>
  [Oguni] I think that it is a common recognition that we have 
now come to a great turning point with various issues. In such a 
situation, you are all saying that we may find a solution or a 
direction for our future course in the decentralization of 
administrative power. In this context, I would like to shift our 
discussion to why administrative power should be decentralized. 
  [Ishiguro] The decentralization of administrative power is 
not a question of yesterday. What we now call the Provisional 
Council for the Promotion of Administrative Reform, which 
functioned during the Ikeda cabinet with then Mitsui Bank (now 
Sakura Bank) President Kiichiro Sato as its central figure, also 
contended that it was important to decentralize administrative 
power. 
  Thirty years later, there was the second Provisional Council 
for the Promotion of Administrative Reform, led by Mr. Toshio 
Doko during the Nakasone cabinet. Mr. Doko succeeded in bringing 
the government-run NTT [Nippon Telegraph and Telephone 
Corporation], etc. into the hand of the private sector. However, 
nothing has been attempted up to date in shifting power from 
central to local quarters. 
  Concentrating everything on Tokyo--as seen in the unipolar 
convergence of things into Tokyo, the centralization of 
administrative power, the one-party rule by the LDP, and all 
huge enterprises, huge banks, and huge newspaper companies 
having their main offices in Tokyo--has been an extremely 
advantageous policy for Japan's growth and efficiency. However, 
with the passage of some 40 years under this policy, all the 
people have begun to think twice about this position. We now 
stand at the crossroads in this regard. 
  There is an auto parts manufacturing company named Dynacs in 
Chitose that produces 60 percent of Japan's automobile clutch 
disks. In the old days, all auto parts company had different 
affiliations like affiliations with Toyota or Nissan, and they 
were, under the keiretsu system, ruled by major firms in all 
aspects such as personnel affairs, capital relationships, and 
distributions. However, nowadays Nissan or Toyota would be 
unable to exist if it followed this practice. Such a brilliant 
industrial firm exists in Hokkaido as well. And the earning 
power of this kind of enterprise has now become much greater. 
When such an industrial change is effected, the unipolar 
convergence of things into Tokyo will also change. 
  [Oguni] The conventional system has become inefficient, and 
the minds of people now seek affluence. However, Japan's 
potential growth rate is no longer very high. 
  [Ota] To be sure, the economic growth rate will become lower 
for the long-term. One thing we do not know at present is what 
industry will become Japan's driving force now. What we need 
most at present is to nurture future excellent companies. I 
think that perhaps, the knowledge-intensive industry will become 
Japan's driving force in the future. However, it is believed 
that a capacity to generate new things will not grow under the 
present Tokyo circumstances where people suffer from accumulated 
stress caused by their endurance of harsh commuting conditions. 
I think that capacity will probably grow in circumstances where 
there is culture, broad space, and greenery, and where it is 
possible to activate human brains to a greater extent. 
  At any rate, it will be necessary to ease regulation and 
thoroughly reduce control so that newer things can be generated 
and that localities can nurture new industries and improve 
living circumstances by means of their own independent 
strategies. And under these conditions, they also need to 
discuss a federal system in earnest. There is no country with as 
much economic power as ours that is enforcing the centralization 
of administrative power. In addition, I would like to mention 
three points which I am now considering with regard to the 
decentralization of administrative power. 
  First, I think that the work of decentralizing 
administrative 
power in Hokkaido should begin with the position that Hokkaido 
no longer needs the Hokkaido Development Agency. When people 
discuss decentralization of administrative power, their 
arguments should also include how to resolve the issue of 
revenue sources. They cannot bring up only favorable aspects in 
their debate. 
  Second, the more decentralization deepens, the more that 
local strategies are needed. How should Hokkaido be dealt with? 
The strategy related to this question is most called for, is it 
not? 
  Third, the need for strategies for all of Japan is also 
being 
called for along with the decentralization of administrative 
power. When the economic growth rate falls, public works are 
scattered in local areas to remove the income gap. Debate is 
necessary on the order of priority to be given to these 
localities. 
<H5>  Abolish Construction and Transport Ministries </H5>
  [Oguni] To carry our discussion a step forward, let us move 
to the question of which work we have to touch first 
strategically. Mr. Hoshino suspected that the question of land 
utilization would emerge as a point of discussion. What 
arguments are now being made in Kasumigaseki [government office 
quarters in Tokyo]? 
  [Hoshino] The centralization of administrative power proved 
to be a quicker means for repairing war damage and improving 
rivers in the postwar period on the basis of uniform standards. 
It was a kind of planned economy. However, the people have 
become fed up with this. So respective local public bodies have 
begun shaping various designs in this regard. 
  I know only partial instances, but as for the way the 
current 
subsidy administration is working, it is collecting good 
examples from local areas, and to have those examples followed 
across the nation, it is asking, for instance, Kyushu to begin 
the same projects that were sucessfully carried out in Hokkaido. 
If so, it would be better that local areas themselves assume the 
whole work directly. There is no need at all to go through the 
filter of Kasumigaseki. 
  The ability of local planners has increased markedly of 
late. 
This is an age in which the people directly make things they 
want most at nearby places, is it not? I think that this is the 
real form of decentralizing administrative power. 
  However, it should be the last phase to entrust revenue 
sources to local areas. Entrusting the use of land should 
precede it. This is because subsidies are generally appendant to 
the utilization of land. When decision-makers on land use are 
reversed, those who assume the subsidy administration are also 
reversed subsequently. Touching the issue of the tax allocated 
to local governments is the next step. Otherwise, small cities, 
towns, and villages will instantly find themselves in an impasse. 
  [Ishiguro] I think that the land issue Mr. Hoshino mentioned 
represents a big proposition. In a sense, it seems that the 
issue of decentralizing administrative power will not be 
resolved smoothly unless we change our position drastically. 
  If we mean business, we had better abolish the Construction 
and Transport Ministries and transfer all of their authority to 
localities. There will be no way of giving such authority to the 
central government again, because it no longer has those organs. 
What the central government requires by all means are the 
Foreign Ministry, the Defense Agency, the Economic Planning 
Agency. 
  At present, people think that tax earnings in Tokyo are 
distributed to localities, but will this be true? Local 
residents should be armed theoretically. For example, the 
Kojimachi Tax Office, which takes in the largest amount of 
national taxes, collects over 2 trillion yen. Tokyo alone 
collects 35 percent of total national taxes. Should these tax 
earnings belong only to Tokyo? No, they should not. Payments are 
made there simply because main company offices are located 
there. These earnings should be divided correctly. 
  The mayor of Izumo City in Shimane Prefecture, Tetsundo 
Iwakuni, says: Old folks send their children to colleges in 
Tokyo and remit 1.5 million yen for their living expenses every 
year. The children do not return to Shimane and work in Tokyo 
for 30 years. The old folks remain in Shimane, and their burden 
falls on Shimane Prefecture. As his remarks suggest, it is no 
wonder that the lion's share is taken by Tokyo, while localities 
are placed "in the red" by accommodating only those old folks 
left behind. I hope that such losses will be compensated 
accurately. I say this because it is localities that brought up 
the children. According to a computation, localities suffer 
losses amounting to 12 trillion yen each year. They need to have 
these losses compensated. 
  As for Hokkaido, it does not need to obtain compensations 
because its losses and gains are about the same. However, some 
say that Hokkaido is not earning enough tax income to take up 
its share of the tax burden which the whole of Japan must bear. 
This may be true. No correct estimates are available in this 
respect, but I think that we still have to make considerable 
efforts in this regard. 
  Moreover, I would like to take an issue with government 
offices' stance that there can be no mistakes. Once they begin a 
thing, even if they find it wrong halfway, they take dozens of 
years to rectify it. This erroneous stance seems to be traceable 
to a notion that government offices are not allowed to make a 
mistake. Furthermore, the prices of government-procured 
commodities are too high. For example, compared with France, the 
per kilometer cost of the Shinkansen [bullet train] Line is 10 
times that of the French TGV Line. The cost of Japan's public 
roads is three times as high. As for buildings like hotels, the 
per tsubo [3.954 square yards] costs stand around 1 million yen 
in Tokyo as against 300,000 yen in New York. This is partly 
ascribed to controls. When it comes to the question of controls, 
we are apt to instantly refer only to agricultural products and 
rice, but in fact many Japanese commodities are subjected to 
control. 
  [Oguni] People seem to share the view that all this should 
be 
changed drastically. However, the problem lies after this common 
perception. What comes next is the question of who on earth can 
make the change in what form. 
  [Ota] I think that as drastic measures there are the 
adoption 
of a federal system and the transfer of the capital city. For 
the time being, however, it is, after all, necessary to 
thoroughly ease regulations as a midterm program. I strongly 
hope that voices will be raised from local areas in this regard. 
For example, I wonder why localities have not voiced their 
support for the land value tax. Raising the land value tax means 
raising the cost of undertakings in places such as Tokyo where 
land prices are high. When the land value tax goes up, extra 
undertakings will spread to localities as they cannot be carried 
out in Tokyo. 
  Another point is that it is important whether cooperation is 
possible among autonomous bodies. It is important whether they 
can formulate laterally oriented programs. Let us take up the 
traffic system for instance: Various inconveniences are caused 
because the Transport and Construction Ministries act 
separately. Cooperation between roads and railways is not 
smooth. Vertically oriented programs represent ideas of the 
supply side, while laterally oriented programs are ideas of the 
demand side. It is simple to abolish the national ministries and 
agencies, but as a precondition for decentralizing 
administrative power, it is desirable that certain regions 
containing several cities or prefectures will work out their own 
programs. If such moves arise spontaneously from localities, I 
think that the groundwork for the decentralization of 
administrative power will be getting solid. 
<H5>  Turn Sapporo Into City for International Conventions </H5>
  [Oguni] Well, last, I would like to hear your ideas as to 
what should be done for the benefit of Hokkaido. 
  [Hoshino] Regarding Hokkaido, I think that it would be good 
if the vicinity of Sapporo were turned into a city for 
international conventions, that is, a city like Geneva. On the 
other hand, Obihiro is a agricultural zone. It is desirable to 
have a beautiful area where an international city and an 
agricultural zone coexist. 
  At present, Singapore is a city for international 
conventions 
in Asia. There is no other city that is fit for holding 
international conferences. As is seen in the visits to Niseko 
and Tomamu [both areas in Hokkaido] by rich people in Southeast 
Asia for pleasure which is developing now, because of its 
climate and natural features, Hokkaido will be considered very 
exotic and interesting for people in Asia. In addition, visitors 
from around the world will not only attend international 
meetings; before they leave they will unfailingly see the sights 
of nearby cities. I think that the scenery of the rural area 
around Obihiro will strike those Southeast Asian visitors with 
wonder. 
  In this sense as well, it would be better to further deepen 
the consciousness that Hokkaido is our northernmost zone. It is 
situated around 40 degrees north latitude. It will turn into a 
crossroads where guests come from the south in endless 
succession. It will thus become a city for international 
conventions. This is the dream I have. 
  [Ota] It is not natural features and rich humanity alone 
that 
form local attractions. If it is, so-called local attractions 
are nothing but slight variations of things in large cities. I 
think that Hokkaido must have its own unique 
attractions--attractions that exist only in its locality. If 
people in Hokkaido find and know Hokkaido's attractions, I 
believe that Hokkaido has plenty of room for further development. 
  One attraction I feel to Hokkaido is its fondness for 
newness. The people there are free of odd prejudices and they 
are liberal. They are magnanimous and broad-minded in their 
receptiveness to heterogeneity. However, I hear that the process 
of stiffening and fixation has gradually begun in Hokkaido as 
well. I hope Hokkaido will remain a place that always gives 
birth to new things. I strongly hope that excellent future 
companies will be nurtured in Hokkaido. 
  [Ishiguro] We have heard two panelists express their 
affection for Hokkaido. 
  Present Hokkaido residents were polled about what towns they 
would like to live in. Sapporo ranked first. Over 90 percent of 
the respondents said that they would like to live in Sapporo. 
Ranking last was Shinjuku-ku with about 4 percent naming it. 
  The reasons why Tokyo is not good are: first, it has no 
natural surroundings; second, it is hard to own a house in the 
city; and third, Tokyo lacks flexibility in terms of time as 
well as mentality. Nevertheless, half the respondents said that 
they liked Tokyo. Why? It is because the city is full of fun. 
It is fun to work there and also relax there. It is an enjoyable 
place intellectually as well. Hokkaido is mildly enjoyable as a 
place to work and enjoy oneself. As to recreation in particular, 
one can enjoy golfing and skiing instantly. The largest problem 
is the lack of intellectual fun. This is important. I want 
Hokkaido University to work hard to this end. 
  Mr. Hoshino talked about making an international city, and 
in 
this regard Hokkaido residents should think more about the 
significance of Chitose Airport. The new Kansai Airport is 
totally hopeless. It costs too much and does not have domestic 
flights. It costs 10 times more than Chitose Airport. Yet the 
Transport Ministry will take sides with the new Kansai Airport 
unless we keep a sharp watch on the ministry's moves. This is 
because its officials are stationed there. We must maintain our 
sharp watch with a determination not to tolerate unfairness. 
  Last, I would like to touch on the issue of moving the 
capital. Many places including Tochigi, Sendai, Osaka, and Kyoto 
are now making activities to induce the authorities to set up 
the new capital in their areas, but I think that when the 
capital is transferred to a new area, the area should be 
independent from the prefecture it has belonged to. It should 
become something like Washington, D.C. The area should be 
considered a common district for 47 cities and prefectures and 
separated from its former prefecture. Otherwise, another Tokyo 
will be created again. 

