BFN 

<F P=106> ["News Release"] </F>
  [Text] Polish President Lech Walesa together with Mrs. 
Danuta Walesa, who were on a two-day state visit to Estonia, 
concluded their visit on Tuesday [10 May] in Tartu. 
  Walesa met Tartu Mayor Vino Kull and city government 
members, 
Tartu University Rector Peeter Tulviste and made a speech to 
students, saying that both in Poland and Estonia new era and new 
possibilities need to be taken advantage of especially by young 
people. 
  At a press conference, given by Estonian President Meri and 
Polish President Walesa at the end of the visit, Walesa said 
that his first visit to Estonia was a return visit to President 
Meri's visit to Poland last May. Walesa said that the two 
presidents had determined the conception of development of 
Estonian-Polish relations, which would be the basis for concrete 
cooperation of the governments of the two states. 
  Commenting upon Estonian-Russian relations Walesa said that 
Russia should substitute her "dictatorship policy with 
partnership policy". "The problem of Russians in her 
neighbouring countries is the result of Stalin's policy. 
National minorities, however, must be loyal to the state where 
they live," Walesa said, adding that solution to these problems 
might take several decades but that policies which we see in 
Yugoslavia should be avoided. 
  Walesa said that representatives of Polish society in 
Estonia 
assured him that they "felt very well" here. "Of course not 
everything is ideal but these people understand difficulties 
caused by reforms in Estonia. In case of goodwill it is 
possible to solve all problems that arise," Walesa said. 
  Estonian President Lennart Meri told the press conference 
that Estonia and Poland have, thanks to geographic position 
common interests in many aspects. He thanked Walesa for 
Poland's support to Estonia's demand to withdraw Russian troops 
from Estonia by August 31, 1994. Meri stated that Estonia was 
interested in Polish investments. He added that already during 
the earlier meetings of Polish and Estonian leaders 
possibilities to build a gas pipeline that would connect 
Finland, Baltics and Poland with Norwegian gas reservoirs has 
been discussed, which would help to guarantee the independence 
of states of the region from their eastern neighbour. 
  Polish President left for Poland Tuesday afternoon. 

