BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Jean Syrota, General Nuclear Materials </F>
Company [COGEMA] chief executive officer [CEO], by Elisabeth 
Rochard; place and date not given: "Syrota's Pro-Nuclear Plea"] 
  [Text] [Rochard] COGEMA is making profits which are 
enviable in the current economic climate, and at a time when the 
nuclear sector is losing momentum around the world. How do you 
explain this situation? 
  [Syrota] It is not true to say that the nuclear sector is 
losing momentum. Installed nuclear power continues to rise, 
even if it is rising less quickly than in the past decade. 
Moreover, a not inconsiderable number of countries have nuclear 
programs in development, especially in the Far East: Japan, 
South Korea, Taiwan, etc. However, they are not the only ones. 
We must not forget China, which has a formidable number of 
nuclear facilities to be built. Recently, Ukraine decided to 
terminate construction work on its VVER [water-cooled 
water-moderated] plants (with a design similar to reactors used 
in the West), which had been halted after the Chernobyl 
accident. In fact, it is the building of new electricity 
production facilities that is being victimized by overequipping 
and overly poor growth in economic activity. The nuclear sector 
is doing rather better than the others. Thus, for Japan, the 
United States, western Germany, and France taken all together, 
two-thirds of installed power between 1983 and 1992 was nuclear. 
  [Rochard] Perhaps, but virtually all new electricity plants 
built in the world in the last few years have been coal or gas 
plants. For more than 10 years, the United States has not begun 
construction of a new nuclear plant, and if it acquired 
additional nuclear capacity, it stems from projects that were 
begun 15 or even 20 years ago. 
  [Syrota] Of course, but that simply means, as you say, that 
the growth in electricity production in all of the 
industrialized countries is losing momentum. To get back to the 
COGEMA results, I think that they are good, but we must be able 
to do better. Our ambition is to reach 3.5 percent net 
profitability in the coming years. The situation of our 
"mining" activity is better than before, but it is still far 
from satisfactory. As for the reprocessing branch, activity 
will increase in the coming years, and this should be reflected 
in the results. COGEMA's advantage is that its market does not 
depend much on the current economic climate. However, the poor 
growth in electricity consumption is slowing the construction of 
new plants, which will make our sales more difficult in the long 
term in a market with slowing growth. 
  [Rochard] COGEMA is active in plutonium recycling. Are you 
not expecting a halt to be put to this under pressure from the 
United States, which does not have a civilian plutonium 
industry, and with the excuse of combating proliferation? Japan 
has recently frozen its reprocessing program in this way. 
  [Syrota] I do not agree with your analysis: Let us look at 
the most recent events. In Great Britain, the Thorp 
reprocessing plant has just been put into service, despite 
protests and actions taken in courts by antinuclear activists. 
If there was intervention, it was not effective. I prefer to 
think that there was not any. 
  Another example can be found in Belgium. This is a very 
interesting case, because Belgium's percentage of electricity of 
nuclear origin is very high, almost as high as in France. In 
addition, Belgium was the first country in the world to 
manufacture MOX fuel (a fuel in which plutonium replaces 
enriched uranium as the fissile material). For more than 20 
years, the fuel has been produced under conditions which are 
satisfactory from all points of view. As we recently began 
reprocessing their used fuel in our UP3 plant in La Hague, 
Belgian electricity industries asked their government for 
authorization to load their reactors with MOX fuel by recycling 
their plutonium. The government said yes provided that 
Parliament approved it. So an in-depth debate was held in which 
the issues of reprocessing and nuclear energy in general were 
raised. The Belgian Parliament voted by a very large majority in 
favor of using MOX, as well as in favor of pursuing reprocessing 
contracts. There, too, reason won the day. 
  As for Japan, it has not frozen its reprocessing program at 
all. So what has happened? Every five years Japan reviews its 
long-term energy program. It then makes adjustments based on 
the most recent economic situation and new prospects. The fast 
breeder reactor to follow in the footsteps of Monju will be 
built, but later than planned, with a delay of some 10 years. 
However, it is interesting to point out that the Monju fast 
breeder reactor, which is the same size as Phenix, is currently 
being started up. The Japanese are developing fast breeder 
reactor technologies because they think that they will be of 
interest in coming decades and play an important role in the 
future electronuclear sector. Similarly, they have begun 
construction of the Rokkashomura reprocessing plant, which is 
comparable to the UP3 plant in La Hague, with a capacity of 800 
tonnes per year. Compared to us, the Japanese are lagging 
behind in this domain, but they are catching up and it seems to 
me that their ambitions in the nuclear sector are still just as 
strong. 
  [Rochard] So in your opinion, Japan is not calling its 
nuclear program into question, and while it may be slowing down, 
it is only doing so to adapt to demand? 
  [Syrota] Exactly. I can confirm this for you, following a 
two-week trip I made to Japan a month ago, during which I met 
not only electricity industrialists, but also Mr. Eda, the 
minister in charge of nuclear power. 
  [Rochard] Do you think that China will begin building new 
nuclear plants? 
  [Syrota] I do not see how China can do without them. China's 
economy is growing rapidly, at more than 10 percent per year. 
Today, its main source of energy is low-grade coal used under 
poor conditions. With a per capita income that is still low, 
China is already one of the biggest emitters of carbon dioxide 
in the world. I heard the reknown scientist Georges Charpak 
[Nobel Prize winner] explain on television that the Chinese 
would have to give priority to developing their nuclear industry. 
  [Rochard] The plutonium industry in itself bears the risk of 
nuclear arms proliferation. Do you not think that this risk is 
greater than the advantages linked to reprocessing? 
  [Syrota] Surely not. Atomic bombs can be made without 
plutonium: remember Hiroshima. So how are proliferation 
problems shaping up? There is currently a lot of talk about 
North Korea. Before that, it was Iraq, Pakistan, India, South 
Africa, Israel, and a few others. How did these countries try 
to get or how did they get the bomb? In two ways. Some tried 
to produce military-quality uranium, while others tried to 
produce military-quality plutonium. In the first instance, it 
was via an illegal uranium enrichment facility. That is what 
the Iraqis and South Africans did, undoubtedly with the help of 
foreign technologies. Plutonium-based proliferation requires 
under-irradiated fuel which must be discreetly removed from a 
nuclear reactor, and the plutonium must be separated from it in 
a secret reprocessing facility. 
  This is the important point: The only way to make 
military-quality plutonium, i.e., virtually pure fissile 
plutonium, is to have under-irradiated fuel available. If the 
fuel remains in the reactor for a long time, secondary reactions 
take place and the plutonium contains an ever increasing 
proportion of non-fissile isotopes. It then becomes unsuitable 
for use in bombs. Electricity companies are trying to obtain 
the greatest amount of electricity possible with their fuel for 
obvious economic reasons, even though the plutonium separated 
from these used fuels contains a lot of nonfissile plutonium. 
Moreover, electronuclear fuel reprocessing operations are under 
international control and they do not lie at the origin of any 
examples of known proliferation. 
  [Rochard] The Nonproliferation Treaty is to be renegotiated 
in 1995. What can be done to ensure that it is effective? 
  [Syrota] We must not miss the target. The problem to be 
solved is the control of illegal activities. Experience has 
shown that the International Atomic Energy Agency does not have 
problems controlling countries like France, Japan, or Great 
Britain, but does have problems trying to see what it wants in 
more suspect countries. I would reiterate that North Korea and 
Iraq signed the NPT [Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty]. We must 
do what is necessary so that the Agency can better control the 
reactors most likely to easily produce under-irradiated fuels, 
better detect illegal programs, and better supervise transfers 
of sensitive technology. 
  To this can be added a new problem: that of supervising 
military-quality uranium and plutonium from the upcoming 
dismantling of American and Russian weapons. One way of 
resolving this is to use this plutonium and uranium to produce 
electricity. Highly enriched uranium just needs to be diluted 
to make it into nuclear fuel. As for plutonium, it can be used 
to make MOX fuel because, whereas electronuclear plutonium is 
not suitable for making bombs, military-quality plutonium can, 
conversely, be used for electricity generation, and that is the 
most ecological way of destroying it. Unfortunately, the 
Americans, who are the first to be interested, do not have the 
appropriate industrial solutions. 
  [Rochard] Are you pleased with the decision to restart 
Superphenix as a research reactor, although this reactor was 
initially designed to make nuclear fuel "come full circle" and 
burn plutonium? 
  [Syrota] Fast breeder reactors can be justified by the fact 
that as they use plutonium, they make even more of it by 
transforming, at the same time, non-fissile uranium 238 into 
fissile plutonium 239. So this is one way of using natural 
uranium completely: The fast breeder reactor produces 40 to 50 
times as much energy with the same quantity of uranium as a 
light-water reactor. Superphenix was designed with a view to an 
upcoming shortage of uranium, and was made to run optimally on 
this basis. I am convinced that there will not be a shortage of 
uranium for a very long time. However, this does not mean that 
there is no interest in fast neutron reactors for the future, 
because fast neutron reactors have another advantage: They are 
capable of destroying atoms in the plutonium family (actinides) 
and they destroy plutonium's nonfissile isotopes much better 
than light-water reactors. This is one of the reasons why it is 
useful to put the Superphenix back into service. 
  [Rochard] Does Superphenix still constitute a major loss? 
  [Syrota] It required a very heavy investment which, like any 
other prototype, will not become profitable as such. Since the 
investment was made, the choice was either to put a halt to the 
program and lose everything, or to do what was decided. 
  [Rochard] After the Cadarache accident, Brice Lalonde 
denounced the inadequate safety demands, especially as regards 
those "sites which are beginning to age badly." Is there really 
a problem? 
  [Syrota] Extremely rigorous examinations are carried out to 
inspect the aging of facilities. The nuclear industry 
experiences the same problems as any other activity, be it 
chemicals, steelmaking, oil production, etc. However, our 
industry is subjected to far more meticulous supervision by the 
authorities: Nuclear operators undertake a vast number of checks 
and spend a lot of money to maintain their facilities and 
replace parts that need replacing. That is why, in my opinion, 
nuclear power should be reserved for those countries which know 
how to manage advanced technologies and who have the financial 
resources to do so. As far as developing countries are 
concerned, we may well fear that they will skimp on maintenance 
and safety requirements. We must not build nuclear plants just 
anywhere in the world. 
  [Rochard] Does China meet these requirements? 
  [Syrota] China needs nuclear resources so much that it will 
have to meet these requirements. With the growth rate of its 
economy, it should have the necessary resources and not succumb 
to the temptation to make the savings which I fear. 
  [Rochard] Given the state of the nuclear sector in eastern 
Europe, the world is still sitting on a powder keg. Where do we 
really stand? 
  [Syrota] The main risk is Chernobyl-type plants in general, 
and Chernobyl in particular. They can be shut down. To do 
this, there is a solution which is technically simple: To save 
energy. Energy consumption in the countries of eastern Europe 
is so high because energy is virtually free there. If energy 
were billed at its true price, consumption would drop and there 
would no longer be any need for dangerous plants. 
  [Rochard] What is the impact of the freeze on nuclear 
testing 
for COGEMA? 
  [Syrota] COGEMA makes material for military use, but the 
trials themselves have very little impact on our order book. We 
no longer have any orders for military plutonium, which was 
produced in Marcoule, and orders for military uranium are also 
going to stop, but we do not know when. This is what worries 
our employees in Pierrelatte but, in any case, the plant will 
not shut down before the end of 1995, and it would not be until 
the second half of 1996 that employment problems would crop up. 
  [Rochard] Since you became the head of COGEMA in 1988, you 
have said that you would like to see more capital participation. 
You were talking more about financial establishments. Since 
then, Total has become your shareholder. Are you looking for 
other partners? Is the banking-insurance profile still up to 
date? 
  [Syrota] My answer to both those questions is yes. There are 
several types of potential partners for COGEMA: financial 
investors interested in the long-term regular profitability of 
our business; industrialists with whom we can develop synergies 
in our areas of activity, which is the case with Total; and, 
lastly, commercial partners. Here, we have electricity 
producers, especially those who do not have a nuclear fuel 
industry in their country. I definitely hope that something 
will happen in the next few months, but we cannot say anything 
until the agreements have been signed and all the go-aheads have 
been given. 

