BFN 

  [Text] Hanoi, June 14 (AFP) -- Vietnam has resolved its 
main problems with the United States, especially the issue of US 
troops missing in action (MIA) from the Vietnam War, which 
dogged relations for nearly 20 years, Communist Party General 
Secretary Do Muoi said. 
  In an interview with AFP on Monday, Do Muoi said the 2,231 
MIAs were a "humanitarian" issue that had been settled, although 
it was "still an internal problem in the United States." 
  "We are acting in good faith," he said, referring to 
Vietnamese help in the effort to discern the fate of the missing 
troops. 
  The United States on February 3 scrapped an embargo on trade 
with Vietnam that had been set in place to press Hanoi on the 
MIAs. The move was followed in May by a mutual decision to set 
up liaison offices in Hanoi and Washington -- the first step 
towards restoring full diplomatic ties. 
  Do Muoi said he did not rule out an historic first visit to 
Vietnam by a US secretary of state in the near future. Warren 
Christopher is to go to Bangkok next month for a meeting of the 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), and US press 
reports say he may stop off in Vietnam before or after the visit. 
  "He can come when he feels like it," Do Muoi said. 
  US-Vietnamese trade has surged since the end of the trade 
embargo. The deals include a contract with the US oil giant 
Mobil for exploring offshore oil sites, as well as the sale of 
100,000 tonnes of rice for the US market. 
  Turning to regional issues, Do Muoi said he was "concerned" 
at the Korean nuclear crisis, the situation in Cambodia and the 
friction between Vietnam and China over sovereignty in the South 
China Sea. 
  Vietnamese Defence Minister General Doan Khue left Hanoi 
Monday on the first official visit to Pyongyang by a ranking 
Vietnamese military chief in 19 years. 
  The visit, Do Muoi said, was purely on a "friendship basis" 
and had no link with rumours that Khue would press the North 
Koreans over their nuclear programme. 
  "We've got other things to worry about," he said, adding 
that 
Vietnam had no intention of selling arms or ammunition to North 
Korea. 
  Do Muoi repeatedly emphasised Vietnam was only interested in 
peace after years of war, and intended to widen and strengthen 
its ties with the rest of the world, as its wish to join the 
Association of South East Asian nations "sooner or later" 
demonstrated. 
  He attacked a Chinese contract with a US oil company, 
Crestone, for drilling rights near the disputed Spratly Islands, 
but said disputes of this kind should be resolved by "patient 
negotiations," although insisted that the Spratlys and the 
Parcels in the South China Sea "are ours." 

