Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with President Nursultan Nazarbayev by Mayra </F>
Abdrakhmanova, correspondent for the television program 
"Sharayna"; place and date not given -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Abdrakhmanova] Tell me please, what was special 
about your visit [to Washington]? 
  [Nazarbayev] What was special was that, in comparison with 
the administration of President Bush, these are entirely new 
people, representatives of their power; young people who have 
positive ambitions, so as to make American society even better. 
And so I think that these politicians are actually working for 
the 21st century, and it was very important for me that the 
leader of Kazakhstan was able to establish normal relations and 
work in full mutual understanding. I can say bluntly that the 
United States is currently the number one state in the world, 
and its might and its resources, its economic potential, the 
scientific and technical progress there -- it is actually a 
state which holds first place in scientific and technical 
progress and in the growth of its productivity. And it was very 
important for us to establish political and economic relations, 
and to enlist the support of the United States at a difficult 
time. Moreover, I was grateful because the United States 
actively supported us, so that the donor states should support 
Kazakhstan with advantageous credits for supporting our currency 
and our reforms. I think we managed to achieve a high level of 
mutual understanding and trust in this, both with President 
Clinton and with Vice President Gore. 
  We were one of the first CIS states to have spent half a 
year 
drafting and to have signed a Charter on Democratic Partnership. 
It is a very important document. The document envisages 
partnership on issues of exchange of scientific and technical 
information, economic help, and attracting American business to 
Kazakhstan. And the most important thing is that in one of the 
clauses of the Charter it says that the United States, in the 
event of a threat to the territorial integrity of Kazakhstan and 
its borders, will take active measures to involve the entire -- 
so to speak -- system, both through the UN (?and CSCE) and in 
the framework of NATO, because we supported the recent 
initiative, "Partnership for Peace," and thus we are drawn into 
the NATO process, and so it is a very important factor now at 
the time of the formation of Kazakhstan. For example, in the 
Ministry of Defense we signed a document on participation in 
conversion of defense enterprises and allocation of money by the 
U.S. Government for problems with conversion. 
  You will have heard yourselves that the Chase Manhattan 
Bank, 
the biggest bank in New York, together with Citibank -- the 
Chase Manhattan Bank opened a fund for supporting reforms in 
Kazakhstan, and wants to attract the largest financial 
organizations to support this fund. This is very important for 
us, both politically and economically. 
  The most important thing, of course, is our mutual 
understanding on matters of the state of affairs in the CIS, in 
Central Asia, and Russia and prospects for the future of that 
region, and I came out of that conversation fully confident that 
the United States is displaying exceptional interest in 
Kazakhstan. And President Clinton said that America considers 
Kazakhstan to be one of the main states, one of the priorities 
of its policy and will continue its relations of trust with us 
both on the economic and political levels and cooperate in the 
defense sphere. We did not manage to take everything on board; 
in just one visit you cannot solve all problems. I feel the 
specific question was the fact that President Clinton and I 
decided to set up a working group which will single out all 
questions concerning the economy, finances, ecology, 
humanitarian programs, the question of training people, and 
attracting private and other investors. And this group will 
work on the whole range of questions in a brief period of time, 
and then we shall announce a new program of joint work in all 
areas. 

