Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [by ITAR-TASS correspondent Galina Kuchina] </F>
  [Text] Riga January 10 TASS -- A Russian airborne division 
deployed in the city of Pskov near the Latvian border went on 
high alert on Monday after an incident in Riga involving Russian 
military units, which Russian Ambassador-at-large Sergey Zotov 
qualified as a "provocation." 
  "Necessary measures have been taken to put the Pskov 
airborne 
division on alert," Zotov said in a statement on Monday, adding 
that units of the Northwestern Group of Russian Troops are also 
on high alert. 
  "As is known, on January 10 the talks were due to take place 
between the heads of the state delegations of Latvia and Russia 
on the set of problems connected with the troop withdrawal. 
Today, on the day of the delegation's arrival in Riga, 
outspoken provocative actions were taken against the 
Northeastern Group of Troops [as received] by the administration 
of the Vidzeme district of Riga," the statement said. 
  "Acting on the direct order from the district leadership, 
paramilitary units seized four facilities of the Russian Armed 
Forces and arrested Major-General Nikolay Taylakov, deputy 
commander of the Northwestern Group of Troops, and Major-General 
Anatoliy Vodopyanov, assistant to the commander of the 
Northwestern Group of Troops for work with personnel, who 
arrived at the scene of the incident. Violence was committed 
against the representatives of the troop command: The Russian 
generals were handcuffed and driven towards the Latvian-Russian 
border under guard," said Zotov, who is also head of the Russian 
delegation to the talks with Latvia on troop withdrawal. 
  "At the airport Commander of the Northwestern Group of 
Troops 
Colonel-General Leonid Mayorov informed the Russian state 
delegation about this flagrant provocative act by Latvian 
authorities. In this connection I voiced strong protest to the 
head of the Latvian delegation, Martyns Virsus, and demanded an 
immediate release of the arrested Russian generals and 
unblocking of the seized military facilities. The delegation 
announced its decision not to begin talks until all 
circumstances of this extraordinary incident have been found out. 
  "I informed the Russian Foreign Ministry, Defence Minister 
Pavel Grachev and the top Russian officials about the outright 
arbitrariness of Latvian extremist forces. It has come to the 
delegation's knowledge that respective military units of the 
Northwestern Group of Troops have been placed on high alert. 
Necessary measures have been taken to put the Pskov airborne 
division on alert. The Russian delegation considers the 
provocative actions by the Zemessargs (Latvian paramilitary 
units) as nothing else but an attempt to torpedo the 
Russian-Latvian talks and complicate relations between Russia 
and Latvia. 
  "In connection with the coming reports about the release of 
the Russian generals and the beginning of the unblocking of the 
seized facilities, and taking into account the apologies made by 
the Latvian leadership for the Zemessargs's actions, the Russian 
delegation has agreed to begin the talks on January 11," the 
statement said. 

