BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Aldo Renato Soares] </F>
  [Text] Brasilia -- Some of the main Brazilian construction 
companies like Mendes Junior, Andrade Gutierrez, and CBPO 
[expansion unknown] will form a consortium with Chinese 
companies to build the largest hydroelectric dam in the world: 
the Three Gorges project, which will be twice as large as the 
Itaipu hydroelectric dam [in Foz do Iguazu, Brazil] when 
finished. The estimated $20 billion project will be completed in 
15 years. Guo Xuyan, president of the Three Gorges project, will 
arrive in Brazil next month to visit Itaipu and hold talks with 
construction companies and capital goods suppliers (turbines and 
electricity generators). 
  The Brazilian trade offensive is being prepared by the 
Itamaraty Trade Promotion Department in reply to the Asian 
countries' interest in increasing trade with Brazil. At least 
two official Chinese trade missions have visited Brazil in the 
past six months, contacting government officials and business 
leaders. Currently a mission of 30 Brazilian businessmen is 
touring Singapore, Vietnam, and Malaysia looking for business 
deals and partnerships. In May, a business delegation will 
accompany President Itamar Franco to the PRC, and in September 
another business mission will travel to China, South Korea, and 
Indonesia. 
<H5>  Priority </H5>
  Southeast Asia is one of Itamaraty's priorities. "It is the 
fastest growing region in the world, and China is the largest 
country in the region," a diplomat said. In the past few years, 
trade with China has been increasing at 20 percent annually, and 
trade between the two countries surpassed $1 billion in 1993. 
  Brazil's main interest is to participate in hydroelectric, 
mining, and telecommunication projects, as well as in 
pharmaceutical industry, software [preceding word in English], 
and satellite launching and manufacturing technology deals. Some 
deals already are well under way. A Brazilian company will 
supply the Chinese Government with digital centrals for rural 
telephone systems -- a contract whose negotiations started in 
November 1993. 
  A Sao Paulo enterprise will sell banking automation 
equipment 
to the PRC. The CBPO, Mendes Junior, Andrade Gutierrez, and Vale 
do Rio Doce construction and mining companies already have set 
up offices in Beijing. This year Brazil and the PRC will 
commemorate 20 years since the reestablishment of diplomatic 
relations between the two countries. "Businesses tend to 
increase given the large size of the two countries in the 
international context," an Itamaraty source said. 
<H5>  South Africa </H5>
  Another market in which Brazil is interested is South 
Africa, 
which intends to invest nearly $5 billion in a reconstruction 
and development project. A Brazilian business delegation visited 
South Africa and returned very optimistic about future business 
opportunities. South Africa is a rich country with considerably 
developed technology, which is concentrated mainly on the white 
minority. 
  Elections will be held there on 27 April, and African 
National Congress leader Nelson Mandela is expected to win and 
introduce a deep transformation in the country. 
  A Brazilian company closed a deal to export tow trucks, and 
other Brazilian companies will participate in the duplication of 
telephone circuits, thus expanding telecommunications routes 
between the two countries. 
  According to a diplomatic source, the South African 
Government is particularly interested in obtaining intermediary 
technology in the fields of steel mills, mining, electricity, 
petrochemical, and agribusiness. 
  Some Brazilian construction companies will be able to 
participate in a project to build 1 million low-income houses. 
"In the mid-term, 20 million people, mainly blacks, must become 
consumers," a diplomat said. In 1993, trade between Brazil and 
South Africa was $280 million. 

