BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Moscow Talks, a New Text"] </F>
  [Text] As the Tajikistan peace talks continue in Moscow, 
the Tajik Labor Minister who heads his government's delegation, 
has expressed hopes that the outcome of the first round of talks 
would pave the way for signing of a final agreement by the 
leaders of two sides. 
  The talks are hosted by Russia and supervised by Iran, 
Pakistan and Afghanistan. 
  The new mediation initiated by Russia and Iran, is in fact a 
new attempt to restore stability to crisis spots in Central Asia 
and the Caucasus by the two influential countries in the region. 
  But in order for this cooperation to continue, mutual trust 
is required. The Russians have once attempted to launch a coup 
d'etat in Tajikistan without taking into account the wishes of 
the Tajik Muslims and today we are watching how the Russians are 
sinking deeper in the quagmire they themselves have created in 
Tajikistan. 
  In this round of the peace talks too, the Russians witnessed 
that Iran used its "spiritual influence" among the combatant 
Tajik groups and urged them to attend the Moscow talks. But as 
influential opposition leaders such as Akbar Tourjanzadeh and 
Sharif Hematzadeh were on their way to Moscow, news from the 
Russian capital indicated the participation of a low-level 
delegation on behalf of the Tajik government. In other words, 
none of the regime ruling over Dushanbe are attending the Moscow 
talks. This move in itself would create a sense of "mistrust" 
in the combatant Tajik groups towards the real intention of the 
Russians and the Dushanbe government. 
  If the Russians are really for restoration of peace and 
tranquility in Tajikistan, they should prepare the ground for 
the people's rule and sovereignty while at the same time 
maintain an impartial stance in the mediation efforts. 
  Regrettably, news from Tajikistan is of continued pressure 
on 
and torture of the people of Badakhshan and Pamir, as well as 
those migrants who are now returning to their villages, by the 
Tajik government. A halt to these crimes is necessary as a sign 
of goodwill by the Tajik government in order to guarantee the 
continuation of the talks and fulfillment of a peaceful solution. 

