BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Cairo ROSE AL-YUSUF in Arabic on 18 
April on pages 62 to 64 publishes a 1,200-word report by 'Isam 
'Abd-al-Jawad in which he warns that al-Minya Governorate "might 
turn into another Asyut." 
  The report reveals that in their search for "additional and 
urgent funding for their terrorist operations, terrorist groups 
have decided to engage in the antiquities trade," having 
obtained a religious edict [fatwa] from their leadership 
legalizing this trade. 
  To establish themselves in the community, these groups have 
started to offer free health and education services. They have 
opened health centers where the groups' physicians examine 
patients without charge and women gynecologists wage a fierce 
war on family planning. They also offer free private lessons in 
mosques and sell foodstuffs at reduced prices in dozens of 
shops, mostly unlicensed, the report explains. 
  To finance their social activities, the groups collect 
voluntary as well as obligatory donations from shops and houses, 
'Abd-al-Jawad says. 
  He points out that the extremist groups' activities cover 
all 
the cities in al-Minya Governorate. He notes, however, that 
Mallawi is the main center of their activity. "The Islamic 
Group organization controls the city of Mallawi. The Muslim 
Brotherhood presence has thinned out in the city for fear of a 
clash with the Islamic Group," the writer says. 
  "Al-Shaykh 'Isa Mosque, the main stronghold of the Islamic 
Group in Mallawi, is the site of a weekly meeting on Wednesdays. 
Group members dressed in their Pakistani uniforms tour the city 
in groups, chanting Islamic songs, until they reach the crowded 
mosque." The mosque's orator is changed every week and his name 
is rarely announced. Following the sermon, a young man reads 
"the weekly bulletin on conditions of Muslims in the world, 
which reports on Westerners' persecution of Muslims, the 
internal position of the group and its persecution by the 
authorities, and finally the success of its operations." The 
bulletin concludes with warnings and threats to whoever stands 
in the group's way. 
  Explaining why Mallawi was selected, 'Abd-al-Jawad says that 
it is one of the main strongholds of the Islamic Group and the 
birthplace of al-Sadat's assassin, Khalid al-Islambuli, and 
Muhammad Shawqi al-Islambuli, one of the Islamic group leaders 
who escaped to and operated from Afghanistan. 
  'Abd-al-Jawad adds that signs indicate that a number of the 
fugitive leaders of the Dayrut branch of the Islamic Group 
reside in Mallawi and work out plans for their operations there. 
Of these he mentions Rif'at Zaydan and Jamal 'Abd-al-Hamid 
'Abd-al-Nasir, better known as al-Shaykh. 
  Citing a politician who requested anonymity "out of fear for 
his political career," 'Abd-al-Jawad says that terrorist groups 
control much of the services; they attract the citizens by 
offering free medical treatment and private lessons. Although 
the Awqaf Ministry appoints preachers and imams every now and 
then, the groups still control the governorate's mosques and the 
ministry's imams fear punishment from the terrorist groups. 
  Asked why the extremism phenomenon spreads in al-Minya, the 
politician cites unemployment as the major reason. He notes 
that the rate exceeds 60 percent and that productive projects 
are almost nonexistent. Terrorist groups attract citizens by 
involving frustrated young people in small projects, he explains. 
  As to where collected funds go, the report notes that they 
are spent on arms and financing operations in Asyut. 

