BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Igor Belskiy] </F>
  [Text] Moscow June 12 TASS -- Despite bad weather, a 
demonstration, announced by the irreconcilable opposition, did 
take place in Moscow. According to the estimates of the 
militia, some 2,500 people took part in it. Parties and 
movements included in the National Salvation Front marked today 
the fourth anniversary of the adoption of the declaration on 
Russia's state sovereignty with a march and a meeting. The 
initiative of holding the demonstration came from the Labour 
Russia Movement, the Russian Communist Workers' Party, led by 
Viktor Anpilov, the Revival Party and other organisations. 
  A column with streamers saying "USSR is our homeland", "All 
power to the soviets of working people" etc. marched under the 
torrential rain from the Triumphalnaya Square to the centre of 
the city by the Tverskaya Street. 
  The meeting was held in the very centre of Moscow, at the 
Teatralnaya Square. Opening the meeting, Sazhiy Umalatova, head 
of the permanent presidium of the Congress of People's Deputies, 
described June 12 as "the day of national mourning" and urged 
people to demand early presidential elections. Chairman of the 
Russian Party of Communists Anatoliy Kryuchkov, who took the 
floor after Mrs. Umalatova, has a different view of the tactics 
of the struggle. In his opinion, a massive civil disobedience 
campaign is the only form of the struggle that could be used in 
the current situation in Russia. Skurlatov, leader of the 
Revival Party, went even further. He described the existing 
system as an "occupation regime whose orders and instructions 
are all illegal" and urged to create "a Russian area of 
guerrilla warfare" and "parallel power structures." 
  Viktor Aniplov, the leader of the Labour Russia Movement, 
suggested that "working people should be persuaded to declare a 
general political strike." 
  The meeting was addressed as well by Vladislav Achalov and 
Oleg Shenin, leader of the Union of Communist Parties -- CPSU. 

