Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "The IRA's Answer"] </F>
  [Text] Last night's mortar attack on Heathrow airport was 
the most eloquent response that the IRA is likely to make to the 
peace initiative launched with the Anglo-Irish declaration. The 
five mortars, apparently aimed from a vehicle in a hotel car 
park at one of the runways, instantly threw the world's largest 
international airport into chaos. A week and a half after the 
specious rhetoric of the Sinn Fein conference in Dublin, the 
Republican movement was once again speaking the language it 
knows best. 
  The immediate effect of the blast was to help secure the 
renewal of the Prevention of Terrorism Act by a majority of 86, 
after Labour forced a vote on an issue traditionally governed by 
bipartisan consensus. Yet its political significance was much 
broader. Since John Major and Albert Reynolds, the Taoiseach, 
signed their declaration in December, Sinn Fein has sought to 
nurture an atmosphere of suspense and uncertainty. Having 
already won the offer of exploratory talks after a 12-week 
ceasefire, the IRA's political wing has encouraged the view that 
with more diplomacy, more concessions, and more attention to the 
Republican agenda it may be willing to lay down its arms. Its 
leaders Gerry Adams and Martin McGuinness have called for 
"clarification," "demilitarisation" and British "persuasion" of 
the Unionists. 
  Last night, this deplorable tactic of studied indecision was 
shown for the mockery it always was. The IRA revealed that its 
true strategy is still one of attrition, an indefinite assault 
upon the weak points of the British political and economic 
system. This was its message in February 1991 when it launched 
a mortar attack upon the Gulf War Cabinet in No 10 [Downing 
Street]; in its bombing of the City in April 1992 and a year 
later; and now in its assault upon Heathrow. That the attack 
was thwarted will not concern the movement's military leaders 
unduly. Their purpose was to show the world that they could 
smuggle their artillery into the heart of an airport which is 
still the hub of the European network and a vital entrepot for 
transatlantic flights. To disable Heathrow is to strike a 
serious blow to the nation's economic credibility and reputation 
as a centre of tourism and trade. 
  The Government must now consider its own response. Those in 
Whitehall who argued last year that the IRA had become arthritic 
and was in serious operational decline must be blushing today. 
In the last three months, the Republican machine has flaunted 
the range of its capabilities, from Mr Adams's American 
propaganda trip to the continuation of the mainland campaign. 
Ministers and officials have noticeably distanced themselves 
from earlier claims in recent weeks. No longer is it argued in 
briefings that peace is imminent or even likely in the 
foreseeable future. Once billed as the starting- blocks of a 
rapid peace process, the Anglo-Irish declaration is now 
presented merely as a lapidary document outlining principles for 
an eventual settlement. But this shift of emphasis begs the 
question: where next? 
  The sooner the Prime Minister ceases to delude himself the 
better. The declaration has failed in its purpose and is no 
longer an even partially convincing foundation for government 
policy. Dublin must remember its promises to take appropriate 
action-meaning security measures -- if the initiative failed; 
President Clinton must give substance to his apparent 
disillusionment with Mr Adams by unequivocally supporting the 
British Government in its response to this attack. The 
Republican gauntlet has been thrown down at Mr Major's feet. 
Having invested so much capital in a failed peace process, he 
must show he is willing to invest similar energy in a quite 
different approach. 

