BFN 

<F P=106> [By Isabel Dias de Aguiar] </F>
  [Text] Sao Paulo, 24 May (AE) -- The position of Brazilian 
exports on the international market is vulnerable. Brazil is 
running the risk of being considered a country that indulges in 
social dumping, and one that could suffer retaliatory actions 
for not having legislation to regulate industrial property in a 
way that is acceptable to developed countries. Furthermore, 
with the creation of the North American Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA) -- an agreement that includes Canada, Mexico, and the 
United States -- Brazilian products are facing the risk of not 
being able to reach the U.S. market at competitive prices. The 
U.S. market accounts for nearly half of all manufactured 
products exported by Sao Paulo State. Carlos Eduardo Moreira 
Ferreira, president of the Sao Paulo State Federation of 
Industries (FIESP), has conveyed these concerns to U.S. Treasury 
Under Secretary Lawrence Summers. 
  Summers visited FIESP to hear suggestions for the agenda of 
the Summit of the Americas to be held in Miami in December. Yet 
instead of making proposals for the meeting on ways to restore 
the flow of capital and credit toward Latin American countries, 
Summers was asked to discuss issues concerning Brazil and the 
United States as trade partners. Ferreira argued that Brazilian 
industry cannot be charged with practicing social dumping 
because it has to bear a heavy social burden amounting to 110 
percent of its salary payments. 
  Boris Tabacof, director of the FIESP Economic Department, 
said Ferreira's concern reflects the prevailing mood among 
Brazilian businessmen. Tabacof added that U.S. President Bill 
Clinton's efforts to defend U.S. industrial interests should 
make the Brazilian Government remain alert. He believes 
international competition will become tougher in the next few 
years. The Americans are inclined to be selective and 
protectionist. The advent of NAFTA has made things worse for 
Brazilian exporters. Mexico competes with Brazil as a supplier 
of major items such as steel, orange juice, auto parts, 
vehicles, and sugar. According to Ferreira, Brazil runs the 
risk of suffering unfair competition, particularly if the NAFTA 
rules concerning the origin of products are not respected. 
  At a luncheon attended by nearly 50 businessmen, Summers 
said 
he is optimistic about the outcome of the Brazilian economic 
stabilization plan. He said the U.S. Government is determined 
to contribute to making the plan a success through financial 
help and through incentives for investing in the country. 

