CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Alex Moskovich, adviser of President N. </F>
Nazarbayev, by Dmitriy Makarov and Andrey Knyazev; place and 
date not given: "Adviser of Leaders"] 
  [Text] Alex Moskovich is an old and good friend of 
our paper, and interviews with him, formerly a member of the 
French Parliament and honorary citizen of Paris, have been 
published in ARGUMENTY I FAKTY repeatedly. Following the lifting 
of the "iron curtain," he has visited Russia often and has lived 
here. He feels the problems of one-sixth of the world as his 
own. But his experience of life and politics as the "confidant" 
and first adviser of the legendary French president de Gaulle 
has gone unclaimed by Russian politicians. In Kazakhstan, on the 
other hand, his experience is considered useful. A. Moskovich is 
now an adviser of President N. Nazarbayev. 
  [ARGUMENTY I FAKTY] You are Nazarbayev's adviser on economic 
and political matters. Does he really listen to you? 
  [Moskovich] We have a tacit understanding, as it were: he 
reads what I write him just about daily and does what he wishes. 
I, regardless of whether it is pleasant for him or not, express 
my opinions. Then we sit down and begin to look into my 
suggestions point by point. Nazarbayev says what he agrees with, 
what he rejects. 
  An ability to listen and hear is very important for a 
statesman. 
  [ARGUMENTY I FAKTY] Nazarbayev is currently being accused of 
serious blunders--the republic's economy is in a difficult 
position, and the situation concerning the Russian-speaking 
population, in North Kazakhstan particularly, is very complex. 
  [Moskovich] First, a law on Russian as the language of 
interethnic communication has been adopted in Kazakhstan. 
Second, Nazarbayev realizes that the republics of the former 
USSR will not on their own climb out of the morass in which they 
have all found themselves. The price of the ruble can only be 
maintained by expanding the production sphere, increasing the 
national product, and seeking to ensure that the state become 
richer. Unless the state becomes richer, its citizens become 
poorer. Everything is interconnected. 
  [ARGUMENTY I FAKTY] Prior to the disintegration of the USSR, 
only four republics--Russia, Turkmenistan, Azerbaijan, and 
Lithuania--seemingly had a surplus balance in interrepublic 
trade. When Russia said: That's enough, brothers, let's live 
each for himself, all republics quickly introduced their own 
currencies. They, consequently, had been preparing for this in 
advance. Hence they knew or anticipated that the disintegration 
would occur.... 
  [Moskovich] They did not so much know as fear that Russia 
would kick them out of the ruble zone. It was fear that prompted 
these decisions. 
  [ARGUMENTY I FAKTY] Sometimes states, like people also, 
probably, need to live apart in order to evaluate their partner 
and ponder and weigh up whether we need one another. 
  [Moskovich] I cannot agree. Strong and powerful countries 
with their own culture, literature, and science--Britain, 
France, Spain, Germany--are uniting, we are parting--this is a 
paradox. If we are speaking of Kazakhstan, however, it was 
impossible for Russia to separate from it. There are a multitude 
of reasons for this. The main ones are the immense resources 
that were invested in the development of Kazakhstan's industry 
by the former Union, the common economic interests, following 
the severance of which Russia and Kazakhstan have found 
themselves in a difficult economic position, and, finally, the 
existence of natural resources, which can only be developed by 
everyone together. An independent republic separately lacks the 
powers for this, unless "uncles" from the West help, and not, 
understandably, for a pair of beautiful eyes. 
  There are other factors also. And it is only the restraint 
and deliberateness of the decisions adopted by Nazarbayev that 
have thus far kept the republic from a rapid fall. Were it to 
fall, however, it would pull Russia with it also--they are that 
closely bound together. 
  [ARGUMENTY I FAKTY] Some political scientists and economists 
are comparing Kazakhstan and China, economically, at least. 
Fundamental economic changes have occurred in the PRC in the 
past 10-15 years, and people have become richer. But there has 
been virtually no increase in democracy. 
  [Moskovich] In my view, the Chinese are right to be doing 
all 
that they can to ensure that each citizen in a country of more 
than 1 billion reach the plank of life of $2,000 a year. Why 
should every Chinese have to get into politics? Do you think 
that in civilized states, which consider themselves democratic, 
any janitor, even if he has the wisdom of Solomon, would be 
admitted to administration of the state? No, an oligarchy rules 
there, and democracy is a myth. I have yet to encounter real 
democracy in a single country. So Kazakhstan could learn some 
things from China in this respect. Why did Russia and 
Kazakhstan, all the former republics of the USSR, which were 
under conditions of postwar devastation identical to France, not 
achieve what France was able to achieve? There was no NEP [New 
Economic Plan]! In the middle and at the end of the 1980's the 
economy was generally on course, but glasnost became license. 
Until everyone understands that everything starts with the 
economy, there will be no "miracle"! Progress means man 
compelling a machine to work, and himself working less. 
Initially, 16 hours a day, then, 9, and then, 6. He has time for 
the theater, the movies, books. 
  [ARGUMENTY I FAKTY] What if people do not know what to do 
with their free time? 
  [Moskovich] If he wants to realize his capabilities, this 
problem does not arise. I became wealthy long ago and need not 
have worked for 30 years now, but I continue to work, even at 
the age of 82. And it is not even a question of money. Money is 
a means for achieving an end, not the end in itself. 
  [ARGUMENTY I FAKTY] For many people it is the end as well. 
In 
Moscow there are many people who stand in line to purchase a 
sable coat, others are forced to run around the stores in search 
of cheap food. 
  [Moskovich] However the economy might develop and however 
huge the size of the middle class, there will always be people 
living below the poverty line. And it will be this way until the 
world achieves over-abundance. Then we may give to everyone 
according to their requirements. And lines at stores for the 
wealthy are excellent proof that there are coming to be more 
prosperous people in the state. And it is important, in 
addition, to be lucky. Both for people and for countries. One 
ancient Russian chronicle said: "Our land is great and abundant, 
but it lacks order." Order needs to be established. Nazarbayev 
will do this, I believe. 
  [ARGUMENTY I FAKTY] Where? In what country? Russia, France, 
Kazakhstan? And, in general, of what state do you feel yourself 
to be a citizen? 
  [Moskovich] When the French inadequately defend the policy 
of 
France, this in itself is abnormal. A true man may love many 
women, but properly only two: his mother and his mistress. His 
mother, whom he forgives everything, and his mistress, whom he 
forgives nothing. So it is that I forgive the Soviet Union, now, 
Russia, everything, and I forgive France nothing. I love Russia 
very much. For me Russia runs from the White Sea to the 
Bosporus. These are the geographical borders which were ordained 
for it... by whom I do not know because I do not believe in God. 

