BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Finance Minister Philippe Maystadt by </F>
Benedicte Vaes; place and date not given: "Flexibility: 
Maystadt Plays It Down"] 
  [Text] The OECD is prescribing massive doses of flexibility 
to its member countries, which are suffering from unemployment 
that is burdening 35 million of its citizens. It says the root 
of all the evil is the "inability of our countries to adapt to 
change." It is advising its member countries to examine 
critically all their social protection measures in order to 
assess the extent to which such measures destroy jobs. 
  Yesterday in Paris, Philippe Maystadt participated in the 
33d 
ministerial session. We asked him if he supports the OECD 
directives. 
  [Maystadt] This report, while stimulating and realistic, 
opens the way to discussion. It rejects simplistic approaches 
and launches a warning about the impasse of protectionism. 
Nevertheless, like some of my colleagues, I would tone it down. 
I do not agree with the conclusion. While flexibility in the 
labor market is essential, it is not a panacea for all our 
unemployment ills. 
  [Vaes] Is more flexibility needed? 
  [Maystadt] I am in favor of strategies to reorganize working 
time. They should be decided on a decentralized basis, such as 
corporate plans. 
  [Vaes] The results are not really convincing. 
  [Maystadt] We have to assess them and perhaps find more 
motivating incentives. 
  [Vaes] The OECD questions the usefulness of minimum wages. 
Do you agree with this? 
  [Maystadt] The OECD is not that categorical. It said that 
the role of legal minimum wages must be reassessed. In those 
places where it is felt necessary to maintain them as a strategy 
in combating unemployment, this is the case for our country, it 
advises minimizing their negative impact on employment. 
  [Vaes] Meaning? 
  [Maystadt] They should be indexed according to prices rather 
than earnings: We are already doing this. In addition, these 
wages should be modulated depending on age and on the 
productivity of the regions. This latter point is not aimed at 
the regions of Belgium: Our regions have identical productivity. 
It remains to be seen if we are sufficiently modifying the 
minimum wage in accordance with age. We have already 
established "springboard jobs," which are paid at a rate of 90 
percent. Perhaps more should be done. 
  [Vaes] If there is not enough flexibility, what other 
solutions are there? 
  [Maystadt] I am advocating two ideas. They are recommended 
by the White Paper, but certain people tend to forget about them 
due to a selective reading of the paper. We must exploit the 
pools of jobs represented by local community services in the 
face of growing social demand due mainly to an aging population. 
I propose taking action on the supply side by further reducing 
the cost of unskilled labor. I also propose taking action on 
the demand side by creating the "service checks" mentioned in 
the white paper, a move which should lead to real jobs. 
  In addition, to alleviate the indirect cost of labor, new 
revenue has to be found through environmental taxes and taxes on 
income from investments. The Austerity Plan is already geared 
to this approach. A harmonized European approach would allow us 
to go further. 
  [Vaes] The OECD wants to limit the payment of unemployment 
incentives, which, it says, "removes the incentive" to look for 
work. Do you agree? 
  [Maystadt] That is the most debatable part of the report. I 
would challenge the cliche that says the right to unemployment 
benefits is unlimited in Belgium. Abnormally long periods of 
unemployment lead to exclusion. 
  [Vaes] You support the inclusion of a social clause in trade 
agreements. Will this ever happen? 
  [Maystadt] I reject disguised protectionism, but I feel it 
is 
legitimate to make access to trade liberalization conditional 
upon the respect of the basic rights of workers. This approach 
is acceptable to the developing countries. We must ban child 
labor and help the targeted countries develop education systems. 
To make this kind of system succeed, I am endeavoring, as 
chairman of the IMF interim committee, and with the agreement of 
Michel Hansenne, BIT [International Labor Office] director 
general, to link the IMF, the World Bank, and the International 
Labor Organization. 

