Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wang Ruowang (The United States): "Three Gorges </F>
Project and Party Culture" -- First paragraph is Wang Ruowang's 
introduction] 
  [Text] The Three Gorges Project has started with the final 
approval of Deng Xiaoping, Li Peng and others to serve the needs 
of putting politics in command of everything for the party 
culture. The proposal to develop the Three Gorges Project is 
actually aimed at setting people's minds at rest and diverting 
their discontent with what happened after the "4 June" Incident. 
This project is destined to end up in three disastrous ways. 
  China is determined to develop the Three Gorges Project. The 
resettlement of the people in the 13 counties along the Chiang 
Jiang has already begun. I cannot say much about this project 
since I am not an expert in water conservancy, and I have been 
driven out of the country. Nevertheless, I am quite familiar 
with the CPC party culture of scores of years. The process from 
the early evaluation to the final decision in developing the 
Three Gorges Project precisely shows a vivid sample about the 
influence of the party culture. There are many things that make 
people indignant and heave a deep sigh. I would like to inform 
my fellow countrymen about them in this article. 
<H5>  Knowing the Present by Reviewing the Past </H5>
  During the 40 years when the Communist Party of China ruled 
the country, all party leaders invariably loved to develop large 
projects and exaggerate. There are some well-known examples from 
the Mao era, such as steel-making in backyards, overtaking 
Britain in 15 years, and realizing Communism after three years. 
(The practice of everyone eating from the same big pot, which 
means communism, was proposed in 1958). 
  Also, there was the Sanmen Gorge Water Conservancy Project 
along the Yellow River. The party ordered the project, because 
it wanted to make the water in the Yellow River clear with 
Chairman Mao's hands so that the prophesy that "when a sage 
emerges, the water in the Yellow River becomes clear" left from 
the ancient times would be fulfilled by Chairman Mao. At that 
time, the whole party regarded the development of the Sanmen 
Gorge Dam as a political task of top priority. However, the 
Yellow River is still filled with murky water today when the 
sage has already been dead for more than 10 years. The Sanmen 
Gorge, clogged with silt, has become a cynical mockery of the 
greatest sage in the world fantasy! 
  Mao's successor Hua Guofeng realized that it was hard for 
him to exercise leadership, because he lacked political capital. 
He sought to score more economic achievements to make up for his 
political weakness. Thus, he made magnificent plans to build ten 
enterprises such as the Baotou Iron and Steel Complex and 
another ten oil fields such as the Daqing Oil Field. Later, his 
mistake was seized by Deng Xiaoping, who sneered and called it a 
"foreign leap forward." Later Hua Guofeng was kicked out of the 
Political Bureau together with his bold remarks. 
  The Chinese Communist leaders love to talk and act big, but 
not because they are conceited or they have the personal 
temperament of loving to brag. The projects they choose to 
develop are not really conducive to the national economy or the 
people's livelihood. They are aimed at heightening or 
consolidating their political authority. This is the purpose of 
putting politics in command of everything. Deng Xiaoping 
criticized Hua Guofeng for promoting the foreign leap forward, 
but he himself cannot jump out of the eccentric ring of history. 
If political leaders are elected by the people, they must pay 
full attention to the will of the people, and the tenure of 
their offices is limited. They would not commit such errors. 
This is the first main point of the party culture. 
  Raising a hue and cry on the mass media and winning warm 
applause from the people is half way to success for the Chinese 
Communists. They attach great importance to propaganda work. 
They do not take into consideration in advance the difficulties 
they may encounter as well as the consequences. Deng Xiaoping's 
suggestion to "cross a river by feeling the stones" is a brief 
outline of this mode of thinking. Therefore, most of China's 
projects in economic construction have a fine start but poor 
finish. There are some projects where a great deal is said, but 
no action is taken. In some cases, they cannot find the stones, 
while in other cases, they have not got into the water yet. The 
aforementioned is the second main point of party culture in 
economic construction. 
  The Three Gorges Project for hydroelectric power 
generation was vetoed when Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai were in 
power. Why does this project resurface again, after 1989? We are 
able to understand the situation better if we study the first 
and second main points of the party culture. Deng Xiaoping, Li 
Peng, Zou Jiahua and others have made the final decision to 
develop the Three Gorges Project under this kind of historic 
background, because they need to serve the need to put politics 
in command of everything. As far as 1989 is concerned, the 
Chinese Communist leadership regard it as a bad year. The "4 
June" butchery was followed by the collapse of the Soviet Union 
and Eastern Europe. Faced with troubles at home and abroad, the 
Chinese Communists found themselves isolated and helpless as 
never before. It was at such a time that they proposed 
developing the Three Gorges Project. On the surface, they 
claimed that power shortages were the roadblock in increasing 
production and deepening reform (Quoting Zou Jiahua's words), 
but actually the project is aimed at setting the peoples' minds 
at rest and diverting them from their discontent with reality. 
This mentality of "singing a grand Beijing opera for the people" 
is similar to that of working hard to host the 2000 Olympic 
Games in Beijing. 
  Referring to Zou Jiahua's remarks, I said at a gathering 
held in the Silicon Valley near San Francisco on 15 August 1992 
that "the Chinese Communists hope to extricate themselves from 
their predicament by developing the Chang Jiang water 
conservancy project. The result will invariably be a suicidal 
policy bringing calamity to the country and the people. 
Actually, China is not short of electric power. Power shortage 
problems can be solved by adopting other measures. What China 
needs badly is democracy and human rights." (Local newspapers 
have carried reports on my speech). 
<H5>  Understand the Present To Better Predict the Future </H5>
  Those at the top act arbitrarily and turn a deaf ear to 
all negative views. To meet requirements in accordance with the 
second main point of party culture, it is necessary to mobilize 
the whole party to ensure that public opinion from the top to 
the bottom throughout China is in conformity with the party 
central committee. All those with different political views are 
criminals, and enemies. 
  First of all, a leader sets up a plan at a meeting. 
(Deng Xiaoping always makes the final decision). Then he 
mobilizes a group of experts to rig up all the arguments to 
prove the brilliance and correctness of the party central 
committee. There was a water conservancy expert at the Qinghua 
University--Professor Huang Wanli [7806 8001 6849]. Prior to the 
development of the Yellow River Sanmen Gorge Dam during the Mao 
era, he wrote a letter to the government organization in charge 
of the project to oppose the development of the project. For 
this, he was labeled a rightist and deprived of his right to 
speak. A campaign was whipped up in the 1990's to develop the 
major Chang Jiang water conservancy project. Huang once again 
wrote a letter to voice his opposition. He was turned down. He 
sought to go through legal proceedings against the project. 
Naturally he was totally ignored. Another water conservancy 
expert wrote a letter, suggesting building five to six medium 
hydroelectric power stations in different locations along the 
tributaries of the Chang Jiang, which would be able to generate 
electricity within five years. The greatest advantage of this 
project is that all places of historic interest and scenic 
beauty would remain intact while improved navigation along the 
Chang Jiang is insured. This plan was rejected by Li Peng and 
others who love to talk and act big. They held that the 
disadvantage of the plan is that it cannot solve all the 
problems at one fell swoop; nor can it demonstrate the 
superiority of socialism. Here we have once again run into the 
party culture "roadblock." 
  To ensure uniformity in all mass media throughout the 
country, all newspapers and journals are forbidden to print any 
opposition views. They also are not allowed to print letters 
from readers who question the project. When experts and Hong 
Kong reporters conducted on-site inspection tours, they were 
invariably briefed in advance about the project and the 
"tremendous achievements" after the completion of the project. 
(We cannot but admire the painstaking efforts made by those who 
advocate the project. They fear that the Hong Kong news media 
would differ with the party central committee in opinion.) 
  When the 1992 National People's Congress [NPC] was 
prepared to adopt the motion on the Three Gorges Project, a 
scale model of the project was put on display outside of the 
conference hall, and the Chinese Communist leadership whipped up 
a frenzy inside and outside of the congress for the project. 
They did not expect that one-third of the deputies would still 
vote against the project or abstain. This was the first time in 
the history of the NPC that its role as a rubber stamp was 
overshadowed. One of the NPC Standing Committee members, Huang 
Shunxing, held a press conference, saying that there are more 
disadvantages than advantages in developing the Three Gorges 
Project. He also said that the Chinese Communist officials made 
him angry by exerting pressure on the NPC deputies. Naturally 
newspapers did not report on what he had said. Later, the 
Chinese Communists expelled Huang Shunxing from the NPC without 
making him lose his face. 
  From this we can see that the entire process in the 
development of the Three Gorges Project is soaked with the 
poisonous juice of the party culture. The party culture is a 
product which combines autocracy with class struggle. It sharply 
conflicts with any effort to make policy decisions with a 
democratic and scientific approach. The Three Gorges Project is 
one of system engineering which goes beyond the century. (A dam 
with the highest elevation of 175 meters in the world.) 
Falsehood and subjectivism have no place in any scientific 
undertaking. In addition, most of the people working on the 
project are laymen or cadres who blindly follow orders. Right 
now, the qualities of the cadres are much worse than those who 
built the Sanmen Gorge Dam during the Mao Era. 
  When a vice minister of Water Conservancy and the chief 
responsible person of the corporation in the development of the 
Three Gorges Project assumed his post, he said: "We plan to cut 
short the time to dam the river by one year so that it will 
happen at the same time as the return to China of sovereignty 
over Hong Kong. The year 1997 will be a year of double 
celebration." "I hope that comrades in the department carrying 
out preparatory work for the project will work conscientiously 
and boldly. Even if they make mistakes, I will naturally assume 
the responsibility," he added. We like to ask a question: Why is 
it necessary to drag together the occasions of damming the Chang 
Jiang and the return of Hong Kong's sovereignty to China? The 
authorities in Beijing are thinking about recovering Hong Kong 
ahead of schedule. Does this mean that the date for damming the 
Chang Jiang will also be moved up so that it will happen in the 
same year as Hong Kong's return to China? Besides, people in 
Hong Kong do not feel that 1997 is a year for celebration. In 
the "year of double celebration," for what do we celebrate? 
During the past dozens of years, China had always selected "1 
July" or "1 October" to start or finish any construction project 
or to launch a new ship as a sign to make contributions to the 
party. To complete a project or launch a new ship on a certain 
date, workers have been asked to hurry up and work overtime at 
the sacrifice of quality. As a result, such practice often 
causes landslides, major setbacks and even deaths. I remember 
that when the telegraph building in Shanghai was completed in 
1987, the leadership chose the party's birthday to celebrate the 
occasion. However, workers did not have enough time to install 
the elevator. As a result, a customer wanted to use the 
elevator, but got himself killed. To fulfill a political task, a 
joyous occasion thus ended as a funeral. In addition, local 
newspapers were not allowed to report the incident. 
  When the aforementioned official said that "I shall 
naturally assume responsibility," his tone was magnanimous, but 
actually he would not be held responsibile. There are hundreds 
of different types of work on the work site. If workers at the 
lower levels have problems, do all of them need to ask the 
commander-in-chief on the work site to solve them ? The work 
site covers an area about dozens of li in diameter. If anything 
goes wrong in terms of quality, how does the commander-in-chief 
at the top know who has caused all this? As soon as this 
anonymous person in responsibility opened his mouth, we knew 
that he was deeply poisoned by party culture. This kind of 
person can be an outstanding cadre in doing political work, but 
he is definitely not a man of action. As the responsible person 
for the project, this vice minister mentioned nothing about 
quality first. He was only responsible to Li Peng and Zou 
Jiahua. He did not assume responsibility for the lives and 
properties of millions of residents along the Chang Jiang. No 
wonder disastrous things happen! 
  We can predict the future if we carefully examine what 
is happening right now. The Three Gorges Project is destined to 
end up in the following three disastrous ways: 
  1. Changes for the worse, such as ecological imbalances 
and dropping of the groundwater level, take place after 10 to 15 
years of hydroelectric power generation at the Three Gorges Dam; 
just like the Aswan Dam which caused mass desertification in the 
lower reaches of the Nile River. Egyptians now regret what they 
had done in building the dam. 
  2. Due to the improper handling of the silt problem, the 
water level in the section of the Chang Jiang between Chongqing 
and Yichang will continue to rise just like what happened at the 
Sanmen Gorge Dam. 
  3. The tragedy caused by the burst of the Gouhou Dam in 
Qinghai on 27 August which killed more than 400 people serves as 
an advance warning from God to Li Peng, Jiang Zemin and Zou 
Jiahua that whenever work is not properly done in strict 
accordance with specifications in a certain location in a huge 
systems engineering project, an irremediable dam burst would 
occur when torrential floods come down from the hilly areas in 
late spring and early summer. This will be a catastrophe beyond 
redemption. 
<H3>  Compatriots Are Responsible for Stopping the Chinese 
Communists' Wanton Behavior </H3>
  In one of his poems, Mao Zedong seemed to foresee this 
catastrophe. In his poem "Kunlun" (source of the Chang Jiang), 
he wrote: 
"In summer days, your melting torrents, 
  Flood the streams and rivers, 
  Turning men into fish and turtles, 
  Who has passed judgement on the good and ill, 
  You have wrought these thousand autumns?" 
  Who are the chief culprits who will cause this terrible 
tragedy? If these several future historic criminals do not wake 
to reality by now, there will be people who compile the list of 
those who stay condemned through the ages. 
  Obviously a catastrophe now looms over the vast land of 
China, while the Beijing authorities stubbornly cling to their 
own stand. How can the Chinese people let them act blindly and 
recklessly? All those who are concerned over the fate of the 
motherland should express themselves. They should write letters 
to the National People's Congress, the CPC Central Committee and 
the State Council; launch a signature campaign; or send appeals 
to the Ministry of Water Conservancy and party and government 
organizations to express their views peacefully. They must call 
for efforts to stop developing the project, resettling people 
and inviting tenders abroad, because this is a major event which 
will involve the lives and properties of millions of people and 
thoroughly destroy our beautiful motherland like what happened 
in the struggle against the "four olds" [old ideas, old culture, 
old customs and old habits]. Every compatriot who is concerned 
about China and its people is responsible for stopping the 
Chinese Communists from acting wildly in defiance of the public 
opinion. The Chinese people should not allow the Chinese 
Communists to do what they please and remain silent like what 
they did during the Cultural Revolution. 

