CSO 

<F P=106> [Proposal by committee on "Details of the FSLN Principles </F>
and Program"; first four paragraphs are introduction] 
  [Text] In its session on 28 August 1993, the Sandinist 
Assembly convened the National Congress of the FSLN [Sandinist 
National Liberation Front] to an extraordinary session to be 
held in May 1994. In both the National Leadership and the 
Sandinist Assembly, it has organized committees to prepare 
documents to serve as a basis for discussion. 
  One of these committees is called "Details of the FSLN 
Principles and Programs". Its specific mandate was to 
prepare positions for discussion on four issues: 
  a) The FSLN's position on its relations with the U.S. 
Government. 
  b) The FSLN's position on the government of Nicaragua. 
  c) The FSLN's position on the problem of property. 
  d) The FSLN's position on the multiclass composition of 
the Sandinist membership. 
  The present document is the result of the work done by this 
committee, which revised the FSLN's Principles and 
Program on the issues listed above. It hereby presents the 
following proposal which updates and attempts to clarify the 
FSLN's positions. 
  This document is the basis for discussion which the 
Sandinists should use in their debate. The theses were prepared 
so as to facilitate discussion and so that the FSLN members can 
vote to express whether they wish to approve, reject, or amend 
each thesis. Then the results of the debate will be sent back to 
the Sandinist Assembly's Program Committee and be incorporated 
in the final version which the Congress will consider and 
approve in its Extraordinary Session to be held from 20 to 22 
May. 
<H5>  I. FSLN's Position on the Government of Nicaragua </H5>
  1. The FSLN opposes any restoration of the system of 
exploitation of human beings that prevailed during Somozism, the 
oligarchical governments of the past, or any other form of 
dictatorship or authoritarianism, either civilian or military, 
which represents a restriction of the exercise of participatory 
democracy. 
  2. The FSLN demands that the Public Administration be a 
loyal 
servant of the interests of the people and the Nation, for which 
purpose it shall fight against embezzlement, administrative 
corruption, abuses of state and community property, and against 
any manifestation of arrogance, bureaucratism, and negligence in 
public activity. 
  3. It will work to decentralize the government's role and 
bureaucracy by providing strong support for municipal autonomy. 
Consequently, it asks that the necessary resources be given to 
each local government to promote development within its 
territory. 
  4. The FSLN will work to ensure respect for Nicaragua's 
Constitution and democratic institutions. This will 
include limits on the State in relation to civil society and the 
rights of the individual; independence of state powers; 
periodic, transparent, and fair elections; respect for law and 
legality as the standard governing relations among individuals, 
and between individuals and society and the state; respect for 
and development of individual protections and liberties and 
human rights, as well as institutions, organizations, and areas 
for participation and management by the workers and by all the 
people, so that democracy may be transformed into an everyday 
occurrence. 
  To cope with the crisis, overcome instability, and 
reactivate the nation, the FSLN proposes: 
  1. To pursue a clear strategy of opposition to government 
policies that are causing the nation's prostration and the 
impoverishment of the vast majority of the people. 
  2. To demand that the state serve as the principal promoter 
of national development, guaranteeing to the people their 
integral democratic participation in this development, and 
performing, without pursuing state-aggrandizing aims, a 
regulatory role for economic activity that will work to benefit 
the majority of the people. 
  The state needs to ensure that the development model to be 
pursued in Nicaragua does not give rise to large concentrations 
of capital and of power in a few decision-making centers; to the 
loss of national sovereignty by succumbing to foreign capital; 
to exclusion and poverty in large sectors of the population; and 
to injustice and arbitrary actions concerning access to the 
opportunites provided by the nation's resources. In summary, the 
state must not allow Nicaragua to again become a breeding ground 
for conditions that will lead to confrontation and violence. 
  3. We demand economic democratization as an indispensable 
requirement for achieving stability and national economic 
development with social justice. State economic policies must 
act in consistency with those objectives, by encouraging the 
development of small and midsized businesses, cooperatives, and 
associative enterprises. 
  The only way to overcome the vulnerability of the democratic 
process and ensure its stability is by basing this process on a 
nonexclusive economic and social project that rests on the 
foundation of economic democratization. 
  4. We demand that the state guarantee freedom of trade, 
along 
with fulfilling its obligation to protect citizens when, in 
crisis conditions caused by a variety of reasons, unjust 
situations of speculation arise that primarily afflict the 
poorest sectors of the population. 
  5. The Sandinist Front is working for a thorough 
democratization of the state and to strengthen Sandinist 
influence in institutions and in all spheres of power of civil 
society. 
  We believe that in order to deepen and expand 
democratization, it is of strategic importance to promote the 
organizing capability and influence of the organizations of 
civil society: social and popular movements, productive and 
professional associations, the media, etc. 
  The campaign to democratize the state and institutions is an 
ongoing and strategic objective for Sandinists. Today from the 
opposition, and tomorrow--after we win the elections--from 
inside the government, the FSLN has no desire to wield absolute 
power. 
  6. For the Sandinist Front, the electoral approach is the 
only valid way to regain the government. Acting in harmony with 
our democratic commitment, we proclaim that today there is no 
room or justification for armed conflict in Nicaragua. 
  The Sandinist Front calls upon Sandinists to promote and 
develop methods of civic struggle that will be most effective in 
developing a political consensus in support of its goals. 
<H5>  II. FSLN's Position on Property </H5>
  1. Property must be in accordance with the nation's economic 
development and social justice for the population. For that 
reason, the FSLN must fight for the security, democratization, 
and productivity of all forms of property: private, individual, 
or business; cooperative, associative, community, and public 
property. 
  The FSLN should encourage respect for private property by 
promoting the productivity of its possession and the social 
function of its management and use. This political claim to 
property must be founded on and sustained with efficiency in 
economic management, while at the same time the concentration of 
property in just a few families is discouraged. 
  2. The FSLN respects and defends the stability of private 
property. In the same way, it also encourages the development of 
all forms of cooperative, associative, and community property, 
considering them an expression of the socialization process. 
  3. The FSLN opposes the confiscation of property in any of 
its forms of management. 
  4. The FSLN considers the following to be strategic 
undertakings: productive and commercial organization, access to 
credit and investment programs, participation in national and 
international markets by small and midsized forms of property, 
as well as that of cooperative, associative municipal, and 
community property. 
  5. The FSLN pledges to the nation's economic and social 
agents that it will deal with the issues of property as they 
relate to political stability, productive growth, jobs, social 
equality, and environmental sustainability. 
  In this context, the FSLN is working for the immediate 
legalization of the property of workers and campesinos in 
concessional or licensing conditions, terms, and for just 
compensation to be provided to sectors whose property rights 
have been infringed. 
<H5>  III. FSLN's Position on its Social Composition </H5>
  1. The fundament of Sandinism's Political Program 
and of its Statutes. The FSLN is a multiclass 
organization in its composition, which reflects the composition 
of the Nicaraguan population. 
  The Political Program of the FSLN--the proposal it 
offers to society--in which it expresses the objectives of 
Sandinism in each phase, is decisive. Sandinism is not defined 
simply by the composition of the membership ranks of the FSLN. 
  2. After 10 years of profound changes, Nicaraguan society is 
now a pluralistic society. Today economic and political power 
are distributed among numerous government institutions and 
throughout civil society. 
  The Front recognizes this situation as the basic condition 
necessary for an authentically democratic system to function. We 
propose to strengthen this tendency by encouraging and 
developing it in all of the nation's socioeconomic sectors, 
without failing to prioritize the strengthening of the capacity 
of the masses to exercise political power for the defense of 
their interests, and in favor of an economic, social, and 
political model that will benefit them. 
  3. As a revolutionary party, the FSLN must extend its roots 
deep into the masses, through its efforts to defend 
revolutionary gains and the democratic transformations of 
society. 
  The Front must promote and defend the campesinos as the most 
important sector at this time, because of their economic 
significance and their political weight. 
  4. The FSLN must clearly define its policy toward various 
social sectors, not only social classes, but those forces that 
play an important role in society, like women, young people, 
indigenous communities, the Atlantic Coast communities, 
territorial movements like the Community Movement, etc. 
<H5>  IV. FSLN's Position on Relations with the U.S. Government </H5>
  1. In the context of establishing relations of respect, 
cooperation, and friendship with all nations, the FSLN calls for 
a new relationship to be created between the United States and 
Nicaragua, in which mutual interests may be preserved and 
historic differences may be resolved to our mutual advantage and 
benefit. 
  The events judged by the International Court of Justice in 
The Hague cannot be repeated. Nicaragua's policy toward the 
United States must be oriented toward encouraging that country 
to help to remedy the material damages caused, both by bilateral 
means and within multilateral organizations. 
  2. The FSLN believes that a respectful relationship between 
the United States and Nicaragua has two essential components: 
strict respect on the part of Nicaragua for self-determination 
and noninterference in the internal affairs of other states, and 
meaningful respect on the part of the United States for the 
sovereign and democratic decisions of the Nicaraguan people; and 
that the political, trade, and cooperative relations of the 
United States shall not be determined by the political ideology 
of whatever government may be currently in office in Nicaragua, 
nor shall any type of strings be attached to these relations. 
  Therefore, the FSLN will pursue an active relationship with 
all political parties and social groups of the United States 
which are prepared to move in this direction. 
  3. The FSLN supports the membership of Nicaragua in 
particular and Central America in general in free trade 
agreements with the United States and other countries. This 
integration must allow Nicaragua sufficient time and the 
commercial and tariff terms necessary for Nicaragua's productive 
capacity to be brought to a competitive position in relation to 
the rest of Central America. 
  Such integration must mean a net flow of financial aid and 
capital from the North to the South, which will enable us to 
overcome the deterioration in our people's standard of living 
and promote the recovery of our economies. It must be a means so 
that all, both North and South, may benefit equally and 
proportionally, rather than simply being a formula for helping 
the United States to solve its own economic problems. 

