Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Chen Chien-ping (7115 1696 1627): "A </F>
Central Policymaker Reiterates Strict Control Over Capital 
Construction Scale To Prevent Economy From Overheating"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 6 Feb -- According to an authoritative 
source here, in a speech several days ago, a central policymaker 
again raised the issue of preventing the economy from 
overheating and of strictly controlling the scale of capital 
construction. Under the present conditions, formulations raised 
by the localities, such as "above the norm" and "in a big way" 
[da shou bi 1129 2087 4581], do not conform with Deng Xiaoping's 
idea of economic development. 
  The source said: The central policy maker explicitly pointed 
out: It is bow inadvisable to raise the slogan of "quickening 
the pace of reform and accelerating economic growth" because the 
Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee has put 
forward a series of major reform measures. The crucial issue 
now is to implement them rather than put forward new reform 
measures. On the issue of development speed, the Chinese 
economy has registered high-speed growth for several years in a 
row. On the basis of an annual growth of 13 percent, it is not 
geared to actual circumstances to raise again the idea of 
accelerating development. 
  In the central policymaker's view, the formulation of the 
central authorities on economic growth is sustained, high-speed, 
and healthy [chixu, kuaisu, jiankang 2170 4958, 1816 6643, 0256 
1660] development. We should not look only at the word 
"high-speed" in the middle without regard for the others at both 
ends. In studying Comrade Deng Xiaoping's idea, we should not 
merely apply the words accelerating development without 
comprehensively and correctly understanding the idea as a whole. 
Therefore, the central authorities call on all localities not 
to deviate from the major principles and policies laid down by 
the central authorities and engage in their own "above the norm" 
projects or carry them out "in a big way." Nor should they 
blindly compete in speed. Provided that they conscientiously 
implement the reform measures put forward by the central 
authorities, the Chinese economy can follow a normal track. 

