BFN 

  [Excerpt] Bratislava, June 23 (CTK) -- [passage omitted] 
  "No one has proved we violated the law, we were observing it 
until the last day," former Premier Vladimir Meciar says in 
answer to the question of SLOVENSKA REPUBLIKA as to whether 
there is any connection between the questioning of the 
privatization projects of his cabinet and the effort of the 
current opposition to the dismissal of Deputy Premier Roman 
Kovac and Privatization Minister Milan Janicina. 
  "Nothing but tiny grammatical errors have been found in our 
privatization projects," Meciar states. 
  "The rumors that we privatized for our partisans are 
rubbish. 
As more than 80 percent of the property was confined to the 
employees' shares, whom could we have supported?" he continues. 
  By contrast, (under the present government) party 
affiliation 
plays a major role which has caused great deal of damage, Meciar 
says. 
  The attempt to dismiss Kovac was an effort to "respect 
certain rules," says Meciar, adding that "if a man himself 
admits his being corrupt, he has no right to be in public life." 
  Regarding Janicina, Meciar says that as a commercial lawyer 
and member of the Privatization Ministry he "is deliberately 
damaging the interests of the state." "Due to this, it is absurd 
that he should be a privatization minister," Meciar states. 
  "Although the matters were proved and properly submitted, 
the 
parliament did not accept them," which proves that neither 
ethics, nor truth nor the principle of the interest of society 
are sought after in the Slovak Parliament, Meciar says. 
  The parliament is dominated by "tough party strategy; either 
you are accepted by the Politburo and you survive, or you do 
not. In order to be accepted, you must serve. And Janicina 
knows whom to serve and why he is there," Meciar stresses. 
  "The whole cabinet is under the thumb of the Politburo which 
orders it how to decide. The only thing it is able to do is to 
make minor comments, no real decisions," Meciar concludes. 
[passage omitted] 

