CSO 

<F P=106> [KHABAR-EGRKIS report under the heading: ``From the Stream </F>
of News''] 
  [Text] The Caspian Sea is on the verge of ecological 
crisis. According to Fikret Dzhafarov, chief of the planning 
department for use of natural resources of the Azerbaijan 
Republic State Committee on Ecology, one of the causes of the 
crisis is many years of barbaric use of natural resources. About 
12 billion cubic meters of polluted sewage is dumped into the 
Caspian Sea annually. More than 18,000 square kilometers of 
aquatic area are covered by petroleum film, which is ruinous for 
the flora and fauna of these areas. A sharp, steady rise in the 
Caspian Sea level is also a cause for alarm. Between 1901 and 
1976 it fell steadily. USSR scientists considered this process 
irreversible and launched ``projects of the century'': damming 
the Kara-Bogaz-Gol Bay, rerouting Siberian rivers, etc., which 
cost tens of billions of rubles. However, in 1976 the sea level 
began to rise steadily. Between the 1989 and 1991 it rose 
another 1.8 meters. 
  According to scientists' forecasts, by the year 2000 the 
Caspian Sea level will rise another 2 meters. Major industrial 
and residential complexes and more than 50,000 hectares of 
cultivated agricultural land will end up in the flood zone on 
the territory of Azerbaijan. The changed level will shift by 
many kilometers the borders of territorial waters, which may 
lead to interstate conflicts. The issue of defining the status 
of the water reservoir has been raised in this connection. By 
proposing to assign to the Caspian Sea the status of near-border 
reservoir, specialists of the Azerbaijani State Committee on 
Ecology were working on the basis of its genesis and location, 
which indicate that it is a lake, whose level is not permanent 
and which is subject to strong anthropogenic influences. The 
question was raised for the first time by the Azerbaijani 
delegation at the Tehran meeting, where the proposal for an 
organization of Caspian states was discussed. At the next 
meeting in Astrakhan Russia proposed to impose a 12-mile 
territorial zone, which was not in the interests of Azerbaijan. 
The issue remained unresolved. 
  ``Over 70 years of Soviet power, in violation of all 
ecological norms, Azerbaijan was deprived of enormous reserves 
of oil in its soil, and the only chance the republic has now to 
deal with ecological and economic problems is by developing the 
rich oil deposits in the sea. Today Khazar is without a master; 
the interests of several states have clashed over its waters, 
and some people want to take the Caspian riches without bearing 
the responsibility,'' Fikret Dzhafarov said in conclusion. 

