Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] La Paz, 15 Dec (ANF) -- Defense Minister Antonio 
Cespedes and General Moises Schirique, joint chief of staff, 
have demanded "total control" over the U.S. funds that come to 
the country as military assistance and within the framework of 
bilateral agreements to fight drug trafficking. 
  The two high-ranking officials told this newspaper that "the 
U.S. military assistance is not in cash, and they administer the 
funds themselves. For instance, $1 million is promised, but 50 
percent or more is used to cover the movement and stay in 
Bolivia of their own personnel. They even import their own 
water with those funds." 
  The sources explained that if the United States delivered 
the 
funds assigned to military assistance in cash, no U.S. advisers 
would need to come to Bolivia, and "Bolivian professional 
soldiers would take over the jobs they fulfill in the midst of 
continuous controversies." 
  The defense minister said it would be very good if the Armed 
Forces were allowed to directly administer the U.S. military 
assistance. Gen. Moises Schirique told local media that "we 
would like the United States to give us the money to carry out 
the tasks they perform." 
  "It is undoubtedly something we must achieve gradually. The 
participation of our local contribution must increase and then 
take over altogether," Minister Cespedes Toro said, during the 
Engineering Military School 1993 graduation ceremony. 
  The Defense Ministry official contradicted the general in 
that Cespedes said the Armed Forces do not depend in any way on 
the U.S. Embassy, while Schirique said the U.S. technical 
cooperation "generates a certain dependence of the institution." 
  "What happens is not dependence, it is a plan for U.S. 
military assistance and support for the fight against drug 
trafficking," the minister said. 
  The U.S. assistance has been dropping in the continent for 
some time. Bolivia, due to the satisfactory level of its fight 
against drug trafficking, will apparently be affected by a 
smaller drop as compared to other countries in the region, the 
minister said. 
  "We still need to conduct bilateral negotiations on the 
matter," Defense Minister Antonio Cespedes Toro said. 

