CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Business Desk editor: "Estonian Banking </F>
Evaluated By European Standards"] 
  [Text] 
  At the invitation of Bank of Estonia, and within the 
framework of the PHARE program, the international auditing firm 
of Price Waterhouse did a selective audit of Estonian banks 
between March and July of 1993. The strict European standards 
applied resulted in harsh criticism in many of the aspects. 
However, in many of the cases, the evaluation applies more to 
the society as a whole, rather than the banking system. 
  1. Estonia's banking functions in an extremely volatile 
economic environment, characterized by a cash-poor society and a 
limited banking culture. Within a span of a few years, most 
of the industry has lost its former supply base and has been 
deprived of its traditional market in the former Soviet Union. 
Reorientation has begun in both industry and trade, but it will 
take some time. 
  The volume of cash transactions, especially among 
individuals, is very low. One indicator of a society's banking 
culture is running its financial dealings through the bank. This 
naturally presumes confidence between the bank and its 
clients--and favorable earnings to the bank for its 
services. 
  Based on the latest surveys done by Bank of Estonia, 
however, 
one can maintain that confidence is on the rise and interest in 
using the modern cash-free forms of settling accounts is growing 
among individuals. 
  Estonia's legislation is deficient, from the business 
and banking point of view. Among new laws enforced since 
this audit are the Bank of Estonia law, right to ownership law, 
securities law, new taxation law, etc. These laws will 
also have to take effect. Banking culture cannot be raised 
independently from the general accounting and tax culture. 
  Privatization of banking is plagued by confusion. 
(This assessment should not be linked to the current attempts at 
determining the state's participation in banking). The biggest 
problem seen by PW experts is the participation of state-owned 
enterprises in the ownership of commercial banks. What happens 
to the shares of such a bank, when the state enterprise is 
privatized? 
  2. Ownership and the management of banks. 
  Conflicts of interest are possible if the actual management 
of the bank is in the hands of an owner (shareholder). The 
banks were too generous in paying out their 1992 dividends. 
Instead, earnings should have been used to create additional 
venture capital funds. 
  The lending departments of some of the banks would benefit 
from additional schooling, some would be well served by separate 
units for problematic loans. (This schooling is now being 
arranged at the initiative of the Banking Association). 
  3. Of reports and regulations. 
  What are needed (and already being prepared) are 
specific measures to establish confidence in Estonian 
banking. PW recommended paying special attention to 
reflecting unaudited profit in the bank's reporting, and to 
defining different levels of capital according to the 
requirements set at Basel. 
  Above all, one must determine the suitability of 
different international conventions to one's own local banking 
environment. Government obligations among the bank's assets 
(which, according to the European custom, have a high liquidity 
rating) should be given a lower liquidity rating under our 
circumstances. (One of the delegates: "In my opinion, government 
obligations cannot be converted into cash in Estonia right now.") 
  The auditors were also concerned with the quality of 
reports being submitted to the central bank by Estonia's 
commercial banks. Banking inspectors have also started to 
do more checking on the banks' operations locally. 
  When the law on credit institutions is passed, changes would 
also have to be made in Estonia's banking law. A steady and 
continued development is expected. 
  Plans for the Bank of Estonia suggest that such selective 
auditing will not be the last of its kind. 

