BFN 

  [Text] Hizballah's rank and file are facing severe 
confusion after news was made public that the Hizballah 
leadership handed over 11 members to the Lebanese authorities 
for carrying arms during a celebration marking Jerusalem Day. 
Imam Khomeyni designated the last Friday in Ramadan every year 
to mark Jerusalem Day. The reason for this confusion is that 
this overture could open the way for more drastic steps. This 
means that the Hizballah leadership represented by Hasan 
Nasrallah is unable to protect its members from government 
security agencies should they abide by organizational 
instructions. Hizballah members are asking why they should bear 
the brunt when all they did was to carry out what their 
leadership ordered, that is, to carry arms and appear in public 
places. 
  Hizballah members are asking if it is admissible for youths 
to pay the price for Nasrallah's decisions when failure to obey 
orders is considered a violation of the Velayat-e Faqih [rule by 
supreme jurisconsult], which is a sin. Hizballah members are 
also asking why Nasrallah should sleep safe and sound in his 
home under the protection of more than 100 heavily armed men 
while those who sincerely obeyed his organizational orders stay 
in Lebanese government jails. Is it not required to pursue the 
official who is responsible for giving the orders for members to 
carry arms in public, that is Nasrallah, instead of arresting 
ordinary members here and there and putting them in jail with 
all the humiliation of the dignity of these sincere youths? 
  Certain Hizballah members compare the situation within their 
organization to that of the Lebanese Forces some time ago when 
Samir Ja'ja' began to sell his low-ranking members to the 
Lebanese Government so that he and his close aides could avoid 
the block. However, this approach gradually led to giving up 
Fu'ad Malik, chief of staff of the Lebanese Forces, to stave off 
any danger to Ja'ja' personally. Hence, resentment against 
Nasrallah is mounting because members believe that the countdown 
has begun with the selling of Hizballah cadres according to 
deals, the price of which will be paid to Nasrallah and 
Hizballah members in the Chamber of Deputies. 
  An informed source has said that the government's success in 
apprehending Hizballah members under legal warrants has had a 
direct impact on confidence between Hizballah members in 
al-Biqa' and their leadership. He said that many Hizballah 
members now hesitate to carry out the decisions of the 
leadership in Beirut. They justify their hesitation by saying 
that the leadership may abandon them after implementing its 
decisions, like what happened to the members who carried out the 
Hizballah leadership's decision to carry arms in public during 
the celebration of Jerusalem Day. This leadership handed them 
over to the state to punish them for carrying arms in public. 
  The confidence crisis between Hizballah members and their 
leadership deepened after Hizballah's Voice of the Oppressed 
radio, which transmits from Ba'labakk, laid off several 
employees in its Political Programs Department after the 
government's decision on audio and visual media. It is worth 
noting that most employees in this radio are Hizballah members. 

