Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Maritza Barranco Rodriguez: "A Trademark </F>
Pharmaceutical Industry"] 
  [Text] [No dateline as received] At a moment when the U.S. 
blockade aimed at making the Cubans surrender out of hunger is 
being intensified, Cuba's pharmaceutical industry has risen to 
cover the back of the national economy and is now expecting high 
profits as a result of its output of products that right now are 
unique in the world. 
  In 1993, the controversy over the effectiveness of Cuban 
vaccines took new heights as a result of epidemics in Chile, 
Argentina, and Brazil and although there are reservations in 
purchasing the vaccine, threats of epidemics must be taken into 
consideration. 
  By exporting the vaccine against the meningococcic 
meningitis, interferon, the anticholestorelomic PPG, and the 
recombining streptokinase, Cuba can secure a new market that 
will be backed by the research, raw materials, and laboratories 
that have the Made in Cuba label. 
  This has come as a big surprise for transnational firms that 
unlock trade ambitions while in poor countries many people die 
for lack of vaccines that Cuba is already producing. 
  In Cuba, as in the rest of the world, the pharmaceutical 
industry is the main beneficiary of advanced technology, over 
which the highly industrialized nations almost have a monopoly. 
  This is the context into which the Cubans broke some years 
ago when the island produced a vaccine against the Type B 
Meningococcic Meningitis (the serotype that produces the most 
deaths among the infant population) and Type B Hepatitis, which 
also affects millions of Latin Americans. 
  These two vaccines are already being marketed in other 
countries. In some countries of the area, where different 
meningococcic serotypes exist, groups of experts are thinking 
about acquiring these vaccines. 
  Although the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in 
Atlanta, the United States, and WHO have issued a positive 
assessment, the obstacles against the marketing of the vaccines 
are huge. This marketing has become a strategic field of the 
Cuban economy. At the National Forum of Science and Technology 
recently held in Havana, Cuban President Fidel Castro described 
the war that has been launched from the United States against 
Cuban pharmaceutical products as terrible. 
  No one could imagine how far the Cubans would go when they 
took, in the 1980's, the short cut that biotechnology and 
genetic engineering opened to the developing countries. 
  The Cubans began producing interferon and now have a series 
of products to treat cancer, to fight infections resulting from 
the human papiloma virus, and to delay AIDS manifestations in 
persons with the HIV virus. These products are marketed by 
Heberbiotec S.A. and their effectiveness has been demonstrated. 
  More than 160 products have been obtained through genetic 
engineering, including eight medications that come as 
injections, creams, and eye-wash. 
  Although the main results derive from genetic engineering 
and 
biotechnology, progress is also being made in chemical and 
pharmaceutical products such as the anti-ulcer Qulcer, 
antibiotics, and biological remedies. 
  In 1993, the main objective of Cuba's pharmaceutical sector 
was to launch a commercial struggle in the face of a powerful 
market where 10 of the largest and most notable pharmacological 
enterprises sold more than $170-billion-worth [of products] in 
1992. 
  New formulas are presented at the island's medicine 
registration offices, thus strengthening the arsenal of 
medicines with high international demand. Some formulas are 
streptokinase (used to dissolve cardiac thrombosis) and several 
others developed from human placenta and melanin (used to cure 
vitiligo). 
  The more complex field of biotherapy has contributed with 
monoclonal antibodies. IOR-T3 was the first product to be 
registered at the state pharmaceutical control office. 
  Dr. Agustin Lage, the director of the National Molecular 
Immunology Center, told PRENSA LATINA that the center is 
currently performing clinical tests using several lymphoma 
treatments. 
  An anti-cholesterol agent, known as PPG or Ateromyxol, was 
developed with the aid of molecular biology. It is currently 
riding the crest of an advertising and sales wave among 
tourists, who come to the island looking for the "sexuality 
formula", as some have come to call these pills. 
  PPG was conceived to treat high cholesterol levels and 
presently enjoys wide acceptance for its lack of unwanted side 
effects. Patients report a general improvement of their 
circulation process and, especially, their sexual functions. 
  This effective weapon against cardiovascular disease was 
introduced to the local therapeutical scene in 1991 and in a 
1993 report issued by the University of Geneva it was recognized 
to be the best anticholesterol drug available. 
  Producing pharmaceutical products nowadays means plenty of 
scientific research. This was evident at the Fifth Cuban 
Pharmaceutical Science Congress, the National Pharmaceutical 
Technology Development Workshop, and the International 
Antibiotics Workshop, all of which were held in Havana during 
1993. 
  These events assessed the Caribbean nation's research 
potential. The island's scientists are preparing to begin the 
production of antibiotics using the method of fermentation, with 
the support of the United Nations Development Program (UNDP). 
  Chemical development has produced other achievements such as 
the production of a cytostatic agent called "Actinomicina D," 
which, according to Dr. Carlos Vallin Ploust, a specialist at 
the Pharmaceutical Chemistry Center, is used to treat several 
types of cancer. 
  This new industry finds its resources on the ocean floor, by 
studying species that provide toxins found useful in 
neurological science. The production of hydroxyapatite, which 
is a complex phosphate calcium produced by sea coral and used as 
an excellent element for bone implants and in stomatology, has 
gained strength. 
  The most innovative discovery of the year about to close, 
was 
the cancer therapy developed from shark cartilage. A 
multidisciplinary Cuban team elaborated and expanded the 
research that began in the United States. 
  A 16-week study was carried out with terminal patients, from 
September 1993 to January 1993, under the direction of Dr. Jose 
Menendez Lopez and labeled "The New Option." 
  Dr. Lopez Menendez [name as received], in explaining the new 
cancer therapy, said that the product is registered and sold in 
the United States as a dietary supplement. There are recent 
reports, however, that indicate that they are doing clinical 
research similar to that completed in Cuba. 
  I can affirm, he said, that their results, as ours, may not 
be described as spectacular. They can, however, be seen as 
highly promising and encouraging enough to press on with this 
therapeutical effort. 
  The specialist explained that Cuba began by importing the 
product. Now, Cuba is producing shark cartilage of unsurpassed 
quality and excellence, as shown in simple spectral analysis. 
  The formula is rich in an astounding collection of 
biologically active substances with anti-inflammatory and 
angiogenetic inhibiting properties. 
  The scientist pointed out, however, that shark cartilage is 
by no means the divine nectar of the gods, nor does its use 
entail magical results. Cuban experience does recognize it 
though as the strongest neoangiogenesis inhibitor tested to date. 

