Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Yokohama, Nov 16 KYODO -- The sustainability of 
Japan's forest management policy was the subject of disagreement 
between the government and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) 
at a board meeting of the International Tropical Timber 
Organization (ITTO) Tuesday [16 November]. 
  Yoshio Hironaka, head of the Forestry Agency's Guidance 
Division, told the ITTO session that it is the government's wish 
to tackle forest depletion at home as well as abroad. 
  Hironaka outlined to the board a policy for conserving 
Japan's forests, saying that sustainable timber management 
continues to be a prime conservation goal of the government. 
  ``Japan has established goals for forest conservation and 
sustainable forest management and has been achieving these goals 
in various systems,'' Hironaka said. ``We will maintain this 
goal and continue implementing sustainable management of our 
forests.'' 
  But in a statement to the ITTO board on behalf of a 
coalition 
of five consumer and environmental organizations, Kazuko Matsue, 
a member of the Sarawak Campaign Committee, said the agency's 
effort to lower its debt by cutting the forestry work force is 
leaving plantations understaffed and causing a drop in timber 
quality. 
  The statement said the widespread conversion of the nation's 
forests into single species tracts is starving the forests of 
biodiversity and decreasing the nation's store of natural 
forests. 
  It said Japan's resort law has led to the construction of 
golf courses and resorts totaling 5 million hectares and 
``causing the clearing of vast areas of natural forests, 
especially beech.'' 
  The statement said Japanese timber cannot compete with 
low-priced wood from Canada, the United States, Indonesia, and 
Malaysia, while imports of timber are causing ``devastation'' in 
Southeast Asia, North America, and Siberia. 
  It called for the ITTO to monitor the trade in boreal and 
temperate timber as well as tropical timber. 
  The weeklong ITTO meeting began November 10 at its 
headquarters in Yokohama. Participants are discussing measures 
to achieve sustainable management of tropical forests by 2000. 
  Tropical timber producing countries from Asia, Africa and 
Latin America, and consumer countries such as Japan, the U.S., 
European Community (EC) nations, Russia and China are attending 
the ITTO board of directors' meeting and standing committee 
meeting. 
  Government representatives from 49 ITTO member countries are 
also attending. Officials from international organizations and 
nongovernmental organizations are present as observers. 
  The Yokohama-based ITTO consists of 23 producing countries 
such as Brazil, Colombia, Peru, Malaysia, Indonesia and India, 
and 26 consumer nations including Australia, Canada, China, 
Japan, Germany, France and the U.S. 

