Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Wu Yunhe: "Economy Up, But Inflation Bolts"] </F>
  [Text] China's economy continued to be brisk during the 
first two months of this year, the State Statistics Bureau said 
yesterday. 
  But swelling inflation and the ballooning investment of 
fixed 
assets continued to pose a threat to sound economic development 
this year, the bureau said in its latest report. 
  Driven by the buoyant domestic market, the country's 
industrial production grew 18.2 per cent during the first two 
months of this year. 
  Inflation, however, was 20 percent during January and 
February, squeezjng domestic industries. 
  And despite the double digit growth, State-run factories 
grew 
only 1.2 percent during the period, the report said. 
  State-owned enterprises have lost money this year due to 
skyrocketing production costs and the erratic market. 
  And despite the central government's call for strict control 
over investment in the fixed assets sector, money invested by 
State units in projects has grown vigorously this year. 
  The bureau's figures showed that State unit investment in 
new 
projects rose 77.5 percent during January and February. 
  The bureau's economists called for the government to 
immediately bring inflation and fixed-assets investment to 
acceptable levels. 
  One of the government's major macrocontrol measures has been 
to ensure that market demand does not outstrip supply, they said. 
  But the report said that during the first two months of this 
year, the banks' net money supply to the domestic market 
increased by 13.7 billion yuan ($159 million) over the same 
period last year. 
  This was mainly due to the salaries rise for State workers 
at 
the start of the year. 
  The report also said that rapidly growing industrial 
production, runaway fixed asset investment, high inflation and 
rising personal incomes contributed to the strong economy during 
January and February. 
  Gross retail sales hit 235.5 billion yuan ($27.4 billion) 
during the period, an increase of 25.9 percent over the same two 
months last year. 
  But the real annual growth of retail sales, after taking 
inflation into account, was only 5 percent. 

