BFN 

  [Text] Warsaw, March 31 -- President Lech Walesa on 
Thursday said that he had not made up his mind yet whether he 
would sign the 1994 budget law, but added that "satisfaction of 
the nation and its understanding of certain values" is "more 
important than the budget." 
  In an interview for PAP the president confirmed that he is 
against Dariusz Rosati's candidature for the posts of deputy 
prime minister and finance minister. 
  "I consider myself a responsible politician and I do 
everything to put the weal of the country in the first place," 
Walesa said when asked about the budget. He added, that even if 
he refuses to sign, he would do it being perfectly aware that 
the coalition would have its way. 
  The budget covers only one year and it is known beforehand 
that it will be amended. "The question is what is more 
important, this budget designed only to initiate certain 
economic processes, or the nation," Walesa argued saying that 
"according to economic calculus one cannot do much about the 
budget, but I think that one should not have told people 
something different and demand from them commitment, support and 
satisfaction while deceiving them." 
  Reminded that the Sejm may reject the presidential veto, 
Walesa said he did not care whether he would win (the battle of 
budget) but he does care about what will be "left after him. If 
I bring society a victory on a tea-tray it would never take to 
work," Walesa said. 
  Referring to his refusal to accept the ruling coalition's 
candidate Dariusz Rosati, Walesa asked: 
  "How can one ignore the president, bring him documents to 
sign and not to discuss the issue at all? I raise this because 
the coalition demands absolute accord from me. It is as if (the 
Communist Party) Central Committee proposed: It must be so," 
Walesa continued. 
  Reminded that the coalition still wants to discuss the 
issue, 
Walesa said that situation would be different if the president 
or his representative had been asked earlier to take part in the 
discussion on selecting a candidate. "Something might have been 
agreed," Walesa said and explained that he was "not included in 
the process and now they demand from me to sign at gun point." 
  After all what has been said about the FOZZ (Foreign Debt 
Servicing Fund) as the biggest theft and swindle in Poland, we 
cannot make deputy prime minister of persons who were on the 
FOZZ board, Walesa said but added that he did not mean that the 
person in question was guilty or not, but only that this person 
was a FOZZ board member. "Hence, I should not agree to what is 
proposed to me unless the matter is accounted for...there are 
many talented people, party and non-party alike, in our country 
of 40 million...," Walesa said. 
  Asked to asses the report of the National Radio and TV 
Council Walesa criticized the council's decision to grant the 
only available national private tv licence to a man with "six 
names on ten passports." He referred to Zygmunt Solorz, a 
businessman. 
  Asked what he will do if the Sejm refuses to ratify the 
concordat with the Holy See, Walesa said he would not do 
anything that would break Polish law and democracy. "I am a man 
who always finds solutions...as a president I must and will 
certainly find a solution," Walesa assured. 

