Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by R. Gavrielyan: "...But Our Interests Are Dearer"] </F>
  [Text] A total of 28 parties are presently registered in 
Azerbaijan. A month ago there were 29 of them. After Aliyev was 
elected Azerbaijan's president, he immediately issued an edict 
on the banning of the Talysh People's Democratic Party. This was 
done after the proclamation on 12 August of the Talysh-Mugan 
Republic, which existed for 2 weeks on the territory of the 
Lenkoran Region in Azerbaijan. 
  Of the 28 political parties,several leading ones, which are 
among Azerbaijan's most influential political forces, can be 
singled out at present. They enjoy the support of entrepreneurs, 
the intelligentsia, and a significant part of the population. 
  The Musavat Party is the oldest party, which has its own 
history (except for the communist party). 
  The Musavat Bourgeois-Nationalist Party was formed in Baku 
in 
1911 under the name of the Musavat Moslem Democratic Party. M. 
Rasul-zade, G. Sharif-zade, and others were its founders. The 
program was based on ideas of pan-Turkism and pan-Islamism. The 
program envisaged the establishment of a single Turkic-Moslem 
state under Turkey's auspices with an inclusion of Azerbaijan's 
territory. After the bourgeois-democratic revolution in Russia 
in February 1917 the Musavat Party united with the Turkish Party 
of Federalists. At the united congress held on 1 October 1917, 
at which the program was adopted with small changes, the party 
began to be called the Federalist-Musavatist Turkish Democratic 
Party. Its social composition was heterogeneous. It included 
both big businessmen and the nationalistically disposed 
intelligentsia. 
  In Tbilisi in early May 1918 the Musavatist Party formed its 
government and on 27 May proclaimed Azerbaijan an independent 
state. 
  In early June 1918 this Musavatist government was 
established 
in Gyandzha (Kirovabad). With England's help it continued its 
struggle for power and as early as 15 September of the same 
year, after the overthrow of the Soviet regime, power was 
formally transferred to Musavatists. In fact, however, a Turkish 
military dictatorship was established in the republic. 
  Having become the ruling party, the Musavatist Party of 
Azerbaijan began to pursue an antinational policy. During its 
rule (1918-1920) mutual relations with Armenia, which were based 
on territorial disputes, became extremely aggravated. 
  The Musavatist government of Azerbaijan kept three-quarters 
of its military contingent on the border with Armenia. It 
incited Armenian pogroms in Baku, Karabakh, and Gyandzha. 
  Soviet rule was proclaimed in Azerbaijan on 30 April 1920. 
Many members of the Musavat Party emigrated to Turkey. 
  It was reestablished in Azerbaijan only in November 1992. 
The 
number of party members is about 5,000. The intelligentsia is 
the basic contingent. It includes about 1,500 instructors at 
higher educational institutions, 140 scientists, and 100 
representatives of the creative intelligentsia. Isa Gambarov 
(Isa Gambar), now former chairman of Azerbaijan's parliament, 
was elected head of Musavat. After Aliyev's coming to power Isa 
Gambarov was arrested. However, under public pressure he was 
released. 
  In the spring of 1992 Etibar Mamedov established the Party 
of 
National Independence of Azerbaijan, which is in opposition to 
the ruling regime. 
  Etibar Mamedov's personality is very remarkable. He is 
candidate of historical sciences and is one of the founders of 
the former Azerbaijan People's Front. In the leadership of the 
Azerbaijan People's Front he headed the radical wing. Since 
January 1990 he has been an active member of the Committee on 
National Defense established by the Azerbaijan People's Front, 
for which he was arrested and held in custody in the Moscow 
Matrosskaya Tishina prison. Mamedov often stated that the 
Karabakh problem can be solved only in a military-political way. 
Military or political measures will not solve the problem 
separately. 
  With regard to the status of Nagorno Karabakh, the question 
of which can be the subject of discussion during negotiations 
with Armenia, E. Mamedov often declared that "Azerbaijan's 
territorial integrity must be preserved. The security and rights 
of the Armenian population of Nagorno-Karabakh are the main 
questions. Any proposals and plans, where international 
organizations or great powers would act as guarantors, can be 
discussed here. 
  "The act on the republic's independence clearly states that 
Azerbaijan is a unitary state. According to this document, the 
establishment of any state formations within Azerbaijan is 
impossible. Hypothetically, this matter can be the subject of 
discussion provided Armenia agrees to the return of 200,000 
(164,000) Azerbaijanis, who lived on its territory prior to 
1988, and enables them to establish their autonomy there." 
  In the opinion of leaders of the Party of National 
Independence of Azerbaijan, any leader of the state, first of 
all, must see to it that normal relations with its neighbors be 
established. These relations depend on the internal situation of 
the state. Azerbaijan has resources for the development of 
all-around normal ties with all neighboring states, except, of 
course, Armenia. 
  "We must take the interests of other states into 
consideration, but place our own above all." 
  Observers believe that E. Mamedov did not receive the chair 
of prime minister, since G. Aliyev wanted to offer him the post 
of secretary of state with the subordination of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs to him. To all appearances, however, E. Mamedov 
rejected this proposal. 
  The Party of National Independence did not participate in 
presidential elections scheduled for 3 October on the basis of 
the results of the vote of confidence in President Abdulfaz 
Elchibey. This decision was adopted at the congress of the Party 
of National Independence. The congress resolution notes that, 
having scheduled elections for 3 October, the authorities 
violated the schedules and procedural norms specified by the law 
on presidential elections. The document also stresses that the 
Party of National Independence sees the way out of the internal 
political crisis in Azerbaijan not in presidential elections, 
but in the formation of a state council, which would include 
representatives of all political forces. The congress came out 
in favor of the most rapid holding of new parliamentary 
elections. 

