Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with N. Didenko, by T. Taten and Yu. Belous: </F>
"Foreigners in Russia"] 
  [Text] Nikolay Didenko, department chief of the 
Moscow OVIR [Visa and Registration Department], answers 
questions asked by TOP-TURA correspondents Tatyana Taten and 
Yuriy Belous. 
  [Correspondents] Nikolay Naumovich, what are the basic 
statutes governing foreigners' stay in Russia? On what laws do 
you rely in your work? 
  [Didenko] Our work today is defined, first of all, by the 
law 
entitled "Legal Status of Foreign Citizens in the USSR," which 
was enacted as long ago as 1985. The second normative act is the 
26 April 1991 Cabinet of Ministers decree, entitled 
"Confirmation of the Rules for the Stay of Foreign Citizens in 
the USSR." All categories of foreign cities residing on the 
territory of Russia are required, within three working days, to 
obtain a residence permit (to register). The registration points 
for various categories of citizens are the Russian MID [Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs], hotels, and internal affairs agencies 
(rayon OVIR's register students, postgraduate students, and 
probationary workers, as well as private trips). Today, 
according to our information, 81,106 foreigners have been 
registered in Moscow. 
  [Correspondents] But the figures that pop up in the 
newspapers say something else: today, according to tentative 
computations, there are 200,000 Chinese alone in Moscow! What is 
your attitude toward these statistics? 
  [Didenko] There actually are a very large number of illegal 
aliens and refugees in Moscow currently. For example, Kurds 
arrive in large groups and demand that the Russian authorities 
recognize the Geneva Convention on Kurdish refugees. They come 
to Moscow by way of Azerbaijan, without any KPP [control and 
checkpoint] stamps in their passports. Until recently, this 
category of citizens caused us a lot of trouble. Today Russia 
has already enacted the Law Governing Displaced Persons, and the 
federal authorities in our country are ready to begin working 
with them. For example, they will be issued identification 
cards. We want to complete this work by 1 April. Unfortunately, 
today Russia has transparent borders with almost all the former 
republics, so that it is very simple to get here... 
  [Correspondents] Previously the foreigners who came here 
were 
limited in their movements around the country. For example, a 
visa was required for visiting another city. What is the 
situation today? 
  [Didenko] Yes, that used to be the rule, and foreigners did 
not have the right to leave without special authorization the 
republic or city where they were registered. Today that rule has 
been simplified: foreigners can move freely across the entire 
territory of Russia, but with the mandatory notification of the 
receiving organization or internal affairs agencies and with 
mandatory registration at the place of temporary stay. 
  [Correspondents] But what if our guest does not do that? 
  [Didenko] He is fined half the minimum (Russian) wages 
(today 
the amount of the fine is 7000 rubles, or $5.00), or the period 
of his stay is reduced. 
  [Correspondents] Are there any distant foreign countries 
today whose citizens can enter Russia without a visa? 
  [Didenko] There are ten such countries. They are the former 
countries of the socialist camp, with the government of which 
agreements governing nonvisa trips have been concluded. 
  [Correspondents] Do you think that it is necessary to 
toughen 
the measures with respect to those foreigners who arrive here 
illegally? 
  [Didenko] Forced eviction under convoy from the territory of 
Russia occurs with the procurator's sanction. But first we send 
a warning to citizens who have failed to observe the visa rules. 
Eviction is the extreme measure and, despite the fact that it 
occurs at the "violator's" expense, for us this procedure is 
extremely wasteful. Of course, it is possible to deliver Chinese 
as far as the border on a train. But there exist countries with 
which Russia does not have common borders, or even direct 
flights. It is impossible to deliver someone from Somalia to his 
country, inasmuch as there exists a currency "air" sector beyond 
which we have to pay a considerable amount of money. I might 
mention in passing that all other countries do not accept this 
category of citizens and do not issue visas (not even through 
visas!) to them. At the present time a new plan has been 
developed for foreigners' stay in Russia, as well as new rules 
governing through travel. I assume that we shall receive the new 
law this year. 
  [Correspondents] Could we speak a bit now about the nearby 
foreign countries? 
  [Didenko] Until a visa system has been established with 
these 
countries, the relations with them will be subordinated to the 
government's decisions. Problems of entry from or departure to 
the nearby foreign countries do not affect us UVIR [Visa and 
Registration Administration] workers. As for the Baltic 
countries, as everyone one, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania 
established visa entry long ago. It is possible to enter those 
republics only if one has in his possession a nationally issued 
foreign passport. But Russia also, in its turn, has established 
visa entry for citizens of those countries. But for those who 
have not received a passport from any of the Baltic countries 
and who have remained, essentially speaking, a citizen of 
Russia, no visas are required for coming here. 
  [Correspondents] In previous years a rather large number of 
so-called "mixed" marriages were concluded. Is it possible, for 
example, for a female citizen of Estonia to obtain Russian 
citizenship if her husband is Russian? 
  [Didenko] First of all, that family must decide where the 
married couple will reside -- in Russia or in Estonia. If they 
have decided that they will live, for example, in Moscow, then 
the female citizen of Estonia must enter Russia on a visa that 
has been registered at the OVIR. We can consider the question of 
her permanent residence with her husband, can issue a residence 
permit, and can file an official request that she be given 
citizenship. But as for the question of dual citizenship, that 
is the president's competency. 
  [Correspondents] Finally, a question that interests many of 
our readers. In various publications one sees announcements 
saying things like, "We can get you a foreign passport quickly." 
Aren't you embarrassed by what your competitors can do? 
  [Didenko] I would like to say a few words specifically about 
this. The duty for formalizing a nationally issued foreign 
passport is two minimum wages -- less than 30,000 rubles. But 
there are people who are ready to pay $100 or more to some 
home-grown companies for the very same services. As a result, 
they receive documents with the seals of nonexistent countries 
-- in effect, fraudulent homemade documents with which it is 
possible to get only as far as Sheremetyevo. We have had a very 
large number of instances like this. It may indeed be true that 
we do not work fast enough, but a genuine passport can be 
obtained today only from the hands of MID or OVIR workers. So it 
makes sense to wait a month and get a passport that is valid for 
five years -- a genuine passport with which you will not be 
"requested" to go back when you reach the border. 

