BFN 

  [Text] President Aristide is squandering Haitian funds 
frozen in the United States. The president of the Chamber of 
Deputies is adamant about seeing the hidden face of the iceberg 
at all costs. In a letter to the U.S. secretary of state, a copy 
of which reached our editorial desk, the president of the lower 
chamber, Frantz Robert Monde, has called Warren Christopher's 
attention to the steps not taken so far, as well as those taken 
by the office of the Chamber of Deputies with the U.S. State 
Department concerning funds belonging to the Haitian state, 
which are frozen in the United States and are being improperly 
spent by President Aristide. The president of the Chamber adds 
that following a request by the Ministry of Finance commission, 
based on the belief that the Constitution and the laws of a 
state define the rules of the democratic game, the Chamber of 
Deputies found it necessary to address you, Mr. Secretary of 
State, on 26 April 1994, in a letter soliciting an accounting of 
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide's expenses being paid from 
funds frozen in the United States. 
  The vice president of the National Assembly has taken this 
opportunity to denounce U.S. authorities who, in response to his 
request, take pleasure in demanding a military intervention in 
his country. Monde asks, Would you prevent light from being shed 
on the scandalous character of those expenses, regardless of the 
Constitution and the laws of the Republic of Haiti? Still, and 
despite everything, he explains, I believe in the democratic 
traditions of U.S. institutions, in the greatness and morality 
of the U.S. people who prevent mean-minded personal interests 
and obstruction of the rules of law from undermining the U.S. 
democracy. He says he is convinced that -- thanks to the vision 
of the U.S. secretary of state and the transparency that must 
characterize the management of a state's funds -- the Chamber of 
Deputies will eventually have at its disposal a written 
accounting of the funds spent by President Aristide. 

