BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by President Rafael Caldera at Miraflores Palace in </F>
Caracas -- live or recorded] 
  [Text] Easter week has begun with good news. The reopening 
of Banco Latino and the performance of the people involved with 
that organization in the first days of the reopening have been 
truly impressive. They have given us reason to be optimistic. 
Many people involved with Banco Latino have expressed confidence 
in the institution; that is, they have expressed their 
confidence in the steps taken to make it serve the people. Some 
people have renewed their relationships with Banco Latino, thus 
proving that they believe the promise made to account holders, 
depositors, and all those who experienced moments of great 
anguish. A total of 98 percent of the people who had loans up to 
10 million bolivares will receive reimbursement for virtually 
all their rights, properties, and interest. 
  Solidarity and joint efforts by the legislative and 
executive 
branches, the financial system, and all sectors of society have 
made this possible. It proves that solidarity is the answer to 
Venezuela's problems. I must say that in the name of that same 
solidarity, I hope we will soon appoint a banking superintendent 
and president of Fogade [Deposit Guarantee and Banking 
Protection Fund] and that we will also make the urgent 
modifications proposed for the banking deficit emergency law. 
  I must also say that the sacrifice that has been made, 
especially the great financial sacrifice of recovering Banco 
Latino and guaranteeing the financial system in general, was not 
done with money given to bankers, as some people have said. That 
money is to protect account holders and depositors, to prevent 
the same thing from happening to people who are involved with 
other banking institutions, to spare them the anguish of those 
who dealt with Banco Latino. We are making the sacrifice for 
them. Fogade has not contributed that money for nothing. It has 
done so to gain control of those institutions through equivalent 
properties to guarantee the financial system in general and so I 
can say today that Venezuelans can go to banks with the 
assurance that they will not be deprived of what is rightfully 
theirs. 
  I must also say that the punishments meted out to the people 
responsible for the Banco Latino disaster will not be the result 
of passing fancies but of the government's firm, persistent 
resolve; of my administration's pledge to execute every action 
compatible with the domestic and international de jure state to 
apply sanctions to the full extent allowed by circumstances and 
the law. They will serve as an example and keep such incidents 
from happening again. 
  We received more good news in the favorable solution of the 
problem of the soldiers awaiting trial. Practically all of them 
are free, and those who are not will soon be released. Everyone 
implicated in the 4 February action has received a presidential 
pardon in accordance with procedures that had to be maintained 
in deference to the military institutions. Soldiers who have 
returned from abroad are receiving dignified treatment and are 
enjoying freedom. Today I signed a document dropping the charges 
against 20 soldiers who had arrived from Peru and Ecuador. 
Eighteen of them will return to the Armed Forces, and the rest 
will join civilian life, where their civilian and political 
rights will be totally respected. I must say that the vast 
majority of them are convinced that their role is to make a 
positive contribution to our peace efforts. The country would 
not understand if those who have received pardons from 
Venezuela's democratic government were to become negative 
factors, incapable of recognizing, encouraging, promoting, or 
supporting the profound changes in the country. 
  The other problem we face is a very difficult one: the 
fiscal 
deficit. This problem has worsened with the deterioration of the 
oil market. Various factors are involved. Therefore, we must 
accept the measures proposed in the so-called Sosa Plan. This 
plan does not represent the national government's entire 
economic policy. It should be seen, however, as the first step 
in dealing with the problem in the near future. We can assure 
you that the same path followed in these short-term measures 
will be followed in long-term measures. In other words, we will 
maintain the tendency of placing the heaviest burden on those 
who can pay and of diminishing as much as possible the burden on 
those who are experiencing more economic difficulties. 
  Confronting the fiscal deficit and keeping the promise of 
eliminating the value-added tax from sales has undoubtedly 
required a great effort, but there has been great understanding. 
The initiative to establish a special powers law arose in 
Congress. I must admit that I have never favored special powers 
laws. I have often expressed distrust, from a legal standpoint, 
of institutions [institucion] such as these, which have been 
utilized during the past few administrations. In view of the 
situation I face, however, I have no right to tell the nation 
that I reject the powers bestowed upon me to decree, through 
that special powers law, the measures I have proposed to 
Congress and which I consider essential. Therefore, I am willing 
to assume my responsibility. I want to be given full powers. 
Since I have this great responsibility on my shoulders, I must 
have your confidence in taking this step, which is essential to 
implementing the economic policy we want. As we have said 
before, we want an economic policy that will create a 
competitive economy; an economy that will encourage investment 
and admit privatization when it is really advisable. We want an 
economy that will seek stability, that will struggle against 
inflation to meet our goals of reducing interest rates, which 
are so high, and of attaining the necessary monetary stability 
for our economy to prosper. 
  In this framework, we have proposed a bill, which we hope 
will be included in the special powers law, to facilitate the 
construction of large public projects through the contract 
system. We desperately need freeways, buildings, public 
services, and aqueducts, but the country's fiscal situation does 
not allow us to have them. We suffer when we see an urgent need 
for roads and essential services but we do not have the 
resources to make them a reality because our budget situation is 
truly very serious. This law, which will allow us to call 
investors to build these projects and recover their money from 
user payments, is indispensable, fundamental, and essential. 
  Many other sectors require active guidance. For example, we 
desperately need tourism in Venezuela. Few countries in the 
world have Venezuela's positive qualities and propitious 
conditions for establishing a large tourist industry. Among 
other things, we must overcome the difficulties presented by our 
own people who do not understand the importance of tourism. We 
must firmly stop any type of attack, offense, or impropriety 
against tourists. When a taxi driver friend of mine, who has a 
right to improve his standard of living, tries to exploit a 
tourist by charging more than what is fair, he harms not only 
the tourist but the entire country. He is damaging an economic 
activity that the country needs. 
  We will also start to give more and better support to many 
other sectors. Mining is a very large and promising possibility 
in Venezuela. We have to work hard to further this sector. We 
will do so with actions that range from reconsidering the 
current mining laws to reviewing the systems used so far. We 
will also direct our efforts at agricultural recovery. This 
sector suffers from the effects of a number of shock [previous 
word in English] measures that were not implemented reasonably 
or gradually. They have caused damage that is hard to fix and 
which will take a great deal of work to rectify. 
  We are determined to support the small and intermediate 
firms. We will emphasize this sector because it is a large 
source of jobs, and jobs are what the country needs most. 
  There is also the neighborhood program. This program is the 
center of our concerns. We will start to work, with the 
resources we have available, in this sector very shortly. 
  The personal security situation has been a very difficult 
problem. We have, however, made some progress. For example, we 
managed to dismantle powerful bands of auto thieves. We have 
also started a purge process in the police corps. But we cannot 
begin a witch hunt or dismantle a corps that has many honorable, 
capable, and efficient people. The process will continue, and we 
will get the crime rates to drop. We must also reach the 
necessary agreements with state governors and mayors to achieve 
our goals in this sector. 
  The country is changing. There have been profound changes. 
There have been changes in public administration. There have 
been changes in public spending--although they must be 
bigger--as we managed to implement a few measures to cut fiscal 
expenses. The reordering of expenses, however, is a very 
difficult process in an excessively complicated budget such as 
Venezuela's. But we are working on it and we are making progress. 
  This is an austerity government. We have made important 
changes in the Armed Forces. We have made important changes in 
PDVSA [Venezuelan Petroleum] management, which is the most 
important private economic institution in the country. We are 
solving the jigsaw puzzle. We have an austere government. We 
have a government without thieves. If there are thieves and it 
is reported, they will be investigated, punished, and suspended. 
We do not want to jump into a void. We said this many times 
during our electoral campaign and we repeat it today. The 
country does not want to jump into the void. The country wants 
consistent, firm, permanent actions to achieve positive and 
thorough changes. 
  We are putting the puzzle together. We said more than once 
that Venezuela seemed like a puzzle with some pieces that did 
not fit. We are performing that task. We are cleaning house, 
which is more difficult than anyone can imagine. We want our 
country to prosper. We want our country to be successful and 
prosper steadily, not violently. We want to do it responsibly 
and firmly. To do so, we need the country's trust. 
  The country views with pleasure our message of a commitment 
to solidarity; that is, an economic solidarity commitment that 
can take us to a relative yet necessary and desirable stability 
that will guarantee real wages to fight inflation and that can 
stop the prices of basic necessities and medicines from rising. 
We are exploring all paths to find a remedy to the grave 
situation the population is facing. We need solidarity to 
achieve it. I am optimistic that we will achieve this 
solidarity. Each day we find more ways out of this situation. 
Those who refuse to understand this, those who criticize 
everything, and those who obstruct our goal are becoming more 
outdated by the day. 
  The country wants us to help it surmount this difficult 
situation. I know we are going to do it. The trust that returned 
to the country and that the population showed in view of Banco 
Latino's financial problem is a principle that is filling us 
with hope about the future of Venezuela. 
  I run into many people who ask what they can do. I reply 
that 
you can do a great deal by keeping faith, by promoting 
understanding, and by contributing just a little, because what 
lies ahead of us is big. We will not make it unless everybody 
joins forces. I want to insist on this. That is why I talk of 
the solidarity commitment. The economic theory of this 
government--economy ministers have insisted on this--is that all 
sectors reach a consensus, a basic agreement to ensure that all 
of us can protect ourselves from the anarchic and selfish 
attitude of many groups that want to harm the population. 
Venezuela is first and above us all. Each one of us, including 
the humblest individual, can contribute a lot. When a humble 
person says in front of television cameras that he has faith in 
the future of Venezuela, he is doing a very valuable service. I 
ask my compatriots to continue providing that service. We must 
continue to fight for the Venezuela we all love, for the 
Venezuela that has the full right to receive everyone's 
contribution to give it a better life. Thank you very much. 

