BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by staff reporter Ma Ling (7456 3781): "Li Ruihuan </F>
and Zhang Baifa -- Striking Similarities"] 
  [Text] The relationship between Zhang Baifa and Li Ruihuan 
was once the talk of the town. Some even acclaimed at their 
"predestined" relationship. 
  Zhang and Li had many similarities and some sounded a bit 
unimaginable. Both of them were born in the same year in 
peasant families in Xianghe County, Hebei. Zhang was only three 
months older than Li. They entered the Beijing No. 3 
Construction Company as apprentices in the same year. Li 
Ruihuan learned carpentry, while Zhang Baifa was a trainee in 
reinforced bar. Although they had not attended institutions of 
higher learning, both of them tackled major technological 
problems in the general technical competition. Li Ruihuan 
resolved the technical problem of enlargement, while Zhang Baifa 
resolved the problem of leaping over steel framework. Later, 
both organized shock brigades and became labor models. They 
also were promoted on the same day. They were interviewed by 
the same person, who talked about the same position. The only 
difference is that the position of assistant general manager was 
for different companies. 
  It is even more strange that: Their wives, who had the same 
name, were born on the same day and same month. Zhang Baifa 
said realistically: "As we were construction workers during 
those years, it was difficult to get girlfriends. Moreover, 
girls in the urban areas were not willing to marry construction 
workers. Some people even said ironically: You look like 
beggars at a distance, or construction workers closer up. For 
this reason, our wives all were from rural areas." 
Unexpectedly, they got wives from rural areas with such 
similarities. 
  Now their grandchildren have the same names and are of the 
same ages. In addition, they go to the same schools. None of 
this was intentionally prearranged. 
  It seems that the "predestined relationship" between Li 
Ruihuan and Zhang Baifa cannot be explained by common sense. 
  While talking about Li Ruihuan, however, Zhang Baifa could 
not help expressing his appreciation from the botton of his 
heart: "Li Ruihuan is very clever. Willing to learn and to 
summarize work, Li is always more impressive than others when 
speaking: No one remains unconvinced before him. In terms of 
learning, I am not his match. When he gives a lecture on 
philosophy at a university, the students are never sleepy. He 
is an eloquent speaker with a good memory. He is knowledgeable 
and argues well on almost any topic. I hold him in special 
regard. I like to joke casually with other people, but never 
with him." 

