Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by E. Kiryanova: "New Chairman of the FEZ </F>
"Nakhodka" Administrative Committee Appointed in Full 
Correspondence With Standard Documents..."] 
  [Text] In the two preceding issues of KRASNOYE ZNAMYA 
we published the opinion of a group of businessmen, politicians 
and jurists of Nakhodka, who place all their hopes on the 
development of the free economic zone "Nakhodka." They have seen 
in the actions of the city's head of administration, Viktor 
Gnezdilov, a threat to the continued existence of the FEZ [free 
economic zone], following his appointment of S. Dudnik as 
chairman of the FEZ administrative committee. 
  Today we are giving the floor to the Nakhodka city 
administration, which presents an opposing viewpoint. 
  Not only the city, but also the kray has been flooded with 
information from the "lover of truth" and the "fighter" for 
democracy, the newspaper NAKHODKINSKIY PROSPEKT, regarding the 
supposedly impending total fiasco of the free economic zone, the 
"palace overthrows" and the "lost opportunities." Nakhodka 
residents, before whose very eyes and through whose efforts this 
very FEZ was born and developed, overcoming barriers of various 
height, were simply stunned by the fabrications of the newly 
proclaimed "chroniclers." 
  Somewhere beyond the boundaries of Nakhodka, uninformed 
people may believe that the appointment of the new 
administrative committee chairman, S. Dudnik, to replace I. 
Ustinov who had been elected as deputy to the State Duma, will 
make Nakhodka a place which is "unfavorable for enterprise," 
will entail a significant increase in the exchange rate of stock 
in local joint-stock companies, and will influence the 
government, which will not issue credits to Dudnik. 
  In any case, the perplexing question arises: How is it 
possible for all the efforts of Nakhodka residents to be negated 
because of one figure? The public is offered a solution: Such a 
gloomy picture will not come to pass if Mr. Zavadnikov or, say, 
Mr. Bondarev are appointed as chairman. 
  But Dudnik--he is proclaimed as a henchman of the "red 
directors," having made his career "on the yeast of the 
administrative-command system." 
  Yes, yes. That specifically is the definition which 
respected 
people in the city have acquired, managers of large enterprises 
who in a difficult moment did not leave their collectives to the 
whims of fate, who bore on their shoulders all the burdens of 
the transition to the market. 
  Nakhodka is not such a big city. And the current propensity 
toward power by "those who are rather well-known in the city" 
(the words of NP in quotation marks) and those who are being 
pushed back to rear positions with the coming of Dudnik is quite 
understandable for any sober-minded person. 
  Nakhodka residents had a rather optimistic, though 
nonsynonymous, attitude toward the appointment of S. Dudnik, who 
stood at the wellsprings of the birth of the FEZ, as chairman of 
the administrative committee. However, we must assume that both 
the PROSPEKT and the group of "well-known" people understand 
that the time of tin soldiers and unanimity has passed. 
Moreover, S. Dudkin's announcements regarding the further 
mechanism of development of the FEZ are realistic and do not 
have the slightest divergence from the course which had 
previously been implemented. 
  Who can object to the fact that we need to revitalize decree 
No. 540, which previously gave the FEZ tax and customs benefits, 
or to the fact that, without giving up our former positions, we 
may use the situation in our favor and create mini-zones on the 
basis of ports? 
  It is understandable that NAKHODKINSKIY PROSPECT in this 
case 
earnestly expresses the will of those for whose money it exists. 
It is a shame that such concepts as journalistic ethics and 
human decency are lost here. Yet the money in circulation is 
considerable. What other newspaper with a circulation of 7,000 
can allow itself to have its own Moscow-accredited correspondent 
in the Federal Assembly? In itself, this fact cannot evoke 
anything but joy. There are many really remarkable examples of 
the charity of the new entrepreneurs. However, the current 
actions of the group of "well-known people" are rather far from 
being charitable. 
  And in addition to everything, PROSPEKT evidently likes to 
appear as a political martyr (See UTRO ROSSII, No 17). Economic 
difficulties, difficulties with printing the newspaper which are 
so familiar today to every editorial collective can, after all, 
be presented as being the intrigues of those same "red 
directors"... and of the city administration. 
<H6>  Announcement Issued by the city of Nakhodka Administration 
Press Center </H6>
  In connection with the fact that recently the newspaper 
NAKHODKINSKIY PROSPEKT has been fanning political passions over 
the appointment of the new chairman of the administrative 
committee of the FEZ "Nakhodka," its journalists operate with 
the facts willfully and with bias, giving them an unobjective 
evaluation, and also publish fabrications regarding the 
involvement of the administration in difficulties associated 
with the publication of the newspaper, the administration press 
center is authorized to give the following explanation: 
  1. The appointment of the new administrative committee 
chairman of the FEZ "Nakhodka" was performed in full accordance 
with the standard documents. 
  2. The administration has nothing to do with problems 
associated with the publication of the newspaper NAKHODKINSKIY 
PROSPEKT. The tin can factory, being a joint-stock company, 
makes decisions independently. 
  3. Noting the destructive position of the editors of 
NAKHODKINSKIY PROSPEKT, the city administration retains the 
right to legally verify the correspondence of newspaper 
publications to reality, as well as to the RF [Russian 
Federation] Law on the Mass Media. 

