Language: <F P=105> Greek </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by P. Kharalambous] </F>
  [Text] When the proximity talks resume next week, UN envoys 
Gustave Feissel and John Paul Kavanagh, will submit ideas in the 
form of nonpapers [previous word in English] to help the two 
sides come closer. 
  According to ALITHIA's information, this is how the UN plans 
to proceed in the discussion of the confidence-building 
measures. This is the same process that was followed in the 
1984 New York talks between President Spiros Kiprianou and 
Turkish Cypriot leader Rauf Denktas that led to the 1985 summit 
agreements. 
  After meeting Denktas and President Glavkos Kliridhis, 
Feissel and Government Spokesman Ioannis Kasoulidhis yesterday 
confirmed that the ideas will be submitted next Monday [7 March]. 
  In a statement at the Presidential Palace and in occupied 
Nicosia, Feissel gave identical answers to reporters' questions. 
The basic points were: 

  -  There is no deadlock. 
  -  So far talks 
have been useful to the future course. 
  -  Material has been given 
to help prepare proposals. 
  -  There have been no results. 
  -  An 
agreement will hopefully be reached during the next two months 
of talks. 
  Feissel said that the ideas that will help the two sides 
converge on disputed issues will be prepared by Monday, when the 
talks resume. 
  According to exclusive information, Feissel said the issues 
on which the United Nations will make significant suggestions in 
an effort to bridge the differences concern the timeframe for 
action on Famagusta and access to it. 
  Feissel said: "I hope the ideas will prove to be useful. We 
are proceeding according to the timetable, and I don't know what 
will happen in two weeks. I am neither optimistic nor 
pessimistic. I believe an agreement will be reached on the 
confidence-building measures within two months." 
  Turkish Cypriot leader Rauf Denktas yesterday avoided 
answering reporters' questions. Kasoulidhis said the two sides 
have finished expressing their views and confirmed that the 
United Nations will now prepare its suggestions. He said we are 
at the same point we were at last Friday, adding that the talks 
will not go beyond March. 
  Concluding, Kasoulidhis said he cannot say that the outcome 
of the talks is disappointing. 

