Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] MITI has moved toward the realization of the "Lunar 
Resource Development Project" (provisional name), which is an 
effort to get helium-3, a nuclear fusion fuel, from the surface 
of the moon and bring it back to earth. The project involves 
setting up a government-private research cooperative in FY95, 
then, when the 21st century begins, to begin actual resource 
probing of the moon's surface. To prepare for the establishment 
of the research cooperative, the "Forum on Lunar Resources" will 
begin this month. Helium-3, which gives off hardly any 
radioactivity, is said to be the ideal fuel for nuclear fusion. 
Succeeding in putting helium-3 into practical use could solve 
the world's resource problems for the next several centuries. 
MITI has also asked NASA, a U.S. organization that has shown 
results in space development, and other groups to join in the 
project. The idea is for the project to evolve into the first 
international space development project led by Japan. 
  In addition to the AIST Geological Survey of Japan and the 
AIST National Institute for Resources and Environment, about 20 
companies, including Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Nissan Motors, 
and Hitachi, Ltd., will participate in the "Forum on Lunar 
Resources." The forum will investigate important development 
topics such as 1) how to separate and remove helium-3 from moon 
sand, 2) technology for transporting the helium-3 from the moon 
to the earth, 3) the development of lunar base camps and lunar 
vehicles, and 4) problems over rights of possession in the case 
where base camps are set up. 
  The government-private research cooperative will begin 
research on the critical technologies in FY95, and will launch a 
probe rocket to the moon when the 21st century begins. The goal 
is to realize a lunar resource gathering system that will convey 
helium-3 from the lunar base camps to earth in the 2020s. 
  Nuclear fusion using helium-3 as fuel is seen as a promising 
source of energy that has markedly less radioactivity than 
conventional reactions using tritium as a fuel. 
  Trial calculations show that burning several tens of tons 
per 
year of helium-3 in nuclear fusion would furnish enough 
electrical power for the entire world in the 21st century. 
Although there is no helium-3 on earth, millions of tons of it 
are presumed to be on the moon's surface. 
  There are also funding and technical issues, such as the 
enormous development costs and making fusion reactors practical. 
MITI, however, says that if the concept is realized there are 
high possibilities that it will solve energy and environmental 
problems and that it will lead to the uncovering of a tremendous 
space business. 
<H5>  Helium-3 </H5>
  Helium-3 exists in collections of high-energy particles that 
are carried away from the sun (the solar wind). Because the 
solar wind falls directly on the moon's surface, where there is 
no air, helium-3 is said to be abundant in the moon's sand and 
rocks. Even when helium-3 undergoes nuclear fusion with tritium, 
most of the energy is taken out in the form of protons. 
Therefore, there is little effect due to radioactivity on the 
surroundings. 

