BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondents Sevindzh Abdullayeva and Viktor </F>
Shulman] 
  [Text] Baku April 13 TASS -- Armenian troops continued 
their offensive in the direction of the Terter district of 
Azerbaijan located several dozen kilometers north of 
Nagorno-Karabakh on Wednesday. 
  The Azerbaijani Defence Ministry said that the offensive was 
preceded by artillery shelling. Armenians are using Grad 
missile launchers to shell the district centre which has a 
population of 20,000 people, it said. 
  The Azerbaijani Army rebuffed the offensive near the town of 
Gyulistan in the neighbouring Geiraboy district. Armenian 
troops were reported stepping up activity in the Agdam district. 
  Earlier today Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh traded 
charges, 
accusing each other of continuing the bloody war over the 
disputed enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh. Azerbaijani Foreign 
Minister Gasan Gasanov said that the unpunishment of Armenia and 
its aggressive actions, as well as the passivity of the 
international community may lead to the occupation of new 
territories of Azerbaijan and unpredictability of the 
development of the situation in the region. He said Azerbaijani 
President Geydar Aliyev's address to the nation and the world 
made on republican television on Tuesday testifies to the 
"constructive position of the republic and its desire to settle 
the conflict by peaceful means." 
  "The leadership of Azerbaijan, taking advantage of the 
connivance of the international community, continues the war 
against the civilians of Nagorno-Karabakh," a statement issued 
by the government of Nagorno-Karabakh said on Wednesday. 
  "Barbaric bombing of towns and villages is accompanied by 
cynical televised addresses by Azerbaijani President Geydar 
Aliyev to the Armenian population of Karabakh, urging them to 
stop the bloodshed and assuring them of (Azerbaijan's) readiness 
to ensure their safety," the statement said. Nagorno-Karabakh 
leaders warned they will reserve the right to take adequate 
measures against Azerbaijani towns, adding that all 
responsibility will rest with the Azerbaijani side. 

