Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The Japan Technology Transfer Association (JTTAS) 
will establish a research forum for exchanges between industry 
and academia on super fine particles. Focusing on the unique 
characteristics possessed by particles on the order of several 
nanometers (10[.sup]-9[/] m), the possible uses of these 
particles in industry are being sought. After collecting 
contributions the participating industries, periodic research 
forums scheduled to begin in October will be sponsored. 
  The Commission on Nano Structure Material Function and 
Applied Research, established as an executive office by JTTAS, 
is chaired by Yuichiro Nishina, professor in the Research 
Institute for Iron, Steel, and Other Materials, Tohoku 
University, and draws its working members from researchers in 
industry, government, and industry, such as the University of 
Tokyo, Kyushu University, Tsukuba University, Tokyo City 
University, Keio University, the Agency of Industrial Science 
and Technology (AIST), and private industry. 
  Compared to typical fine particles, super fine particles 
with 
dimensions of several nanometers have a higher ratio of atoms 
and molecules that constitute the particle's surface. By 
slightly changing the number of atoms and molecules, the 
physical and chemical nature of the particles changes 
dramatically. As a result, this research field has attracted 
attention in recent years. So in addition to being adopted in 
the Ministry of Education's Basic Research Program, AIST also 
began a project which has the aim of establishing technology 
that manipulates individual atoms and molecules. Information on 
the goal of developing new materials using super fine particles 
will be exchanged between industry and academia at the research 
forum. 
  In advance of the forum, a public seminar (admission 
charged) 
will be held in Tokyo on July 7, and the participating 
industries are invited. JTTAS, a corporation authorized by AIST, 
manages, for example, exchanges between industry and academia 
and the services of talented people that accompany each kind of 
technical issue. 
  For information about the research forum, contact the 
executive office by telephone at (03)-3597-8200. 

