BFN 

  [Text] Washington, May 24 KYODO -- Japan and the United 
States vowed Tuesday [24 May] to create a joint health program 
for children to stamp out polio from the face of the world by 
the year 2000. 
  "We believe (this goal) is technically feasible," said 
Undersecretary of State for Global Affairs Timothy Wirth in 
announcing the joint program. 
  The program is a new "common agenda" initiative the two 
countries created Tuesday as part of a year-old bilateral accord 
to promote cooperation on global social and environmental issues. 
  Wirth said the two countries also agreed to pool their aid 
resources and launch a second child health initiative to develop 
an inexpensive, "one-fits-all" children's vaccine to fight 
disease in developing countries. 
  In addition, the United States and Japan agreed to expand 
their "common agenda" plan on narcotics control, the protection 
of coral reefs, and the expansion of global changes research in 
Asia and Latin America, the two sides said in a statement 
released after a general meeting of the U.S.-Japan Common Agenda 
for Global Cooperation. 
  The "common agenda" program is the least controversial part 
of a highly contentious framework agreement the two countries 
concluded in July last year to define a "new economic 
partnership" between the two countries. 
  By stepping up bilateral cooperation on global 
social-economic issues while fighting on the trade front, the 
two countries have shown that "you can walk and chew gum at the 
same time," Wirth said. 
  The two countries have not yet worked out details of their 
new child health program, but Wirth said it involves bilateral 
cooperation in research and development, plus production and 
distribution of children's vaccines for use in developing 
countries. 
  "We believe that aggressive cooperation between the two 
countries...can lead to the eradication of polio worldwide by 
the year 2000," Wirth said. 
  Under the "common agenda" program, Japan and the United 
States have already agreed to pool their resources to control 
global population growth, battle the AIDS epidemic in developing 
countries and promote worldwide environmental projects. 
  A new environmental program approved Tuesday calls for 
providing financial aid to the Philippines to build a 
biodiversity training site at Subic Bay to protect lowland rain 
forests. 
  The two countries also pledged to finance a community 
resource conservation and development program in Papua New 
Guinea aimed at encouraging tribal clans to preserve endangered 
forests by promoting income alternatives. 
  On the AIDS front, the United States and Japan agreed to put 
six countries -- the Philippines, Indonesia, India, Ghana, Kenya 
and Egypt -- on their "priority" lists for a joint U.S.-Japan 
AIDS-fighting assistance program. 
  The two countries have so far pledged to provide up to 12 
billion dollars by the year 2000 to fight AIDS and control 
exploding population growth in the developing world. 

