Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Aleksandr Pozdnyakov report under the "Public" rubric: </F>
"Elections to Petersburg City Assembly Will Be Watched. Mayor 
Decides To Introduce `Presidential Qualification' for Deputies"] 
  [Text] Eight St. Petersburg political parties and the city 
branches of all-Russia parties (among them are the Regional 
Party of the Center, the Russian Federation Communist Party, the 
"Civic Union" association, and the regional branch of the 
Democratic Party of Russia) have formed a Public Committee to 
monitor the elections for City Assembly. The founders of the 
committee have sent an appeal to the electoral commission 
suggesting that regulations for the elections for the City 
Assembly confirmed by the city mayor should be amended to match 
the Constitution of Russia and the presidential laws defining 
general rules for elections for local bodies of representative 
power. 
  According to the leader of the Regional Party of St. 
Petersburg, former city soviet deputy Aleksandr Belkin, who 
drafted the appeal to the electoral commission, the regulations 
for the elections for the City Assembly contain "a mass of 
violations" of the Constitution and presidential laws. In 
particular, the rights of electoral associations are infringed 
upon by the demand to secure at least 35,000 voters' signatures 
in electoral districts for the nomination of their candidates. 
  The leaders of a number of political parties are going to 
protest in court against the most apparent violation of the 
Constitution -- the introduction of a five-year "residential 
qualification" for candidates. In their opinion, this 
restriction curtails the equality of citizens of Russia, which 
does not depend on their place of residence -- this is 
established by the Constitution. 
  The founders of the Public Committee for monitoring the 
course of elections for the City Assembly have declared their 
organization open to political organizations that agree with its 
objectives and tasks. So far there has been no one wishing to 
join it, however, despite the fact that many politicians share 
the founders' point of view. They are probably deterred by the 
membership in the committee of the Russian Federation Communist 
Party and the rather notorious near-trade union association "For 
Justice." The city organization of the "Greens" party, for 
example, having seen the founders lists, abandoned the idea of 
joining. "Greens" leader Yevgeniy Usov thus explained the 
reason: "We are not going to do any business with Communists." 

