BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Jaroslav Spurny: "Government Rejected Report on </F>
Security Situation"] 
  [Text] Last week, Klaus's Cabinet rejected a report on 
which three ministries have been working for six months. 
According to Prime Minister Klaus, the report failed to deliver 
solutions for sorting out the problems indicated in the report. 
The government agreed, however, with the main conclusion of the 
report: "There is no threat to the Czech Republic that could 
throw its political stability out of balance or endanger its 
sovereignty in the foreseeable future." 
<H5>  Gangs, Drugs, and Spies </H5>
  Organized crime, "external security risks" (nationalism, 
above all), and illegal migration are the most serious security 
problems today, the report states. Vladimir Suman, chairman of 
the Defense and Security Committee, recently arrived at the same 
conclusion on his own. The 200-page report, however, deals with 
his conclusions on several pages only. 
  Last year, the police department in charge of criminal 
organizations eliminated 15 gangs. Their members committed 
murders, burglaries, and extortion and forged documents. Some 
of the gangs even cooperated with policemen. When apprehending 
mafia members, police found stolen money in the amount of 
$100,000, 250 kilograms of Semtex, 186 kg of perunite [perunit], 
submachine guns, pistols, radio transmitters, over 1,000 
counterfeit passports, and 0.6 kg of radioactive californium. 
  As regards drugs, police arrested over 100 drug traffickers 
and dealers. Heroin, ephedrine, cocaine, and morphine were 
found on them, all in amounts not exceeding 1 kilogram. Police 
discovered 21 money counterfeiters and also a gang that 
attempted to smuggle arms to Iran and Bosnia. 
  According to the Security Information Service (BIS), no case 
of a planned terrorist action has been recorded on Czech 
territory, if we do not count 44 bomb actions without political 
connotations, which are under investigation by the police. BIS 
is convinced that Russian, Ukrainian, and Polish intelligence 
services have become "significantly active" on our territory. 
Reportedly, they are most interested in our arms exports. Arab 
countries, too, are reportedly very active: Iraq, Iran, Libya, 
Syria, and Palestine. Allegedly, they are mostly concerned with 
the "continuity of economic relations." The rest of the BIS 
report describes the work of counterintelligence. It does so 
very vaguely for secrecy reasons. 
  The Military Intelligence Service (VZS) sees the main danger 
in nationalist conflict between Russia and Ukraine. The 
military sees the second-greatest danger in the developments in 
the former German Democratic Republic. "The totalitarian past 
of the eastern laender is a fertile soil for extremist and 
racially intolerant individuals within the German population," 
the VZS analysis says. Third, the military intelligence list 
describes the "belt of crisis situations," which "starts in 
Africa, goes through the Middle East, south Europe, Central Asia 
and India, and ends in East Asia." 
<H5>  From Crime to Conviction: Too Long a Time Span </H5>
  As regards the problems of internal security, all experts 
are 
united over one problem: There is too long a time span between 
when a crime is committed and when the perpetrator is convicted 
and sentenced. Only in simpler cases are perpetrators sentenced 
within one year. However, if a convict has committed several 
crimes or if he has accomplices, the criminal proceedings may 
take two or three years. 
  Several figures are worth mentioning. Violent crimes 
increased by two-thirds in 1993 against the previous year. In 
the Czech Republic, 195 murders and 4,109 muggings were 
committed last year. A total of 20 percent of crimes are 
committed by minors. The highest success rate as regards 
explained crimes is in the district of Rychnov nad Kneznou (68 
percent), and the smallest in Prague (13.5 percent). The higher 
increase in the crime rate was recorded in the Pardubice 
district (40 percent), and the smallest in Most (a 7-percent 
decline). 
  As regards the Czech Republic's security, the report speaks 
about three priorities: 
  An increased interest of migrants in residing in our country 
is being expected, and, therefore, it is important to secure the 
border with Slovakia as soon as possible. 
  Organized crime (drugs, [radioactive] waste material) is 
expected to increase. With respect to this development, a new 
amendment to the criminal code is being drafted. 

