BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Diplomatic Panorama" feature] </F>
  [Text] After long preparations Russian Foreign Minister 
Andrey Kozyrev signed a frame document of the NATO Partnership 
for Peace program in Brussels today, an INTERFAX special 
correspondent Dmitriy Voskoboynikov reports from Brussels. 
  At the same time Kozyrev urged not to make a fetish of any 
forms of military and political cooperation between the West and 
the East. 
  Speaking in the NATO headquarters in Brussels, Kozyrev said 
that Russia was seeking not only partnership but also 
development of contacts within the scope of the North Atlantic 
Council and within the scope of bilateral relations between 
Moscow, the NATO countries and the North Atlantic Cooperation 
Council. 
  Kozyrev said the main point was not to limit cooperation in 
the sphere of defense for geographical reasons, not to create 
any new separating barriers on the continent and not to make 
anyone feel isolated. He stressed that cooperation in the 
sphere of defense was high on the European agenda. 
  Kozyrev said that establishment of a unified Europe remained 
Russia's prior goal and stated that the principles and standards 
of the CSCE completely conformed with this goal. The CSCE was 
playing and will play the central role on the continent, Kozyrev 
said when arguing with those who assigned primary importance to 
NATO. 
  The parties circulated a protocol as a result of the talks 
with the participation of the Russian minister in the NATO 
headquarters. The protocol said that Russia and NATO agreed to 
work out a wide particular program for partnership conforming 
with the scale, capacities and significance of Russia. 
  Constructive cooperation between Russia and NATO based on 
mutual respect, mutual benefits and friendship is a key 
component of security and stability in Europe conforming with 
the interests of the CSCE other member-states, the protocol 
stressed. 
  The protocol said that Russia's signing of the Partnership 
for Peace program would give new big opportunities for 
development of relations through practical cooperation in the 
spheres covered by the frame document. 
  The parties agreed to continue to develop far going 
cooperation between Russia and NATO both within and beyond the 
scope of the Partnership for Peace program, the protocol said. 
  The protocol stressed that such relations would be developed 
in order to pursue common goals and to enlarge and enhance 
relations with all other countries, were not aimed against the 
interests of any third countries and would be transparent. 
  Russia and NATO also agreed to continue and to enhance wide 
dialogue and cooperation in those spheres where, given Russia's 
status of a great nuclear power, Russia could make a unique and 
important contribution. This concerned exchange of information 
on the policy of security in European dimension, political 
consultations and cooperation in the sphere of security. 
  Russian First Deputy Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov said in 
his 
message to State Duma Speaker Ivan Rybkin that he believed that 
this protocol would overlap the scope of the NATO Partnership 
for Peace program. 
  Ivanov stressed that since the NATO leadership had decided 
to 
sign the protocol, this meant that it recognized the 
particularity of relations with Russia. 

