BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Wen Jiabao (3306 3367 1405): "It Is Necessary </F>
To Deepen Rural Reform and Promote Agriculture to New Heights"] 
  [Text] With Comrade Deng Xiaoping's important talks in 
early 1992 and the 14th party congress as a milestone, China's 
reform, opening up, and socialist modernization entered a new 
phase of development, and so did rural economic restructuring. 
<H5>  I. The New Situation Facing Rural Reform </H5>
  In the wake of the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC 
Central Committee, China's countryside took the lead in 
conducting reform, scoring achievements that attracted world 
attention. Through reform over a dozen years or so, the rural 
economic structure has undergone profound changes: First, the 
highly centralized people's commune structure was abolished, and 
the contract responsibility system on a household basis with 
remuneration linked to output, in the main, and the two-tier 
managerial structure characterized by the combination of 
centralization and separation set up. Second, diversified 
economic factors and forms were developed, with a pattern taking 
shape of the common development of diversified economic factors, 
with public ownership as the main body. Third, under the 
prerequisite of maintaining steady growth in grain and cotton 
output, the rural industrial setup was readjusted, diversified 
management and enterprises in towns and townships was developed, 
economic ties between urban and rural areas were expanded, and 
rural division of labor was considerably developed. Fourth, the 
system of state monopoly in the purchase and marketing of farm 
produce was gradually abolished; the farm produce market has 
greatly developed; and markets of such essentials as land, labor 
force and capital are taking shape. Fifth, the state's 
macroeconomic regulation and control over agriculture and the 
rural economy has been improved, and increasingly has adopted 
economic means to regulate rural economic activities, with the 
market role obviously expanded. Reform has effectively promoted 
agricultural and rural economic development. Consequently, the 
rural areas have undergone a historical change, while laying a 
foundation for the reform and development of the entire national 
economy. 
  Generally speaking, the rural areas today are still in the 
process of converting from the old to the new structure, and the 
tasks of reform are from being completed. The old structure has 
not been entirely eradicated, and is still functioning in some 
aspects; whereas the new structure has just been built, and is 
still incomplete and imperfect in many aspects. The rural 
managerial main body and property right system are incomplete 
and imperfect, the rural market is not highly developed, and a 
macroeconomic regulation and control system meeting the demands 
of the socialist market economy has not been set up. The 
contradictions and problems surfacing in rural economic 
operations are problems in the process of the old structure 
converting to the new, the reflection of their conflict and 
contradictions in progress. The fundamental way of resolving 
the contradictions and problems in rural economic development 
lies in deepening reform. 
  With the comprehensive transition of the entire national 
economy to the socialist market economy, new requirements are 
levied on the deepening of rural reform. In recent years, the 
rural areas have been faced with some new problems urgently 
awaiting solution; these are mainly a drop in the comparative 
economic returns of agriculture -- especially grain and cotton 
production -- the widening price gap between industrial and 
agricultural products, and slow increase in peasants' income. 
It is imperative to stabilize the party's basic policies for 
the rural areas, accelerate rural economic development, and 
further augment the basic role of agriculture. All this calls 
for voluminous work, and continuous arduous exploration. It is 
necessary to promote the rational flow and combination of 
various rural production essentials, and to realize the optimal 
allocation of economic resources on the basis of stabilizing the 
contract responsibility system on a household basis with 
remuneration linked to output. Under the prerequisite of 
ensuring effective supplies of major farm produce, it is 
necessary to develop diversified management, enterprises in 
townships and towns, and other industries; to promote 
on-the-spot transfers of surplus rural work force and the export 
of labor service in an orderly way; and to realize effective 
supplies of farm produce and a simultaneous increase in 
peasants' income. Under the conditions in which peasant 
households' separate production is conducted on a small scale, 
it is imperative to actively develop the rural market, further 
invigorate circulation, augment the opening up of the rural 
economy, and achieve the dovetailing of production with the 
market. In the course of developing the socialist market 
economy, it is imperative to augment the government's guidance, 
support, protection, regulation and control of the agriculture, 
and gradually to narrow the gap in economic development and 
income level between urban and rural areas and localities. 
These issues have a bearing not only on rural reform and 
development, but also on the overall situation of China's 
reform, opening up, and modernization. We must to do a good job 
in solving them in a down-to-earth way in the next step of 
in-depth rural reform. 
  Compared with the past, rural reform -- from day one to 
the present -- boasts some new characteristics: First, rural 
reform increasingly has touched upon deep-level interest 
contradictions; it is imperative to be very meticulous in the 
design of reform plans, the selection of timing, and the grasp 
of magnitude. Second, rural reform increasingly has interwoven 
with urban reform. In many aspects, it is very difficult for 
rural reform to go it alone; that being the case, rural and 
urban reform should be conducted in coordination in a whole 
range. The difficulty and complexity of rural reform have 
increased greatly. In this context, rural reform has entered a 
stage of tackling the bottleneck; the tasks for reform are more 
arduous, with greater efforts involved in deepening reform than 
in the past. 
<H5>  II. Correctly Grasp the Goal of Rural Reform </H5>
  The 14th party congress set the goal of China's economic 
restructuring to be building the socialist market economy 
structure. That was proposed on the basis of our party 
persisting in the truth-seeking ideological line, referring to 
the experiences of various countries, especially summarizing 
China's successful experiences in reform and opening up, and a 
creative development of Marxism-Leninism-Mao Zedong Thought at 
that. "The Decision" adopted by the Third Plenary Session of 
the 14th CPC Central Committee further set out the basic 
framework of the socialist market economy structure, which is 
the general plan and program for action for economic 
restructuring in China. Rural reform is an important component 
in building the socialist market economy structure, and plays a 
very important role in the entire economic restructuring in 
China. It is imperative for us to focus closely on the general 
goal of building the socialist market economy structure so as to 
further deepen rural reform. 
  From the very start, rural reform has been market oriented, 
with two important characteristics: First, it allowed the 
peasants sufficient say in production and operation to give play 
to the enthusiasm of the broad numbers of peasants. Second, it 
led agriculture and the rural economy into the market, while 
giving play to the role of the market mechanism. The rural 
areas were one step ahead in building the socialist market 
economy structure. The tremendous success of rural reform has 
provided evidence of the correctness of its orientation. 
  Today, China's rural areas are in a stage of change, from 
having sufficient food and clothing to being comparatively 
well-off, and from traditional to modern agriculture. 
Agricultural and rural economic development face two extremely 
arduous tasks: First, to ensure effective supplies of farm 
produce. Second, to ensure a steady increase in peasants' 
income. Fulfillment of these two goals calls for adopting 
measures in various aspects, and the most fundamental is to 
adhere to and deepen rural reform based on the general planning 
and requirements of building the socialist market economy 
structure. 
  Ensuring effective supplies of farm produce is the 
foundation 
for the smooth going of the entire cause of reform, opening up, 
and modernization. The per-capita possession of agricultural 
resources in China is limited, and it is very difficult to 
change the trend of shrinking amounts of arable land. With the 
population growth and elevation in income level, social demand 
for major farm produce will continue to grow. It is this which 
calls on us to attach great importance to the supply-and-demand 
balance of major farm products -- by no means should we be 
careless about it. To ensure the effective supply of farm 
products, the most fundamental point is to protect and give play 
to the peasants' enthusiasm, and to augment the basic role of 
agriculture so as to promote steady agricultural development. 
This precisely calls for formulating a price policy that is 
helpful to the production development of such major farm 
products as grains, cotton, and oil; to deepen purchase and 
marketing restructuring; and to improve agriculture's 
comparative economic returns. It is necessary to rely on 
science and technology to develop high-yield, high-quality, and 
high-return agriculture, and to improve agricultural labor 
productivity. It is imperative to increase the input of the 
state, the collective, and individuals so as to augment 
comprehensive agricultural production capability. 
  Increasing peasants' income is an overall issue that has a 
bearing on China's economic development and social stability. 
To increase peasants' income, it is imperative gradually to 
narrow the gap between industrial and agricultural products by 
means of a rational price policy. However, to basically resolve 
the issue of peasants' income in a country like ours which has a 
great population -- and a great agricultural populace, in 
particular -- it is not enough to rely on the government's price 
policy alone. The most fundamental way is to comprehensively 
develop the rural economy, and improve the comprehensive 
economic returns of the rural economy. This precisely calls for 
doing a good job in comprehensive agricultural development; 
exploiting non-arable land such as waste hills, water surface, 
grasslands, beaches, courtyards and backyards; and implementing 
the comprehensive development of agriculture, forestry, animal 
husbandry, sideline production, and fishery in a big way. It is 
necessary to develop an appropriate scope of operations in 
places where conditions are ripe so as to elevate the degree of 
intensiveness. It is necessary to regulate the rural economic 
structure, take an active part in developing secondary and 
tertiary industries, and develop all sorts of products with 
additional value under the prerequisite of ensuring the steady 
growth of such major farm produce as grain and cotton. It is 
imperative to guide enterprises in towns and townships toward 
appropriate concentration and toward linking with the 
construction of small towns so as to accelerate the transfer of 
the surplus rural work force, while creating conditions for an 
appropriate scope of operations in agricultural development. 
  Whether in ensuring supplies of farm produce or increasing 
peasants' income, it is imperative to give play to the role of 
the market mechanism, so that the market may play a basic role 
in allocating resources. For this reason, it is necessary to 
develop the product market in a big way, and actively develop 
the production factors market in order to instill new vitality 
in the entire agricultural production and rural economy, and to 
promote growth in the general supply volume of farm produce. It 
is necessary to promote rural economic restructuring to achieve 
the rational allocation of various economic resources so that 
the comparative advantages of various localities may be given 
full play, and so the peasants' income can continue to grow in 
the comprehensive development of the rural economy. 
  We must have a clear idea that in order to develop the 
socialist market economy by no means should we let agriculture 
go it alone. Agriculture has a long production period and is 
greatly affected by natural factors. It is a department with 
low direct economic returns, but a high degree of social 
effects, and is more often than not in an unfavorable position 
in market competition. Peasant households in China operate on a 
very small scale, with very weak ability to resist natural and 
market risks. For a long time, China has relied on agriculture 
to accumulate funds for industrial development. Consequently, 
agricultural infrastructure conditions are weak. The per-capita 
possession of agricultural resources is very limited, with 
comparatively obvious restriction of resources in increasing 
effective supplies of farm produce. These characteristics 
decide that in the course of introducing the market mechanism to 
the agricultural arena, major fluctuations in the supply of farm 
produce are hardly avoidable, and it is very difficult to ensure 
the steady growth in peasants' income if the government fails to 
adopt the necessary supportive measures along with effective 
marcroeconomic regulation and control. Of course, the 
macroeconomic regulation and control we refer to does not mean 
to return to administrative ways of the traditional structure 
toward agriculture, but to conduct effective regulation chiefly 
through economic and legal means so as to mend the insufficiency 
of the market, support and protect agriculture, promote market 
stability and prosperity, and protect the interests of the 
peasants and consumers. 
  The transition of agriculture to the socialist market 
economy 
structure is a process during which it is imperative for us to 
firmly grasp the goal of rural reform and work hard to create 
conditions, while continuing to guide in-depth rural reform 
<H5>  III. The Major Tasks for Deepening Rural Reform </H5>
  According to the basic work principle the Central 
authorities 
have decided for 1994, and the requirements of "grasping the 
opportunity, deepening reform, expanding opening up, promoting 
development, and maintaining stability," the basic tasks for 
rural work are to earnestly implement the "Decision of the 
Central Committee on Building the Socialist Market Economy 
Structure" and the spirit of the central rural work conference, 
to deepen rural reform, to further give play to the peasants' 
enthusiasm, and to promote rural economic development so as to 
improve peasants' income and maintain rural social stability. 
In deepening rural reform at present, it is imperative to focus 
on grasping the following issues: 
  First, on the basis of stabilizing the contract 
responsibility system on a household basis with remuneration 
linked to output, it is necessary to promote the rational flow 
of rural production essentials and to achieve the optimal 
allocation of rural economic resources. 
  The two-tier managerial structure, on the foundation of the 
contract responsibility system on a household basis with 
remuneration linked to output, is a basic economic system in the 
rural areas which must be stabilized for a long time, and 
continuously completed and perfected. Under this prerequisite, 
it is imperative to meet the need of the rural division of labor 
and readjustment of the industrial setup, so that various rural 
production essentials -- including work force, land and funds -- 
may flow reasonably, while continuously optimizing their way of 
combination. That is the inherent requirement on the 
development of the rural productive force, as well as the basic 
channel for accelerating rural economic development and 
improving peasants' income. 
  With the deepening of reform in recent years, various rural 
production essentials have begun to flow, with their 
reorganization under way. Regarding land, a small number of 
comparatively economically developed regions have begun to adopt 
various forms -- including the transfer of contracted land and 
converting land-use rights to shares, as well as the development 
in rural division of labor -- to develop an appropriate scale of 
operation on the land. Some impoverished areas have stepped up 
the exploitation of nonarable land resources through auctioning 
land-use rights of "four wastes." Some peasants from 
economically underdeveloped areas have gone to the rural areas 
of economically developed regions to contract land. Regarding 
funds and work force, they too are flowing in various ways. The 
central authorities have earnestly summarized these creations of 
the peasants, and have set out a series of measures for 
deepening reform: Under the prerequisite of persisting in the 
collective ownership of land, the contracted period of arable 
land is extended, while allowing the inheritance of contracted 
operational right of developmental production projects and the 
transfer of land-use right with compensation according to the 
law. Enterprises in towns and townships are guided to 
appropriately concentrate in small towns, and their household 
registration control system will undergo gradual reform, while 
allowing peasants to enter small towns to work and do business. 
The rural cooperative foundation will be standardized, so that 
it may become a communal organization of mutual-aid in funds, 
while refraining from operation in saving deposits and loans, 
but serving agriculture and the peasants within the realm of the 
community. 
  To promote the rational flow of rural production factors on 
a 
still larger scale, the key lies in the shaping of a sound 
flowing mechanism, finding a flow pattern and form of 
combination in conformity with various conditions, while 
creating a sound external environment for the flow of production 
factors. In recent years, various categories of the 
shareholding cooperative system have surfaced in the rural areas 
which are playing an increasingly greater role in promoting the 
flow of production factors and the rational allocation of 
resources. They should be given great attention. Such 
organizational forms have a certain adaptability in many rural 
arenas, and have become an important operational organizational 
form, which gradually must be standardized on the basis of 
earnestly summarizing experiences. We should guard against 
rushing headlong into developing the shareholding cooperative 
system, but we should not violate mass voluntariness or resort 
to administrative means in compulsory implementation. The 
shareholding cooperative system should not be regarded only as a 
means for fundraising. Attention should be paid to clarifying 
property rights relations, converting operational mechanisms, 
and shaping effective assets accumulation. There are other good 
forms in the combination of rural production factors. It is 
imperative to select the proper form by proceeding from the 
actual conditions and suiting measures to local conditions; we 
should not confine ourselves to any specific way. 
  Second, it is necessary to develop intermediary market 
organizations in a big way and to adopt various ways to 
effectively link peasant households' production operations with 
the market. 
  The peasant household operates on a small scale in China. 
Under the condition of the gradual opening of operation in farm 
production, it is imperative to promote the development of 
intermediary market organizations in a big way. That is an 
important aspect in completing and perfecting the rural market 
system, and it must be grasped as an important task in deepening 
rural reform. 
  We must encourage diversified forms in developing 
intermediary market organizations. There already are now 
various forms of economic bodies, such as 
trade-industry-agriculture combinations; production, supply and 
marketing shaping into a whole range; and companies with 
participation of peasant households; in addition to various 
categories of associations of specialized technology for 
peasants -- all of which are effective organizational forms to 
link peasant households to the market, with bright propects for 
their developmnet. We must give them all-out support and 
promote their even more rapid development. 
  To better protect the peasants' interests based on China's 
national conditions, while referring to successful world 
experiences, it is necessary to pay special attention to 
developing cooperative economic organizations in various 
categories and to guide the peasants to enter the market. To 
develop rural cooperative economic organizations, the key lies 
in proceeding from the inherent requirements of economic 
development and showing full respect for the peasants' will, 
while genuinely persisting in the basic principle of cooperative 
economy. It is necessary to link up with the building of the 
agricultural socialized service system and to focus on 
circulation, processing, and other agricultural service arenas. 
The development of cooperative economic organizations in these 
arenas is beneficial to protecting the peasants' interests and 
to developing the rural economy, and the peasants welcome such 
practices. Supply and marketing cooperatives at various levels 
should continue to deepen reform, and genuinely make themselves 
the peasants' cooperative economic organizations. They should 
take an active part in exploring new paths for development in 
the direction of comprehensive service organizations. Village 
collective economic organizations should actively run economic 
bodies in the service trade so as to render service to household 
operations, while gradually accumulating assets to magnify 
collective economic strength. In a nutshell, it is necessary to 
proceed from the peasants' actual needs; develop diversified 
intermediary organizations; link the peasants to the market; and 
promote the rural division of labor so that agriculture may 
develop in the direction of being specialized, socialized, and 
converting to commodity. 
  Third, it is imperative to strengthen the government's 
macroeconomic regulation and control over agriculture. 
  The government's macroeconomic regulation and control mainly 
embody support for agricultural production and protection of 
peasants' interests. Mainly economic means are adopted in 
macroeconomic regulation and control. At present, it is 
especially necessary to grasp work as follows: First, it is 
necessary to work hard to increase agricultural input. In the 
course the market economy development, all sorts of production 
factors are driven by interest, and follow those industries that 
yield high economic returns; consequently, agriculture more 
often than not is placed in an unfavorable position. This 
precisely requires the government to augment its support and 
protection of agriculture in a down-to-earth way. This being 
the case, it is imperative to readjust the distribution pattern 
in the national economy and to increase the proportion of 
national investment in capital construction, funds in financial 
budget, and loans for agricultural purpose so as to gradually 
increase agricultural input. At the same time, we should 
enthusiastically encourage the peasants and collectives to 
increase labor and capital input to continuously improve 
agricultural production conditions, and to augment the material 
and technological foundation of agriculture. Second, it is 
necessary to augment and improve macroeconomic regulation and 
control over the farm produce market. We should strengthen 
market control, standardize market behavior, and do a good job 
in the regulatory storage structure so as to maintain market 
stability. It is necessary to deepen the restructuring of grain 
and cotton purchasing and marketing; firmly grasp the founding, 
completion, and perfection of the regulatory storage system and 
market risk fund; ensure supplies; and protect the interests of 
the producer and consumer. Third, it is imperative to protect 
peasants' interests in a down-to-earth way. We must support 
industrial development for agricultural purposes, do a good job 
in supplying agricultural production materials, and earnestly 
resolve such issues as insufficient supplies of chemical 
fertilizers and diesel oil, and excessive high prices. We must 
unremittingly do a good job of monitoring and control of 
peasants' burdens, which must be reduced with continuous efforts 
so as to protect their economic interests. Fourth, it is 
necessary to establish, complete, and perfect the socialized 
service system. We should proceed from the peasants' actual 
needs, develop diversified service organizations, and shape a 
service network characterized by the combination of village 
collective economic organizations, state economic and 
technological departments, and various specialized technological 
associations jointly organized by the peasants. 
  To deepen rural reform, it is necessary to have a clear 
picture of the goal and tasks, while simulaneously paying 
attention to methods. Many experiences in rural reform over the 
past dozen years or so should be inherited and brought forward. 
First, we must persist in emancipating our minds, seeking 
truth from facts, proceeding from actual conditions in 
everything, experimenting boldly, allowing to wait and see, and 
refraining from argument, while paying attention to summarizing 
experiments. Second, we must show full respect for the 
peasants' spirit of initiative, and link mass spontaneous 
invention with active guidance by the leadership. 
  Third, 
regarding major reform measures, in some cases they should be 
unfolded by being shaped into a whole range, with related 
departments according to different conditions, with plans 
formulated first. In other cases, experiments should be 
conducted in partial areas and the experience gained should be 
spread. Fourth, work in this arena should be conducted in order 
of the degrees of difficulty, by starting from the comparatively 
easier link and area to realize a stable transition step by 
step. Fifth, we must persist in linking reform with 
development. The bottlenecks in development should be regarded 
as the key to reform, while promoting development through 
reform. In short, we should always persist in weighing the 
acceptance or rejection of various reform measures and should 
determine their success or failure by the basic criteria -- 
namely, whether or not they are helpful to developing the 
socialist social productive force, whether or not they are 
helpful in augmenting the comprehensive national strength of the 
socialist country, whether or not they are helpful to improving 
people's living standards -- so that reform may win an extensive 
and profound mass foundation. 
  In the course of rural reform and development, another 
extremely important issue is precisely to strengthen the 
building of rural grass-roots organizations, spiritual 
civilization, democracy, and the legal system, so that the rural 
material and spiritual civilizations may enjoy synchronous 
development. For this reason, we should at all times persist in 
the principle of "doing two types of work simultaneously, 
attaching equal importance to both" so as to achieve synchronous 
development of the material and spiritual civilizations in rural 
areas. At present, many rural grass-roots organizations are in 
a state of weakness and relaxation, and some do not even play 
any role. Social order is unsatisfactory in some places, with 
strong resentment from the peasants. In other places, feudal 
superstition is on the rise, with all sorts of ugly phenomena 
rising and spreading. Should no solutions be found to these 
problems, reform and development will be affected and the 
party's foundation in the rural areas will be endangered. If 
spiritual civilization fails to develop, material civilization 
will not develop, either. Even if the material civilization 
develops for a while, it will retrogress in the end. While 
studying rural reform and development, we should by no means 
neglect this point. 
  In the course of building the socialist market economy 
structure, the tasks involved in rural reform are great and 
arduous. It is imperative for us to adhere to Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics and to the basic line of the party, under the 
leadership of the Central Committee with Comrade Jiang Zemin as 
its core, and earnestly implement the party's various rural 
principles and policies to deepen rural reform, push agriculture 
up a new plane, lay a solid foundation, and create sound 
conditions for ensuring the smooth going of the entire economic 
restructuring and the sustained, rapid and healthy development 
of the national economy. 

