Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nadezhda Nadezhdina: "To Neither Live Nor Die </F>
Like Others Do; What Ails Our Society, and Is There Hope for a 
Cure?"; first paragraph is boldface TRUD introduction] 
  [Text] In 1959, immediately after graduating from 
Moscow Medical Institute, Vladmiir Ivanovich Mishugin left for 
Sakhalin on assignment. He was sent, and he went. For 5 years he 
worked there on the remote island in a maternity home. He 
returned to Moscow, headed a department, and became deputy chief 
and later chief physician of the hospital. He completed 
international courses of the World Health Organization. For 13 
years now he has been the chief physician of Moscow's Hospital 
No. 52. He has seen a great deal during these years, knows a 
great deal, and has thought over a great deal. He has something 
to say. 
  What is a hospital? A place where they operate, treat, and 
care for patients and help them recover their strength. But I 
would put it more briefly: A hospital is a center of pain and 
sorrow. That is why a physician who bends over a patient in the 
operating room, during resuscitation, or simply in a ward 
intensely catches his breathing and pulse and sees how suffering 
is replaced by hope in his eyes. I once thought that in the 
physician's consciousness there was no room just then for the 
thoughts that would scare, sadden, or gladden him beyond the 
hospital walls and that our profession demands such 
concentration and such self-denial. But now this life outside 
the hospital digs into the wards every hour of every day. And 
sometimes you do not know what you must save a patient from: 
from the hypertension crisis that brought him here or from what 
awaits him beyond the hospital walls. 
  The rule of thumb is that the health of the masses is the 
property of the country. So why then aren't we trying to augment 
this property? True, this is a difficult transitional time. But 
each individual's life is unique. People are eating poorly. The 
demand for bread and potatoes is growing. Vegetables, fruits, 
and juices are far from available to everyone. Drugs are 
incredibly expensive. One of my doctor friends stopped seeing a 
patient because the patient could not afford the pills: "He had 
better find a way to buy them because burials are even more 
expensive." A bitter joke! 
  And in addition, life has twisted around so that many have 
stopped seeing physicians. The reasons are many. Here are the 
statistics: A polyclinic is designed for 20,000 visits each year 
and has 10 sections and 10 therapists. The results are tallied: 
16,000 to 18,000 visits maximum. This means that they are forced 
to consolidate sections and reduce the number of physicians. As 
a result, the medical service of the microrayon becomes 
increasingly worse. 
  It is a bitter paradox: the number of polyclinic visits is 
decreasing while the number of emergency calls is increasing. We 
feel it ourselves: There is almost no systematic 
hospitalization. Before, they would hospitalize you with chronic 
appendicitis. For a a cold, you would receive anti-inflammatory 
treatment. In a week or two a person was back on his feet. New 
they transport you with a ruptured appendix or else with 
peritonitis. But by then there is a threat to life. Patients 
arrive in very grave condition, the ambulance brings in 50 or 
more persons each day, and operating rooms work day and night 
because often it is already too late for anything besides a 
scalpel to help. 
  Our surgeons are excellent. But after an operation, patients 
need care. Otherwise, even a person whose operation was 
successful may be lost. And again the winds of the disorder of 
life blow into our wards. There is essentially no one to care 
for patients. Nurses earn 32,000 and nurse's aides earn 10,500, 
which is below the minimum pension. Who will take the job? 
Before, young women graduated from medical school and were sent 
to work in hospitals or polyclinics. Now, they put their 
diplomas in some remote drawer, or else they seek work in 
commercial situations. 
  There are no nurse's aides. There are 44 positions in the 
admissions department, and only 17 are filled. Before, 
moonlighting students from the medical higher educational 
institutions filled them and entered hospital life nevertheless. 
Today there are none: blood, pain, moans....It is better to 
unload the car at night to earn a few "pieces" in addition to 
one's stipend than to wheel patients from floor to floor and 
help the helpless... 
  And in the departments? Take vascular neurology. Impairments 
in the brain's blood circulation and strokes. Everyone is 
bedridden. They do not raise their hands, their legs are 
paralyzed, and their speech is unintelligible. They cannot feed 
themselves or perform self-care. A few are visited by relatives 
often. But how many there are who go without visitors for a 
month. The department is scheduled to have 26 nurses and 18 
nurse's aides; however, 14 nurses and 2 nurse's aides work 
there. And the departments has not 70 patients as planned, but 
87. I will not take the blame. Our dear nurses work selflessly. 
But can they really provide real care. One wipes the floor, 
throws down the rag, quickly washes her hands, and goes to give 
an injection. Parishioners have come from the church. They have 
been called to be sick nurses. All traces of them have been 
wiped out after only a couple of weeks. The work is very hard. 
That is why a nurse cannot be found. And each combines at least 
two positions. It is simply impossible to live on one nurse's 
salary. 
  Nearly 40 percent of our patients are elderly. They are the 
worst of all. Well, we bring them in from an acute situation, 
and every one of them has a heap of chronic illnesses. Their 
legs do not work, and their pressure is very unsteady. They are 
thin and weak. You look at just what is holding a soul inside 
it. And we cannot leave them in the hospital longer. What we 
have is a conveyer. The ambulance keeps on bringing them. The 
next one needs the cot. And it breaks your heart to sign a 
patient out. Just how will he get by this way at home? 
  Not long ago they brought in an old man directly from the 
polyclinic. He was suffering from acute hypertension. He lay in 
the ward, and we treated and fed him. And once he asked a nurse 
to telephone his daughter. Our Verochka became interested and 
asked, "And do you live with your daughter?" "Together, 
together," he said, "and I hand over my pension. She is all 
alone. Her husband left, and she has two children. Is she really 
in the mood for me? We called the apartment and only had time to 
say "This is the hospital calling" before they hung up at the 
other end of the line. And this happened several times. The old 
man had to be signed out. He was recovering. No one came for 
him. What was there to do? They took a car and drove him home. 
It was locked. The neighbors said, "The little children are in 
kindergarten 5 days each week, and the mother herself gets home 
late." They drove him home the next evening, and again it was 
locked. It ate the old man's heart out. His face went blank, and 
he whispered under his breath, "You see, nobody needs me..." And 
what were we to do? The daughter had to be found through the 
police. 
  You start to think, and your heart breaks. Whom do you feel 
sorry for? I understand how it is for the young woman. She 
worked somewhere as a recordkeeper at a factory. She earned 
20,000 and assistance for her children. One time the old man 
told us that nearly every morning she took work as a 
deliveryperson. Later, she moonlighted as a helper in a store to 
have a kopeck for herself. After all, children must be clothed, 
provided with shoes, and fed. She would return home exhausted 
and would again wash, cook, and scrub the floors. And she is 
still young and wants some kind of life...But to abandon her 
father? 
  Once I recall his worried eyes, I lose all sympathy for the 
young woman...In the hospital I grew attached to our sweet old 
man and felt sorry for him. But would they take him home to his 
daughter. His pressure was brought down, but he could barely 
walk, his joints ached, and he had an old man's cough. No one 
would pour him a glass of tea.... 
  I certainly would not have mentioned this case had it been 
the only one. In nearly every department there lie old men who 
were ready to be discharged long ago. But we could not. You just 
don't say "leave". And their relatives are in no hurry to come 
for them. Sometimes it is worse. We drive them home. They open 
the door, look out, and shout, "Why did you bring him here? He 
can hardly walk. You take care of him. It's your duty...." And 
sometimes enterprising people assume guardianship over an 
elderly person. He transfers his privatized apartment over to 
them according to all the rules, and at his very first sign of 
indisposition, they send their "ward" off to the hospital. They 
sell the apartment. You can whistle for them in a field....And 
where is he to go? To the old folks' home? 
  We need hospitals with nursing care. Let them be hospitals 
that charge. Every elderly man and elderly woman has some kind 
of pension. They can lie calmly, get better, and recover their 
strength as much as possible. And they can leave when then are 
able to care for themselves. We have been talking about this. 
But what's this about nursing care hospitals, they wonder, when 
there are not enough places for patients with acute illnesses? 
It will happen. We will wait until things in the economy take a 
turn for the better. We were promised this first in 92, then in 
93, and now in 95. This means that today's elderly have no 
possibility of seeing anything better. What hasn't befallen 
their fate: the camps, the war, the 5-year-plans, and the shock 
Siberian construction jobs. Can concern for them be put off 
until "after stabilization"? 
  The most terrifying thing is that your close relatives 
refuse 
to bury you. As far as I remember, this never happened before. 
Perhaps the man is some homeless vagrant. It was impossible to 
find his relatives, so the hospital had to bury him. And then? 
The son comes, takes the death certificate, and fills out an 
application: Because of financial circumstances, I am unable to 
bury my relative...I request....Upon my word, this past year it 
has ceased to amaze us. 
  Yes, funerals today are incredibly expensive, and the grants 
that the government gives do not even cover one-third of the 
cost. But to not send your father, wife, or son on their final 
journey? To not bend over them, not throw a handful of earth 
into a fresh grave. How can one live afterward? God, what is 
happening to us? 
  We gather in the hospital's staff room in a rare free moment 
and think. Of course, people's lives are hard. In some families 
they live from pay to pay, and they don't have enough bread. But 
really, was it easy during the war? During the evacuation a 
mother was ready to give her last skirt for milk for her little 
children. And she woke up and went to bed with deathly fear for 
her husband, who was fighting somewhere near the Dnepr. But 
there was never such bitterness. They helped one another how 
they could. They took care of the little children, and they took 
pity on the old people. The common misfortune united them. In 
the name of one common great purpose -- victory -- they were 
ready to endure. But today? 
  There are rich as well as poor. One child brings a Snickers 
and kiwi to school, while another mother can only put a piece of 
bread into the child's bag....No, I am not for poverty-ridden 
socialist equality. Let the rich be. They create jobs and 
sustain the public coffers with their taxes. Only poverty must 
not be below what we now call the "subsistence minimum." And how 
much lower can it go if it is already the "minimum"? And nearly 
every fourth family among us lives that way. Is this not the 
reason for the bitterness? 
  Many of those who before believed in the coming communism 
have now been drawn to the church. But even religion will not 
bring calm to society. The discussions of the politicians -- the 
democrats, the reds, the browns, the market proponents, the 
market opponents -- are loud. In another family, instead of 
putting the children to bed on time, they argue about Gaydar and 
Yeltsin until they are hoarse. Excess politization, like a 
disease, poisons the consciousness. Simple human values -- 
compassion, common experience, concern for the elderly and 
children, loyalty to one's wife or husband -- have lost their 
worth. Where are the quiet family joys when everyone used to 
gather in the evening, albeit at a meager table, but where 
everyone was happy because despite all the trouble in the world, 
they still had undying love, warmth, and the comfort of home? We 
physicians may understand more clearly than others that it is 
not only the physical but also the moral health of the people 
that is in danger. Only, where are the drugs for this malady? 

