Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the press review] </F>
  [Text] Cairo, 21 Feb (MENA)--Cairo papers appearing 
tomorrow, Tuesday, criticize NATO for failing to carry out its 
ultimatum and attack Serbian positions encircling Sarajevo. 
  The newspaper AL-AKHBAR denounces the Russian position, 
which 
it says opposes aerial attacks against the criminals of Serbia. 
  The paper says that the Serbian forces have failed to 
withdraw all their heavy weapons from around Sarajevo and that 
the Russians cite the fall of rain and snow as a reason for this 
failure. The paper adds that the weapons that have been 
withdrawn are being kept nearby for convenient retrieval and 
reuse as soon as the crisis caused by the NATO ultimatum blows 
over. 
  AL-AKHBAR warns that the situation will remain unchanged and 
that the Bosnian people will remain prey to the ethnic cleansing 
policy that Serbs have pursued unchallenged for the past two 
years. 
  Another newspaper, AL-WAFD, asserts that NATO has lost its 
credibility by failing to implement its threat against Bosnian 
Serbs. NATO, the world's mightiest power, braced itself for 
action on a promise to salvage the credibility of the 
international community, punish the Serbian aggressors, and 
protect the Bosnian people, but failed to stay the course, 
leaving the tragedy unchanged and the aggressors unpunished. 
  AL-WAFD warns that the weapons that were said to have been 
withdrawn from the Serbian positions have actually been hidden 
for later use. The paper denounces the Russian position, which 
it says is one of unabashed and unflinching support for the 
Serbs. 
  Another daily, AL-JUMHURIYAH, says that the main force 
shaping the U.S.-European position on Bosnia was not public 
opinion as much as Europe's need for security and stability. 
  AL-JUMHURIYAH denounces Russian support for the Serbs. It 
says that following the collapse of the Soviet Union, unbridled 
ethnic tensions broke out in Moscow, influencing the Russian 
decision to side with the Serbs. 
  The paper adds that, due to the change in the international 
political scene, European and U.S. pressure in the Adriatic has 
made the Serbs relax their grip on Sarajevo, or at least pretend 
to do so. 

