BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, June 9 (YONHAP) -- North Korea is believed to 
have already extracted plutonium needed in developing nuclear 
arms and registered a considerable progress in nuclear arms 
development, Defense Minister Yi Pyong-tae said on Thursday. 
  Testifying at the National Assembly Defense Committee, Yi 
said Pyongyang began developing nuclear weapons in the 1950s or 
60s, concentrating on the training of nuclear experts, enriching 
nuclear knowhow, securing plutonium and testing nuclear 
detonators. 
  Yi said that if sanctions were taken against them, North 
Korea may provoke localized armed clashes as a means of finding 
a way out of the difficulties they are faced with. 
  Besides, any minor clashes could escalate into battles of 
considerable magnitude once sanctions are enforced, he said. 
  "Our Armed Forces are fully prepared against any 
contingency, 
even an all-out war," he said. "We are now securing additional 
needs of war capability to beef up weak areas of our 
preparedness." 
  The defense minister said the present strength of the 
Korea-U.S. combined forces is powerful enough to cope with any 
localized provocation. 
  "In any case, South Korea and the United States stand fully 
prepared to cope with any scenario of North Korean provocation 
promptly and forcefully," Yi said. 
  To better cope with nuclear threats from North Korea, war 
deterrence will be beefed up, he said, adding that steps in this 
connection could include the firmer guarantee of the U.S. 
nuclear umbrella and a reinforced high-tech weapons system to 
counter the North's nuclear delivery means. 
  Yi further stressed that any sanctions against North Korea 
by 
the U.N. Security Council should be accompanied by firm security 
measures for the Korean peninsula. 
  "Since the sanctions, if taken, would be enforced by the 
United Nations, any U.N. Security Council resolution on 
sanctions should include an express provision that if North 
Korea provokes in defiance of such sanctions, it would be dealt 
with under the name of the United Nations," he said. 
  Yi also said North Korea's underground military 
installations 
number about 2,000. "The entire forward-area ground combat 
forces can be sheltered underground and so can major war planes 
and vessels," Yi said. 

