BFN 

<F P=106> [By Quinton Chan] </F>
  [Text] The popularity of Legislative Councillor Christine 
Loh Kung-wai has shot up as a result of her attempts to change 
ancient inheritance laws barring women from inheriting land in 
rural areas, according to a SUNDAY MORNING POST poll. The 
survey of 1,055 people found strong backing for Ms Loh's stance 
on the controversial New Territories laws. She described it as 
an encouraging result and said she would push ahead with her 
amendment. 
  Twenty-four per cent of those surveyed by Hong Kong Polling 
and Business Research (PBR) on Wednesday and Thursday said their 
opinion of Ms Loh had improved as a result of her handling of 
the issue. Only eight per cent said their impressions of the 
legislator had worsened, while 51 per cent said their view of Ms 
Loh had not changed, and 17 per cent expressed no opinion. 
  PBR managing director Citi Hung Ching-tin, who conducted the 
survey said the result showed Ms Loh had became the "champion" 
of the New Territories row. "There is a net gain of 16 per 
cent. She is the single biggest beneficiary of this issue," he 
said. "This is a turning point. People can recognise her after 
this issue. Before this, she had nothing that people could 
identify with. 
  "Her chances of winning in the 1995 Legislative Council 
direct elections are now very high," he added. 
  The appointed Legislative Council member announced in 
January 
she would stand in the 1995 polls. Last week, she resigned as a 
project director from CIM Company Ltd to begin working as a 
full-time legislator. She is undecided over where she will 
stand in the 1995 polls but has said she prefers a seat on Hong 
Kong Island. 
  But Ms Loh declined to express any satisfaction at the rise 
in her personal popularity rating, insisting she had not 
intended to gain any political points from her controversial 
stance. "This is an interesting result. People recognise me 
when they hear about the New Territories issue seven days out of 
10," she said. "I am not working for votes. I put forward the 
issue before I had made up my mind to stand for the direct 
elections." 
  The poll found 64 per cent supported her amendment to end 
discrimination over land inheritance in the New Territories, 
while only 12 per cent were opposed, with 24 per cent unsure. 
The 1,055 sample included 63 indigenous inhabitants of the New 
Territories -- the group that vehemently opposed any changes to 
the inheritance law. Of these, a surprising 32 supported Ms 
Loh's amendment, while only 16 were opposed, with 15 unsure. 
The numbers involved are too small to be statistically 
significant, but Ms Loh said she still took comfort from the 
finding. "It is an encouraging result despite the fact the 
sample was so small," she said. 
  In further poll findings, half of those surveyed still 
believed the Heung Yee Kuk represent the interests of New 
Territories natives, while 23 per cent disagreed, and 27 per 
cent were unsure. The poll -- which had a 62 per cent response 
rate -- also revealed strong opposition to Beijing interfering. 
Seventy-four per cent said China should not be involved in 
resolving the row, while only 11 per cent believed Beijing had a 
role to play, with 15 per cent unsure. 
  China last week continued to support the protests of groups 
in the New Territories against the amendment saying the rights 
of indigenous residents should be protected. It also accused 
the Government of creating conflicts among Hong Kong people and 
undermining the stability of the territory. Beijing also 
defended the issue, saying it was an historical one and should 
not be mixed with sexual equality. 

