Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Pool item] </F>
  [Text] Belgrade, January 13 (TANJUG) -- Possible NATO air 
strikes against Bosnian Serb positions would "directly threaten" 
the safety of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) on 
the ground, a senior officer of the Bosnian Serb army has 
warned. He also rejected a possible opening of the airport in 
Tuzla. 
  "Let them bomb (us) but it will directly threaten (the 
safety 
of) UNPROFOR units and the Moslem and Croat forces who are 
deployed close to Serb positions throughout Bosnia-Herzegovina," 
Chief of the General Staff of the Bosnian Serb army General 
Manojlo Milovanovic told the Belgrade daily POLITIKA on Thursday. 
  General Milovanovic described NATO's threat with air 
strikes, 
made at a summit in Brussels earlier this week, as a "scheme 
used too often when the objective was to impose unacceptable 
peace plans to the Bosnian Serb side," the paper writes. 
  General Milovanovic said the Serbs would not allow the 
activation of the airport in Tuzla, a Moslem-controlled town in 
the north-east of Bosnia, because it would only help continue 
the civil war which has already ravaged that former Yugoslav 
republic in the past 21 months. 
  "There are other airports in the territory of former 
Bosnia-Herzegovina," he said and pointed out that "under the 
pretext of sending humanitarian aid, Tuzla airport could easily 
turn into a huge depot of arms sent primarily from Islamic 
countries, which is a part of the U.S. plan." 
  Reacting to NATO's demand that the airport be opened, 
Bosnian 
Serb President Radovan Karadzic on Tuesday said it could not 
take place before the peace agreement was signed. 
  The Bosnian Serbs believe that the Tuzla airport would be 
used for arming the Moslems, like in the case of Sarajevo 
airport, which the Serb side handed over to UNPROFOR on July 1, 
1992. 
  The Bosnian Serbs maintain that the opening of the Tuzla 
airport at a time when peace is within sight and the signing of 
the peace plan at the Geneva talks next week realistic would 
only stir up war rather than secure peace. 

