BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister 'Ali Akbar Velayati by </F>
unidentified correspondent; place and date not given -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Correspondent] What is the major problem in the way 
of peace in Tajikistan? 
  [Velayati] In the name of God, the compassionate, the 
merciful [preceding phrase in Arabic]. The main problem is the 
lack of mutual understanding, which has been available since the 
very beginning of negotiations. But this problem needs time to 
be solved. I mean, if we want to solve this problem we need 
more time. If you take a look at the result of the talks that 
they had in Moscow and also the preliminary statement that they 
had in ceremonial session, you will see that may be there are 
some progress. As I said in my interview, at the beginning they 
were not ready to talk together. And both of them used to be 
very angry against another one. Now the nature of their 
presence is a positive step which has been taken by them. So we 
can say that cautiously we are optimistic and we do hope that 
after few days of talks they can reach some more positive 
points. This is the national desire of the people of 
Tajikistan. They want to put an end to these internal conflict 
because they have lost many lives and they are facing, the 
people of Tajikistan are facing a national disaster. They have 
difficulties even for providing the raw material for their very 
simple life. Lack of sanitation, lack of food, lack of 
transportation, continuation of killing and slaughters and 
assassination have made the people of Tajikistan frustrated. 
People are very disappointed. That is the national desire that 
now the time is ripe for a national reconciliation. 
  [Correspondent] It seems no specific plan for restoring 
peace 
in Tajikistan has been offered. Do you think a clear peace plan 
will come under discussion in the current round of negotiations 
in Tehran? 
  [Velayati] Of course, this is the task of the special envoy 
of the secretary general of the United Nations. But as far as 
we could understand of what he has said he has tried to make a 
cease-fire at the beginning as a fist step; because the 
establishment of the cease-fire will give opportunity to both 
sides for continuation of talks and decreasing of tension; while 
the continuation of assassination and killing and slaughters 
will increase tension. And if tension is increased or is being 
increased they cannot stop the hostility. So, the cease-fire is 
the first step that should be established unconditionally, 
without any precondition. That's what we could understand from 
the special envoy of the secretary general of the United Nations. 

