BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Candidate of Historical Sciences Vladimir Burov </F>
under the rubric "Reader's Comment:" "`Why Do We Need a New 
Construction Project of the Century?' Asks Candidate of 
Historical Sciences Vladimir Burov"] 
  [Text] There have been extremely few details given about 
the St. Petersburg-Moscow high-speed rail link. That is why the 
majority of us believe that the issue here concerns the 
modernization of the existing Oktyabrskaya Railroad. This is a 
great error! The high-speed rail link is set to pass through 
conservation areas in Novgorod and Tver oblasts and the Moscow 
region. 
  The high-speed rail link will be protected on both sides of 
the track by a three-meter concrete screen -- a variation on the 
theme of the Great Wall of China. The territory of Russia's 
historic heartland will be divided in two although admittedly 
there will be some small crossing points for pedestrians and 
traffic. A fast highway and power lines will run alongside the 
high-speed track. In the conservation areas the no-go zone will 
be several hundred meters across. To that it should be added 
that according to the planners' scheme the route itself will 
become the axis for the formation of a megalopolis. In their 
fevered minds they have the idea (and it is being studied!) of 
creating a "two-headed capital city" on these ecologically 
fragile lands. The rapid development of these lands between St. 
Petersburg and Moscow will have unpredictable consequences -- an 
ecological and cultural catastrophe. 
  Hundreds of hectares of plowland, meadows, and forests and 
archeological monuments will be destroyed by the scoops of the 
excavators at this construction project of the century. The 
special levees that will be built will upset this unique 
region's hydrology. This is the watershed of the Volga-Baltic 
water system. The blow will be struck at its "solar plexus." 
All these factors would be highlighted by an ecological expert 
appraisal but one has not been held and the construction workers 
are already prepared to begin work. 
  At local level in the oblasts and rayons there is a mounting 
protest from the population, scientists, and ecologists against 
the barbaric destruction of nature, archeological monuments, and 
the historical and cultural landscape. Individual rayons have 
withheld their consent to the laying of the track across their 
lands. The Russian Federation Committee for Land Resources and 
Land Management responded to that by issuing order no. 62 of 22 
December 1993 confiscating lands in the designated area along 
the entire route from St. Petersburg to Moscow for federal needs 
under the high-speed rail construction program. 
  At a session of the State Extradepartmental Expert Review 
Council of the Russian Main Administration for State Expert 
Review of Designs and Budget Estimates for Construction Work on 
25 February an alternative to the high-speed rail link -- the 
modernization of the Oktyabrskaya and Savelovskaya railroads -- 
was proposed but without success. That would have been a 
European approach to the solution of the problem, combining the 
interests of protecting nature and cultural monuments with the 
need for technical progress. 

