Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with General Aleksandr Lebed, commander of the </F>
Russian 14th Army deployed in the Dniester region, by Lyudmila 
Feliksova, ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA correspondent, in Tiraspol; date 
not given: "General Lebed: New Politicians Are Needed"] 
  [Text] General Lebed needs no introduction. The 
commander of the Russian 14th Army, which is deployed in the 
Dniester region, is well known, including to the readers of 
ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA. Coming as a liberator at the height of the 
Bendera events, he gradually, whether he wanted this or not, 
became a notable political figure, in any case, on the 
Moldovan-Dniester region horizon. He is quoted, referred to. He 
has been the most popular personality in the Moldovan mass media 
since the time he declared war on the leadership of the Dniester 
region. Apparently, a state of struggle is necessary to the 
combat general. But its gradations are assessed differently in 
both the Dniester region and Moldova. What does the general 
himself think about the current situation, how does he assess it? 
  "We will have to begin with the fact that the Dniester 
region," said the general, "has gotten into numerous political 
and economic impasses. But against this gloomy background you 
have the gentry--limousines, villas, drinking sprees; that is, 
the life of the leaders in power. 
  "A situation arose in which the regime reeled. Measures were 
required, and they followed. One of these is the special 
situation that was introduced by Smirnov's edict as a means of 
shutting people up. 
  "Processes are already going on that are not controllable. 
The situation is heating up and inclining toward social 
explosion. Everyone is fighting for survival, no one believes in 
the regime. The situation has to be relieved somehow, and the 
attention of the people has to be diverted. An image of the 
enemy helps. A foreign one--Moldova--is not suitable. They do 
not have time there now for the Dniester region. Moldova does 
not need war now, and Chisinau is following the situation on the 
left bank. 
  "I was picked for the role of internal enemy. Insulting 
leaflets and accusations that a military coup is being prepared 
with my assistance have appeared. I started to issue pay to 
officers with Russian rubles, naturally, and the howl 
immediately went up: They are ruining the economy. The question 
arises as to what kind of economy it is that can be ruined 
because of a hundred million or so, especially when the money is 
paid by Russia. 
  "War fits well in such a situation--it diverts, it writes 
everything off. Both sides are actively seeking provocations. On 
the one hand, the Dniester region prohibits the Romanian 
language and the Latin alphabet; on the other hand, Moldova is 
trying to get rid of Russian, and it is forcing an attestation. 
An irreconcilable ideology that is embedded with forceful 
methods does not lead to anything good. When the situation is 
electrified, everything can start with a trifle." 
  [Feliksova] But are things heading toward an armed clash? 
  [Lebed] Realistically they are not. We are dealing with a 
process that is artificially edging toward conflict. This and 
only this resulted in the statement of the military council of 
the army in which we warn both one side and the other. But I do 
not intend to react to petty rubbish, only if events assume a 
serious character. The people do not want to wage war. 
  [Feliksova] We hope that everyone has enough common sense 
not 
to engage in provocations. What is your prediction: What will 
happen to this region? You will agree that you did a lot to 
cause the leadership of the Dniester region to be up in arms 
against the commanding general. 
  [Lebed) But does the leadership of Moldova like me? 
  [Feliksova] Of course not. But there are several versions of 
your line of behavior. The first--you are working for Moldova. 
Second--you are carrying out the orders of certain political 
forces in Russia. And third--you are pursuing your own aims. But 
who in fact is General Lebed? 
  [Lebed] Aims? What, do I want to become a tsar? It is 
ridiculous. As a matter of fact, General Lebed falls into the 
category of people who walk alone. I am guided by common sense 
and, while this will sound immodest, also with decency in this 
situation. 
  [Feliksova] But the situation is such that there is no 
negotiating process. What is to come? 
  [Lebed] The Bendera war created a gulf between the two 
shores. Only one thing can reduce its depth and bring the 
countries closer together--time. Will they pile up hundreds of 
corpses, thousands of wounded, leave people impoverished, and 
then say: Let us be friends, boys, and live in one republic? 
This will not happen. It is my deepest conviction that there is 
only one solution--federalization. 
  Coming closer together will work then, especially because 
communications have not been disrupted at the level of ordinary 
people. If it were not for the politicians and cordons, which 
only strain the situation, things would be easier. The current 
politicians on both shores have already outlived their political 
time, they are spent material. 
  On this shore, they were caught stealing, and on 
that--President Snegur no longer has a chance to be a 
peacemaker. He does not satisfy everyone now: the Romanians, the 
People's Front, or the people. He went in one direction for four 
years, and suddenly--Stop!--sparks flew from the brakes: Let us 
go in another direction. But what was he thinking about earlier? 
They had had enough of fighting, and the state, which was once 
united, split into three parts. 
  How is this broken pot to be put back together now? With 
what 
glue? There are no guarantees that there will be no recidivists. 
The current politicians are incapable of constructive steps on 
the path to rapprochement. The turning point will come when 
there are new people, intelligent and not burdened by war, who 
are capable, without hurrying, of meeting others halfway. There 
are historical precedents for resolutions, it is only necessary 
for politicians to appear who really want peace and are ready 
for sensible compromises. 
  [Feliksova] In your opinion, do the recommendations of the 
CSCE provide any possibility for normalization of the conflict? 
  [Lebed] Yes, but the CSCE representatives did their work, 
wrote, recommended, and left. But who will do the implementing? 
The mice decided to hang a little bell on the tail of the cat 
for the purpose of timely notification of its coming. And then 
the question arose: But who will do the hanging? The situation 
is like that here. Who will do the talking. I repeat: New people 
are needed. 
<H5>  ...But in the Meantime </H5>
  Moldovan President M. Snegur is supposed to sign the NATO 
program "Partnership for Peace" in Brussels today. Great meaning 
is being given to this fact in the republic, judging by the 
commentaries of politicians. 
  I. Botnaru, acting minister of foreign affairs, said that 
Moldova's joining this program guarantees the security of the 
republic and makes it possible to begin consultations with the 
NATO bloc. 
  M. Snegur, not denying this aim, displayed his usual 
caution, 
noting that the signing does not contradict the declaration of 
independence of the republic, the policy of neutrality and the 
course it is taking toward it, and the recently conducted 
sociological poll. This does not at all signify a sharp and 
decisive reorientation of Moldova to the West. The republic will 
also further expand, as the president noted, mutually beneficial 
relations with all countries, including also the former Soviet 
republics-members of the CIS. 
  Tiraspol does not share the enthusiasm of Chisinau with 
respect to the signing of the NATO program. And the louder 
Chisinau announces a search for security guarantees for Moldova, 
the more guarded is Tiraspol's reaction and assessment. 

