Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Tamara Zamyatina] </F>
  [Text] Moscow January 10 TASS -- The latest consultations 
and negotiations held by the factions of the State Duma give 
reason to say with a big degree of certainty that the lower 
house of the new parliament will begin its work with determining 
"the weight categories" of deputy groups. 
  It should be recalled that the State Duma which consists of 
450 deputies includes representatives eight election blocs. On 
the eve of the December 12 elections political scientists 
divided the blocs according to the classical scheme "left -- 
center -- right." However, after the elections the scheme turned 
out to be inapplicable as even the factions which considered 
themselves democratic (the Russia's Choice election bloc, the 
Party of Russian Unity and Accord and the 
Yavlinskiy-Boldyrev-Lukin bloc /Yabloko/) failed to set up a 
parliamentary coalition. Meanwhile, the left -- communists and 
agrarians -- have already struck deals on some issues but keep 
silent about their alliance with the faction of the Liberal 
Democratic Party of Russia (LDPR). 
  The Women of Russia bloc and the Democratic Party of Nikolay 
Travkin stand somewhat aloof in this scheme as they consider 
themselves a "centre" and are likely, together with independent 
deputies, side either with their left or the right. It is 
noteworthy that none of the factions has received a 
parliamentary majority in the State Duma. 
  The deputies are most likely to be preoccupied with 
struggling for power in the new parliament in the first couple 
of days of its work. Russia's Choice leader Yegor Gaydar voiced 
concern that the communists and LDPR members will try to gain 
the upper hand in the duma by taking under control its major 
committees and commissions dealing with defence issues and 
international relations. The three other biggest factions of 
the duma (LDPR, the Communist Party and the Agrarian Party) 
obviously have refused to support Russia's Choice in its 
intention to take over the Duma Budget Committee. As a result, 
the bloc has withdrawn from the talks with them. 
  Moreover, the Party of Russian Unity and Accord "suspects" 
Russia's Choice of striking a deal with the three 
above-mentioned factions to nominate four deputies of the State 
Duma speaker. Independent deputies elected in individual 
constituencies have repeatedly warned that deputies elected on 
party tickets who have only half of the seats in the house are 
trying to push through their candidates to the duma ruling 
bodies by the principle of factionalism rather than 
professionalism and political neutrality. 
  Thus, the interfactional discussions have resulted so far 
only in an agreement that the post of speaker will be most 
likely taken up a representative of one of the small factions 
since big factions are strong enough to influence decision 
making in the house. Among the candidates are Anatoliy 
Adamishin and Vladimir Lukin of the Yabloko bloc, and Alevtina 
Fedulova of the Women of Russia bloc. 
  It is unlikely that representatives of the State Duma 
factions will reach a consensus on the coexistence of the 
legislative and executive branches of power. Communist leader 
Gennadiy Zyuganov, obviously unaware of the presidential decree 
on the composition of the new government published today, said 
that his party will "continue its struggle for the government to 
be formed with consent of the parliament." 
  Vice-prime Minister Aleksandr Shokhin recently regretted in 
an interview with ITAR-TASS that the government is being formed 
in unprecedented secrecy, while Gaydar emphasised that his bloc 
will support only those ministers in the parliament who share 
its programme. All this goes to prove that there is strong 
opposition in the parliament to the constitutional right of the 
president and prime minister to form a government independently. 
  Political observers are doubtful that factions will manage 
to 
act constructively while adopting more important laws in the 
future. The majority of blocs, including the Party of Russian 
Unity and Accord, the Yabloko bloc, the Democratic Party, Women 
of Russia, the Communist Party and LDPR strongly oppose "shock 
therapy" as a method of carrying out economic reform in the 
country. At the same time, Gaydar and his followers, although 
admitting the need for social reorientation of reforms, still 
insist on a tough monetary policy. 
  Observers believe that no peace and accord will reign in the 
State Duma even after the first "hot" sessions of the house. In 
this situation the president may count only on support of the 
Upper House, the Federation Council, whose deputies include the 
presidents of several Russian constituent republics, heads of 
regional administrations and independent deputies. This will 
enable the Upper House to control and curb the unpredictable 
Lower House. 
  Under the new constitution, the Federation Council considers 
laws adopted by the Lower House and makes decisions on the 
redrawing of borders between the subjects of the federation, 
imposition of a state of emergency and on holding presidential 
elections. In fact the Federation Council will virtually act as 
a buffer between the president, the government and the State 
Duma. 

