Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Text" of Bulletin No. 31 issued by the Mexican National </F>
Defense Secretariat on 8 March in Mexico City; from the "24 
Hours" newscast] 
  [Text] In its preliminary report on the armed conflict in 
Los Altos de Chiapas issued on 22 February, the National Human 
Rights Commission stated that it has received 76 complaints of 
human rights violations allegedly committed by Mexican Army 
members. 
  In this regard, the Judge Advocate General's Office explains 
that of the 76 complaints mentioned by the commission, it has 
only been notified of 46, of which 40 have already been 
investigated within the legal time period with no evidence being 
found that military personnel were responsible. The remainder 
are under investigation by the citizens complaint office. Three 
cases are under preliminary investigation. Two of them allegedly 
occurred in Ocosingo, and one allegedly occurred in Altamirano. 
An in-depth investigation is being carefully carried out. 
  Even though the National Human Rights Commission is the 
constitutionally recognized organization in charge of protecting 
human rights on national territory, we have also heard 
complaints from the national human rights network called All 
Rights for All [Todos los Derechos para Todos], which submitted 
a list of 127 alleged violations by Army members. Up until 
now, 93 of them have been resolved, and the military has no 
responsibility. The 34 remaining complaints are in the 
investigation process and are being cleared up by the citizens 
complaints office. Likewise, we reiterate to the public that 
the complaint office is permanently open to receive any person 
wishing to report any improper conduct by military personnel. 
  As for the armed institution, it is important to clear its 
members beyond any shadow of a doubt, because, as it has been 
reported to the public, any conduct contrary to military 
discipline will be penalized according to what has been 
stipulated in our Code of Military Justice. The goal is to 
irrefutably prove that the charges that have been filed against 
Mexican Army personnel in some cases have only been unfair 
accusations. 

