BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Yuriy Soltan] </F>
  [Text] Shrouded in mist and indefinable. This may be the 
closest definition of the situation in Bosnia. As before, 
events around Gorazde, one of the six towns declared by the 
United Nations as safe havens, are giving cause for great 
concern. Several hours of negotiations by the Russian 
president's special representative to Yugoslavia, Vitaliy 
Churkin, with the Bosnian leaders have so far failed to produce 
any positive results. Radovan Karadzic, the leader of the 
Bosnian Serbs, seemed to have agreed to a cease-fire and a 
withdrawal of forces from Gorazde and to ensure an unhindered 
access to the town by humanitarian convoys. But in practice 
this has not happened. 
  According to Vitaliy Churkin, a small group of Bosnian Serbs 
have become sick by the senseless war and are trying to drag 
into the melee all the other Serbs. They are sowing the seeds 
of hatred, not only towards the Muslims and the Croats but also 
to the entire world community. According to Vitaliy Churkin, 
Russia, as a great and responsible power, cannot allow a group 
of extremists to use such a policy as a cover for their actions. 
  This does not mean that Moscow is breaking off its peace 
efforts in Bosnia. And Vitaliy Churkin's words cannot be 
interpreted as a Russian U-turn over to the side which seems to 
accuse only the Serbs for all the sins in Bosnia. It is the 
firm conviction of Russia's leaders that there ought to be equal 
pressure imposed on the other side too -- the Muslims. It was 
precisely the Muslims who took the NATO air bombardment of 
Serbian positions around Gorazde as a carte blanche to launch 
military offensives, not only in Gorazde but along the whole of 
the Serbian-Muslim front. 
  NATO's damaging air raids have become more and more obvious 
as being ill-advised. Such bombardments did not protect the UN 
peacekeepers, but on the contrary have put them in a more 
dangerous situation. The most unfortunate fallout from the air 
strikes is that the peace process has been imperiled. Reaching 
an agreement will now be much more difficult. 
  Regrettably the United Nations Secretary General, Butrus 
Butrus-Ghali, believes that it's possible to widen NATO's 
military operations in Bosnia. He sent a letter to NATO's 
headquarters asking the alliance to prepare for air strikes not 
only in Gorazde but in all the other so-called safe havens. 
  The Russian representative at the United Nations, Yuriy 
Vorontsov, justifiably points out the dangers in such a step and 
has warned that Russia will oppose an automatic unilateral 
decision to carry out new bombing raids in Bosnia. 
  Events in Bosnia are drawing the republic to a decisive 
culmination. Either NATO under the United Nations flag will 
enlarge its military operations in Bosnia -- a step that could 
lead to an escalation of the war, as happened in Vietnam and 
Afghanistan -- or new attempts will be made through political 
means to reconcile the warring sides and encourage them to 
return to the negotiating table. Such a possibility still 
exists. Russia, with other interested countries, intends to 
pursue this option with all possible vigor. 

