Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, March 30 KYODO -- Prime Minister Morihiro 
Hosokawa on Wednesday [30 March] defended himself against 
opposition claims that he obtained 100 million yen as an 
unreported political donation from a trucking firm at the center 
of a payoff-and-mob scandal. 
  The fact that Hosokawa offered to the Sagawa Kyubin trucking 
group his vacation house in Yugawara, Kanagawa Prefecture, as 
collateral and later had the company return the collateral shows 
that he repaid the loan, the premier told a Diet session. "The 
very fact that I pledged (the vacation house) as collateral and 
later had the collateral lifted proves that I repaid the loan, 
rather than obtaining the money as a donation," Hosokawa told 
the House of Representatives Budget Committee. 
  "Sagawa Kyubin's records of credits also show that I repaid 
the loan completely," he said. Hosokawa made the remarks in 
reply to Hiroyuki Nagahama, a Sakigake [Harbinger] legislator 
from the governing coalition. 
  Under Japanese law, repayment of a loan is not a 
prerequisite 
for having a creditor remove a borrower's collateral from a 
Justice Ministry register. It only requires consent of a lender 
to have the collateral cleared. 
  Hosokawa has repeatedly told the Diet that he put up both 
the 
vacation house and a state-of-the-art sword guard as collateral 
in securing the 100 million yen "loan" in September, 1982. 
  He said he needed the money to finance the purchase of a 
condominium in Tokyo's posh Moto-Azabu area as well as to fix 
the gate and wall of his mansion in Kumamoto Prefecture. 
  Asked why he "borrowed" the money from Kiyoshi Sagawa, owner 
of the Sagawa Kyubin group, but not from an ordinary financial 
institution, Hosokawa replied, "I was concerned about what 
evaluation a bank would have given for the sword guard I was 
planning to put up" as one of the two collaterals. The premier 
also said, "Mr. Sagawa demonstrated a more flexible stance than 
a bank by agreeing to allow me to repay the loan in several 
installations, so choosing him as a lender was economically a 
more advantageous choice." 
  "In Japan, it is customary to consult with your relatives or 
close acquaintances rather than with a bank (in taking out a 
loan)," he said. "I decided to borrow the money from Mr. 
Sagawa, as he has coincidentally rented one of my vacation 
houses," he said. 
  Hosokawa denied allegations that he distributed the 100 
million yen to Kumamoto Prefecture Assembly legislators in 
winning official endorsement as a candidate backed by the then 
ruling Liberal Democratic Party [LDP] for the 1993 gubernatorial 
race. The legislators were reported to have a strong say over 
the central LDP leadership in picking up the LDP-backed 
candidate for the gubernatorial race. 
  "If I had planned to use the money for under-the-table 
payoffs, I would not have borrowed the money in such a 
conspicuous manner as pledging my vacation house as collateral," 
he said. 
  Hosokawa also rejected allegations that his explanations to 
the Diet were contradictory, as loan-related documents he had 
submitted to the Diet do neither carry his seal nor a mandatory 
revenue stamp. "The documents I submitted were the xeroxed 
copies of the duplicates of the original documents which have 
been kept by Sagawa Kyubin, so it is natural for them not to 
carry my seal or revenue stamps," the premier said. 
  Last January 7, Hosokawa described the documents as "full of 
defects" in his reply to an opposition questioner at a House of 
Councillors session. 
  In a related development, the leader of the Liberal 
Democratic Party's largest policy study group urged LDP 
President Yohei Kono to place priority on uncovering suspicions 
surrounding Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's 1982 acceptance 
of the 100 million yen loan from the scandal-ridden trucking 
group. 
  LDP officials said former Foreign Minister Taro Nakayama, 
who 
is spearheading the newly-founded, 182-legislator group, made 
the appeal in a meeting with Kono at the LDP's headquarters in 
Tokyo's Nagatacho [district]. 
  The meeting between the two LDP executives followed an 
inaugural meeting of the policy study group, called, 
"Sasshin-no-kai" (Association for Renewal), the officials said. 
  Nakayama called on Kono to demand the resignation of 
Hosokawa 
to take responsibility for the scandal involving the Sagawa 
Kyubin group, a trucking conglomerate whose reported payoffs to 
ex-LDP kingpin Shin Kanemaru triggered public anger against the 
LDP. Voter disaffection following the Sagawa scandal is partly 
responsible for the LDP's loss of its 38-year grip on power. 
  In reply, Kono pledged cooperation with the newly-founded 
group, the officials said. "Let's push the matter in 
solidarity," Kono was quoted as telling Nakayama. 
  The LDP said the premier's explanations to the Diet have not 
dispelled suspicions that he obtained the money as an illegal 
unreported political donation. The LDP, Japan's largest 
political party, alleged that evidence points to Hosokawa's 
using the money to grease the palms of Kumamoto Assembly 
legislators whose goodwill he needed to win the nomination as 
the LDP's sole candidate for the 1983 gubernatorial race. 

