BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Tuan Minh: "Something About the Freedom of the </F>
Press"] 
  [Text] With the explosion of communication technology and 
the increasing number of newspapers under variable forms with 
their diversified, informative, speedy, and attractive 
presentation, the Western press has created an impression of 
unlimited freedom for the press. There are many people who 
think that in the West, from professional journalists to every 
citizen, anybody can say and write anything through newspapers 
and other mass media, and that the public always receives all 
the information. 
  We recognize the reality that in the West democracy has had 
a 
history of development for more than 200 years, that the 
laboring people have continuously fought for the rights to 
freedom and democracy, and that the development of the press can 
not be detached from the result of that fight. There was a time 
when the laboring people seized an important part of the press 
for their own forum to voice their just cause and the truth. 
There have been many genuine journalists who have fought side 
by side with the laboring people for social progress. 
  The prominent movements calling for peace in Vietnam; the 
ending of the French war of invasion in Indochina, as seen in 
the French press in 1953-1954; and the stopping of the U.S. war 
of invasion in Vietnam, as seen in the U.S. newspapers have been 
a source of great strength for the press. And these movements 
incurred without the approval of the ruling authorities. In his 
memoirs, Mr. Kissinger expressed his resentment towards the 
anti-war press and charged American progressive journalists with 
abetting "North Vietnamese" and "Vietnamese Communists". So, 
the chairman of the U.S. National Security Council did not 
encourage the freedom of the press. 
  At present, the Western press has been reporting daily on 
the 
struggles of the laboring people as they demand better living 
conditions and democracy. The latter is a true reflection of 
the profound contradictions in Western society, something the 
press cannot overlook if it still wants public support. 
  But the Western press has another significant side. First of 
all, newspapers and other means of propaganda do not belong to 
the laboring people. They are in the hands of companies which 
monopolize the publication and the press. These companies 
control nearly all the systems of publication and press not only 
in one nation but also in many countries. They represent or at 
least have relations in one way or the other with multinational 
companies, political and economic institutions, and prominent 
political parties. Here, the press as well as television and 
radio are in fact centers for production and manipulation of 
information and public opinion for certain purposes. 
Information on the Gulf war, which excessively exaggerated the 
strength of the U.S. Army; and reports on the "crimes" committed 
by leaders of Eastern European countries and the USSR are now 
discovered by the public as cheap psychological warfare hidden 
behind the motto of "objective information." 
  Meanwhile, the leftist press, especially the communist 
press, 
must go through all forms of coercion, ranging from political to 
economic coercion. And it has to face unbalanced fighting 
against plentiful anti-communist information. 
  Approval has been voiced of the fact that the Western press 
enjoys the right to attack any individual and any organization 
on any matter it wishes, and that public opinion has been 
shocked by major scandals and cases of corruption discovered by 
the press. This tactic of exposing one another's wrongdoings is 
just a reflection of profound and irreconcilable contradictions 
in the power struggle of different political institutions and 
parties. Therefore, we rarely see -- and we can say that we have 
never seen -- any newspapers which belong to a certain party and 
institution expose the mistakes, condemn the wrongdoings, and 
report the crimes committed by their leader and sponsors. 
  And the world public can not neglect this "Freedom" of the 
Western press: "Freedom" to libel, attack, and intervene in 
other countries' internal affairs. Some radio stations and 
newspapers, especially the former Radio "Free Europe" and the 
current Radio "Free Asia," are energetic information agencies 
which execute this no-need-to-ask-for-permission "Freedom". 
  When we thoroughly assess the Western press, it is 
impossible 
for us not to conclude that it does have the right not to follow 
any direction; it can say and write whatever it likes. However, 
it cannot move too far away from the target of praising 
capitalism -- its superiority, eternity, and invincible 
strength. It can say and write whatever it likes, but it 
cannnot be out of tune with the musical composition against 
Communism, Marxism-Leninism, and the "prediction" of the 
inevitable collapse of socialism. 
  For many decades, Vietnamese revolutionaries have 
consistently struggled for true freedom of the press, opposed 
the propaganda tactics of imperialism and colonialism, while 
combining the struggle for freedom of the press with that for 
national independence and the people's fundamental rights. 
During the colonialist and feudalist period, we had to organize 
the "illegal" secret press network to voice our just cause. 
Only after the victory of the 1945 August Revolution, would we 
be able to set up the people's press system that could represent 
the impetus and aspiration of the people and promote the freedom 
of expression of the laboring people. 
  We do not hold freedom of the press as an absolute freedom 
of 
individuals as in the case of anarchy. We contend, however, 
that true freedom of the press is the freedom to express 
viewpoints aimed at serving national defense and construction, 
strengthening the people's happiness, liberating mankind and 
making them dynamic and creative. Through the press, the people 
are informed of various issues, and are thus enabled to discuss 
their own interests and that of the nation. Also through the 
press, the people can voice their protests and opposition 
against the aggressive and enslaving forces, with all their 
forms and tactics, and fight against all bad practices, 
bureaucratism, embezzlement, corruption, and prerogative so as 
to build a healthy society. However, we cannot take freedom of 
the press as a mean to distort the truth, create fabrications, 
or turn nonexistence into existence, nor can we take it as a 
mean to smear history or bias our protracted brilliant struggle 
for national independence and the people's happiness. As in 
many other countries, including those in the West, Vietnamese 
laws do not accept the practice of using the press as a means of 
inciting public opinion to create unrest and disturb social 
order and political security. And as in other nations, Vietnam 
does not tolerate the kind of freedom of the press that demands 
publication of national secrets. 
  In the West, some people say that as long as the Vietnamese 
press cannot strongly promote privatization and ownership of 
assets and effectively encourage change in the political system, 
there is no freedom of the press in Vietnam! If this is their 
concept, it will never happen in our country. This is because 
the Vietnamese people resolutely reject damaging their 
revolutionary achievements, which were achieved through 
sacrifices in blood and bone. They also reject efforts to block 
their objectives in making the people prosperous, the country 
powerful, and society just and civilized. 
  After overcoming numerous inevitable difficulties during the 
war as well as the limitations caused by the rigid one-way 
communications system during the bureaucratic, centralized, 
socioeconomic management system in the past, the Vietnamese 
press has been consistently changed along with the nation's 
renovation process. Indeed, changes in the Vietnamese press 
have greatly contributed to the nation's renovation process, and 
the latter serves as a basis for changes to and progress of the 
press. Everyone now can see that news and information are 
diversified and abundant in the Vietnamese press and that the 
people now can exercise their freedom of expression through mass 
media channels. 
  The law on the press, promulgated in late 1990, is the 
product of a compilation of ideas concerning freedom of the 
press and stipulations in various orders of the State President 
in 1946. It is also the concretization of the citizen's various 
fundamental rights which have been stipulated in the SRV 
Constitution. 
  Naturally, we cannot claim that changes in the Vietnamese 
press have reached their peak. There are yet many tasks to be 
fulfilled to overcome the prevailing shortcomings and weaknesses 
so as to create conditions for the press to better carry out its 
function as an apparatus to provide news and information to the 
people and to serve as a forum for the people to express their 
viewpoints. 

