CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Miyako Suda, professor at Gakushuin University: </F>
"Economic Measures With View To Effect Overseas; Growing 
Mobility of Capital; Japan's Surplus Does Not Cause Bad Effects"] 
  [Excerpts] 1) Currently, international capital 
movements are increasing. Economic stimulus measures should be 
considered under an open macro model like the "Mandel-Fleming 
model." According to the model, the higher capital mobility is 
and the smaller the relative weight a country has in the global 
economy, the less effective are measures to expand demand. When 
we consider the degree of capital mobility and our size in the 
world economy, as well as the effects that future income produce 
on current savings, we cannot expect too much effect from this 
February's comprehensive economic measures. 
  2) Even though we cannot expect effects on domestic 
income, the chances are good for ripple effects on other 
nations' income. Also, Japan's current accounts surplus does not 
cause a worsening of the world business climate. 
  3) Policy dialogues are ever more needed so as to 
mutually understand each country's policies and gauge the 
effects that domestic demand expansion will have on every other 
nation. 
<H5>  Fears of Comprehensive Economic Measures's Ineffectiveness </H5>
  It has been 20 years since the shift to a floating exchange 
rate system, and during this time economic interchange 
domestically and abroad has become quite activated. Impacts that 
Japanese economic policies have on other nations' economies can 
no longer be disregarded. The comprehensive economic measures 
announced February 1994 have drawn attention not only at home 
but from abroad as well, and the United States has repeatedly 
expressed its disappointment. 
  As the interdependence of domestic and foreign economies 
grows, one must use open macro models covering not just the 
domestic but the foreign as well when scrutinizing the effects 
of economic countermeasures. However, a major point at issue in 
evaluating these comprehensive economic measures is how large 
the ultimate direct increase in demand will be. We can hardly 
find any cases in which changes in things like exchange rates 
and interest rates and their effects are explicitly considered. 
  A typical case of a Keynesian model taking the scope of 
capital mobility into consideration is the Mandel-Fleming model. 
In this model what is distinctive is the point that it 
emphasizes the role of capital mobility. When capital mobility 
is high under a floating exchange rate market, measures to 
expand internal demand are cutting taxes, augmenting public 
investment, and setting rates of interest on the high side. That 
will bring a massive capital influx and force up currency 
values. For small nations, the result will be that foreign 
demand (current account balances) will decrease to that extent 
even if measures to expand domestic demand are adopted, and 
overall demand will be unchanged, making measures on the macro 
business climate quite invalid. 
  However, as Japan is no small nation and since we cannot 
conceive of domestic and foreign interest rates being congruent 
as U.S. economist Robert Mandel hypothesized, we cannot apply 
this conclusion as is. If we take these into consideration and 
revise them, measures stimulating internal demand would not be 
ineffective but would bring on high interest rates, a strong 
yen, financial balances going into deficit, and a shrinkage in 
the current accounts balance surplus. So, we are led to the 
conclusion that we cannot expect much of a rise in the domestic 
business climate. [passage omitted] 
  The world's current account balances taken together add up 
to 
zero; however, when we consider such things as that limitation 
not applying to financial balances or the ripple effects from 
other nations, we cannot always get results precisely according 
to the model. Still, we may not be able to call adopting the 
Mandel style of thinking inappropriate. 
  Lately, attention is being drawn to ideas that seek to get 
decisions on consumption and savings by explicitly taking into 
consideration even income expected in the future. When one 
brings those ideas into decisions about consumption and savings, 
the effectiveness of measures to stimulate internal demand 
becomes lower. If we look into these ideas, policies cutting 
income taxes become totally ineffective regardless of whether 
financial resources are from increased taxes or issuance of 
government deficit bonds. Deficit government bonds mean 
increased taxes in the future, but since consumption is decided 
upon by taking that into consideration, even if taxes are cut, 
savings will merely increase, preparing for future increased 
taxes. Such thinking is called "Ricardo's neutrality thesis." 
  This idea is often applied in criticizing the Ministry of 
Finance's challenge to the issuance of deficit government bonds, 
but I cannot believe this thesis will be rigorously put into 
effect. Yet, there is corroborative analysis that we cannot 
negate this thesis. Graph 2 [not translated] shows the ratios of 
the government's net receipts to gross domestic product (GDP) 
and shifts in household savings rates in Japan. In times of 
growing government net receipts, the domestic savings rate 
decreases; therefore, we may be unable to ignore completely that 
thesis even in Japan. 
  If we thus take into consideration savings rate changes due 
to policies, the economic stimulative effects will be even less. 
  It is not that such theoretical ideas as the above have been 
totally ignored in the recent policy debates. In evaluating the 
economic measures this time, we saw many adopting views dubious 
about the effects of tax cuts which projected increased taxes. 
On the other hand, we also came across arguments which, from a 
standpoint not assuming the neutrality thesis's effectuation, 
would link recent high interest rates to issuance of government 
deficit bonds by cutting taxes. 
  However, on exchange rates, arguments emerge such as that 
the 
United States will work to induce a higher yen if Japan does not 
adequately stimulate domestic demand, or that stimulating 
internal demand will cut current account surpluses and so reduce 
external frictions and hence "the wise way is to stimulate 
internal demand if we want to avoid a higher yen." Yet, there is 
very little sense of its being axiomatic that we will get a high 
yen from stimulating domestic demand. Consequently, we do not 
know how correctly the measures for stimulating domestic demand 
are being evaluated. 
<H5>  Ripple Effects Overseas Cannot Be Ignored </H5>
  When the scale of direct stimulation of domestic demand is 
small or when the private sector reacts to government actions in 
such a way as to offset them, there are no ripple effects either 
at home or abroad. Nor do current account surpluses change. 
However, if the offsetting effects by the private sector are not 
so large, measures to stimulate domestic demand may not be 
effective, we cannot ignore their ripple effect overseas. 
  To reflect on this point, let us consider a simple global 
model resembling the economic structure for all nations. If we 
include each nation's method for determining incomes, the sum of 
external demand will be zero. Hence, we can treat the world as a 
closed economy. In short, the world's business climate is 
determined by the scale of the total of internal demand in all 
nations. Global income and decisions on interest rates do not 
relate either to capital mobility or to the degree of mutual 
trade dependence. Moreover, whatever nation uses them, effective 
demand measures will have the same impact on global income. The 
issue is how the effects are apportioned to each nation. 
  In cases such as in the Mandel-Fleming model where they are 
balanced and internal and external interest rates are in accord, 
the distribution from measures stimulating internal demand will 
be determined by a nation's size. Hence, when a major nation 
puts internal-demand expansion measures into effect, the impact 
at home will be great while the ripple effect on foreign nations 
will be small. More so than if the United States boosts its 
internal demand, Japan's stimulating its internal demand would 
have the effect of causing the portion spilling over into other 
nations to be larger. 
  However, when capital mobility is not very great, since the 
currency of the nation carrying out such policies does not rise 
very much, the ripple effect abroad will become a bit smaller. 
  In addition, although the scale of ripple effects will 
differ 
under a variety of major factors, those are assuredly in a 
positive direction. A rise in interest rates will come about 
through this process and that is often criticized by foreign 
nations. For other nations, however, the effect of lowering the 
value of the currency will be larger than the rise in interest 
rates. 
<H5>  Give Weight to Policy Dialogues With Other Nations </H5>
  In Japan's current expansion of its current accounts 
balance, 
there is an aspect of ripple effects of the U.S. economic 
expansion. The ripple effect from the United States is 
defensive. Problem is that, seeing the surpluses caused by that 
and view this as robbing it of employment. Also, economic growth 
rates have often been an aim of promises made abroad; however, 
the smaller a nation is which stimulates its internal demand the 
more other nations' income will grow without increasing domestic 
income. It is absurd to judge its contribution to a foreign 
nation's economy from the resulting economic growth rate. 
  Again, from the fact that global internal demand determines 
the world's business climate, surpluses in Japan's current 
accounts do not cause adverse effects on the world's business 
climate. To say that Japan's current account surpluses are a 
problem, we must say that foreign nations' current account 
deficits--the other side of Japan's current account 
surpluses--restrain global internal demand. 
  However, aside from such cases as heavily indebted 
developing 
nations, such restraints are inconceivable for advanced nations 
whose capital mobility is high. For example, we cannot conceive 
of the U.S. economic policies being constrained by current 
account deficits. If there were such an aspect to the United 
States, we would not have to concern ourselves with the matter 
of how to get the United States to take up fiscal moderation. 
This problem is always an issue when considering reforms of the 
international currency system, but no solution has been found 
yet. Where could there be an advanced nation whose economic 
policies are being restrained because its current accounts are 
in deficit? 
  With measures stimulating domestic demand by tax cuts and 
public investment, if an easy-money policy is adopted at the 
same time, when increases in income cannot be expected much, 
interest rates will fall and currency will lose value. Hence, 
impacts can be expected domestically. But an easy-money policy 
has adverse effects on other nations' incomes by raising 
currency valuations; therefore, it is undesirable for those 
nations' economies. It should be also clear from this that it is 
absurd to evaluate the degree of contribution to foreign 
nations' economies by economic growth rate record. 
  In any case, ripple effects vary greatly depending on 
policies; therefore, exchanges of views on what kinds of 
policies each nation seeks to adopt become important. Policy 
dialogues internally and abroad will become increasingly vital 
in the future so that to judge whether for the world as a whole 
the scale of internal demand is appropriate. 

