Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Anne Segall report: "Job Figures Hit Recovery Hope"] </F>
  [Text] An unexpected rise in unemployment added yesterday 
to the growing sense of unease over the patchy and uncertain 
nature of the economic recovery. 
  The news that the number of people out of work rose by 
15,500 
to 2.788 million in January after four consecutive monthly falls 
led to calls for further cuts in interest rates to help cushion 
the effect of higher taxes in the spring. There were other signs 
that the economy could be losing momentum. 
  Although the Central Statistical Office [CSO] was able to 
dismiss the suggestions of a sharp slowdown in spending 
contained in a recent Confederation of British Industry [CBI] 
Survey, retailers expressed some reservations about the trend in 
high street activity. 
  According to the CSO, spending increased by 0.6 per cent in 
volume in January to a level 3.5 per cent higher than a year 
earlier. It also estimated that sales have risen by 0.8 per 
cent over the past three months. 
  But the rise in volumes in January was rather less than 
might 
have been expected given the huge discounts on offer in some 
shops. 
  Retailers fear consumers are behaving cautiously following 
recent publicity surrounding the impact that tax rises will have 
from April. 
  According to Mr Hugh Clark, trading policy director at the 
Retail Consortium which represents 90 per cent of retailers, 
"consumers may have started to tighten their spending in the 
light of pending tax increases and the uncertainty of wage 
increases in this time of low inflation." 
  The consortium has appealed to the Chancellor, Mr Clarke, to 
"nurse" consumer confidence by allowing base rates to fall 
further. 
  There was a smaller-than-expected rise in the headline 
inflation rate -- from 1.9 per cent to 2.5 per cent -- in 
January, but the increase was attributed mainly to technical 
factors and analysts are predicting that the rate will fall back 
towards two per cent in the coming months. 
  The "underlying" inflation rate which excludes volatile 
mortgages, underpinned the view of analysts that inflationary 
pressures in the economy remain subdued. It rose from 2.7 per 
cent to 2.8 per cent in January. 
  The Chancellor, in an interview on Radio 4, admitted 
consumer 
demand would be affected by higher taxes, but said that those on 
middle incomes who faced the biggest increases had benefited 
from huge falls in mortgage payments. "And that is why they are 
able to increase their consumption," he said. 
  Mr Clarke was "quite confident" that the economy would grow 
by 2.5 per cent this year as predicted by the Treasury. 
  The Employment Secretary, Mr Hunt, described the jobless 
figures as "erratic" and said: "The downward path can be 
uneven. But it remains a downward path." 
  Investors were confident of a cut in base rates -- possibly 
a 
further 1/4-point reduction -- and the FT-SE [FINANCIAL 
TIMES-Stock Exchange] index closed 24.5 points up at 3417.7. 

