BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, May 27 (XINHUA) -- Visiting Russian Prime 
Minister V. S. Chernomyrdin said here today that Russian-Chinese 
cooperation promises a bright future and his visit serves to 
promote bilateral ties. 
  At a press conference before his trip to other Chinese 
cities, the Russian prime minister said he talked with Chinese 
President Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng about the furthering 
of bilateral ties and their future development. 
  "We agree that Russian-Chinese ties are moving toward a new 
high," he stated. 
  Both countries held that the 21st-century-oriented, 
constructive ties between Russia and China accord with the 
interests of the two nations and are conducive to peace and 
cooperation in the Asia- Pacific region and the world as a 
whole, he said.. 
  The seven cooperation agreements signed here today embody 
the 
healthy and smooth development of bilateral relations and will 
help to propel the development of economic and trade ties 
between the two countries, he said. 
  His country was satisfied with the rapid growth of Russia's 
economic cooperation with China, Chernomyrdin said. 
  Russia and China share geographic advantages and their 
economies are highly complementary, he said. 
  "We cannot but fully employ these advantages. This is the 
wish of the Russian people and leadership," he said, adding that 
he found with pleasure that this wish is also cherished by the 
Chinese people and leaders. 
  He told the press conference that he also discussed with his 
Chinese counterpart Li Peng the possibility of Russia assisting 
China in revamping the enterprises built with the help of the 
former Soviet Union, and his country's participation in 
hydro-electric projects in the host country. 
  When asked whether China, through developing ties, was 
"filling the vacuum" left in the former Soviet Union's central 
Asian countries, Chernomyrdin said flatly: "In our opinion, 
they are developing the normal, good-neighborly ties of 
friendship." 
  There was no question of China's filling up the vacuum, he 
asserted. 

