BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with European Commission Vice President Sir Leon </F>
Brittan by Paolo Peluffo in Brussels; date not given: "This Is 
How I, a Conservative, Will Change Europe"] 
  [Text] [Peluffo] Sir Leon, you are officially in the 
running to head post-Delors Europe, a Europe that chose a 
center-right majority on Sunday [12 June]. Will it be a Europe 
in which market freedom or solidarity prevails? 
  [Brittan] It is wrong to set the values of the free market 
and solidarity against one another. In today's Europe, these 
two elements exist side be side. What is changing is the 
balance between them. In the seventies, the pendulum swung 
toward the idea that the individual had to be protected under 
any circumstances. We have now seen that excessive protection 
inhibits employers and discourages them from taking on new 
employees. So now the pendulum is swinging back, in Italy as 
well, and the idea of giving employers a free hand is taking 
over. Nevertheless, in spite of these oscillations, I do not 
believe that the solidarity element is going by the board, 
because unemployment is the only really major problem facing the 
European Union today. 
  [Peluffo] Is the Delors plan for boosting employment still 
credible? 
  [Brittan] The plan set out in the white paper is still 
feasible, and I hope that the Corfu European Council will adopt 
it in a few days' time. 
  [Peluffo] Do you not fear that the railroad networks and 
infrastructure works envisaged in the Delors plan will 
distinctly neglect the north-south axis in favor of its 
East-West counterpart? 
  [Brittan] Yes, this is an important point. The Commission's 
intention is certainly to develop an infrastructural grid that 
will be as fair as possible. And it is no mere coincidence that 
Christophersen [European commissioner responsible for economic 
affairs] has selected Milan airport as one of the priority 
projects. It is also true that the reintegration of East Europe 
is the greatest task facing the Union, but this must not come 
about at the expense of a strong, well thought-out policy on the 
Mediterranean area. 
  [Peluffo] The Maastricht Treaty is looking like its own 
ghost. Everyone is waiting for the revision conference scheduled 
for 1996. To do what? 
  [Brittan] The priority goal of the 1996 meeting must be to 
reform the European institutions to make them efficient and 
competitive even after expansion to 16 or 20 countries. The 
problem with the Maastricht Treaty is obvious. There were two 
parallel proposals. One was Monetary Union, which had a clear 
political objective and has worked well. The other, Political 
Union, had no specific objective and has produced less coherent 
results. 
  [Peluffo] In its first actual instance of application, the 
Bosnian tragedy, the Political Union has made a poor showing.... 
  [Brittan] I do not agree. The Bosnian issue is an ongoing 
tragedy that neither Europe nor the United Nations has proved 
capable of settling. But the Union has not been idle. We have 
effectively applied the economic and customs sanctions for which 
we received the UN mandate. We have exerted the maximum 
possible pressure on the warring parties, and the factions have 
been brought to the negotiating table. 
  [Peluffo] But people are still dying.... 
  [Brittan] The Union has never had the means required for 
military intervention. We have no magic formulae, but our 
experience -- of which Italian experience forms an essential 
part -- regarding that part of the world leads me to hope that 
we can make a real contribution to peace. 
  [Peluffo] Sir Leon, you were a respected minister in the 
government led by Mrs. Thatcher, the sworn enemy of European 
Monetary Union. Do you believe in the single currency? 
  [Brittan] I am certain that there will be a single currency. 
The timing may be in some doubt, but the single currency will 
come, I have no doubt about that. 
  [Peluffo] How can you be so sure? 
  [Brittan] The single currency is the necessary complement to 
a single market, it is the other side of the same coin. 
Moreover, if we have the single currency, European industry 
will gain from several points of view: It will lower the cost 
of transactions within the Union, we would have a world-class 
currency to work with, with all the benefits in terms of 
strength and power that this entails, small- and medium-sized 
businesses would be encouraged to trade across common frontiers, 
and so on. 
  [Peluffo] But there are the famous "convergence criteria" 
poised to pounce on all the member states. There is a risk that 
no one will be able to comply with them.... 
  [Brittan] The convergence conditions are important, if only 
because they force governments to adopt sound economic policies. 
Then the European Central Bank has a specific mandate that 
imposes monetary policies designed to lower inflation and keep 
it low. Of course, we still have a long way to go in this 
direction. 
  [Peluffo] Do you think Italy will make it? 
  [Brittan] We have to help Italy meet the convergence 
criteria 
and join the Monetary Union from the outset, as befits one of 
the founder members of the EEC. 
  [Peluffo] Do you have no fears of Europe becoming dominated 
by Germany? 
  [Brittan] The histories, traditions, and cultures of the 
individual European countries protect us against any type of 
hegemony, whether it be the economic hegemony of Germany, or 
cultural hegemony of the type that some see in the predominance 
of the English language. But enlargement to 20 states will put 
the German population, which is by far the largest, at one-fifth 
of the total. All things considered, it is not such a terribly 
alarming prospect. 
  [Peluffo] In Cernobbio two years ago, you made a heartfelt 
appeal to Italy to reduce subsidies to industry and to balance 
its accounts. How do you see the situation two years later? 
  [Brittan] You have made enormous progress since then. My 
address in Cernobbio followed that of Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, then 
governor of the Bank of Italy, and I echoed his appeal for 
sounder economic policies, for a reduction in the weight of the 
public sector. Since then, the reforms over which he presided 
as prime minister have begun to bear fruit. Inflation and 
interest rates have fallen in a really impressive manner. The 
cost of the public debt has been lowered. The first 
privatizations have got off to a good start. 
  [Peluffo] Are you optimistic about Italy? 
  [Brittan] Italy has turned a decisive corner. The change has 
also been psychological. This will enhance its real force. I 
believe that the feather bed that the state provided for a lot 
of major corporations will soon prove not merely useless, but 
damaging. The subterranean force of the Italian economy and the 
creativity of your entrepreneurs are truly outstanding. 
  [Peluffo] What is your assessment of the first steps that 
the 
Berlusconi government has taken in this field? 
  [Brittan] Removing the crushing weight of taxation (which 
was 
needed to sustain a debt-ridden public sector) will allow the 
live wires in the Italian economy to prove their worth. 
  [Peluffo] For years you were commissioner for competition, 
the European antitrust board. Does it not strike you that 
Italian capitalism is too concentrated? 
  [Brittan] Wherever there is a stock market dominated by just 
a few operators, it is more difficult to have stability. 
Whenever too few people are watching each other's moves, it is 
more likely that they will become inward-looking. In Britain 
this problem has been solved by privatization, which has 
increased the numbers of shareholders. 
  [Peluffo] [French] President Mitterrand has expressed 
concern 
over the concentration of television channel ownership and 
political power that has occurred in Italy. What is your view? 
  [Brittan] Television is certainly a powerful weapon, but it 
has always been recognized as such. For example, when General 
de Gaulle set about organizing how the broadcasting media were 
to operate in France, he took enormous care to keep television 
and radio under state control, because he felt that the 
newspapers were against the government and that this would 
guarantee a certain equilibrium. In the early years, television 
in all the European countries was controlled by the political 
authority. Then commercial television developed. Generally 
speaking, I think that this has been a beneficial process. 
  [Peluffo] As industry minister in the first Thatcher 
government, what do you think of our privatizations? 
  [Brittan] You still have the most important ones to go. The 
privatization of the telecommunications sector will constitute 
an extremely significant step. 

