Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Mikhail Rebrov: "Russia Is a Great Space Power. </F>
And Its Partners Should Remember That"] 
  [Text] It is 19 years since the joint flight by the Soyuz 
and Apollo spaceships. The project, which was known as ASTP 
[Apollo-Soyuz Test Project], inspired great hopes for an 
expansion of cooperation, but in all the years since July 1975 
that process has been sluggish, unless you count individual 
episodic and not particularly notable upsurges. How do the 
cards now lie in the international game of patience, what moves 
can be expected from the main space powers -- Russia and the 
United States? 
  Back in the fall of last year the question was hanging in 
the 
air, but by mid-December there had been developments: A program 
was defined, consisting of 10 flights by U.S. shuttle spaceships 
to our Mir complex. Over that period, U.S. astronauts are 
supposed to spend a total of around two years working at our 
space station, catching up with our experience of prolonged 
space expeditions. The date has also been set for the launch of 
a shuttle with Russian cosmonaut Sergey Krikalev on board. The 
week-long flight is planned for the first days of February 1994. 
  Cooperation has always been beneficial, especially in such a 
large-scale and costly matter as space exploration. This 
problem is common to all mankind, and must be tackled by joint 
efforts. But is this partnership always equal? 
  Partnership and the market are interrelated concepts. The 
international market in space technologies has been in existence 
for more than 15 years now, and competition here is as tough as 
on any other international market. The proportions are roughly 
like this: Western Europe's share is 60-65 percent, and that of 
the United States is 30-35 percent. The share of Russia, the 
biggest space power, is laughably small -- less than half a 
percent. Given this correlation, a powerful lever is in the 
hands of the United States, and it does not want to let go of 
it. In a situation in which the supply of satellite launch 
services is 2.5 times consumer demand (disregarding Russia), it 
is clinging to everything so as not to get crowded out. So the 
ideas of partnership are pushed into the background, while, by 
way of justification in the eyes of the world community, all 
kinds of stories are circulated about "Russia's technological 
backwardness." 
  But among the many different opinions there are some sober 
assessments, too. Experts note: "Let us be realistic: The 
former USSR still accounts for two-thirds of the world's 
launches." But the number of launches is not the point. 
Russia's space industry, although inferior to America's in 
terms of electronics, has the lead in a number of technologies. 
We have today's most powerful booster rocket, with a highly 
sophisticated first stage; we have the world's only active 
long-term orbital multimodular space station; we have developed 
a unique nuclear reactor capable of generating power in space, 
which is compact, relatively powerful, and reliable; we have 
developed plasma motors, used to change the orbits of space 
devices.... One could also mention other up-to-date equipment, 
which is potentially of value for states exploring space. 
Moreover, our scientists, who possess experience without equal 
in the world, hold in their hands a "bank of knowledge," which 
other countries cannot manage without. "Just as the American 
space research program drew so much from the experience of 
German scientists after World War II, so today it could gain 
from the Russians' participation," the INTERNATIONAL HERALD 
TRIBUNE stresses. 
  Let us admit that Russia has plenty of difficulties. But 
these are times for those who not only try to survive at all 
costs, but also venture forth boldly and intelligently, without 
losing their national pride and dignity. The Americans have 
problems of their own. Their Freedom orbital station project, 
according to experts' comments, has become like a woolen 
sweater, which was washed in hot water. First it began to 
shrink (number of cosmonauts on board, equipment, power supply, 
and so forth) like a comet approaching the sun. Then the idea 
of totally abandoning further research arose. The reason -- 
"budget constraints." But is that the only reason? 
  At the latest session of the Russian-American commission for 
economic cooperation, important documents concerning space were 
discussed and signed. They deal, in particular, with the Alpha 
orbital station, conceived as a prestige program for the turn of 
the century. The construction of the vast orbital complex will 
take approximately five years. It is proposed to begin work in 
1997 and complete it by 2001, after which the full-scale 
operation of the station is planned. Its life is expected to be 
10-15 years. 
  Of course, participation in such a large-scale project is 
prestigious. Yes, it means access to leading technologies. 
Yes, it means a sensible integration of efforts and resources. 
Yes, it means useful orders for many of our firms in the space 
sector (some 200 of our enterprises will be involved in the 
Alpha project, and that is 60,000-70,000 people). But is this 
cooperation entirely cloudless? Is there not a danger of ending 
up back at square one, as the saying goes? 
  Let us look at the problem objectively, without emotion or 
embellishment. It is no secret that Russian standards for 
life-support systems for space devices (as the ASTP project 
showed) do not coincide with America's. The same is true of 
standards for a number of technical parameters, and in 
particular for relay satellites. The Alpha station's 
inclination of plane of orbit is 51.6 degrees (for Mir it is 65 
degrees), and that means that it will be possible to observe 
only 7 percent of Russia's territory from on board. 
  The reality today is this: Of the heavy booster rockets 
available in the world, only Russia's Energiya is capable of 
putting the future Alpha's modules into space, and this will be 
far cheaper than if the mission was entrusted to shuttles. The 
Americans have not yet been able (or willing) to assess the 
merits of our Protons and Zenits. Added to that, there is the 
experience of Russian experts and cosmonauts in supporting 
prolonged space expeditions, without which the very idea of 
long-term stations with changing crews becomes pointless. The 
implementation of such a large-scale project in a relatively 
short time would be practically impossible without Russia's 
participation and the use of its space experience and industrial 
potential. So the present cooperation, with a $400-million 
advance, is not charity, but payment for our labor, and very 
modest payment at that. That is why further thought should be 
given to the advantages. 
  Russia's participation in the Alpha project (incidentally, 
the name "Sigma" would have been more apposite, as a symbol of 
integration) in conjunction with the Americans will require 
considerable expenditure. It is naive to think that we will be 
paid generously in hard currency for all our work. The 
accounting system works like this: You put such-and-such a sum 
into the "common purse," and you receive a proportion of the 
"resources." If the balance tips in one direction you are owed 
something, if in the other direction, you must pay to enjoy the 
"common asset." In general this is a perfectly sensible 
principle in accordance with market norms. But what are the 
legal and other guarantees that we will not give more than we 
get? Today we are prepared to hand over for next to nothing 
something that took years to create, that has a value. A 
considerable value. So let us be prudent, proud, and 
intelligent. And then cooperation in space will be a good thing 
both for us and for others. 

