BFN 

<F P=106> [By Reporter Chao Wen (6872 2429): "Some Cotton-Growing </F>
Areas in North China Are To Be Moderately Hit by the Bollworms 
of the First Generation--Released in a Report on the Trend of 
Occurrences of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests from May to July 
by the Ministry of Agriculture] 
  [Text] Beijing, 16 May (XINHUA) -- This reporter was 
informed by the department concerned under the Ministry of 
Agriculture that since the beginning of spring, the air 
temperature in most localities in east China has been 
comparatively low. Thus, the plant disease and insect pest 
occurrence period generally comes late. In mid and late April, 
the temperature was going up rapidly, it rained more frequently, 
and the occurrences of insect pests rose in succession. Through 
the general investigations of the insect pests and the crop 
growing situations in various localities as well as the central 
meteorological observatory's analysis of weather forecast, it is 
estimated that from May to July, major crops will moderately be 
hit by plant diseases and insect pests. 
  Since the beginning of mid April, most localities in north 
China have generally had rainfalls. Thus, the drought has 
become less serious. This is extremely conducive to the 
emergence of cotton seedlings and the growing of cotton. 
However, this year, the first discovery of the adults of the 
over-wintering bollworms in Hebei, Shandong, Henan, Shanxi, and 
Shaanxi Provinces was earlier than the previous years. Of this, 
that in Shandong Province was two or three days earlier than the 
previous years. The number of moths amounted to 20 at the 
height, noticeably lower than the figure in the corresponding 
period of last year. The bollworm pests of the first generation 
are expected to occur moderately. 
  The powdery mildew of wheat generally appeared in most of 
the 
wheat-growing areas recently. But, the conditions were less 
serious when compared with the corresponding periods of the 
previous years. A period when this disease spreads at a high 
speed is estimated to emerge. The recent investigations 
conducted among Shaanxi, Hebei, Shandong, and Henan Provinces 
showed that wheat syrup-sucking worms amounted to a large number 
and their rising activity rate was high. The wheat growing areas 
along the valleys of Huang He, Huai He, and Hai He will be hit 
by the wheatworms moderately or more seriously. The wheat 
growing period in the northern part of Sichuan Province and in 
the areas on the middle and lower reaches of Chang Jiang will 
generally arrive late this year. Since the beginning of May, 
there has been more rainfall in Huang He, Huai He, and Chang 
Jiang valleys. Therefore, the wheat in these areas will 
moderately suffer scab. This year, the base figures of the 
wheat aphids in Jiangsu and Anhui Provinces, north of Huai He, 
are high. The base figures in some of the localities in these 
two provinces reach the peak when compared with those in the 
past years. Wheat head aphids will hit most of the wheat 
growing areas moderately or more seriously. The situation will 
become more serious in some areas along Huang He, Huai He, and 
north China. 
  This spring, the temperature in south China has been low, 
and 
the weather has been cloudy and rainy. So, the rice seedlings 
are growing comparatively late, and excessively more rice 
seedlings are carrying bacterium. Sheath and culm blight of 
rice are to be prevalent in the early rice growing areas in 
south China and those south of Chang Jiang. Rice blast will 
moderately occur in Guangdong, Jiangxi, Fujian, Guangxi, and 
Hainan. Rice hoppers will appear in varying degrees in some of 
the early rice growing areas throughout the country. Besides, 
the corn borers of the first generation will appear moderately 
or more seriously in northeast China. The peak time for the 
emergence of adults will occur from late June to mid July. 
  To this end, the Ministry of Agriculture urged that the 
agricultural departments at various levels should pay attention 
to upgrading the understanding about the prevention and control 
of the plant diseases and insect pests, define targets, and 
timely attend to prevention and control. The Ministry of 
Agriculture will organize relevant departments to hold work 
conferences on prevention and control of bollworms and to make a 
unified arrangement for the prevention and control work in an 
effort to reduce the disasters to the minimum. 

