SUMMARY 
                            In the lead up to referendums on European Union (EU) membership 
in Austria, Finland, Norway, and Sweden, press commentary in all 
four countries has predominantly favored membership, seeing the 
economic and security advantages as greatly outweighing any 
lingering concerns about "joining Europe." 
                     END SUMMARY 
   With a majority of respondents in the four countries telling 
pollsters they feel "uninformed" on the pros and cons of EU 
membership, the predominantly positive press coverage is likely 
to have a significant impact on the relatively large number of 
people who are undecided on the issue.  In some countries the 
media are apparently filling a gap left open by the government. 
While in Sweden and Norway the governments are conducting high 
profile campaigns for membership and there are well-organized, 
well-financed organizations for and against accession, in Austria 
and Finland, apparently weak and divided governments are keeping 
a low profile and there are few non-governmental organizations 
campaigning either way.  The head of the Finnish Foreign 
Ministry's EU information office explained the government's 
dilemma to a Danish newspaper:  "If the government begins to 
campaign, the population will believe they are manipulating, and 
the psychological climate in Finland is such that people will 
react the opposite.  We are instead trying to be neutral" 
(Berlingske Tidende, 28-29 March).  In much the same way, polls 
in Austria show that 60 percent of the population would reject a 
recommendation on how to vote from the political parties (Profil, 
18 April), and polls published in the two major dailies, Der 
Standard (18 April) and Die Presse (5 May), indicate that the 
media, rather than parties or politicians, are the most trusted 
source of information on EU membership, with the government's 
campaign lagging significantly behind. 
   Emphasizing the Positive 
   Regardless of the different strategies of their governments in 
supporting EU membership, the coverage of the EU accession 
agreements in the major newspapers and magazines of the four 
countries has been predominantly positive. 
   Norway.   In this country, where the populace is most split on 
the question of membership, the larger dailies have editorialized 
extensively in favor.  Even the newspaper of the Labor Party, 
which is divided over the issue, declared in an editorial that 
"we have long thought that Norway should join the European Union" 
(Arbeiderbladet, 18 March). 
   Austria.  Typifying the Viennese press, Die Presse admitted that 
"this newspaper has never made a secret out of the fact that we 
are for Austria's entry into the EU" (5 May). 
   Finland.  Most Finnish dailies have strongly advocated EU 
membership.  For example, a Finnish research institute study on 
attitudes in the press toward the EU concluded that the country's 
leading daily Helsingin Sanomat had been "an active promoter" of 
membership, publishing almost exclusively pro-EU editorials 
(Hufvudstadsbladet, 28 April). 
   Sweden.  The Swedish press, which had been skeptical about 
membership, became more enthusiastic after the country reached 
what the media considered an advantageous agreement with the EU. 
Buoyed by the excitement of the Swedish hockey team's gold medal 
at the Olympics the day before the agreement, the Swedish press 
portrayed the conclusion of the accession agreement as a similar 
triumph--a cartoon even showed a Swedish player blasting the puck 
past the EU goalie (Svenska Dagbladet, 5 March).  Although it had 
scoffed at the triviality of some of the issues during the 
negotiations--publishing headlines on bear hunting and "EC 
Adapted Toothpaste"--the Swedish press gave high marks to the 
agreement ultimately reached.  In a "report card" on the 
negotiation results, for example, one paper gave the accord two 
nines, a seven, and an eight (out of a possible ten points) on 
the four issues the paper considered most important (two 
environmental standards issues, regional policy, and 
agriculture); overall, the agreement received 78 out of 100 
points (Dagens Nyheter, 3 March). 
   Common Themes 
   The press in the four countries has emphasized three broad themes 
in arguing for membership.  Most often cited has been the need to 
join forces to solve cross-border problems such as environmental 
pollution, immigration, and organized crime.  European 
integration has been defined as being first and foremost "how 
member states together attempt to find common solutions to common 
problems" (Svenska Dagbladet, 3 March).  An Austrian daily made a 
similar case:  "With the new Union regulations, we can surely 
react more effectively than only on the national level to trans- 
border problems . . . [such as] immigration and the fight against 
organized crime" (Die Presse, 3 March).  The supranational 
management of the ecology is also often mentioned as a sound 
argument for joining, especially in environmentally conscious 
Norway.  The most widely read daily, Aftenposten, sounded the 
environment theme repeatedly, as in a 20 April headline: 
"Environmental Goals Dependent on Membership in EU."  A third 
argument commonly cited is the boon to the economy and a 
reduction in prices paid by consumers; the press in all the 
countries has published forecasts predicting economic growth and 
lower food prices after membership. 
   Different Emphasis 
   In several cases the press has made its case for membership by 
attacking the soundness of arguments used by EU opponents.  In 
Sweden and Norway, where there is a strong but not well defined 
nostalgia for a unique Scandinavian society of the past, the 
debate has centered on the whether this heritage must be 
abandoned in joining Europe.  Most press commentaries have 
concentrated on attacking EU opponents for failing to realize 
that Scandinavia cannot remain isolated in the new European order 
and for not presenting a realistic alternative to membership. 
   --Swedish commentators have argued that Sweden must be involved 
in shaping the future of Europe and have challenged EU opponents 
for not "saying what they are for" (Svenska Dagbladet, 9 March). 
Svenska Dagbladet's leading commentator on the EU, Rolf 
Gustavsson, wrote that "not even an overwhelming no victory could 
make it possible to return to the old agenda" (Svenska Dagbladet, 
3 March). 
   --Norwegian commentary has adopted a very similar tone, pointing 
out that these nostalgic dreams are unrealistic.  Aftenposten 
wrote on 28 April that "a no to membership in the EU is not a yes 
to continuing everything as before.  A new situation for Norway 
is arising..."  The same paper warned on 17 March that "Norway 
cannot create its own alternative world." 
   In Finland and Austria, where the concept of joining Europe is 
not as controversial, most of the opposition has coma from 
special interest groups, primarily farmers, who have attacked 
specific provisions of the accession agreements.  Commentaries 
have, therefore, focused on defending the specifics of the 
agreements rather than presenting any comprehensive vision of the 
future. 
   --Most Finnish newspapers have recognized the need to join the EU 
and praised the accession agreement.  On 2 March Helsingin 
Sanomat called the accord "the most important success of our 
foreign policy since World War II," and expressed regret that the 
government was so fearful of opposition from farmers that it did 
not hail it as well.  Several editorials warned that farmers, who 
comprise less than 10 percent of the population, should not be 
allowed to become an "insurmountable obstacle" to something so 
important to the country (Demari, 3 March). 
   --Immediately after the conclusion of Austria's agreement, most 
commentary hailed the government's achievements in the 
negotiations, rebuffing claims by opposition parties that the 
negotiators caved in to EU demands.  Foreign Minister Alois Mock, 
who headed the delegation, was proclaimed "a dogged negotiator" 
and "Mock the hero" upon his return to Vienna (Der Standard, 2,3 
March).  Die Presse (12 April) found the criticism that the 
negotiators "raised the white flag," to be "mean and 
underhanded."  In a reference to the farmers' complaints about 
the agreed levels of agricultural subsidies, Der Standard said on 
3 April that the agreement "benefited the whole," despite "small- 
minded egoism."  Another commentary criticized lobbying groups 
for pushing their costly demands "at the expense of others" (Der 
Standard, 29 April). 
   The Neutrality Debate 
   While neutrality has played an important role in the histories of 
Sweden, Austria, and Finland, only in Sweden has the debate over 
EU membership focused on the preservation of neutrality as a 
central issue. 
   Sweden.  The Swedish press has focused on the future of 
neutrality to a much greater extent than have the media of other 
countries.  Political leaders in Sweden have conducted an open 
debate in the press--in the form of guest commentary and 
statements to reporters--on the merits of moving away from the 
traditional policy and on what EU membership will mean for 
neutrality.  The government has declared neutrality "outdated" 
and expressed its desire to fully participate in a common EU 
foreign and security policy (Dagens Nyheter 15 Oct 93).  The 
Social Democratic opposition also has also endorsed Sweden's 
participation in a common foreign and security policy, but has 
criticized the government's abandonment of neutrality.  Svenska 
Dagbladet has published a series of articles examining the future 
of neutrality.  Most commentaries have concluded that "what best 
serves peace and security is a deepened and expanded economic and 
political cooperation which includes all of Europe" (Idag, 21 
March).  It is, therefore, "an advantage for us to join a West 
European defense community." (Dagens Nyheter, 15 April). 
   Finland.   By contrast, there has been little debate about 
neutrality in the Finnish press, perhaps because neutrality has 
traditionally been a thorny issue for the country.  The 
government, probably still wary of provoking a Russian reaction, 
stated in an official report that neutrality would not be 
affected by EU membership because Finland was joining the Union 
"politically but not militarily."  Nonetheless, the government 
report was apparently alluding to security matters when it argued 
that Finland could expect "commitment and solidarity" from the 
other EU members (Suomen Kuvalehti, 11 March).  The Chief of the 
Armed Forces recently declared that EU membership would not mean 
any changes to defense policy (Hufvudstadsbladet, 11 March), and 
the press has largely confined itself to discussing the economic 
issues of membership, such as agricultural subsidies.  Some 
editorials have pointed out that "continued focusing on 
agriculture distracts attention from the essential questions of 
EU membership" (Helsingin Sanomat, 8 March), and regrets have 
been expressed that "we do not dare debate the core issues" such 
as security (Hufvudstadsbladet, 31 March).  One commentary 
wondered if the government's agricultural support package is "in 
the first place a decoy. .. to avoid discussion relating to 
security policy and new directions of geopolitics" (Pohjalainen, 
6 March). 
   Austria.   Similarly, there is little open debate in Austria on 
redefining its neutrality--a product of Cold War stalemate- 
-despite the fact that it too is surrounded by neighbors whose 
stability is uncertain.  Because the government has declared that 
it intends to retain neutrality after EU membership, Chancellor 
Franz Vranitzky and President Thomas Klestil have proclaimed 
neutrality a non-issue.  In reality, according to the weekly 
Profil (16 May), a debate is taking place behind the scenes about 
redefining neutrality, and the government is trying to keep it 
that way at least until after the referendum.  The magazine's 
assertion that "any discussion of neutrality is taboo" is 
reflected in the silence of the press on this question.  With 
some apparent exasperation, the 2 May Die Presse, asserting that 
such discussions are premature, declared "Austria needs this 
discussion [on neutrality] at this time like a hole in the head." 
The commentary expressed the assurance that neutrality can be 
retained inside the EU, claiming that to remain outside would 
actually reduce Austria's room for maneuver because it would be 
isolated. 
   BOX:  Upcoming Referendums on EU Membership 
   In March, all four EU applicant countries--Austria, Finland, 
Norway, and Sweden--concluded accession agreements in hopes of 
officially joining the Union at the beginning of 1995.  All will 
now hold referendums on membership: Austria on 12 June, Finland 
on 16 October, Sweden on 13 November, and Norway on 28 November. 
Austria's will be binding, while the Nordics' are.legally non- 
binding, although the governments are unlikely to reject the 
popular will.  Polls show a close vote in all countries, with the 
yes side leading in Finland and Austria and the no side on top in 
Norway and Sweden. There is, however, a large group of 
"undecideds" in each country. 
   END BOX 
   (AUTHOR:  SCHWENK.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF 
ANALYST, EUROPE AND LATIN AMERICA GROUP (7O3)-733-612O.) 
ELAG/GILISON/ta 08/2259z jun 

