Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Deputy Industry Minister Phonthep Techaphaibul 
yesterday urged developed countries which are parties to the 
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer to 
help replenish the Multilateral Fund. 
  Financial assistance is essential for developing countries' 
efforts to phase out their use of ozone-depleting substances, he 
asserted. 
  The Montreal Protocol is an international agreement on the 
protection of ozone layer which filters the harmful ultraviolet 
rays from reaching the earth's surface. 
  K.M. Sarma, Coordinator of the Ozone Secretariat, told 
participants at the Preparatory Meeting of the Fifth Meeting of 
the Parties to the Montreal Protocol--which opened in Bangkok 
yesterday--that contributions to the Multilateral Fund are still 
behind pledges. 
  Speaking on behalf of the Executive Director of the United 
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), Mr. Sarma urged the 
Governments of the countries which ``could pay but did not pay'' 
to make their contributions as soon as possible. 
  Mr. Phonthep, in his opening speech, said the provision of 
adequate funding is important to developing countries 
constrained by their technologies and financial resources in 
eliminating the production and consumption of ozone-destroying 
chemicals. 
  Thailand is listed in the so-called Article 5 Paragraph 1 
countries which are eligible for financial assistance from the 
Multilateral Fund for projects to phase out the use of 
substances that damage the ozone layer. 
  Mr. Phonthep said the Thai Government has already taken 
various measures to discourage the use of such substances, 
including promoting public awareness on the danger of ozone 
destruction and encouraging people to help save the ozone. 
  Mr. Sarma said the requirements of the Multilateral Fund for 
1994, 1995 and 1996 are a vital issue of discussion at the 
Bangkok meeting. 
  According to Mr. Sarma, it has already been agreed that the 
requirement for the next three years will be between U.S. $340 
and $500 million. 
  He stressed this requirement must be met so developing 
countries can achieve their goals of phasing out their use of 
ozone damaging substances as early as posslble. 
  ``The less cash we put in now, the more the consumption of 
the developing countries will increase.'' 
  ``And ultimately it is the contributors to the Fund who have 
to bear the burden of the cost of phasing out a much larger 
quantity of the controlled substances,'' he said. 
  Mr. Sarma said although there have been reports that the 
Montreal Protocol is working splendidly and that the extent of 
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), a chief ozone-eating agent, is 
coming down as control measures take effect, he still did not 
want the people to be complacent. 
  ``This is not the time to pat ourselves on the back and 
assume that we have succeeded in our task,'' he said. 
  Mr. Sarma said the news about the ozone layer continues to 
be 
depressing. 
  In 1992, the Antarctic hole was at its largest and ozone has 
been depleted by 60 percent. The destruction was also 
significant in the northern latitudes. 
  In 1993, the record low ozone values over Antarctica 
reported 
in September were the lowest ever reported for that month. 
  These values have continued into early October, he said. 

