BFN 

<F P=106> ["Pool" item] </F>
  [Text] Belgrade, April 16 (TANJUG) -- Russian Foreign 
Minister Andrey Kozyrev arrived here on Saturday evening for 
talks with Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic. 
  The unscheduled visit of the Russian foreign minister to 
Belgrade was obviously provoked by the deterioration of the 
situation in Bosnia which threatens to annul the frantic 
diplomatic efforts for putting the Bosnian peace process back on 
the rails. 
  Russia is actively participating in the process through its 
special envoy Vitaliy Churkin who is currently in Pale in the 
Bosnian Serb Republic. 
  Before leaving for Belgrade, Kozyrev urged a peaceful 
settlement of the Bosnian crisis and criticized both Moslems and 
Serbs. 
  In a statement to the Russian state television channel 
Ostankino, he said the situation would have been different had 
NATO consulted Russia about the air raids. 
  "Had Russia been consulted, a way to cool the hotheads among 
the Bosnian Serbs might have been found and they would have been 
advised against shelling Gorazde. With our partners, we would 
have probably found a way to warn the other side -- the Moslems 
-- against provoking the Serbs." 
  Kozyrev said the Moslem leadership had been undertaking 
provocative actions and Moslem troops had been opening fire on 
various sections of the front. "We know that and U.N. officials 
have confirmed it too." 
  The Moslems must stop their provocations, the Russian 
foreign 
minister said and added that what was needed was maximum 
restraint rather than a show of heroism on the part of the 
international community. 
  Kozyrev allowed for the application of the strictest 
possible 
measures, including air strikes, to protect U.N. troops on the 
ground. "It is quite a different matter whether and to what 
degree the NATO air raids against Bosnian Serbs had been 
justified and what was their effect," he said and added their 
immediate result was a major acceleration of the situation. 
  Kozyrev also said his deputy, Churkin, was on the spot where 
he was virtually trying to pin the hands of the Serbs and the 
Moslems. He is trying to do the same with the West, but so far 
with little success, he added. 
  The situation is at a turning point, said Kozyrev and added 
that thanks to Russia, prospects had been created for signing 
peace in Bosnia, after which steps should be taken to ease 
sanctions against Yugoslavia (Serbia/Montenegro). 
  "The Serbs should see some kind of prospects opening before 
them," he said. 
  [Belgrade TANJUG in English at 2018 GMT on 16 April 
transmits 
the following message: "Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic 
received late on Saturday Russian Foreign Minister Andrey 
Kozyrev on the latter's surprise arrival in Belgrade. 
  Milosevic and Kozyrev are conferring behind closed doors. 
  Kozyrev made no statement on arrival, but his talks with 
Milosevic are certain to concern the latest situation in war- 
shattered Bosnia-Herzegovina."] 

