Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Press Review" -- ITAR-TASS headline] </F>
  [Text] Moscow January 15 TASS--NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA on the 
Russian-U.S. summit: 
  "The latest summit has not introduced anything particularly 
new to the two countries' relationships. Expressions of Bill 
Clinton's support for Boris Yeltsin and his policy of economic 
reforms have been coming from across the ocean ever since 
Yeltsin himself broached the subject of reform. 
  "At the final press conference the two presidents did not 
say 
anything sensational similar to that which had been agreed upon 
in Vancouver or the Tokyo G-7 summit. 
  "In reference to Russian-U.S. relations, the Moscow summit 
can be referred to as a working, scheduled, and routine one 
rather than historic. Were it not for the Ukrainian nuclear 
weapons issue and the Friday signing of the 
Russo-Ukrainian-American agreement to eliminate them, one could 
not have derived from Clinton's visit to Moscow what is usually 
expected from a meeting between the presidents of great powers". 
  NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA on the live broadcast of Bill Clinton's 
remarks from the studio of the Ostanikino television centre: 
  "The Americans did not miss the opportunity to show their 
president in what he is at his best: producing impression on the 
audience and winning it over. Who knows what moved Russian 
citizens more--the political results of Bill Clinton's visit or 
his sociability and openness (at the needed moment) before 
ordinary people". 
  SOVETSKAYA ROSSIYA on U.S. President's first European tour: 
  "The first European tour along the 
Brussels-Prague-Kiev-Moscow-Minsk-Geneva route was apparently 
conceived, firstly, with a view to giving a boost to the 
international prestige of the U.S. President and, secondly, once 
again showing support for Boris Yeltsin, the support which the 
Russian president is permanently in need of". 
  ROSSIISKAYA GAZETA carries an article by Igor Vlasov, a 
section head at the committee to the president of the Russian 
Federation on convention-related problems of chemical and 
biological weapons. 
  "All stocks of chemical weapons of Russia are now stored in 
special arsenals of the Russian Defence Ministry--seven chemical 
'thorns' in the body of Russia.... The aggregate amount of 
chemical weapons is 40,000 tonnes.... The process of 
eliminating the weapons, provided the Paris convention is 
ratified, is expected to be started in 1997". 
  IZVESTIA on Moscow diplomatic circles' irritation with 
Azerbaijani president's actions: 
  "In Moscow diplomatic circles, there is felt a certain 
irritation with the actions of Azerbaijani President Gaydar 
Aliyev. In words he favours a political solution to the 
conflict (in Nagorno-Karabakh -- note by ITAR-TASS) while in 
actual fact he is not in a hurry to discontinue the use of force. 
  "This is possibly accounted for by the fact that the 'war 
party' in Aliyev's entourage is much more influential than the 
advocates of power politics among the associates of Armenian 
leader Ter- Petrosyan. One gathers the impression that the 
internal political positions of former Politburo member Aliyev 
are hardly better than those of his unlucky predecessor 
Elchibey". 
  KRASNAYA ZVEZDA (Red Star) carries an interview with police 
Colonel-General Mikhail Yegorov, Russia's first deputy minister 
of the interior and chief of the main department for combatting 
organised crime. 
  "As of the end of 1992, 2,800,000 crimes were committed as 
against 1,200,000 in 1987, that is, the number of crimes grew by 
almost 150 per cent, that of grave crimes by 160 per cent and 
murders -- by 150 per cent. Last year we manage to break the 
dynamics of crime growth from 26 per cent (1992) to 1.4 per cent 
in 1993. The grave crime rate decreased from 31.2 to 23.6 per 
cent respectively," Yegorov told the newspaper. 
  TRUD on the discovery of Americium-241 near Chernobyl. The 
newspaper maintains that Americium-241, a radioactive element 
which is utterly hazardous to human health, has been found in 
the area of the chernobyl nuclear power station. The element's 
"semi-decay period is approximately 430 years. It is extremely 
toxic and brings about strong mutations in living organisms". 
  Another element ostensibly discovered in the area -- 
Americium- 242 (which disintegrates into beta particles) has a 
period of existence of almost 16 hours. "But the element has an 
extremely small critical mass -- i.e., it is capable of 
exploding even in minute quantities. The `sarcophagus' which 
protects the world from the damaged reactor (of the Chernobyl 
nuclear power station -- note by ITAR-TASS) now possibly cracks 
and literally bursts at the seams precisely due to the 
microexplosions of Americium which accumulates in the 
sarcophagus walls". 
  VECHERNY PETERBURG reports that the city police 
headquarters' 
emergency rescue service has summed up the results of the past 
year. There were 29,336 fires last year, 5,815 more than in the 
previous year, with 350 people dying in the fires or being 
mortally poisoned with carbon monoxide. There were 12 children 
among the victims of the fires. The aggregate damage inflicted 
by the fires amounted to more than 138 million roubles. 

