Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 22 (XINHUA) -- Chinese Premier Li 
Peng said here today that China attaches importance to Sino-U.S. 
relations and hopes to resume and expand normal relations with 
the United States. 
  At a reception in the Great Hall of the People here, Li told 
reporters that expansion of such relations will not only benefit 
the two countries, but also world peace and development. 
  In response to a question about the recent visit to China by 
Warren Christopher, the U.S. secretary of state, he said that 
the visit was fruitful, although perhaps "we had expected to 
achieve more results." 
  "Besides understandings reached on some specific issues, I 
think there is at least another achievement (of Christopher's 
visit), that is, the two sides have enhanced understanding of 
each other's views, and that is very important," he said. 
  He said that Chinese President Jiang Zemin, he himself and 
Foreign Minister Qian Qichen respectively held frank, in-depth 
talks with Christopher on Sino-U.S. relations and international 
issues, including human rights, the renewal of China's most 
favored nation (MFN) trade status with the U.S., the missile 
technology control regime (MTCR) and other issues. 
  He said Christopher must have obtained first-hand 
information, having heard directly from the Chinese leaders 
Chinese stand and views on the issues he is concerned about. 
  "This may perhaps help the United States, through careful 
considerations, to make decisions in the next few months that 
will be in keeping with the interests of both the United States 
and China," he said. 
  "We have noticed what president Bill Clinton said on March 
16. We regard it as a positive sign," he said. 
  "I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate that 
China is willing to improve Sino-U.S. relations. We have made 
great efforts to improve relations and will continue to do so," 
he said. 
  But he maintained that China is a sovereign country and will 
never make a deal by sacrificing principles. 
  "Generally speaking, I do not feel pessimistic about the 
prospects of Sino-U.S. relations," he said. 

