CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Argo Ideon: "Foreign Investor's Road to Estonia </F>
Must Be Made Smoother"] 
  [Text] 
  Based on data from the economic ministry, the total of 
foreign capital invested in Estonia during 1993 was 906,966,000 
kroons. Is that little or is that a lot? More, in proportion, 
than some of our other Eastern European neighbors who did not 
put their best foot forward, but certainly less than expected. 
To support the effort of bringing foreign investors to Estonia, 
the creation of a Foreign Investment Agency 
[Valisinvesteeringute Agentuur] is currently being 
contemplated that would report administratively to the Ministry 
of Economics. 
  Riho Rasman, counsel to the economic ministry, told 
PaEVALEHT that the agency to be created is planning to 
support investments in two ways. On one hand, an investor 
arriving in the Republic of Estonia knows that the Foreign 
Investment Agency can provide him with information about 
investment opportunities at all times--from general legislation 
up to specific projects. For business partners, he will be 
offered a choice of either state or private enterprises. On the 
other hand, the Foreign Investment Agency should develop into an 
organization that helps Estonian investors go outside the state 
and to consult them. 
  Riho Rasman said that there has been talk of such an agency 
for at least a year-and-a-half now, its formation had also been 
discussed in connection with creating the Privatization Agency. 
The need for a structure that would promote all of Estonia as a 
favorable place to invest has been felt all along. By now, the 
idea is so ripe that both money and the people to bring it about 
have been found. The agency will be starting its operations as 
soon as possible. 
<H5>  Last Year, Most Investments Were Made in Industry </H5>
  This is where foreign entrepreneurs invested roughly 409.5 
million kroons, or 45 percent of the investment total. Of the 
total capital outlay, 26 percent went into wholesale and retail, 
8 percent into insurance and finance, and 7 percent into real 
estate. These were followed by 6 percent for transport and 
communications, 3 percent for agriculture, and 2 percent for 
hotels and restaurants. Foreign investment capital placed in the 
rest of the business sectors last year amounted to 14,886,000 
kroons, which is also roughly 2 percent of the investment total. 
Following the structure of investments by different sectors of 
the economy, one is struck by the growing significance of sales 
activity, which seems to go naturally with the present state of 
Estonia's economy. 
<H5>  Closer Neighbors Have Been More Active </H5>
  Data from the economic ministry shows that most of last 
year's foreign investments--31 percent of the total--came to 
Estonia from Sweden. Next was Finland with 22 percent. It is 
interesting to note that the United States from across the ocean 
came in third with 16 percent, and placing fourth with 6 percent 
was Russia, whose secret invasion of state capital into Estonia 
has been a subject of serious discussions lately. 
  Further down the list of last year's bigger investors in 
Estonia is Germany with 4 percent, Italy with 3 percent, and 
Great Britain with 2 percent. The portion of investments from 
all other countries made up 16 percent of the total. 
<H5>  Why Invest In Estonia? </H5>
  The economic ministry introduces Estonia to foreign 
investors 
as a state with a relatively stable political situation. 
Besides, Estonia could also be presented as a traditional 
industrial country, where a high educational level is coupled 
with European culture. It has also become customary to point out 
Estonia's location on the map, and tell the investors about the 
opportunities afforded by Estonia's favorable position between 
the East and the West. 
  A stable monetary unit, quality work force, low wages, 
permissibility of taking out profits, and the opportunity to own 
land in Estonia, should seem like positive features in the eyes 
of foreign entrepreneurs and financial people. The main features 
of economic policy being carried out by Estonia's current 
government: Restructuring, geared to joining the European Union, 
economic integration of the Baltic states, planned free trade 
agreements with Russia and other CIS states, giving up 
protectionism, accelerating privatization and ownership reform, 
free trade zones (in Paldiski, for example). Securing 
competition in banking, and a balanced state budget should also 
create interest in foreign investors. A different matter is, of 
course, how well we succeed in implementing the professed 
policies. Even the Foreign Investment Agency about to be 
created, cannot offer anybody an Estonia that is better than it 
actually looks. 

