CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Wang Xucai (3769 4872 2088), chief of the </F>
provincial agricultural bureau: "Implement Policies To Increase 
Investment and Reap a Bumper Harvest in 1994"] 
  [Text] The agricultural and rural economic situation of 
Guizhou Province was good in 1993. Improvements involved 
increases in the gross value of agricultural output, a new 
record in the history of grain production, 15 continuous years 
of development in animal husbandry, accelerated development in 
aquatic and reclamation undertakings, and a higher per-capita 
net income for peasants. 
  The gross value of agricultral output reached 17.66 billion 
yuan (based on 1990 constant prices), an increase of 4.1 percent 
over 1992. The per-capita income of peasants reached 579 yuan, 
an increase of 73 yuan over that of 1992. 
  Total grain output was 8.695 million tons, an increase of 
10.2 percent over 1992, of which summer grain was 1.695 million 
tons, an increase of 1.3 percent and fall grain was 7 million 
tons, an increase of 12.6 percent. Total cash crop output of 
flue-cured tobacco was 507,900 tons, an increase of 13.1 percent 
and rape seeds was 384,000 tons, a decrease of 23.1 percent. 
Tea leaves totalled 142,000 tons, an increase of 2 percent over 
1992. 
  In animal husbandry, the number of live hogs increased 0.6 
percent as compared to that of 1992 and the number of 
slaughtered hogs increased by 2.2 percent. The number of live 
draft animals increased 1.4 percent and the number of sold draft 
animals increased 21.9 percent. The output of meat and milk all 
increased markedly as compared to that of 1992. 
  The output of aquatic products was 25,000 tons, an increase 
of 8.2 percent over 1992. The total industrial and agricultural 
output value of farmland reclamation undertakings was 76 million 
yuan, an increase of 8.2 percent. The amount of taxes paid by 
these enterprises was 5.8 million yuan, an increase of 9.3 
percent over 1992. 
  Since the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central 
Committee, agriculture, animal husbandry, fishery, and 
reclamation industries of Guizhou Province has made considerable 
progress, and the output of grain, oil-bearing crops, tobacco, 
and animal products has increased steadily. Grain production 
set an all-time high in 1993. Judging the 15 years of reform 
and opening up, the achievements can be attributed to four basic 
reasons: 1) Rural areas have implemented the output-related 
contract responsibility system, liberating productive forces and 
arousing farmers' enthusiasm for production. 2) The market and 
prices of most farm and animal products have been decontrolled, 
stimulating the development of production. 3) Party committees 
and government organs at all levels have paid great attention to 
agriculture and formulated and adopted a series of effective 
policies and measures. 4) The primary productive force of 
science and technology has also been brought into play. 
  Currently, agricultural work faces quite a number of new 
situations and problems. Mainly they involve one transfer, two 
changes and three weaknesses. The one transfer is that the 
three elements of agricultural production are being transferred 
from agricultural to non-agricultural departments. Cultivated 
land is shrinking every year; strong labor is being transformed; 
and agricultural funds continue to flow out. Two changes are: 
1) Agriculture is changing from a planned economy to a socialist 
market economy. 2) Traditional agriculture is changing toward a 
high-yield, high-quality, and high-efficiency agriculture. The 
three weaknesses are: 1) The system is incomplete. 2) The 
macroeconomic regulation and control ability is weak. 3) The 
infrastructure of agriculture is poor. To continue the 
excellent situation in agriculture, we should thoroughly 
understand these issues, study solutions and adopt measures so 
as to achieve the steady development of agriculture. 
  To implement the guidelines of the Central Rural Work 
Conference and the Rural Work Conference of the Provincial CPC 
Committee and to reap a bumper harvest this year, agricultural 
departments must give full play to their advisory role and 
technological advantage and actively cooperate with party and 
government organs at all levels to advance and work toward 
fulfilling the task of agricultural production for 1994. To 
fulfill all of 1994 plans--18.34 billion yuan of total 
agricultural output value, 8.75 million tons of total grain 
output, 340,000 tons of flue-cured tobacco, 500,000 tons of 
rapeseeds, 18,000 tons of tea leaves, 7.15 million heads of live 
draft animals, 14.3 million heads of live hogs, 915,000 tons of 
total meat product, 55,000 tons of eggs, 13,000 tons of milk and 
26,000 tons of aquatic products--the Guizhou Provincial 
Agricultural Bureau set forth the following guidelines, focuses, 
and main measures for agricultural work in 1994. 
  1. Basic guidelines are: being market-oriented, science and 
technology driven and efficiency-conscious; aiming to increase 
peasants' income, rationalizing the distribution of resources, 
readjusting and optimizing the agricultural structure and 
guaranteeing the steady increase for grain production. Great 
efforts should be made to develop the production of "grocery 
basket," vigorously promote high-yield, high-quality, and 
high-efficiency agriculture, increase the comprehensive 
production ability of agricultural departments, and accelerate 
the continuous agricultural development in Guizhou Province. 
  2. Production focuses are as follows: 1) Grain production. 
Steadily increasing grain output is an important task for 
agricultural production in Guizhou Province. In accordance with 
the requirements for stabilizing acreage, optimizing structure, 
improving variety, and focusing on per-mu yield, Guizhou 
Province should keep seeded areas at or above 40 million mu and 
concentrate on enforcing production, technology, and management 
measures to ensure growth in production. 2) Production of 
dominant cash crops and name-brand quality products. Flue-cured 
tobacco and rape are two main cash crops of Guizhou Province. 
They are main sources of revenue for the province and provide 
income for the peasants. As far as flue-cured tobacco is 
concerned, Guizhou Province mainly needs to stick to planned 
cultivation, concentrate on quality, and increase per-mu yield 
and economic returns. Using regionalized and restricted 
cultivation and coordinating improved variety with quality 
methods, rapeseed production should follow the principle of 
using sales as a criterion and incentive for production and 
concentrating efforts on developing quality rape and increase 
economic returns. The development of name-brand quality farm 
products is an important measure for increasing the economic 
returns for agriculture. Rice production should focus on 
developing superior rice, black glutinous rice, and fragrant 
rice. Great efforts should be made to develop the variety of 
corn that has high content of protein and lysine, expand the 
production of name-brand quality tea and fruit, and increase the 
ability to earn foreign exchange and compete on the market. 3) 
The production of "grocery basket." It is necessary to increase 
the output of meat, poultry, eggs, milk, and aquatic products to 
enrich the "grocery basket" of the masses of people. The focus 
of animal husbandry, the breeding industry and the farm 
reclamation industry is to steadily develop the production of 
live hogs, vigorously develop plant-eating animals, increase the 
ratio of beef, mutton, and poultry in meat, and make great 
efforts to promote fish breeding in rice paddy, ponds, and 
netted boxes to increase the per-capita output of aquatic 
products. 
  3. Main measures are: To fulfill agricultural production 
tasks in an all-round way for 1994, Guizhou Province needs to do 
a good job mainly in the following areas: 
  A. Implement "Law of Agriculture" and "Law for Promotion of 
Agricultural Technology" and increase supervision for law 
enforcement. Since their promulgation, government and 
agricultural organs at all levels have made great efforts to 
publicize and enforce the above two laws. However, judging from 
the current situation, publicity and enforcement are still 
inadequate. In addition to agricultural departments making 
further efforts we should, in accordance with the demand of 
popularizing the legal system and under the leadership of 
people's congress and government organs at all levels, make 
greater efforts to publicize and enforce the above two laws to 
ensure that there are laws to follow and rules to apply in 
agricultural work. 
  B. Readjust and optimize the industrial structure of 
agriculture. Since the reform and opening up, the agricultural 
structure of Guizhou Province has been changing continuously. 
Judging from the composition of gross agricultural output value 
in 1978 and 1992, the crop planting industry has declined by 14 
percentage points, animal husbandry increased by 11.6 percentage 
points, and fishery increased by 0.3 percentage points. The 
readjustment of agricultural structure should be focused on the 
development of animal husbandry, aquatic breeding, high-return 
cash crops, forestry, orchards, township enterprises, and rural 
sideline production. To readjust the structure of the 
crop-planting industry we should, under the prerequisite of 
guaranteeing the steady increase of grain production, vigorously 
promote the diversified economy, and develop in light of local 
conditions, garden products such as tea, mulberry, fruits, and 
herbs for medicine. Steadily increasing autumn grain, we should 
speed up the production of summer grain and continue to increase 
the ratio of summer grain to the total grain output. 
  To readjust the structure of animal husbandry, we should 
mainly proceed from the characteristic that Guizhou Province has 
both farm and meadow type animal husbandry, steadily develop the 
production of live hogs pursuant to market demand, vigorously 
develop cattle, sheep, and rabbits, accelerate the development 
of poultry, and gradually establish a mix of animals which help 
save grain, eat grass, and can be sold as commodities. At the 
same time, we should also develop the sources of famous and 
precious brands such as fragrant pigs and ducks and special 
kinds of cash animals. The focus of live hog production is to 
increase the slaughter and commodity rates and develop the 
production of hogs with lean meat. Plant-eating animals should 
be focused mainly on cattle and sheep to increase the ratio of 
beef, mutton, and poultry in meat. The aquatic industry needs 
to mainly promote fish breeding in suburban areas and rice 
fields, vigorously develop netted box fishery, concentrate on 
per-mu yield, develop famous, special, and quality aquatic 
products, and increase the ratio of high-quality aquatic 
products. 
  C. Accelerate the construction of bases for commodity 
production and carry out various agricultural projects. 
  Commodity production bases are concentrated in one area and 
connected to one another. Their production and management are 
on a fairly large scale which is conducive to the popularization 
of technology. Such bases also have a high commodity rate, 
better investment returns, greater promotional effect, a clear 
demonstrative function, and the economy of scale. They are a 
good way to increase the productivity and commodity rate of 
agricultural products in Guizhou Province. In 1944, the 
crop-planting industry should mainly do a good job in 4 counties 
and cities which have been designated as commodity grain bases, 
including Bijie, 23 counties whose grain production is funded 
with special grain production funds, and 9 major grain producing 
counties which have applied for state assistance, including 
Zunyi. Efforts should be made to ensure a good job in the 
construction of bases for flue-cured tobacco, rape, and crop 
seeds. 
  Animal husbandry mainly needs to concentrate on three sets 
of 
12 projects. They are namely, 12 bases for commodity cattle 
(sheep), including Wuchuan and Zhijin, 12 bases for commodity 
hogs with lean meat, including Zunyi and Meitan, and 12 ensilage 
and ammoniation livestock breeding bases, including Wuchuan and 
Xiuwen. The output value of these bases should reach the scale 
of 100 million yuan. Fishery should mainly focus on building 
commodity fish bases in the suburbs of Guiyang and other cities 
to effectively increase the output of fish products. 
  Guizhou Province should continue to carry out throughout the 
province bumper harvest plans, the Spark Plan, high-yield 
demonstration projects, and other high-efficiency demonstration 
projects such as double key-link field, ton-grain field (soil), 
and double-thousand field. In 1994, efforts should be made to 
do a good job in the high-yield demonstration project of 500,000 
mu wheat field in seven counties including Xiuwen and Meitan and 
the high-yield demonstration project of 500,000 mu rape field in 
seven counties including Anshun and Xifeng. 
  D. Vigorously apply science and technology to agriculture 
and 
actively promote useful agricultural technology. 
  In 1994, the following useful agricultural technologies will 
be popularized. "Three hybrid varieties" will be popularized 
over a large area. Some 8.5 million mu of hybrid rice, 6.5 
million mu of hybrid corn, and 2 million mu of hybrid rape will 
be planted. Some 6.5 million mu of dryland will be planted 
using the multi-harvest rotational system. Some 4 million mu of 
hybrid rice will be cultivated using the leaf age pattern 
cultivation method. The technology for comprehensive 
improvement of soil for medium and low yield fields will be 
popularized. We should improve the soil for 500,000 mu of 
medium and low yield fields, plant 5.5 million mu of green 
manure crop, use the semi-dryland cultivation and comprehensive 
utilization technology to transform 800,000 mu of barren land, 
and to promote rational crop fertilizing technology. We should 
conduct soil test and use it as a basis for formulating 
fertilizer for 15 million mu, popularize trace element 
fertilizer for 3 million mu, and promote the comprehensive 
technology to prevent plant and animal diseases and insect 
pests. Plant disease prevention technology should be applied to 
over 80 percent of infected area, and over 70 percent of animals 
should be inoculated. The comprehensive hog-raising technique of 
"two promotion's and five reform's" should be applied to over 40 
percent of farms. With regard to the ensilage and ammoniation 
technique, Guizhou Province should have 300 million kg of 
compost made of ensiled and ammoniated straw and stalks. With 
regards to precision breeding and high yield fish breeding 
techniques, Guizhou Province should breed fish in 1.7 million mu 
of rice paddies, 500,000 mu of netted boxes, and 200,000 mu of 
high-density running water. 
  E. Stabilize and improve the agricultural technology 
promotion system and support the development of specialized 
service organizations run by local people. In view of the 
unstable condition of current agricultural technology promotion 
teams, we should do a good job mainly in the following areas: 
First, we should stabilize organizations and contingents in 
accordance with the guidelines of the National Agricultural Work 
Conference, adopt measures under the leadership of party and 
government organs at all levels to improve working and living 
conditions for agricultural technicians, and speed up the "three 
stability's" work of three stations in townships and towns. 
Second, beginning in 1993 the provincial treasury should set 
aside 3 million yuan each year for 3 consecutive years with 
matching contribution from prefectural and county treasury 
departments for use in the construction of "three stations" in 
townships and towns. All levels should do a good job in 
managing such funds to ensure fulfillment of construction tasks. 
Third, correct guidance should be given to agricultural and 
animal husbandry departments at all levels to establish service 
entities, increase service items, and enhance economic strength. 
Various kinds of associations run by the local people in rural 
areas, which are a reinforcement for socialized service of 
agriculture, are relatively weak in Guizhou Province. 
Agricultural and animal husbandry departments at all levels 
should do a good job in research in this area, conscientiously 
sum up experience, and vigorously encourage and support their 
development. 
  F. Cultivate and build an agricultural market system. In 
1994, focus should be placed on guiding and helping local 
development and circulation organizations, cultivating product 
market, and developing productive factors markets, enabling 
individual small production households to be linked to large 
markets and participate in market competition. The main methods 
are: 1) Increase the service function of rural economic 
organizations and encourage peasants to participate in 
circulation. 2) Develop organizations which integrate 
production, supply, marketing, breeding, planting, processing, 
trade, industry, and agriculture. 3) Use production bases and 
state-run farms and pastoral areas and township enterprises as a 
basis to organize production and marketing complexes. 4) 
Organize and build enterprise groups for pillar industries or 
products. On the basis of primary markets and centering around 
product markets, we should build a market system using fairs as 
its network, including various specialized and wholesale 
markets. With regards to the development of productive factors 
markets, we should focus on guiding the construction of money, 
labor, and technology markets. 
  G. Vitalize state-owned agricultural enterprises and 
vigorously develop the export-oriented economy. State-owned 
agricultural enterprises in Guizhou Province currently suffer 
from such problems as rigid management mechanisms, poor market 
adaptability, and low economic returns. The main measure to 
quickly improve such situations is to increase reform efforts, 
properly and fully utilize existing policies to increase 
management returns through the methods of leasing, renting, 
share-holding, and cooperation. Guizhou Province has made 
definite achievements in foreign economic relations in 
agriculture in recent years. It has established friendly 
relations and started technical and economic cooperation 
projects with over 20 countries and areas. Since the reform and 
opening up, Guizhou Province has absorbed and utilized over 200 
million yuan renminbi of foreign investment. In 1994, Guizhou 
Province will continue to absorb foreign investment and expand 
the scale of foreign fund utilization. 
  H. Make conscientious efforts to reduce peasants' burden. 
Guizhou Province has made definite achievements in this regard. 
In 1994, it will make further efforts to conscientiously 
implement the guidelines of state and provincial documents 
regarding reducing peasants' burdens and ensure that peasants' 
legal rights are protected. 

