BFN 

<F P=106> ["Decree of the president of the Republic of Kazakhstan on </F>
additional measures to ensure legality and law and order" -- 
KAZTAG headline] 
  [Text] [No dateline as received] -- The low effectiveness 
of the measures being taken by bodies of state power and the 
administration to ensure legality and law and order on the 
territory of the Republic is creating serious obstacles to 
socioeconomic transformations and defense of the constitutional 
rights of citizens. 
  (?Especially) dangerous is the continuing growth in 
organized 
crime, corruption, embezzlement, and abuse by officials. Crimes 
committed with the use of firearms are spreading. There are 
considerable shortcomings in the organization of the work of law 
enforcement agencies. 
  With the aim of further strengthening legality, law and 
order, and discipline, and of ensuring the personal and property 
security of citizens, I decree: 
  1. To indicate to the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic 
of Kazakhstan and to local representative and executive bodies 
the untimely and ineffective implementation of the requirements 
of the acts of the president of the Republic of Kazakhstan on 
matters of the fight against crime and defense of the 
constitutional rights of citizens. To oblige officials of the 
state administration bodies to take exhaustive measures to 
strengthen legality and law and order in the Republic. To warn 
heads of ministries, state committees, and departments and heads 
of local administrations about their personal responsibility for 
ensuring public order and the safe-keeping of state property. 
  2. The Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Kazakhstan is 
to: 

  -  Review the progress of carrying out the state program of 
priority measures in the fight against crime and strengthening 
law and order in the Republic of Kazakhstan for 1993-95 and take 
measures to invigorate the work being done. By 1 August 1994 
present proposals on making amendments and additions to the 
above program; 
  -  Draw up and by 1 September 1994 confirm 
government programs to fight drunkenness, alcoholism, and drug 
addiction [passage indistinct] 
  -  Work out an effective mechanism 
for transferring to law enforcement agencies the transport and 
technical property seized and confiscated by court order, and 
also part of the compensation paid for criminal damage. 

  3. The Council for Combatting Crime of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan is to hear reports from the Ministry of Justice, the 
Ministry of Education, and the Ministry of Press and Mass 
Information of the Republic of Kazakhstan on work in legal 
education and training of citizens, propaganda, and explanation 
of legislation and legal policy among the population and raising 
the role of the mass media in the business of instilling respect 
for the law. 
  4. The General Public Prosecutor's Office, the Interior 
Ministry, the National Security Committee, and the Committee on 
State Finance Control under the Cabinet of Ministers of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan are to step up their work to control the 
following issues in order to expose and suppress abuses and 
other violations of legality: 

  -  To observe the order for issuing licenses giving the right 
to export goods, products, and raw materials from the republic, 
and implement the established rules on hard currency operations 
by export enterprises; 
  -  To check the validity of state property 
sales during the process of privatization which is taking place; 
ensure that all the money is received into special accounts; and 
check that the conditions for sale, exchange, and granting for 
temporary use are correctly observed, and that state enterprises 
borrow their main funds correctly; 
  -  To create various 
entrepreneurial structures under state enterprises, 
organizations, and establishments, and prevent any possible use 
of state money and resources for a wrong purpose; 
  -  To ensure that 
the state hard currency funds aimed at restructuring and 
modernizing industry and purchasing a limited range [words 
indistinct] important goods is correctly spent; 
  -  To ensure that 
state, joint-stock, and private banks observe legality and 
established economic norms during the giving of credits and 
loans, and in cash turnover, as well as in the use of state 
credit resources and the cash funds of legal entities. 

  5. The heads of the Republic's enterprises, organizations, 
and establishments are obliged to immediately consider and take 
measures in accord with presentations and directions of law 
enforcement agencies to eliminate any causes and conditions 
which could allow labor team members to violate the law or make 
criminal encroachments on cash funds, goods, or material 
valuables, regardless of the type of ownership. 
  The Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Kazakhstan is to 
submit for consideration by the Supreme Soviet of the Republic 
of Kazakhstan a draft law envisaging greater responsibility on 
the part of authorities for violations of this matter. 
  6. There will be an amnesty for those members of the 
population who voluntary surrender by 1 September 1994 any 
firearms, ammunition, or explosives they may be illegally 
possessing. 
  Citizens who voluntarily hand in weapons, ammunition, or 
explosives will not be subject to the penalties laid down by the 
law. 
  The full weight of the law will apply to those who do not 
comply with this. 
  The Justice Ministry, together with the General Public 
Prosecutor's Office and the Interior Ministry of the Republic of 
Kazakhstan, shall submit for consideration of the Cabinet of 
Ministers of the Republic of Kazakhstan a draft law to increase 
the penalties for carrying, keeping, purchasing, making, or 
selling weapons, ammunition, or explosives. 
  7. The General Public Prosecutor's Office of Kazakhstan, 
together with the Interior Ministry and the National Security 
Committee, should by 1 August 1994 examine the maintenance of 
standard issues, ammunition, and explosives in units and 
subdivisions subordinate to the Defense Ministry, the main 
directorate of the commander in chief of Interior Troops, the 
main directorate of the Border Troops, and the Republican Guard 
of Kazakhstan. The perpetrators should be made to answer for 
any violations that may be found. 
  8. The General Public Prosecutor's Office, the Interior 
Ministry, the National Security Committee, the Justice Ministry, 
the main customs directorate, and the main taxation directorate 
of the Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Kazakhstan should 
carry out by 1 October 1994 an extraordinary appraisal of 
leaders of all ranks and dismiss those not appropriately 
fulfilling their obligations concerning the protection of the 
constitutional rights and freedoms of citizens, and the 
strengthening of law and order. 
  9. The Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Kazakhstan and 
the heads of local administrations, with the participation of 
the Interior Ministry of the Republic of Kazakhstan, should set 
up a taxation militia in accordance with the temporary 
resolution endorsed by the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic 
of Kazakhstan. 
  The Justice Ministry of the Republic of Kazakhstan, together 
with interested ministries and departments, should elaborate and 
submit for consideration to the Cabinet of Ministers a draft law 
on a taxation militia. 
  10. The Transport and Interior Ministries and the heads of 
local administrations should elaborate and implement a set of 
measures to enhance public order and ensure the safety of 
passengers and cargo hauled by road, rail and air. 
  11. The Ministry for Youth Affairs, Tourism, and Sport, the 
Ministries of the Interior and Justice, together with other 
interested ministries and departments, should elaborate and 
submit by 1 September for examination by the Cabinet of 
Ministers a program of actions for state power bodies and the 
directorate for the prevention of juvenile crime, and proposals 
for appropriate changes and additions to the Law on State Youth 
Policy of the Kazakh SSR [Soviet Socialist Republic -- as 
received]. 
  12. The State Property Committee, the Education Ministry, 
the Ministry of Youth Affairs, Tourism, and Sport, and the heads 
of oblast, Almaty, and Leninsk city administrations should by 1 
September 1994 investigate the legality and validity of use of 
places of sport and entertainment, and out-of-school activity 
clubs. They should take appropriate measures if such places are 
being used in a manner not befitting their purpose. 
  13. In conformity with the requirements of this resolution, 
the Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Kazakhstan should 
speedily prepare draft laws foreseeing changes and amendments to 
the current laws. 
  14. Resolution N1004 of the President of Kazakhstan of 4 
December 1992 increasing the responsibility of officials and 
state power organs for the state of discipline, public order, 
and safety, and Resolution N1562 of the President of Kazakhstan 
of 11 February 1994 intensifying the battle against crime should 
be regarded as no longer valid. 
  [signed] President of Kazakhstan [Nursultan] Nazarbayev. 
  [dated] Almaty, 9 June 1994. 

