Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] A high-ranking official of the Department of 
Foreign Affairs yesterday proposed the "internationalization" of 
the territorial disputes in the South China Sea through the 
intervention of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
(ASEAN) and the United Nations to prevent several countries from 
asserting their claims through the use of force. 
  Discarding previous proposals of confining the problem 
within 
the East Asian region, Foreign Affairs Undersecretary Rodolfo 
Severino said that injecting a "degree of internationalization" 
to the South China Sea issue will help lead to a more enduring 
and binding solution to the conflicting claims. 
  Severino presented this proposal during the third 
international workshop on ASEAN-UN cooperation in Peace and 
Preventive Diplomacy in Bangkok, Thailand. The Department of 
Foreign Affairs released copies of his briefing paper to the 
media. [passage omitted] 
  Despite the potential of armed conflict erupting in the 
region due to the disputes, there are no existing mechanisms 
readily available to prevent this scenario, or any concrete 
proposals to resolve the problem peacefully, Severino noted. 
  Severino explained that, ensuring the close cooperation of 
the ASEAN and the UN in peacefully resolving the brewing 
conflict will squelch fears that internationalizing the issue 
will only complicate it and lead to interference by "outside 
powers" who have no direct interests in the problem within the 
South China Sea. "On the other hand, one could argue that some 
degree of internationalization could be a form of preventive 
diplomacy," Severino said. "Focusing the international 
spotlight on a volatile, albeit regional problem, can 
effectively restrain states from resorting to the threat or use 
of armed force." 
  He added that bringing the issue to the United Nations will 
help ensure that any aggressor in the region will be held 
accountable "and will have to face the political consequences of 
his act." 
  Severino said that instead of waiting for the problem to 
erupt into a full-blown conflict, the ASEAN and UN should start 
working hand in hand as soon as possible to prevent any 
instability in the East Asian region. 
  Severino said that involving the ASEAN in the settlement of 
the claims in the South China Sea will limit international 
participation to the positive gains under this proposal. 

