Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Commentary" by XINHUA reporter Duanmu Laidi (4551 2606 </F>
0171 1229): "Britain Can Never Realize Its Attempt To Make 
Chinese Sovereignty in Hong Kong Exist in Name Only"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 5 Mar (XINHUA) -- Owing to the British 
side's recent moves, the Hong Kong issue has again attracted 
worldwide attention. First of all, following an intense 
publicity campaign, Chris Patten instigated the British 
Legislative Council [Legco] in Hong Kong to adopt his partial 
constitutional package. Then, the British side published the 
White Paper in which it unilaterally publicized the so-called 
contents of the Sino-British talks about elections in Hong Kong. 
For the sake of clarification, the Chinese Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs publicized on 28 February the facts of the several 
issues discussed in the Sino-British talks on Hong Kong's 
1994/95 elections, thus exposing to the world the way the 
British violated the Sino-British Joint Declaration, the Hong 
Kong Basic Law, and the accords and understandings that China 
and Britain had reached, as well as the British side's 
deliberate attempts to undermine Sino-British cooperation and 
the Sino-British talks. 
  The recent Sino-British disputes show that, in an attempt to 
extend its colonial interests, Britain may disregard 
international faith, play tricky games, and do whatever it 
wants. They did that during the negotiations, and their recent 
move to unilaterally publicize the so-called contents of the 
Sino-British talks was also no exception. When the talks 
started, the two sides, to create a good atmosphere for the 
talks, reached an agreement that the contents of the talks 
should be kept confidential. China, of course, was not against 
the publication of the contents of the talks at the right time. 
China, being open and aboveboard during the talks, has nothing 
to hide from the world. But since an agreement had been 
reached, the contents of the talks should not have been 
publicized until the two sides consulted one another through 
diplomatic chennels. This is a basic international faith that 
should be abided by. However, the British side, without any 
consultations with China, acted unilaterally to publicize the 
so-called contents of the Sino-British negotiations in an 
unexpected manner on the same day Chris Patten instigated the 
Hong Kong Legco to adopt his partial constitutional package. He 
wanted to use one- sided and distorted facts to shirk to China 
the responsibility for the breakdown of the Sino-British talks, 
taking advantage of the psychology that "first impressions are 
the strongest." People can see how ignominous the British 
side's move was! 
  When the contents of Sino-British talks publicized by the 
Chinese and the British side are analyzed and compared, the 
flaws which the British side tried to hide come to light. For 
example, before the Sino-British talks started, Chinese Vice 
Foreign Minister Jiang Enzhu presented a diplomatic note to 
British Ambassador to China Robin McLaren, presenting to the 
British side the five-point conditions for the reopening of the 
negotiations. The fifth point states: "If the British side 
submits the constitutional package to the Legislative Council 
for discussion, it shows a total lack of sincerity on the part 
of the British side, and it means that China shall not be held 
responsible if the talks break down." But this important note 
is not mentioned at all in the white paper. Moreover, the 
Chinese side again reminded the British side about this point 
during the 17th round of talks, but the white paper also totally 
ignores this reminder. This being the case, how could the 
British side state that the white paper has publicized "all the 
facts"? The world can see that, to hide its total lack of 
sincerity in the talks and to cover up its responsibility for 
the termination of the talk, the British side is ready to 
hoodwink the public! 
  Let us now take a look at the negotiation process. The 
British side states in the white paper that it withdrew from the 
negotiations because it could not achieve a common understanding 
with the Chinese side on two issues. The first one is about 
Legco's single-seat, single-vote voting method; and the second 
one is the elimination of appointed seats on district boards and 
the two municipal councils. The facts publicized by the Chinese 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs show that this is again an ignoble 
move by the British side. First of all, the two sides had yet 
to discuss Legco's voting method, and the Chinese side only 
hoped that more complex issues concerning arrangements for 
Legco's election in 1995 will not be discussed until an accord 
has been reached on issues that can be easier to deal with -- 
issues about arrangements for the 1994/95 elections of district 
boards and the two municipal councils -- because that would help 
the two sides reach an accord. Second, on the issue of 
maintaining the appointed seats, the Chinese side, considering 
the fact that Hong Kong's district boards and the two municipal 
councils were commonly opposed to the elimination of the 
appointment system and considering the system's actual 
operations, proposed that the existing number of appointed seats 
be maintained. The British side, however, disagreed. To reach 
an agreement at an early date, the Chinese side conceded three 
times and came up with a plan which took into consideration the 
two sides' positions and which sidestepped differences so that 
the British side would not have to set up appointed seats before 
30 June 1997 and then the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region [HKSAR] Government can set up a proportionally 
appropriate number of appointed seats according to the relevant 
provisions of the Basic Law. This totally positive and 
constructive proposal fully explained the Chinese side's 
sincerity and flexibility in solving problems. However, in the 
White Paper it has published, the British side not only fails to 
elaborate the specific process, but also distorts it, alleging 
that the Chinese side has violated the HKSAR's autonomy 
prescribed in the Joint Declaration and the Basic Law. Is this 
not another pretext to undermine Sino-British negotiations? 
  In the concluding part of the white paper, the British side 
ascribes the breakdown of the Sino-British negotiations to the 
"basic differences" between "China's far more restrictive 
electoral arrangements with far fewer voters" and the British 
side's "proposal which truly represents the interests of Hong 
Kong and the Hong Kong people." The fact publicized by the 
Chinese side is that, when the two sides almost reached a 
concensus in their talks on the elections of Hong Kong's 
district boards and the two municipal councils, the British side 
suddenly complicated the issue and insisted on incorporating 
Legco's single-seat, single-vote voting method with the 
memorandum of understanding about electoral arrangements for 
regional organizations; then, before the issue was discussed 
further, it brazenly declared that it was instructed to 
terminate the talks. Making such an important announcement 
during the course of the talks fully proves that British side 
had premediated it a long time ago. Later, the British side 
again violated the agreement and submitted Chris Patten's 
partial consitutional package to the British Legco in Hong Kong 
for discussion, thus terminatng the 17-rounds of Sino-British 
talks. The British side must be held responsible for the 
disruption of the Sino-British talks and it can never escape the 
responsibility no matter how it indulges in sophistry with sweet 
words and no matter how the white paper has painstakingly 
glossed over the facts. 
  In the White Paper, the British side tries its utmost to 
defend the longstanding lack of democracy in Hong Kong, but none 
of the explanations are tenable; rather, they fully expose its 
fear of the re-exercising of China's sovereignty over Hong Kong. 
People can see that why Britain never mentioned that it would 
promote democracy in Hong Kong prior to the signing of the 
Sino-British joint declaration in 1984 is because the time in 
those days was not favorable to Britain, but now it talks about 
"democracy" in a big way when there are only a few more years 
left before China re-exercises its sovereignty over Hong Kong. 
This is because it can use this beautiful word to create chaos 
in Hong Kong during its stable transition, to cultivate its own 
influence, and impose a pro-British, anti-China group on China 
so as to turn Hong Kong into a political entity having the 
audacity to demand independence or semi- independence from the 
central government so that Britain's political power and 
influence can continue beyond 1997 and China's sovereignty and 
administrative power will exist in name only. 
  One point stands out clearly from the facts which China and 
Britain have publicized, the scheme of the British side. For 
example, as soon as the negotiations started, the British side 
held firmly to the issue of the Legco members' request to ride 
the so-called "through train" all the way into the HKSAR 
legislative organ, and demanded that the Chinese side come up 
with "objective standards" which are "acceptable to the British 
side." Whether there is a "through train" in 1997 rests 
primarily with whether the arrangements for the 1994/95 
elections are in line with the relevant provisions in the Basic 
Law and whether Hong Kong's political system before 1997 can 
converge with the Basic Law. As for who can ride the "through 
train," they should be acknowledged by the HKSAR Preparatory 
Committee to be formed in 1996. But as soon as the negotiations 
started, the British side brazenly put forth the aforementioned 
demand which violates the Basic Law and China's sovereignty in 
order to keep the anti-China forces it has nurtured. Here is 
another example: During the negotiations, the British side time 
and again wanted to discuss three demands with the Chinese side: 
1) The Hong Kong members of the HKSAR Preparatory Committee 
should be produced through Sino-British consultations; 2) If the 
HKSAR agrees, the Chinese Government should support the 
Legislative Council's general election in 2007; and 3) The 
electoral committee in 1995 should henceforth become the model 
for producing the committee for nominating the first HKSAR Chief 
Executive as well as the committee for electing all the 
subsequent chief executives. These issues are irrelevant to the 
agenda of the negotiations. The first demand has been 
prescribed in the Basic Law, and the second and third demands 
should be issues to be dealt with after 1997, and that will be 
China's internal affairs after China resumes the exercise of its 
sovereignty in Hong Kong. That fact that the British side 
should come up with these demands nakedly bares its intention to 
cultivate its agents for Hong Kong's political stage after 1997 
to extend its administrative power there. 
  The foundation for Sino-British cooperation to achieve a 
stable transition in Hong Kong has now been destroyed. Under 
such circumstances, the Chinese side can only intensify all 
preparations so that, after Britain's three-tiered political 
framework in Hong Kong ends on 30 June 1997, it can be 
reorganized according to the decision made by the National 
People's Congress as well as the provisions in the Basic Law. 
What is gratifying is that the Preliminary Working Committee 
for the HKSAR Preparatory Committee has already started doing 
what is essential, and more and more Hong Kong people have 
become interested in or have taken part in Hong Kong's 
transitional affairs. We believe that any interference from the 
British side can only be compared to an ant trying to topple a 
giant tree, and that Hong Kong's future will be even brighter. 

