Language: <F P=105> Lao </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "A New Milestone in the History of Lao-Cambodian </F>
Relations"] 
  [Text] At the invitation of His Excellency [H.E.] Saman 
Vi-gnaket, chairman of the National Assembly [NA] of the Lao 
People's Democratic Republic [LPDR], Samdech Chea Sim, chairman 
of the National Assembly of the Kingdom of Cambodia, and his 
delegation paid an official friendship visit to our country from 
5 to 7 March. 
  During their stay in Laos, Samdech Chea Sim and the 
delegation paid courtesy calls on H.E. Nouhak Phoumsavan and 
H.E. Khamtai Siphandon, respectively president and prime 
minister of the LPDR. The party also laid a wreath at the 
Monument of Unknown Combatants and visited many places of 
economic and cultural significance in Vientiane Municipality and 
Vientiane Province. 
  An official meeting was held to exchange views on the 
situation of the two National Assemblies at the National 
Assembly Hall in an atmosphere of friendship, sincerity, and 
mutual understanding. The two sides expressed satisfaction with 
the time-honored traditional fine relations of friendship 
between Laos and Cambodia -- two adjacent countries which have 
developed close ties of good neighborliness and multifaceted 
cooperation in coordinating and improving the methods of 
cooperation to become more efficient for their common and 
unilateral interests in the immediate and long-term future. 
  An indication of such goodwill and friendship has been 
displayed in the recent exchange of visits by the high-level 
delegations headed by the prime ministers of the two countries, 
the July 1993 Laos-Cambodia Joint Statement, and the 
Laos-Cambodia Joint Communique and Agreement on Economic, 
Scientific, Technical, and Cultural Cooperation signed by the 
two governments in Phnom Penh in November 1993 which marked an 
important step in the development of Lao-Cambodian relations and 
cooperation in the new period. 
  The success of the visit constitutes a glorious sign of 
historic significance in the relationship between the 
legislative institutions of the two countries. The multiethnic 
Lao people wholeheartedly hail this development of great 
historic significance to the Lao-Cambodian relations and pledge 
to cooperate with the Cambodian people to overcome all 
difficulties and obstacles in enhancing and making the relations 
of friendship and cooperation between the two countries more 
glorious, thereby positively contributing to fulfilling the 
ardent aspirations of the two peoples in building and developing 
our respective countries with peace, independence, and 
prosperity. 

