Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "No Signing of Agreements Before Resolving All </F>
Problems"] 
  [Text] Jordan has reiterated the need to resolve all 
problems with Israel before signing any peace agreement. There 
are many topics on the Jordanian-Israeli agenda that need urgent 
solution. There will be no solution if Israel does not 
acknowledge or respond to Jordan's requirements related to 
borders and occupied Jordanian territory, water and its fair 
distribution, or the issues of refugees who are still living in 
camps under the supervision of the United Nations Relief and 
Works Agency. 
  His Majesty King Husayn addressed these issues in his 
statements in the United States. He also presented them clearly 
in front of the representatives of the American Jewish 
communities and the members of the U.S. Council on Foreign 
Relations. No peace would be achieved if these rights were not 
recognized or the necessary and appropriate solutions were not 
reached. 
  King Husayn noted, in one of his statements, that he heard 
some suggestions saying: Why does Jordan not sign a peace 
agreement with Israel? The king's answer was: There will be no 
signing of agreements before reaching a just and comprehensive 
peace, not with Jordan only, but also with all involved Arab 
parties. We do not seek incomplete or fragile peace, but a 
peace that will be accepted by the coming generations. We seek 
a peace that will consolidate security and stability in the 
region; a peace that will pave the way for progress and 
prosperity in the region; and a peace that will provide an 
honorable life for people, relieve their suffering, fear, 
concern, and deprivation, and save them from the dangers of 
fighting and wars. 
  King Husayn wanted to reiterate this so that everybody will 
know that Jordan has not deviated from its sound national and 
pan-Arab course to which it has been adhering since the 
beginning of the Arab-Israeli conflict and the Palestine 
question. Jordan will remain, despite all circumstances, the 
patient and indefatigable country which defends its rights and 
those of its nation with honor and truthfulness. 

