BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, May 31 (XINHUA) -- China is to develop and 
put into production at least 300 new and major chemical products 
every year between 1996 and 2000 under a government program to 
prepare the chemical industry for the next century. 
  Minister of the Chemical Industry Gu Xiulian said today that 
by 2000 some 65 percent of China's 1,200 major chemical products 
should meet international standards. Moreover, fine chemical 
products should account for half of the chemical production. 
  She was speaking to about 300 officials and experts at the 
third national conference on scientific and technological 
progress in the chemical industry, who are to give the finishing 
touches over the next three days to the 1996-2000 program for 
science and technology. 
  The program aims to bring the industry up to international 
standards, and calls for concentrating human and financial 
resources on projects that have a direct bearing on the entire 
national economy and problems that affect the development of the 
chemical industry as a whole, she added. 
  "We aim at narrowing the gap between China and the developed 
countries in the chemical industry, and we'll prepare ourselves 
for tackling issues of key importance to China's development in 
the 21st century," she said. 
  Under the program, priority will be given to nine fields, 
including the development of new catalysts and gas separation 
methods, as well as biochemistry and the application of 
computers to the chemical industry. 
  China is also to become capable of designing and building 
synthetic ammonia plants producing a total of 300,000 tons a 
year with natural gas as the material and urea plants capable of 
turning out 520,000 tons a year using what is known as the 
"ammonia steam process". 
  It will also develop six series of fine chemical products up 
to the latest world standards, including insecticides, dyestuffs 
and chemicals used in electronics products. 
  "Our policy is to concentrate on what is advanced and new, 
on 
complete sets of equipment and special-purpose equipment, on 
what saves energy and on what is environmentally clean," Gu told 
the meeting. 
  By 2000, she said, high-tech enterprises will be yielding 
ten 
percent of China's chemical industrial output. Work will also 
be done to promote the nationwide use of 30 items of chemical 
technology which have proved important to the technological 
progress of the whole chemical industry. 
  The participants are also to discuss how to commercialize 
research findings, Gu said, adding that the problem of research 
and design institutes being separate from enterprises "must be 
overcome". 
  The minister also called for expanding the industry's 
external co-operation, suggesting that domestic research and 
design institutes establish "sister relations" with 
internationally known institutes for the joint development of 
science and technology. 
  Over the past two years, she noted, the ministry has signed 
agreements on all-round co-operation with a dozen transnational 
companies, including Du Pont of the United States and Bell of 
Germany. 
  Also signed were agreements with the GE company of the 
United 
States and the BASF company of Germany on co-operation in 120 
specific projects. 

