BFN 

<F P=106> [Pool report] </F>
  [Text] Belgrade, April 7 (TANJUG) -- The North Atlantic 
Council ignores the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (F.R.Y.) plea 
to the International Court of Justice in The Hague against all 
NATO member-countries for resorting to ultimatum and threatening 
to use force in the former Yugoslav republic of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  TANJUG has learned from reliable sources that when the North 
Atlantic Council recently met at the level of permanent 
representatives it held a debate on the F.R.Y. plea for the 
Hague court to institute proceedings against the NATO 
member-countries for violating international law by resorting to 
ultimatum and the threat with the use of force. 
  The North Atlantic Council on February 9 threated to launch 
air strikes against Bosnian Serbs and Moslems unless they 
withdrew or placed under U.N. control their heavy weapons in and 
around Sarajevo within ten days. The ultimatum was interpreted 
in the West as applying only to the Bosnian Serb side. 
  TANJUG has learned from the same sources that a broader 
discussion about the F.R.Y. plea at the meeting of the North 
Atlantic Council was prevented by the U.S. representative, who 
insisted on his government's position that the F.R.Y. plea did 
not deserve a reply because it was politically motivated. The 
U.S. representative urged the NATO member-countries not to 
recognize the Hague court's jurisdiction in the case. 
  It is set out in NATO circles that the U.S. prevented a 
substantive debate and avoided a confrontation with the NATO 
member-countries, such as Greece, who had reservations when 
decisions concerning military operations in Bosnia-Herzegovina 
were being taken. 
  According to the available information, the International 
Court of Justice is still waiting for replies from the NATO 
member-countries whom it has asked in writing to let the court 
know whether they accept the court's jurisdiction in the 
respective case. 
  The F.R.Y. on February 18 filed the plea against the NATO 
member-countries. 
  The NATO ultimatum and threat to use force were gross 
violations of Articles 2 and 53 of the U.N. Charter. Article 2 
bans the threat with or use of force, and Article 53 enables 
certain measures to be taken but only on condition they are 
decided on by the U.N. Security Council. 
  It is well known that the U.N. Security Council had not 
taken 
a decision for the Bosnian Serbs to withdraw their heavy weapons 
in the Sarajevo area by February 20, and that U.N. 
Secretary-General Butrus Butrus-Ghali had asked NATO only to 
report to him about whether it was ready possibly to intervene. 
Neither the Security Council nor the secretary-general had 
authorized NATO to set ultimatums and threaten with the use of 
force. 

