BFN 

  [Excerpts] Cairo, 26 Apr (MENA)--The 10th session of the 
Arab Justice Ministers Council began at the Arab League 
headquarters here tonight under the chairmanship of United Arab 
Emirates Justice Minister Dr. 'Abdallah Bin-'Imran Turyam. 
  The ministers will discuss during their two days of meetings 
a number of Arab issues that will boost joint Arab action, 
including the unification of Arab legislation, the draft law on 
unified financial transactions, the unified criminal draft law, 
the plan to unify civic measures, the Arab human rights plan, 
the unified Arab draft law on land registration, and the plan on 
preventing the phenomena of extremism and terrorism. [passage 
omitted] 
  Addressing the meeting, Arab League Secretary General Dr. 
'Ismat 'Abd-al-Majid stressed that the draft agreement on 
preventing the phenomena of extremism and terrorism is one of 
the most important issues that the justice ministers will 
discuss. He said: This issue is of concern to Arab citizens 
all across our Arab nation because of its close link to the Arab 
nation's values and traditions. These values and traditions are 
based on rejection of violence and terrorism and on adherence to 
the principles of the tolerant Islamic shari'ah, the principles 
of right and justice, and commitment to the international 
charters and the principles of public and private international 
law. 
  He added that the sons of the Arab nation are looking toward 
this meeting and waiting for the resolutions that will have a 
bearing on the core of the various aspects of Arab society. They 
are waiting to see the effect this will have on strengthening 
and bolstering Arab solidarity, which is of extreme importance 
in view of international and regional changes. The Arab 
countries have to pay attention to these changes and deal with 
them from a united Arab stand based on coordination and 
integration of the Arab efforts so as to back the Arab 
negotiator in the process of a comprehensive and just peace. 
  Dr. 'Abd-al-Majid called on the Arab countries to prepare to 
deal with the economic changes brought about by the signing of 
the "GATT" agreement and to seek political solidarity and 
economic integration. He added that this can be brought about 
through the achievement of Arab reconciliation. [passage 
omitted] 

