Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Lima, 9 Feb (NOTIMEX) -- Today, Peruvian Interior 
Minister Juan Briones Davila rejected alleged ties between 
high-ranking Army officers and drug traffickers as claimed by a 
former DEA agent. 
  The high-ranking military officer expressed his concern that 
some press have given credence to statements "by any person 
accusing officers of having covered up activities of powerful 
drug trafficker Demetrio Chavez Penaherrera, also known as 
`Vaticano.'" 
  "Every report is investigated, but we must treat this 
information with great care," the minister stated. 
  Chavez Penaherrera was mentioned as the connection between 
Peruvian drug traffickers and Colombia's Cali Cartel, which 
after the death of Medellin Cartel leader Pablo Escobar controls 
90 percent of drug shipments to the United States. 
  "Vaticano" was captured on 13 January in Cali and was 
deported the next day to Peru, where he is being prosecuted for 
drug trafficking offenses and ties to subversive groups. 
  Last Sunday on a Lima Channel 9 program, former DEA agent 
Augusto del Rio said "Vaticano" had the personal protection of 
Army troops deployed in the area of Alto Huallaga. 
  More than 60 percent of coca leaf produced in the Andean 
nation is grown in the region, 700 km northeast of Lima. It is 
also considered the main storage center for international drug 
trafficking. 
  Del Rio, who has infiltrated drug trafficking organizations 
since 1988, said that between February 1992 and March 1993 he 
tried to capture Chavez Penaherrera during the "Campanazo" [Toll 
of a Bell] operation, but he failed because he was protected by 
the military in the area. 
  Del Rio accused Generals Eduardo Bellido Mora and Alberto 
Arciniega Huby, former chiefs of the Huallaga Front 
political-military command in the jungle region of San Martin, 
of protecting "Vaticano" in exchange for large sums of money. 
  He said Bellido Mora foiled the "Campanazo" operation from 
which authorities hoped to seize some 3,000 kg of drug, but only 
managed to seize some 500 kg of cocaine basic paste. 
  Interior Minister Gen. Juan Briones Davila stressed that 
Bellido Mora is an "excellent officer" and as chief of the 
Huallaga Front fought "narcoterrorism" in that part of the 
Peruvian Amazon region in an efficient manner. 

