BFN 

  [Text] The president of the Republic, engineer Juan Carlos 
Wasmosy, yesterday reported that there are people and segments 
who want to destabilize his government. Although he did not 
supply any names, he described these people and segments as 
professionals of "showiness [vedettismo] and populism who 
sometimes use `ungodly' methods." Wasmosy made these remarks 
after inaugurating the Paraguayan Airlines [Aerolineas 
Paraguayas] (Arpa) flights at the international airport. 
  Wasmosy openly complained because he believes there are 
people and segments who, through "showiness and populism, and 
sometimes using ungodly methods," are seeking to destabilize his 
government. He noted that despite this situation, the Paraguayan 
people and the Armed Forces "welcome the Arpa company." The 
president did not identify the people and segments he was 
talking about, but his remarks were interpreted as referring to 
people and segments who have recently been criticizing him, like 
trade union and peasant leaders, especially after the 2 May 
incidents during the nationwide strike called by the United 
Workers Trade Union Federation (CUT), the National Workers 
Federation (CNT), and the Paraguayan Confederation of Workers 
(CPT). 
  Entrepreneurs are also consistently criticizing the Wasmosy 
administration, claiming it is ineffective in the struggle 
against corruption. 
  Asked about a demonstration held on the evening of 13 May by 
various segments of the public, Interior Minister Carlos Podesta 
said: "They gathered and dispersed in an orderly manner. The 
criticism against the government is part of a script drawn up by 
some people who participated in the march of silence." 
  The interior minister noted that not all the people who 
participated in the march had the same goal. He emphasized: 
"Some of my relatives participated in the march, and they have 
different beliefs." 
  Moving on, the interior minister emphasized that it is 
necessary to mention that this type of demonstration may be held 
under the state of law, and that when they are held within the 
rules of the game, all demonstrations are held normally, as it 
is appropriate. 
  Asked about the consistent efforts to have Congress 
interpellate him, the interior minister said he is willing to go 
to Congress whenever he is called in order to supply all the 
information that congressmen might require. He emphasized: "I am 
a public servant, and I have the duty of reporting to the people 
whenever it is appropriate or necessary." 
  Podesta rejected reports that the government is allegedly 
preparing some court actions against trade union leaders and 
journalists. He concluded by saying: "I have actually been 
informed that there are people who have felt that their 
interests have been harmed, and that these people are 
considering the possibility of filing court actions, but the 
government has no part in these cases." 

