Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by "P.O.": "30,000-km Optical Fiber Cable From </F>
England to Japan. Consortium of Companies Will Invest Around $1 
Billion/Additional Partners Conceivable/Price Differentiation 
According to Market Conditions"] 
  [Text] London--A multinational consortium of companies 
under American leadership is presently preparing to run the 
first optical fiber cable from Great Britain to Japan. Gabriel 
Yackanich, president of the FLAG Consortium in London, has 
reported that this telecommunications link will be put into 
service at the beginning of 1996. 
  Exploration work for the precise routing of the cable is 
being performed already now by quite a number of ships. 
Yackanich estimates at "around $1 billion" the total cost of 
this 30,000-km-long optical fiber cable link between West Europe 
and the Far East. 
  While there are already cable links both across the Atlantic 
and Pacific, which each permit 400,000 to 450,000 simultaneous 
telephone connections (with at the same time a multitude of call 
capabilities), according to Yackanich the route between Europe 
and the Far East has been developed only extremely poorly in 
most national sections. 
  There are only around 17,000 telephone links via cable in 
national sections here. This applies to the Near East and across 
the Indian Ocean, for example. The new cable having a capacity 
of 120,000 connections, permitting as many as 600,000 telephone 
calls simultaneously, accordingly means multiplication of the 
intensity of offered telecommunications traffic. 
  The name FLAG in this connection stands for Fiberoptic Link 
Around the Globe. However, it is not yet possible to predict 
whether this cable will one day really encircle the earth. For 
example, the fact that New York and London are not linked with 
one another via the FLAG cable has not least legal reasons that 
are a consequence of restrictions on telecommunications 
companies in the United States. Nevertheless, its continuation 
(to America or Australia for example) has by no means been ruled 
out, as was intimated in London. 
  The FLAG cable is to have 13 stations to begin with. It will 
begin with Great Britain and extend through Gibraltar, Italy, 
Egypt, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, India, Thailand, 
Malaysia, Indonesia, Hongkong and Korea to Japan. However, 
additional terminal connections have by no means been ruled out. 
  The active selling of cable capacities to potential 
customers 
will begin soon and is to be concluded in the middle of next 
year. Here it will essentially be a question of postal, 
telegraph and telephone and telecommunications administrations 
as customers for FLAG, as Yackanich expressly emphasized. In 
contrast to its satellite competition, the FLAG Consortium is 
emphasizing above all the interference-free service of 
underwater cable. 
  At the same time FLAG is banking on a different kind of 
marketing policy. In contrast to the usual pricing in 
telecommunications, the absolute distance of a communication via 
the FLAG cable will play no role with regard to its price. 
Rather the "price differentiation" will be done just according 
to market conditions, and thus according to the demand. Here 
Yackanich drew a comparison with the pricing policy of the 
airlines, whose prices in broad sectors also depend not in the 
least on the distance. 
  Thus far four without exception private-sector partners 
belong to the FLAG Consortium. They include--from the United 
States--the Nynex Corporation, which is involved almost 
exclusively in the telecommunications business, and Gulf 
Associates, an investment firm. 
  The Near East partner is the Dallah Al-Baraka business group 
of Saudi Arabia, and, finally, the Japanese partner is the 
Marubeni Corp. business firm of Tokyo. The inclusion of 
additional partners, from the Near East for example, is 
considered very likely, however. 
  It is worthy of note from the service viewpoint that the 
link 
between the Mediterranean and the Red Sea will have redundancy 
for security reasons. An additional land cable is to be laid as 
a standby, besides the FLAG underwater cable that will run 
between Alexandria and Port Said and on to Suez. 

