BFN 

  [Excerpts] [Announcer] This morning the Lebanese Army 
engaged Israeli aircraft as they staged numerous low-altitude 
sorties over al-Nabatiyah and Iqlim al-Tuffah. The Israeli 
enemy's artillery has been bombarding several areas in the 
south. The NATIONAL NEWS AGENCY correspondent in al-Nabatiyah 
reports: 
  [Correspondent] Since 0630 this morning Israeli warplanes 
have not left the area. They are flying at very low altitude 
and staging mock raids over the al-Nabatiyah and Iqlim al-Tuffah 
areas. The Lebanese Army ground defenses in both areas are 
confronting the aircraft. At 0800 today, Israeli artillery 
began bombarding Tallat Mlita in Iqlim al-Tuffah. The same area 
came under a similar barrage after midnight. Al-Luwayzah came 
under an Israeli barrage from the al-Zaffatah positions. The 
barrage was accompanied by shelling of the al-Litani River basin 
and nearby areas from Tallat 'Alman and Tallat al-Shumariyah. 
The Israelis directed machine-gun fire at Zawtar al-Gharbiyah 
and Zawtar al-Sharqiyah. The Israeli planes staged numerous 
flights over al-Nabatiyah and Iqlim al-Tuffah last night and 
dropped dozens of flares. [passage omitted] 
  [Announcer] Several areas in the south, notably the Tyre 
area, came under violent artillery bombardment after midnight 
last night amid numerous Israeli overflights. The Lebanese Army 
engaged the Israeli aircraft with all types of antiaircraft 
fire. The NATIONAL NEWS AGENCY correspondent in Tyre reports: 
  [Correspondent] The Israeli enemy escalated its aggression 
at 
midnight last night. The villages of the south, particularly in 
the western and central sectors, experienced a difficult night 
as the enemy and its Lahdist [South Lebanese Army] agents 
committed acts of aggression against peaceful villages. At 
about midnight, the bombardment was extended to the outskirts of 
Srifa, where four 155-mm rounds fell. Since 0030, the Israeli 
aircraft have been staging mock raids. The planes are flying at 
very low altitude over the area The Lebanese Army's artillery 
has engaged the Israeli aircraft. 
  Israeli gunboats raked the southern coast with machine-gun 
fire last night. The bombardment continued until O200. Several 
155-mm shells landed in the outskirts of Kafra, Yatar, and Haris 
from the Israeli positions in Muhaybib. Israeli helicopters 
flew over the entire coastal area up to the villages adjacent to 
the border zone, dropping flares. The Israeli aircraft flew 
over the area until 0800 today. 
  Panic is gripping the citizens, while the resistance is 
massing its forces. 

