Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Lawrence Chung] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, Jan 24 (AFP) -- A pro-democracy Chinese 
dissident who fled China after the 1989 Tiananmen massacre, now 
facing repatriation to the mainland, called on Beijing Monday to 
stop persecuting his relatives and friends. 
  "Because of my involvement in the pro-democracy campaign 
almost five years ago, I was branded a rebel, and my relatives 
and friends were spied on and purged," Yin Chin, a former 
journalist, said. "I sincerely hope that China can spare my old 
mother, my wife, my daughter and my friends," he added. 
  Yin, 36, previously a reporter for the Taiyuan Daily News in 
China's Shanxi province, and bureau chief of the Shanxi Economic 
Daily, sneaked into Taiwan in July 1993. He was put into a 
detention home for five months before being transferred to a 
small hostel run by the Free China Relief Association, a group 
dealing with asylum-seekers from China, and is now waiting for a 
foreign government to give him political asylum. The dissident 
could be repatriated if no foreign government agrees to take him 
before the end of this year. 
  Yin told AFP he had been persecuted since June 4, 1989, when 
hundreds of Chinese dissidents were violently crushed by the 
Chinese military in Tiananmen Square in Beijing. "I was 
arrested shortly after the incident and put behind bars for 
three years. After I was released, nobody dared to hire me for 
work. In the end I became a street vendor," Yin said. 
  Yin was arrested in September, 1989 for making speeches 
critical of the Chinese government, including attacking the lack 
of press freedom and democracy in China, and joining public 
protests. He was released in 1992. "I couldn't find any job. 
I was seriously beaten in jail by the wardens and my (right) 
leg was broken," he said, adding that friends later helped him 
escape to Hong Kong in late 1992 to apply for political asylum. 
But the Hong Kong government refused to give him amnesty, and 
sent him back to China, he said, calling the action "inhuman." 
  He said his experience was a typical of hundreds of smaller 
figures in the short-lived pro-democracy movement in China. 
"Many of these people had been turned down by foreign 
governments when they asked for political asylum. A number of 
them hid in the border area of Burma and Thailand, fleeing 
communist pursuit and avoiding arrest by Thai or Burmese 
police," he said. 
  "The Taiwan government does not want to take me either. I 
sneaked into Taiwan last year along with a group of stowaways, 
but was immediately arrested by the coast guard," Yin said. 
"They did not believe I was one of the pro-democracy figures, 
calling me a liar, a beggar....I was beaten and my leg was 
broken again," he said. He said Taiwan's Mainland Affairs 
Council (MAC) later learned of his case and arranged for him to 
stay at the hostel where he was given better treatment. 
  Jackson Chen, an MAC section chief in charge of 
international 
affairs, told AFP the hostel now housed five Chinese dissidents, 
including Yin. "They are applying through local and 
international human rights groups for foreign shelters," he 
said, but added if no foreign governments took them within a 
year, they would be repatriated back to China. 
  He said under Taiwan law, any mainland Chinese sneaking into 
Taiwan was subject to repatriation. "The government here has 
made special consideration for their cases and allows them to 
stay here for one year before repatriation," he said. 
  Hsu Pei-tzu, secretary-general of the Taipei-based Chinese 
Association for Human Rights, said his group was doing all it 
could to help Yin and other dissidents find foreign shelters. 

