Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The world rings in two certainties with the new 
year: capitalism and free markets are in; and the new GATT 
regime, going by what the advanced capitalist nations say, has 
firmed up free trade. The industrialised countries have no use 
for a world order that enables poorer nations to catch up with 
them. It is sufficient if the poor countries open up their 
markets to the industrialised countries. The rich countries of 
course need a decade to fully open up their markets to the rest 
of the world. Knowledge is now a commercial property without 
obligations to any one, and with the power to exercise the 
property right to restrict exports by the leaseholder. No 
chances can be taken with the Asian nations: one Japan has been 
lesson enough for Europe and America. Never has the 
international division of labour been more blatantly loaded in 
favour of the dominant. Even agriculture has not been spared. 
There are no compulsions to pull the punches in a unipolar 
world. The year that has been rung out has yielded to the 
entrenchment of the world by the advanced capitalist countries. 
  For India, the new year rings in two jarring certainties. It 
must push up exports to tackle the external debt crisis, but 
exports of manufactures will depend on how rapidly 
multinationals relocate their production in this country. This 
dependence stems from the absolute control over technology 
conferred by the new GATT on multinationals. The domestic 
private sector will also have to play second fiddle because its 
access to cheap international capital is nowhere near that 
available to the multinationals. It may seem that the public 
sector enterprises are, by virtue of their size, better-placed 
to enter into strategic alliances; however, in a world in which 
there are only two or three players in major industries, as in 
telecommunications or in heavy power equipment, strategic 
alliances will have to yield the dominant say to multinationals. 
Certainly one then is that globalisation will see the retreat of 
domestic initiative. Certainty two is that foreign investment 
will have to be accepted on terms dictated by the 
multinationals. The country will have to lump the terms, however 
outrageous (INDIAN EXPRESS report in the issue of December 31 on 
the conditions, including a 10-year tax holiday, set out by US 
West for its $351 million telecom project in India is but a 
straw in the wind). 
  The allotted role in the international order requires grant 
of fiscal giveaways, led by a drastic reduction in import 
duties. After providing for burgeoning public debt servicing, 
the fisc will have little left for investment in neglected 
infrastructure and for social sector spending. Failure to 
satisfactorily resolve the competing claims will mean low 
growth, inflation and high interest rates. Beginning with 1994, 
the travails of structural adjustment will become tragically 
visible. 

