Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ortrun B&ubreve;hling, German Research Service, </F>
Bonn, under the rubric "Course of Technology": "Wind Energy/New 
Technology Improves Availability/1200 MW by Year 2000. 
Government Subsidies Causing Flood of Applications to the 
Federal Research Ministry to Grow"; first paragraph is an 
introduction] 
  [Text] 23 Nov 93 (HANDELSBLATT-TL)--The coastal areas of 
Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein blessed with a strong breeze 
want to cover, via ambitious subsidy programs, around five 
percent of their electric power demand by means of wind power by 
the year 2000. The construction of 8000 installations is planned 
in Lower Saxony alone. That such goals can be attained is 
definitely confirmed by a study prepared at the request of the 
Federal Ministry for Research and Technology (BMFT), that was to 
find out what contribution wind energy can make to the Federal 
Republic of Germany's energy supply in the next 10 to 15 years. 
  The authors' intent was to provide a picture as close to 
reality as possible. Therefore they investigated, in addition to 
the technical assumptions and economic factors, also whether 
financial backers were prepared to invest in wind power, whether 
the manufacturers of wind power units are able to meet the 
growing demand besides, and whether the today still tedious 
licensing process could slow development. 
  In addition, they investigated whether easy integration into 
the local power system would be ensured for areas having a 
favorable wind situation. Besides, they had to be outside 
wildlife sanctuaries and nature preserves in order to be 
included in the study at all. Wooded areas were also excluded, 
because, in the authors' opinion, the gain obtained by the 
exploitation of wind energy does not compensate for the loss 
that occurs by the clearing of forests. Taking all these factors 
into account, the study's conclusion is that it is possible to 
expect that in the year 2000 all the wind power installations in 
Germany together could generate approximately the power of a 
nuclear power plant (around 1200 MW). 
  However, without government subsidies it will go far worse 
for the future of wind power. At present the federal research 
ministry is administering the republic's largest subsidy 
program, the so-called 250-megawatt program, that grants 
operators of wind power installations an operating cost subsidy 
for a term of about 10 years, or optionally a one-time 
investment subsidy. The ministry has been struggling with a 
veritable flood of applications since in 1991, through an 
amendment to the electric power supply legislation, it became 
substantially more attractive for private operators to deliver 
to electric power companies electricity that they do not consume 
themselves. 
<H5>  Climate Tax Could Spur Wind Wheels On </H5>
  However, the funds are limited because the program was 
established exclusively for research purposes. Facilities are 
being subsidized up to a total capacity of 250 MW, 120 MW of 
which are already in service, and BMFT has applications already 
today for an additional 1129 MW. However, the Federal Ministry 
of Economics would then be in charge of subsidy programs that 
exceed this scope. 
  Only the state programs of Lower Saxony and 
Schleswig-Holstein, that want to subsidize 2000 MW and 1000 MW 
respectively by the year 2000, offer substantial prospects. 
Accordingly the new states could be placed at a disadvantage 
when the federal republic's subsidy money runs out. Sixty-eight 
wind power installations having a total capacity of 11 MW have 
been erected there since 1990. This represents about five 
percent of the total wind energy capacity installed in Germany. 
This percentage can be increased to 20 percent by the year 2000, 
the authors of the study say. 
  Admittedly, the direct government subsidizing of wind power 
could become unnecessary with the introduction of the debated 
carbon dioxide tax. Because the construction of wind power 
installations is very costly, the use of wind energy because of 
an increase in the price of electricity would be substantially 
more economical. However, the introduction of the carbon dioxide 
tax will still fail because of the differing interests of 
several member countries of the European Union (EU). Therefore, 
the federal government is now considering the introduction of an 
energy tax at the national level. 
  Wolfgang Mayer's study published by Resch Verlag 
[Publishers] 
in 1992 under the title "Exploitation of Wind Energy in 
Germany," however, does not take into account the contribution 
technical advances could make toward the economic efficiency of 
wind power. In this connection, Graduate Engineer Aloys Wobben 
of the Enercon company in Wilhelmshafen recently presented the 
latest developments in this field at a Eurosolar show in Bonn. 
  In the meantime the company's first 300-kilowatt facility 
has 
been freed of several repair-prone and thereby expensive 
components. So, gears and linkages are unnecessary, because the 
rotor blades now transmit their mechanical energy directly to 
the electricity-producing generator. Therefore the facilities 
can be built substantially more inexpensively. In Wobben's 
opinion the wind power units' technical development is still far 
from complete. He admits great prospects for a unit, developed 
within the EC's Wega-2 program, that has a capacity of one 
megawatt and is to come onto the market in 1995. Besides, 
technical innovations could result in the fact that locations in 
the interior also will be more attractive in the future. 
  But not even wind energy can fulfill the dream of a form of 
energy without any influence on the environment. Wind power 
installations can have a lasting influence on the migratory 
behavior of some species of birds. The birds shun their vicinity 
when looking for suitable resting places. They are a problem 
above all in proximity to dikes, because migratory birds use the 
dikes as orientation points. "We are for wind energy because we 
do not want to exchange nature conservation for environmental 
protection," says a supporter of the German Nature Conservation 
Alliance. However, the legislature's measures, like the 
guidelines for the erection of wind power units prepared by the 
Lower Saxony environment ministry, for example, have often not 
been sufficient. The protection of additional areas is necessary 
so that the "achievements in environmental protection do not" 
bring in their train "losses in nature conservation." To this 
aim the BMFT study also calls for further studies of the 
possible effects on the animal world of the use of wind power. 

