BFN 

  [Text] Vilnius, May 18, BNS -- Lithuania has already 
created a democratic government structure, secured the 
principles of democracy in social life and established a legal 
system, Lithuanian Prime Minister said Wednesday [18 May]. 
  Speaking at a World Bank conference that opened in Paris, 
Slezevicius presented his country's investment program and 
economic strategy. 
  The premier said the economic reforms carried out by the 
Lithuanian Government are aimed at free-market transformations 
and integration into Europe. Slezevicius noted that Lithuania 
was one of the first former Soviet republics to become a member 
of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. 
  Introducing Lithuania's economic strategy, Slezevicius said 
the government seeks to achieve economic stability and to carry 
out structural reforms. He said the primary tasks are to make 
Lithuania's monetary and fiscal policies firmer, to liberalize 
export and import, to reduce government subsidies to enterprises 
and individuals. 
  The Lithuanian premier said the process of state-property 
privatization, introduction of a stable national currency and 
the value-added tax, as well as the creation of the currency 
board helped curb inflation. In Slezevicius' words, inflation 
should not exceed 35-50 percent this year and should be reduced 
to 15-20 percent next year. 
  The premier said Lithuania is now entering a new stage of 
restructuring the economy. Slezevicius said a legal framework 
stimulating the private sector and foreign investments in it is 
currently under preparation. He said primary attention in 
reorganizing enterprises is paid to investments and economic 
development. 
  Slezevicius said the Lithuanian Government intends to 
complete the first stage of privatization this year and to start 
the next one, during which the principle of giving away property 
will be no longer applied. Privatization will be carried out 
for cash, foreign investors and Lithuanian citizens will have 
equal rights in the process, the premier said. 
  Introducing Lithuania's investment program for 1995-1997, 
Slezevicius said priority will be given to energy, 
transportation and environment protection. 
  Slezevicius emphasized that Lithuania is still dependent on 
Russia's energy resources. The premier said the Lithuanian 
Government will seek to increase the reliability of primary 
energy supplies, to use energy more rationally, to upgrade the 
safety of the Ignalina nuclear power plant, to expand the use of 
internal and renewable energy resources and to reduce the 
negative effect of energy on the environment. 
  The Lithuanian premier said around 700 million USD are 
needed 
to carry out major energy projects: 40 million to complete the 
construction of the Kruonis hydro-electric power station; 20-25 
million to build nuclear fuel storage facilities in Ignalina; 
90-100 [million] to upgrade the safety of Ignalina's reactors; 
90 million to build the Butinge oil terminal; 50 million to 
build a pipeline from Butinge to Mazeikiai; 90 million to 
modernize the Klaipeda oil export terminal; 100 million to 
modernize municipal heating systems. 
  Slezevicius said one of the top priorities in transportation 
is to develop the Klaipeda seaport and a related land transport 
infrastructure. He said the port's reconstruction would cost 
around 80-90 million dollars. The costs of the initial stages 
of the Via Baltica highway project reach 40 million dollars. 
The premier said the construction of a 
Warsaw-Kaunas-Riga-Tallinn railroad line with European standard 
tracks is also listed among priority projects. 
  Discussing environment protection, Slezevicius said primary 
attention should be paid to such problems as sewage, dangerous 
waste and air pollution. 
  The Lithuanian premier said pollution of inland waters 
endangers the Baltic Sea, therefore it is necessary to complete 
the construction of water refinement systems in Vilnius, Kaunas, 
Klaipeda, Siauliai and Palanga. Slezevicius said these projects 
require some 80 million dollars. Another 100 million dollars 
are necessary to carry out a dangerous waste recycling and 
disposal project. 
  Slezevicius said the Lithuanian Government has already 
prepared and approved national development programs in the 
fields of energy and transportation. 
  In implementing priority projects, the Lithuanian Government 
will coordinate actions with its Baltic neighbors, Nordic and 
other countries, Slezevicius said. In his words, Lithuania's 
investment program will be distributed to potential investors 
through structures of the European Union in July. The premier 
said the program will be presented to major international 
financial organizations and interested countries at a 
conference, which is likely to be arranged late this year or in 
early 1995. The Lithuanian premier said bilateral meetings with 
potential investors may start in September. 
  In conclusion, Slezevicius urged international financial 
organizations and interested countries to cooperate more closely 
among themselves in dealing with investment projects in 
Lithuania. He assured the conference's participants that the 
Lithuanian Government will ensure the necessary conditions and 
support for foreign investors. 

