Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ge Shiping (2047 0013 1627), Deputy Director of </F>
Provincial Bureau of Industry and Commerce: "Anhui's Individual, 
Private Economic Sector Must Leap Forward Once Again"] 
  [Text] Since the beginning of 1993, an unprecedentedly good 
situation prevails in the development of individual and private 
economic sector in Anhui. As of the end of August this year, the 
number of rural and urban individual commercial and industrial 
establishments reached 706,000 in the province with 1.21 million 
employees, marking increases of 26 percent and 32 percent 
respectively over the same period in 1992. The number of 
registered private enterprises in Anhui reached 3,995 with 
50,000 employees, marking increases of 79.8 percent and 63.9 
percent respectively over the same period at the end of 1992. 
The rank of the number of individual industrial and commercial 
establishments and private enterprises in the country also rises 
from the ninth and 18th at the end of 1992 to the eighth and the 
17th, while the rates of growth rank second and third 
respectively. However, Anhui still lags far behind the coastal 
areas in individual and private economy. First the number of 
individual and private-owned establishments is far less, and the 
per-capita output value is much smaller. Only 2.08 percent of 
the population in the province are working for the individual 
and private economic sector. Second the overall scale of the 
individual and private economic sector is small, and it is not 
so strong in strength. Third the development of this economic 
sector is not well balanced. There are not enough business 
establishments in production and processing, while the 
development is not so fast in rural and remote areas. Therefore, 
Anhui must energetically develop its individual and private 
economic sector and turn it into a major pillar of Anhui's 
economy. 
  I. It is necessary to correctly understand the 
important role of the individual and private economic sector in 
social and economic life and increase the sense of urgency in 
developing it. In recent years, the individual and private 
economic sector has played an ever-increasing important role in 
Anhui's political, economic and social life. It is manifested in 
the following aspects: 
  A. It has developed the productive forces in society. 
According to statistics, the total output value of all the 
individual industrial and commercial establishments in Anhui 
totalled 2.78 billion yuan in 1992. About 70 percent of 
industrial and commercial establishments participated in the 
4,126 trade fairs and markets with their volume of business 
transactions making up 85 percent of the total volume of 
business in the province. In addition, about 600,000 people 
travelled a long distance in doing businesses. Facts prove that 
the individual and private economic sector is a significant 
force that should not be neglected and a sector which has plenty 
of room for improvement in the development of the productive 
forces. 
  B. It has successfully made explorations to change the 
system 
of planned economy to one of market economy. The individual and 
private economic sector has withstood the test of the law of 
competition in market economy such as the law of value and the 
law between supply and demand, and shown it abilities to compete 
with others in the market and its flexibility in business 
management . This has played a significant role in helping 
enterprises change the way they operate and reforming the 
socialist market economy system. 
  C. It has helped readjust the rural industrial structure. In 
1992, the number of industrial and commercial establishments in 
Anhui's rural areas totalled 451,000 with a total employment of 
774,000 people, accounting for 65.2 percent and 65.4 percent of 
the total number of establishments and employees in the 
province. The development of the individual and private economic 
sector in Anhui's rural areas has changed the unitary industrial 
structure and quickened the pace in shifting the rural labor 
force, in spreading the concept of commodity economy among the 
peasants and in building small towns and cities in the 
countryside. 
  D. It has promoted social stability. A large number of 
people 
awaiting jobs and surplus labor forces in urban and rural areas 
work for the individual and private economic sector. This is 
conducive to achieving stability and unity and promoting social 
stability. 
  E. It has helped poverty-stricken areas become well-to-do. 
Practice proves that the development of the individual and 
private economic sector is an important way to shake off 
poverty. It may help some people to make use of local resources 
to develop diversified industries and become well-to-do. 
  F. It has helped increase the state revenue. The individual 
and private economic sector needs no state investments. It helps 
increase the state revenue. In 1992 alone, the total amount of 
taxes collected from individual industrial and commercial 
establishments and private-run enterprises totalled 506 million 
yuan in the province, accounting for 11.6 percent of Anhui's 
industrial and commercial taxes. 
  However, we must fully realize that right now there are some 
people in the society who have prejudice against the development 
of the individual and private economic sector. Especially the 
traditional system somewhat restrains the rapid development of 
such an economic sector in the following aspects: 
  1. People do not fully understand the concept in developing 
the individual and private economic sector. Influenced by the 
ideas of the traditional planned economy, some areas and 
departments have not regarded the practice of allowing all 
economic sectors to develop side by side as a long-term project. 
They do not fully understand and firmly implement the policy of 
the party and the state in developing the individual and private 
economic sector. They do not treat all those who engage in 
individual and private businesses on an equal basis in extending 
loans, issuing business licenses and helping individual and 
self-employed businessmen look for places to run their 
businesses. The social environment for the development of 
individual and private economic sector is not so favorable. 
  2. The problem of "three disorders" has not been thoroughly 
solved. The burdens of those who engage in individual and 
private businesses remain heavy. According to a survey conducted 
by a certain city, the miscellaneous expenses an average 
individual establishment has to pay reached 2,000 yuan in 1992. 
There are more than 60 items, both legal and illegal, for 
unreasonable service charges in the city. 
  3. Fake collectives are formed by "forming chain stores." 
This has affected the development of individual and private 
economic sector. Some enterprises use preferential treatments in 
loans, taxation, business sites, and the use of water and 
electricity as a bait to lure some individual and private 
businessmen to become affiliated in name. This practice not only 
reduces the state tax revenue and harms the formation of the 
socialist market economy which advocates competitions on an 
equal basis among all economic sectors, but also prevents the 
individual and private economic sector from improving itself. 
  Therefore, we must fully realize that the factors that 
restrain the development of the individual and private economic 
sector remain. Only by fully understanding the significant role 
of the individual and private economic sector in social economy 
and production, continuously increasing our sense of urgency and 
carrying out work in a down-to-earth manner, will it be possible 
to further speed up the development of the individual and 
private economic sector. 
  II. It is necessary to relax our policy while 
strengthening control in order to rapidly develop the individual 
and private economic sector. To develop the individual and 
private economic sector, we must rely on flexible environment 
and policy as well as effective supervision and administration. 
That is to say, we must adhere to the principle of attaching 
importance to persistently developing this economic sector while 
placing such development under control. Only by doing so, will 
it be possible to develop this economic sector healthily and 
steadily. The main points to achieve this goal are as 
follows: 
  A. In order to energetically develop the individual and 
private economic sector, we must understand fully, in an overall 
manner and correctly the guideline laid down by comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's talks which he gave during his inspection tour in 
South China, and firmly implement the principle formulated in 
the related documents issued by the provincial CPC committee and 
the provincial government. All this requires us to further 
emancipate our thought, change our concepts, continuously adopt 
a series of flexible policies and vigorously support efforts in 
developing the individual and private economic sector. For 
example, we must not limit the number of employees to be hired 
and encourage them to become shareholders. Encouragement should 
also be given to running shareholding enterprises and forming 
shareholding enterprise groups. In the scope of business, 
individual and private-owned enterprises should be allowed to 
produce or handle commodities and means of production, of which 
the state has lifted its restrictions or has not explicitly 
forbidden any enterprise to manufacture. With regard to the 
registered capital, all private-owned limited-liability 
companies in remote poverty-stricken areas and those companies 
for consultation services and technical and scientific 
development for the production of export-oriented products 
should be allowed to register as long as they can raise 50 
percent of their registered capital. They should be permitted to 
raise the remaining amount within one year. In addition, 
restrictions on the use of the name of the province ahead of the 
name of an individual and private industrial and commercial 
establishment should be relaxed. Only by continuously relaxing 
the policies, firmly protecting the legal rights and interests 
of the individual industrial and commercial establishments and 
private enterprises and whipping up their enthusiasm in carrying 
out production and doing business, will it be possible to 
develop the individual and private economic sector in Anhui. 
  B. In order to energetically develop the individual and 
private economic sector, we must continuously implement the 
principle of grasping both ends. On the one hand, we must deal 
with and prosecute, in accordance with law, those who violate 
laws and regulations; while on the other hand, we must severely 
strike at those who monopolize the market, mix the real with the 
fake, sell shoddy merchandise, smuggle or peddle smuggled goods 
or carry out other lawless activities. We must protect all fair, 
just, and legitimate competitions, while prohibiting illegal 
business activities. Only by continuously strengthening our 
control, will it be possible for us to maintain the normal 
social and economic order and promote the healthy development of 
the individual and private economic sector. 

