CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Carlos Jose Marques, Luis Antonio Novaes, and </F>
Helio Contreiras] 
  [Text] The Amazon region, the lungs of the world--a 
nickname that certainly takes into account more than its 
ecological endowments--has in recent decades been the stage for 
episodes, not the least sedate, of devastation of riches. Forest 
burnings, mineral smuggling, the massacres of Yanomami, the 
activities of drug traffickers, and landings on clandestine 
airstrips have all contributed to reinforce the image of a 
territory that is almost abandoned. A futuristic scenario full 
of technological installations, the latest-generation radar, 
mobile and stationary radio surveillance units, computerized 
guided missiles and an infinite array of sensor paraphernalia 
could soon transform this picture. An international bidding 
competition aimed at endowing the region with the most complete 
system available for protecting this country is about to be 
concluded. It has excited the universe of equipment 
manufacturers as never before. The war is a brutal one that 
involves billions--about $1 billion is forecast to be spent in 
the first phase, and as much as $5 billion could be spent before 
the system is finished--and features plenty of dramatic 
maneuvers. The resources available to the players are enormous: 
heads of government of the major powers, heavyweights of the 
business world, and military commandos, all engrossed in 
diplomatic intrigues and battles for information and under 
pressure from all sorts of lobbyists. At stake is one of the 
most generous packages of orders the industry has ever seen. 
"There is no project like it anywhere, and it could be the most 
profitable in the decade," observed Richard Breadbarry, vice 
president of Hughes Aircraft, one of the American giants in the 
control systems business that are competing for that part of the 
project. 
  Hughes, like the other competing firms, discreetly submitted 
its technical and commercial proposals against the background of 
the first drumbeats of revelry on the Saturday before Carnival. 
The deadline for presentation of the credit lines, a 
precondition for the choice of the vendors, is 4 April. The 
candidates have gathered in four different pools, each comprised 
of manufacturers of aircraft, telecommunications systems, 
sensors, and informatics products. The French firm Thomson-CSF, 
traditional supplier of radar to the Air Force, and Alcatel lead 
the European group that has the most experience in the Brazilian 
market. Unisys, NEC, Westinghouse, and Hughes make up a team 
that is almost unbeatable internationally in the field of 
surveillance and protection systems. 
  Raytheon, an American colossus in the area of radar 
manufacture, has joined IBM and Ericsson to form a pool that has 
nothing to apologize for. Lastly, a couple of state 
enterprises--Dasa (German) and Alenia (Italian)-- believe their 
long history of services to the public sector will weigh in 
their favor when decision day rolls around. Besides these 
multinationals, seven other companies are competing 
independently to fill certain orders for the project, which has 
been dubbed the Amazon Region Surveillance System, or Sivam. As 
if the sheer size of the candidates were not enough, official 
representatives from several countries are working behind the 
scenes to help make this or that consortium the victor. Before 
it reached the desks of Brazilian officials, the proposal from 
Raytheon Company, one of whose biggest clients is the U.S. 
Department of Defense, had been hand-delivered to U.S. President 
Bill Clinton, who gave the matter priority treatment. The 
proposal was sent to the National Economic Council, a committee 
comprised of 12 federal government agencies that reviews 
business deals of great interest to the White House. In response 
to Clinton's inquiry, Robert Rubin, the council's director, 
suggested the matter be treated in parallel with the discussion 
on pending Brazilian trade issues in the area of patents. In the 
impressive offices at the Washington headquarters of the USTR, 
the United States Trade Representative, commercial sanctions 
against Brazil were being considered because of a failure to 
enact laws protecting patents. According to one USTR advisor, 
the selection of an American group in the Amazon competition 
"would certainly facilitate an easing of the sanctions." Since 
the threat no longer exists, all that is left is the negotiation 
of the project. 
  At any rate, the Americans have no monopoly on the exercise 
of this kind of pressure. The European consortia, which got a 
head start in terms of political mobilization, also have strong 
backing from their respective countries. In the middle of 1993, 
during a trip by Finance Minister Fernando Henrique Cardoso to 
Europe, the subject was raised more than once during different 
meetings. At the lunch with local businessmen, the Amazon Region 
deals were the piece de resistance. The managing 
director of the IMF, Michel Camdessus, was emphatic in stressing 
the importance to France of this project. At the Paris Club, 
which is studying the possibility of renegotiating Brazil's 
foreign debt, the competition and the release of the needed 
funding have already been mentioned. Key pieces on the game 
board of Brazil's external commitments, the Paris Club and the 
IMF can play a decisive role in the selection of the equipment 
manufacturers. "It is no secret that the agreement with the IMF 
will regulate the understandings on the project," said Brigadier 
General Lauro Nei Menezes (Reserve) who once headed the Air 
Force's Aerospace Technical Center and is now a consultant on 
the business aspects of Sivam. "Given the size of the 
transaction, the question of financing is vital and the IMF 
could influence it favorably," he believes. 
  The Brazilian Government imposed a requirement that each 
consortium's proposal be accompanied by a guarantee of 
financing, and the European and American groups are still hard 
at work on this aspect. "The banks are talking to each other and 
the best proposal for financing Sivam will depend on the 
evolution of an agreement on the foreign debt," said Armando 
Medeiros, director of special projects for Alcatel. "In our 
case, we will have the backing of the French government." The 
executive of Alcatel--a world telecommunications giant with 
annual sales in excess of $20 billion-- dismissed the idea that 
his consortium might not obtain the financing. He argues that 
the Europeans are going to be in a better position than the 
Americans to offer a more attractive financial solution, because 
they are not facing the same kind of official resistance. There 
is no question that allegations like this are ploys in the 
information game intended to bombard the enemy positions, but 
judging by the initial reactions from the U.S. Eximbank, the 
American groups have something to worry about. "If the debts are 
not rescheduled, we will not make any deal with the Brazilian 
Government," warned Christopher Dorval, the bank's 
representative. 
  A letter sent in January from the U.S. secretary of commerce 
to Minister Mario Cesar Flores of the Secretariat of Strategic 
Affairs (SAE), confirms that the American groups will not get 
the hoped-for financing and that, at the moment, only the best 
"basket" of credit options is being discussed. Celso Fernandes 
Junior and Kenneth Hansen, IBM's representatives in one of the 
consortia, told ISTOE that the Americans' proposal will surprise 
people and that the possibility that some of the money might 
come in the form of donations has not been ruled out. "There is 
a lot of interest in the United States in supporting the project 
because of what it means for security in one of the most 
important parts of the world," Fernandes Junior claimed. The 
same terms are being sought by the Unisys and Dasa pools. But, 
during the phase preceding the selection of the best proposal, 
the jabbering has served to heat up the contest. 
  Beyond the financial bickering, there is another focal point 
of controversy, one that relates to the nature of the project. 
Because it involves participation of entities ranging from civil 
institutions such as Funai [National Indian Foundation] to 
military bodies like the National Air Defense and Air Traffic 
Control System (Sindacta), there are those who would like to 
portray it as a military-led mixed project. The Europeans are 
especially interested in highlighting the military aspects of 
the competition in the Amazon Region, for a very simple reason: 
American laws do not allow that country's companies to supply 
high-tech equipment and technology for systems that have a 
military purpose. This way, all the American consortia would be 
shunted aside with a stroke of a pen. This desire to 
characterize the project as military has the support of some 
sectors of the Ministry of Aeronautics, which would then have 
control over a hefty investment package, a real Christmas 
present in times of skimpy budgets. "We know that companies from 
various countries that have more flexible laws want Sivam to 
stay in the military area, but it will not be that way," 
Minister Flores has said. 
  Behind the scenes, the head of the SAE has been waging 
another intramural barracks battle ever since the competition 
was launched in the middle of last year. It is rumored in 
military circles that the Air Force was not happy about having 
lost Sivam to the SAE and is still trying to wield influence in 
the project. Esca-Control and Automation Systems Engineering, 
the company that will supervise the Sivam services, is said to 
be its listening post. Esca's partners, most of whom are retired 
Air Force colonels--among them Colonel Jose Ernesto Monteiro, 
who until a very short time ago was its president--are thought 
to have a lot of clout in Sivam. Some sector sources say this is 
why Esca gained a strategic position in the project without even 
participating in the bidding process. "The SAE reluctantly 
accepted the inclusion of Esca in order to avoid problems," a 
high official of the secretariat said. Since 1991, the 
government has been Esca's biggest customer, accounting for 80 
percent of its sales. The company also has strong ties to the 
French, because it has long been a client of Banque Nationale de 
Paris (BNP). The marriage of interests is further strengthened 
by the presence of the company Tecnasa, an electronics equipment 
manufacturer that will assist with Esca operations. 
  In the field of aircraft supply--where the project calls for 
orders worth $250 million--the Dutch Fokker, represented in 
Brazil by the Monteiro Aranha group, yearns to come out the 
winner with its Fokker 50 turboprop, known as the "King Bing." 
"We have the greatest possible interest in this competition, and 
we have a suitable product," said Colonel Renato Goulart, the 
company representative, who hopes to sell at least four planes 
at a price of $30 million each. Chief among the specifications 
the plane is required to meet is adaptability to carry mobile 
radar for AWACS systems. In that area of the competition, the 
Brasilia model built by Embraer [Brazilian Aeronautics Company, 
Inc.], has the advantage. The fact the plane is made by a 
domestic company and that the government needs to come to the 
financial rescue of the state enterprise--which, with debts of 
$700 million, is still looking for oxygen to keep it alive--are 
aspects that will count for a lot on decision day. The consortia 
were advised by the coordinators of Sivam to look for a 
Brazilian partner. 
  Unisys Corporation, a mammoth in the informatics business 
with annual sales of around $8 billion, has put together one of 
the most complete consortia in the competition--including in it 
some world leaders in different fields--and did not ignore this 
advice. Embraer also appears in its proposal. Unisys already 
provides 90 percent of the air traffic control systems in the 
United States. In Brazil, it has assumed responsibility for 
coordinating one of the pools in the Amazon Region project and 
is willing to expand its activities. "If we win, we will invest 
heavily in new facilities, equipment testing, and assembly 
laboratories," said Jose Roberto Santos, director of the company 
that would directly supply some of the means for surveillance, 
environmental control, traffic control, and weather monitoring. 
Hughes, which shares leadership of the pool with Unisys, was 
assigned the systems integration portion. NEC will handle the 
communications part of the job. "We will set up four 
telecommunications parent stations that will relay the 
transmissions via satellite," said Vair Doiche, products and 
projects manager for the group that last year had sales of $30 
billion. 
  In the other American consortium, Raytheon is taking charge 
of supplying the 17 radars that Sivam is asking for. The radars 
are considered to be a big slice of the orders pie, and the 
manufacturer that sold three systems to India, Holland, and 
Norway last year, reaping sales of more than $9 billion, said 
this is the most attractive competition in which it has been 
involved in recent years. "The projects we won were on the order 
of $100 million," said Carlos Gonzaga, a director of Lider Air 
Taxi, which represents Raytheon. "The Sivam project is at least 
four times as big." Bob Young, dispatched to Brazil by the 
American multinational especially to follow the progress of the 
competition, adds that the parent company considers this "the 
most important contest this year." IBM and Ericsson also see it 
that way. The former claims it has already started training 
specialized personnel to manage the computerized systems for 
Sivam. "We are ready to start," Fernandes Junior points out. 
Ericsson, in turn, inspired by Sivam, is reorganizing its 
operations in this market. In January, it brought a new 
executive, Bjorn Lundgren, from the home office in Sweden to 
preside over the green-and-yellow arm of Matec, one of the 
companies in the group. "Matec is bidding on the MD-110 PABX 
equipment for the telecommunications services under the 
project," Lundgren revealed. "We will be competing through 
Matec." 
  In the French camp, Thomson-CSF, which has sales of $10 
billion a year and has already supplied radar for the two phases 
of Sindacta, is attempting to act with some discretion. The 
reasons are said to be the sharp attacks leveled against it by 
competitors and even by some sectors of the government, unhappy 
with the near-monopoly the company has held in this area. The 
clearest demonstration of this dissatisfaction may be the 
company's recent loss to Hughes in the bidding to readapt radar 
equipment that Thomson-CSF itself supplied years ago. "This is 
proof that the Brazilian Government wants something more 
modern," said Hughes' Breadberry [as published], needling his 
rival. "We do not have a monopoly on supply and it is not 
unusual not to win a competition. We won a lot of others," 
alleged Gilles Piffard, a Thomson director. Piffard told ISTOE 
that "people are doing all sorts of things to destroy Thomson's 
hegemony in this field, but they will not succeed." 
  Weighing against the French state enterprise in the battle 
of 
information and misinformation was the accusation that at the 
request of its government during the Gulf War, Thomson had 
disconnected the radar it had supplied to Iraq. The charge, 
although unproven, raised fears about the security of the Amazon 
Region project in the event that the French radars are selected. 
Piffard reacted sarcastically to the report, saying: "I don't 
know what kind of power people are attributing to us." Armando 
Medeiros, director of projects at Alcatel, also came out in 
defense of his partner company. "What is lacking are solid 
arguments to counter our superior preparation." Alcatel cites as 
its best weapon its previous experience in surveillance systems. 
"We already have more than 20 years of commercial relations with 
the Brazilian Government, and that counts for something," 
Medeiros said. Truly, this is a war between giants, and 
predictions as to the winner are nothing more than the expressed 
hopes of the competitors' fan clubs. At any rate, the Amazon 
Region is a market that can never satiate the appetites of the 
rivals. 
<H5>  [Box p 66] </H5>
<H5>  What is Sivam? </H5>
  Although fictional, the classic figure of Big Brother in 
George Orwell's book 1984 will be getting a twin 
brother whose eyes are focused on the Amazon Region. Any 
clandestine aircraft flight, any hot spot of tree-burning or 
site of deforestation, the movements of the drug trade, and any 
sort of assault on the region will be detected in a matter of 
seconds and promptly countered. In practice, the system will be 
based on the operation of 17 radars, four communications network 
stations, an endless system of electronic apparatus, and the 
Brasilsat satellite, which will transmit most of the data. 
Initially estimated at $800 million, the project has grown, won 
the backing of Venezuela and Colombia, and now reached the 
billions point. Because of the situation in the Amazon Region, 
Sivam is vital. What is debatable is its priority at a time when 
the federal budget is being cut in essential areas like health 
and education. 

