Language: <F P=105> Italian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Giorgio Rivieccio: "And Now Robots in White </F>
Overalls"] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] 
<H5>  The Robot Surgeon Is in Italy Too </H5>
  The United States does not have exclusive rights in the 
field 
of robot surgeons. Italy, a country with a great tradition both 
in medicine and automation, will also have its automaton in 
white overalls within a year. The experimental use of a robot 
during surgical operations will start in 1994 at the Rizzoli 
Orthopedic Institute in Bologna. The experiments will be 
conducted by Maurilio Marcacci who, together with Prof. 
Piergiorgio Marchetti, director of the laboratory of 
biomechanics, and in collaboration with the CNR (National 
Research Council) and the University of Genoa, has been working 
on the orthopedic robot project for some years. The Italian 
experts have asked the advice of ISS of Sacramento on how to 
perfect the system. 
  Marcacci explained: "The robot will essentially consist of a 
mechanical arm that has a number of joints, able to move itself 
in space, at the end of which there is an instrument (a cutter, 
a drill or something else) that can be given prior instructions 
for its movements, based on precise data resulting from 
examinations such as a CAT (computerized axial tomography) scan 
or NMR (nuclear magnetic resonance). It will be possible to 
execute extremely precise repetitive movements using the arm, 
and these will be better than a surgeon could do." 
  Researchers at Rizzoli think that the possible applications 
of an orthopedic robot include surgery of the knee and spine. 
<H5>  `Virtual Surgery' at Pisa and at Boston </H5>
  The orthopedic field is already restrictive for the robot in 
white overalls. New and promising horizons have already opened 
up with the marriage between robotics and virtual reality. 
Digitalizing the images of a patient's organ, something that has 
been made possible by the diffusion of diagnostic instruments 
such as the CAT, RMN, and PET [positron emission tomography], 
seems to have been done to link together and form something that 
can interpret the data and then intervene on the patient with 
millimetric precision, that is, a robot. 
  At Pisa university, researchers from the Santa Chiara 
Hospital radiology institute, together with researchers from 
Hewlett-Packard, one of whom is the American Irwin Sobel one of 
the fathers of computerized graphics, have created the first 
Italian virtual reality system applied to neurological 
diagnosis, medicine, and to the preparation of surgical 
operations. The radiologist Davide Caramella, one of the 
researchers working on the project, explained that: "The system 
acquires data from diagnostic instruments like the TAC and 
magnetic resonance. These supply two-dimensional images that 
correspond to many very fine `strata', or `slices' of an organ, 
such as the brain. The computer uses special software to 
reconstruct a three-dimensional virtual image from this 
information. The different tissues of the brain are then 
highlighted using false colors. Finally a pair of stereoscopic 
glasses that look like an underwater mask recreate the effect of 
depth for the person wearing them, thanks to which the image 
literally seems to come out of the screen and invade the room." 
  Former systems for the visualization of medical images, such 
as those based on videodisks or multimedia computers, suddenly 
become out of date because the data they contain cannot be 
changed and refers to a typical patient, comparable to that 
shown in the anatomical plates of a text book. On the other 
hand, using the system developed at Pisa, the neurologist, or 
the surgeon, finds himself in front of a faithful representation 
of the brain structure of that particular patient. In this way 
they can carry out a virtual surgical operation, identical in 
every part to that which they must then face in reality. For 
example they can study the best course for an instrument to 
reach the mass of a tumor without damaging the healthy 
structures that surround it and they can find out whether they 
will meet other risky situations during the operation such as an 
aneurysm that could burst. [passage omitted] 
  Finally, the potential of virtual reality in neurosurgery is 
the central point of research being carried out by Cesare Giorgi 
of the Carlo Besta Neurological Institute in Milan, as part of 
the CNR targeted robotics project. 
<H5>  How Much Electronics for Remote Surgery </H5>
  But virtual reality is not only images. It also makes it 
possible to intervene on the electronic environment created by 
the computer and modify it using an "electronic glove," called a 
"dataglove," that directly translates the movements of the hand, 
wrist, and individual fingers, into instructions for the 
computer. 
  The "dataglove," developed by Jaron Lanier of the American 
company VPL Research, is made of photo transistors and sensors 
that capture every movement made by the hand, while tiny 
gyroscopes keep record of the movements of the complete hand in 
space. The "dataglove" was also baptized in the medical surgery 
field, when on 2 December last year the first remote surgical 
operation was performed between the Milan Polytechnic and the 
Umberto 1 General Hospital in Rome. 
  Wearing a "dataglove," Prof. Alberto Rovetta of Milan 
commanded a robot installed in Rome which performed an operation 
on a model via cable. The movements of Rovetta's hand, which 
moved in the air, were transferred with the greatest accuracy to 
the arm of the robot. With respect to former remote control 
techniques for robot systems, "dataglove" avoids having to learn 
the commands and techniques of manipulation. The user only has 
to perform the natural movements that he would perform on a real 
patient. 
  This Italian "first" opens up a horizon that has no 
limitations and makes it possible to operate on patients that 
are hundreds or thousands of kilometers away, perhaps in areas 
where it is not possible to have the specialized assistance 
necessary for a serious case. 
  This was quickly confirmed on 7 July by another exceptional 
experiment conducted by Italy and the United States. For the 
first time in the world a surgeon, Licineo Angelini of La 
Sapienza University in Rome, operated via satellite from 
California on an animal organ in the Milan Polytechnic. The 
operation was made possible by a robot manipulator, commanded by 
Angelini and connected to an identical piece of equipment that 
operated on the sick organ. 
  The "patient" was a simulator model of the human body in 
which the liver of a pig and a synthetic gall-bladder had been 
inserted. The Italian part of the experiment was once again 
coordinated by Alberto Rovetta of the Milan Polytechnic, who 
drew from the experience of the American jet propulsion 
laboratory of Pasadena, the NASA research institute where the 
"space robots" that explored the planets of the solar system 
were born. 
  Angelini had a robot in front of him and an ecographic 
monitor that sent back the images of the "patient" in Milan. 
The surgeon commanded the robot, that then transmitted the 
instructions to its correspondent in Milan, ordering it to make 
a stitch after having localized the exact point on the model by 
means of the ecographic scanner images. Then the robot was 
ordered to make two incisions. 
  The experiment was part of the CIAO [Collaboration, 
Intervention and Help in Hospitals] program that plans for 
remote surgical operations to be performed by robots. 
<H5>  The Robot That Reconstructs the Organism in Milan </H5>
  However, in the hospital of the year 2000, the robot will 
not 
only take over in the operating theater. Other types of 
automatons will work in laboratories to reconstruct, with the 
maximum accuracy, bones and other "inserts" of human tissue that 
have been destroyed as a result of accidents or destructive 
surgery. 
  The prototype computer-robotic reconstruction system, which 
is unique in Europe at present, has once again been perfected in 
Milan by the group of Luigi Donati, director of the Statale 
University plastic surgery institute, and has been built at 
Niguarda hospital. 
  It is called MIRUS-Lab (Management of Imaging and Robot 
Utilization in Surgery) and once again it results from the 
possibility of digitizing any element of the organism using 
diagnostic image techniques. The computer, integrating the data 
coming from these instruments, reconstructs an "electronic twin" 
of the patient on the screen. Then using techniques similar to 
those of the CAD-CAM [computer-aided design - computer-aided 
manufacturing] used in industry for computer design, the system 
examines the area to be reconstructed and designs the anatomical 
parts that are missing. Finally it transfers the design to a 
robot that builds the "bioinserts" to be put into the patient, 
using numerically controlled fabrication techniques similar to 
those used by advanced mechanical industries. 
  Finally, the MIRUS-Lab is also able to help the surgeon to 
choose, and optimize, different materials with respect to the 
biological and mechanical characteristics of the parts to be 
replaced. 
  Thanks to this system it is therefore possible to carry out 
reconstructive surgery, by having the exact prosthesis to be 
inserted in the patient, in bone or other tissue, available 
before the operation, and eventually to carry out a first 
simulation of the operation on a computer, to see if the insert 
has been made correctly and if it adapts exactly to the organism 
of the patient. In fact, the reconstruction of anatomical parts 
has hitherto been performed directly in the operating theater 
and for obvious reasons the surgeon had to prepare these parts 
extremely quickly. [passage omitted] 

