Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
disease reports monitored from FBIS Abidjan Bureau and EAU 
coverage areas. Source information is given in parentheses after 
each item. 
<H5>  Ethiopia </H5>
  Epidemic -- One hundred and seventeen people have died of an 
epidemic which broke out five months ago in the Keficho Zone in 
the southern Ethiopia People's Regional Administration, 
according to the head of the zonal health department, Dr. 
Habtamu Argaw. He said 607 people living in 31 kebeles 
(neighborhoods) in six districts hit by the epidemic had been 
given treatment. Though efforts have been made to contain the 
epidemic in the zone by health workers and the zonal 
administration, the epidemic had proved to be uncontainable. 
Financial, manpower, material and transport vehicle shortages 
had contributed to the failure to contain the epidemic. (Addis 
Ababa Voice of Ethiopia Network in Amharic 0400 GMT 15 Feb 94) 
  Dysentery -- Eighteen people have died of dysentery in the 
past week alone in Asbulu town of Erer District in Region Five, 
according to a people's representatives there who also told the 
ETHIOPIAN NEWS AGENCY during the week that apart from people 
dying of dysentery, cattle were being forced to move out of 
settlements. The people faced severe problems due to lack of 
rainfall for the past 10 months. According to the secretary of 
the district administration, Mr. Isa Mohammad, more than 10,000 
people face famine in Hareta, Gerefle, Hardila and another seven 
kebeles and that people are dying of dysentery every day. 
(Addis Ababa Voice of Ethiopia Network in Amharic 1700 GMT 15 
Feb 94) 
<H5>  Kenya </H5>
  AIDS -- The high rate at which the acquired immune 
deficiency 
syndrome (AIDS) is spreading in Kenya may cause a major decline 
in population growth, the KENYAN NEWS AGENCY (KNA) reported in 
Nairobi on Wednesday, quoting a report. The agency cited a 
newly-published report on the AIDS situation in Kenya according 
to which fertility rate is expected to drop fron 5.4 percent in 
1990-93 to 4.2 percent by the year 2000 and further down to 3.5 
percent by the year 2010. It also says that mortality resulting 
from a wide range of causes other than AIDS would decline while 
life expectancy would increase from about 57 years presently to 
67 years by the year 2010 if there were no AIDS-related deaths. 
According to the report, Kenya's population would be growing at 
the rate of 2.5 percent per annum, by the year 2000. (Dakar PANA 
in English 1253 GMT 16 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Nigeria </H5>
  Vagina festula -- The vagina festula disease is in on the 
upsurge in different parts of the country. Latest statistics 
show that about 200,000 cases of the disease have been recorded 
nationwide. (Lagos Radio Nigeria Network in English 1800 GMT 16 
Feb 94) 
<H5>  Uganda </H5>
  Diarrhea/measles -- A total of 112 Sudanese refugees in 
camps 
in north western Uganda are reported to have died of an 
assortment of diseases between 22 January to 11 February. A 
Uganda Red Cross (URC) report dated 14 February said the 
refugees died of diarrhoea, pneumonia, post measles, upper 
respiratory infections, injury, eye disease, skin disease and 
other minor infections. The report stated that the figures 
could be higher. 
  The report also talked of a riot by refugees around 
mid-January when they held four URC workers hostage for sometime 
before police rescued them. The Red Cross workers were held as 
they attempted to carry out a census to establish population of 
North Kochi and Gbenge camps. They also wanted to re-organise 
the latter as it is over crowded, the report adds. (Dakar PANA 
in English 0955 GMT 16 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Tanzania </H5>
  Cholera -- Eight people died in the southern Tanzania 
district of Mtwara following a severe outbreak of cholera last 
week, a senior government official said here on 14 February, 
reports PANA. About 50 people are reported to have contracted 
the killer disease and are being treated at a village health 
center in Mtwara District, southern Tanzania. 
  Cholera, which first broke out in Tanzania in 1977, has 
claimed more than 19,000 lives in the past 17 years, according 
to the Ministry of Health. The disease first broke out in 
villages along the Tanzania coast killing thousands of people 
before it was contained towards the end of 1982. However, 
despite government efforts to eradicate the cholera scourge, 
lack of drugs and poor environmental sanitation among Tanzanian 
villagers have contributed to the persistence of the disease. 
(Nairobi KNA in English 1435 GMT 14 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Zaire </H5>
  Trypanosomiasis -- In the Bandundu region, an outbreak of 
trypanosomiasis has been reported in the Plateau subregion. 
Lack of medicine to fight the disease has resulted in hundreds 
of people dying everyday. (Kinshasa Voix du Zaire in French 1800 
GMT 15 Feb 94) 
  AIDS -- The major religious denominations in Zaire, namely 
the Catholic Church, the Church of Christ, the Kinbangist 
Church, the Islamic community, as well as the National 
Associations of Parents of Students, have embarked upon a war 
against the use of condoms. They consider the use of a condom 
as a dangerous habit and recommend abstinence from sexual 
intercourse before marriage. ZAIRE PRESSE AGENCY reports that 
the advice was given at the end of a seminar on the role of 
schools in the fight against AIDS. It should be noted 2 million 
people tested positive in Zaire between 1985 and 1991, a figure 
that reportedly doubled at the end of last year. (Kinshasa Voix 
du Zaire in French 1800 GMT 18 Feb 94) 
<H5>  Epidemiological Reports Monitored 24-30 January </H5>
  [Editorial Report] Following is a compilation of reports 
monitored by FBIS Mbabane Bureau from 24 to 30 January 
concerning outbreaks of and reports on various diseases. Items 
are listed by country and disease. Source follows each item. 
<H5>  Mozambique </H5>
  Cholera/Diarrhea -- "Cabo Delgado Province has been affected 
by cholera since the last quarter of 1993. The disease which 
has spread to the districts of Chiure, Ancuabe, Montepuez, 
Palma, Metuge, and to the city of Pemba, has already killed 86 
people. Hundreds of people in the province have also been 
affected by bloody diarrhea in the province." (Maputo Radio 
Mozambique Network in Portuguese 1030 26 Jan 94) 
  Diarrhea -- "About 30 cases of diarrhea with traces of blood 
are reported in Inhassunje District, Zambezia Province every 
week. The chief district health officer says there has been an 
increase in such cases because the residents have been drinking 
untreated water. He said water wells in the district are not 
working because of faulty manual pumps." [Maputo Radio 
Mozambique Portuguese 1030 Jan 94] 
<H5>  Namibia </H5>
  Polio -- "A countrywide inoculation campaign against polio 
and other preventable children's diseases was launched yesterday 
after polio cases, originating in Angola and affecting 
northwestern Namibia, were reported. Since the outbreak of 
polio in November, 23 cases were confirmed in the Karas, Hardap, 
Khomas, and Omaheke districts. Five out of six confirmed cases 
of acute polio in the northwest originate in Angola. The last 
confirmed polio case in the south was reported on 1 December." 
(Windhoek DIE REPUBLIKEIN in Afrikaans 25 Jan 94 p 3) 
<H5>  Zambia </H5>
  Malaria -- "The Zambian National Malaria Control Center says 
that more than 50 percent of all deaths in Zambia are caused by 
malaria. The center said in a report that about 50 percent of 
Zambians attending hospitals and clinics have been found to have 
malaria, most of these being children. It said that between 30 
and 60 percent of Zambians were carriers of the malaria 
parasite, which had flourished because of the ineffective 
enforcement of malaria control measures by the Zambian Ministry 
of Health." (Johannesburg Channel Africa Radio in English 1100 
GMT 28 Jan 94) 

