BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following full-page advertisement 
appears on 3 April in the Johannesburg SUNDAY NATION in English 
on page 9 and in the Johannesburg SUNDAY TIMES in English on 
page 10. 
  The upper portion of the page is divided into two columns -- 
the left one headed "WHAT THE NP [National Party] IS DOING." and 
the right headed "WHAT THE ANC WILL DO." 
  The NP column contains three pictures and associated 
captions. The first picture shows three apparently unemployed 
black men. The caption reads: "The NP talks jobs. But its 
economic policies have left 5 million people without jobs." 
Below that is a picture of young children doing school lessons 
crouched on the floor in a room where no desks, tables, or 
chairs are visible. The caption reads: "The NP talks about 
equal education. But this year they are spending 3 times more 
on each White pupil than on each Coloured, Indian, and African 
pupil." Below that is a third picture, a close-up of a grieving 
black woman. The caption reads: "The NP talks about peace. But 
there is strong evidence that officials appointed by the NP are 
running a Third Force within the South African Police." 
  The ANC column is similarly divided into three sections, but 
without pictures. The text reads: 
  "On Jobs 
  "We have a plan to create 2.5 million jobs over the next 10 
years through a National Public Works Programme alone. 
  "We will also create jobs through small business development 
by changing licensing laws and providing training and access to 
loans. 
  "We will create a stable environment for investment and 
growth. 
  "On Education 
  "We have a plan to give 10 years free and quality education 
to all our children. 
  "We will ensure that a national bursary and loan scheme is 
established. 
  "And we will establish a major programme for adult education 
and skills training. 
  "On Peace 
  "We have a plan to reform the security forces to ensure that 
they are professional and non-partisan. This will allow the 
police to work closely with the communities to stamp out crime 
at its root. 
  "We will introduce a strict gun control programme." 
  Below the two columns is the following text, extending 
across 
the full width of the page. 
  "You don't need to wait for the election to see what the 
National Party's plan will do for South Africa. Just look 
around you. The damage caused by the NP's policies is 
everywhere to see. You cannot trust them with your future. 
  "The National Party have had their chance. It's time for 
change. On April 27, vote for the ANC. We have a plan for 
better life for all. 
  "A better life for all. Working together for jobs, peace and 
freedom." 
  A small ANC logo appears as a graphic in the bottom right 
corner of the page. 

