BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Salim Salih Muhammad, member of the Yemeni </F>
Presidential Council and assistant secretary general of the 
Socialist Party, by unidentified reporter in Amman; date not 
given] 
  [Text] [AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT] What are the results of your 
visits to Syria and Jordan and the meetings you held with 
President Hafiz al-Asad and King Husayn? 
  [Muhammad] The visits are considered successful. We have 
come out with the impression that there is clear Arab interest 
in our conditions in Yemen and in helping us with the support of 
our brothers in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Syria, Egypt, and 
Jordan. We have sensed interest in helping Yemen to overcome the 
problems and difficulties facing unity. And we have learned 
what role fraternal Arab countries can play to help Yemen to 
surmount its predicament and eliminate any contemplation of a 
military action. Because this option is incompatible with 
domestic conditions and the stability of this vital region, 
which is the focus of the world's eyes, not only for political 
considerations, but clear economic and geographical 
considerations as well. 
  [AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT] Did you request the continuation of Arab 
mediation in general or just the Jordanians' efforts to follow 
up what was agreed in Amman? 
  [Muhammad] Yes, we have asked the Syrian, Jordanian, and 
Egyptian brothers and some Arab brothers to continue their role, 
specifically Jordan, on the grounds that it is represented in 
the military committee. It also has a political role in the 
current dialogue process. And the Pledge Document was signed in 
Amman. Of course, there are developments now, and an Arab 
presence has begun to take shape. 
  [AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT] It is said that there is a move to hold 
a four-way Arab summit in Damascus to discuss the crisis in 
Yemen. Did you discuss this issue in Syria? 
  [Muhammad] I have not heard about that. However, 
preparations are being made to hold an expanded meeting in Cairo 
in which all Arab parties concerned, including the Arab League 
and Yemeni leaderships, will participate. No date has been set 
yet. This idea emerged during the Egyptian and United Arab 
Emirates envoys' visits to Yemen. The Yemeni leaderships did 
not object. They welcomed the idea of holding the meeting in 
Cairo. 
  [AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT] Some observers believe that all the 
present Arab and international initiatives are aimed at fighting 
the religious extremism represented in some Yemeni Reform 
Grouping [YRG] elements. What is your position in this 
connection? 
  [Muhammad] Those claims are made by elements linked to the 
YRG. But the real fear is the orientation toward establishing a 
fascist state relying on the arms stockpile totaling at least 1 
million rifles, according to the interior minister's recent 
statement. This orientation is the frightening one. Of course, 
there is a world Islamic movement whose capabilities are known. 
They are supported by several states, and I will not name any 
one state. Many of the states which agree with this idea have 
interests in this connection. They support such orientation in 
Yemen and elsewhere. They are the ones fueling religious 
extremism in the Arab world. 
  [AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT] It is reported that some parties are 
working to thwart the Amman agreement. Do you believe there are 
any indications of that? 
  [Muhammad] Those are premature conclusions. They are based 
on false information or positions that must be rectified, not 
only to end Yemen's crisis, but also to improve Arab relations 
in general and to eliminate any sensitivity among states. 
Obviously much information, and coordination among Arab states, 
have to be corrected. 
  [AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT] Why have the Yemenis not referred their 
case to the Arab League, the official Arab establishment 
entrusted with looking into such cases? 
  [Muhammad] We never turned to the Arab League in the past, 
nor do we favor turning to it now. We prefer Arab efforts from 
any Arab country. These efforts have so far been made by the 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Egypt, Oman, and the United 
Arab Emirates. We appreciate these efforts and welcome their 
continuation. We believe they lead us to more success than the 
routine efforts made by official organs in the League or 
elsewhere. 
  [AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT] Is it true that the Aden leadership 
prefers a federation to Yemeni unity in its present form? 
  [Muhammad] About 75 percent of the document talks about a 
federation, so let us begin there. As to why we do not talk 
about it openly, perhaps the word arouses some sensitivity. 
This is why we avoid announcing that, since the document itself 
talks in practice about points leading to a federation. 

