BFN 

  [Text] Presidency Minister Antonio Lacayo announced 
yesterday that the military naval fleet will be expanded to 
"guard our seas and coasts" from smugglers, pirates, and drug 
traffickers. 
  The announcement was made during a meeting with 
representatives of the fishing, business, labor, livestock, and 
transportation sectors, as well as the mayors of the Northern 
Atlantic Autonomous Region [RAAN]. During the meeting held at 
the National Technological Institute installations in Puerto 
Cabezas, Minister Lacayo responded to concerns voiced by 
representatives of the Moravian and Adventist Churches regarding 
the drug problem, which is affecting the area's population, 
especially youths. 
  Lacayo's decision triggered thunderous applause from 
attendees at the meeting, which was held following a private 
meeting between Lacayo and delegates of government institutions 
in the RAAN. 
  This meeting, which was closed by Governor Marcos Hoppenton, 
was followed by another meeting between Lacayo and 
representatives of all active sectors in the RAAN. 
  Not only did the mayors of Waspan, Bonanza, and Prinzapolka 
express the needs of their communities, but they also pointed 
out the achievements of the government of President Violeta 
Chamorro. 
  Reverend Cantol Taylor and Reverend Salomon Espinoza, 
representatives of the Moravian and the Adventist Churches, 
respectively, not only gave their blessings to the leaders of 
the country, but also recommended that unity, reconciliation, 
and love be promoted to help the country survive. Rev. Taylor 
also gave thanks for the good relations the Chamorro Government 
has promoted with his church. 
<H5>  The Challenges </H5>
  The representative of the Association of Indian Women, who 
spoke on behalf of some 4,000 organized women, also spoke at the 
meeting, which was attended by 350 delegates. 
  Meanwhile, Lacayo -- after listening to the concerns of the 
participants -- noted that the government likes challenges 
because they force it to redouble its efforts, thus allowing for 
changes to be made in Nicaragua. As for this last aspect, he 
mentioned the disarmament of armed groups; the transition from 
an authoritarian and autocratic government to one that respects 
constitutional and human rights; and the transition from a 
war-oriented to a development-oriented economy. Lacayo 
mentioned the return of many Nicaraguans -- many of whom were 
originally from the RAAN -- who were exiled to Honduras as one 
of the changes experienced since 1990. 
  Lacayo explained the reasons why the Enhanced Structural 
Adjustment Facility was signed with the IMF. He indicated that 
one of the reasons is to continue growing and to increase 
foreign investment in Nicaragua. He cited such specific cases 
as Taiwanese investment in the Intercontinental Hotel; Russian 
investment in geothermia; Swiss investment in NICALIT [expansion 
unknown]; and Honduran investment in the Sebaco Valley. 
<H5>  Road Improvement </H5>
  He stated that as a result of elections in the RAAN, 
representatives of the central government and the regional 
government, religious leaders, cooperative members, and mayors 
had been able to attend the meeting. He briefed attendants on 
the projects that are being implemented this year in various 
areas. He said that improvements are being made on the road 
that joins the Nicaraguan Atlantic and Pacific areas, and that 
funds are being increased for credit and grain collection 
purposes. The first allocation will be 12.7 million cordobas; 
5.4 million for the livestock sector; 3 million for the business 
sector; another 3 million for the fishing sector; and 300,000 
cordobas to reactivate silos to store basic grains. 
  Lacayo -- who was accompanied by several cabinet members -- 
announced that in 1994, 20 million cordobas will be allocated 
for works by the Emergency Fund for Social Investments [FISE], 
the Nicaraguan Institute of Municipal Development, and the 
Social Action Ministry. Only in the RAAN, the FISE-AID program 
will invest 18 million cordobas to build schools and health 
centers, and to buy desks. 
  Meanwhile, Education Minister Humberto Belli announced that 
the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg donated $1 million to build two 
teachers' schools, one in Bluefields and another in Puerto 
Cabezas. A visit by Prince William, son of the Grand Duke, is 
scheduled for the coming weeks. 

