Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] Ioannina (DPA) -- FRG Foreign Minister Klaus 
Kinkel does not expect a decisive breakthrough to be reached at 
the meeting with his counterparts from the European Union [EU] 
countries in Greece this weekend regarding the controversy in 
the European Union about the distribution of power in an 
extended Council of Ministers. During a break in the meeting 
Kinkel said in Ioannina, Greece: "I am really not very 
optimistic that a solution can be found today or tomorrow." 
  However, Kinkel considers "movement" in the stalemated 
controversy possible. But he does not yet see prospects for a 
special Council of Ministers meeting next week to conclude an 
agreement. 
  The internal controversy of the Twelve, for the settlement 
of 
which the ministers started the fifth attempt this month on 
Saturday [26 March], is endangering the already decided 
accession of Austria, Sweden, Finland, and Norway on 1 January 
1995. Says Kinkel: "It cannot and must not be that the 
accessions fail because of this issue." In the minister's view, 
the quarrel between Great Britain and Spain on the one hand and 
the other 10 countries on the other hurts the image of the 
European Union. 
  According to Greek and Spanish diplomats, "small steps of 
progress" were achieved on Saturday in the mediation efforts 
with London and Madrid -- both refuse an adjustment of the 
blocking minority in the extended Council of Ministers from 23 
to 27 votes. It is considered to basically stick to the 
adjustment to 27 votes for a blocking minority in the extended 
Council of Ministers. However, if there should be narrow 
decisions, the partners might commit themselves to looking for a 
mutually acceptable solution. 
  Kinkel said: "The core of a solution must be 27 votes." 
This is the only way in which the European Parliament, which 
also demands the adjustment of the blocking minority to 27 
votes, can agree to the enlargement treaties. [passage omitted] 

