BFN 

<F P=106> [By Cao Min: "State Introduces Job Qualifications for All </F>
Employees"] 
  [Text] The government will introduce internationally- 
recognised qualifications for the blue and white collar 
employees to foster a skilled, flexible workforce. 
  Every worker in the country, Chinese or foreign, can apply 
for a professional certificate which identifies their skills and 
qualifications, under new regulations issued by the ministries 
of labour and personnel. 
  Government officials said professional certificates will 
help 
job-seekers to find positions for which they are qualified. 
  The rules aim to set professional standards and promote a 
competitive employment market for job-seekers, said the two 
ministries. 
  The new certificates will be mandatory for government and 
enterprise vacancies. 
  Applicants for the credentials will have to demonstrate 
their 
on- the-job skills and professional qualifications. 
  Private practice lawyers, doctors and accountants, will have 
to apply for professional licences under the new system. 
  The qualification certificate covers two parts: One is the 
rudimentary standard of the knowledge, skill and ability of a 
worker in certain profession; the other is the necessary skill 
and ability required for an individual to engage in a private 
professional practice, which is controlled by the government. 
  The labour and personnel departments of the State Council 
will assess workers' educational backgrounds, examination 
records and on- the-job performance for the paper qualification. 
  The new system will encourage employees to improve their 
skills and adapt themselves to a market economy, said the Labour 
Ministry. 
  And the certificates issued by the Chinese Government will 
be 
valid in other countries. 
  The Regulations on the Qualification of Professionals aim to 
promote professional standards, particularly among the young. 
However, quite a number of young workers today are indifferent 
to professional skills. 
  Almost 48 percent of the country's 120-million-strong urban 
workforce have no professional training. 
  Nearly 70 percent of them are manual labourers. 
  The unskilled workforce has hindered the efficiency and 
development of new and hi-tech enterprises. 
  Government concern led to last year's professional appraisal 
plan, which replaced the old eight-grade worker system. 
  Skilled workers were given technician or senior technician 
grades by the Labour Ministry. 
  And a million young workers took part in a nationwide 
professional training contest sponsored by several government 
departments. The certificate system would encourage more 
employees improving their quality to adapt themselves to market 
economy, according to officials. 

