BFN 

  [Text] On 21 and 22 May, YOMIURI SHIMBUN conducted a 
nationwide public opinion poll on people's view on the 
Self-Defense Forces [SDF] which will mark the 40th anniversary 
of its establishment in July. Fifty-three percent of the 
respondents have a good impression of the SDF. The rating 
exceeded 50 percent for the first time since the first public 
opinion poll on this issue was conducted in 1984. 
  Asked about whether the SDF is constitutional, 53 percent 
answered it is "constitutional," 22 percent, it is "not," and 25 
percent "refrained from answering." Concerning the necessity 
of the SDF, 84 percent said it is "necessary," representing an 
overwhelming lead over the 10 percent of respondents who said it 
is "not." On the question of in which areas the SDF has been 
"useful," 74 percent answered ensuring national security, 95 
percent, disaster relief; 92 percent, cooperation in people's 
livelihood. Such a high percentage of favorable views 
illustrates the fact that the SDF has taken root among the 
people. Regarding SDF's future participation in UN peacekeeping 
operations (PKO), over 70 percent also said it is "necessary." 
  This is the fourth time the impression of the SDF has been 
surveyed, following polls conducted in 1984, 1988, and 1991. 
The rate of respondents having "favorable impression" or 
"rather" favorable impression reached over 30 percent in 1991, 
and had shown a slightly rising tendency. However, the 
percentage in the most recent poll increased by 13 points, 
compared to the result of the previous poll. It is believed 
that the SDF's activities in Cambodia, where the SDF 
participated in a PKO mission for the first time, improved its 
image. On the other hand, 14 percent, the lowest figure ever, 
said they have a "bad" impression. 
  With regard to the SDF's future participation in PKO, 23 
percent said it is "not necessary" or "not really necessary," 
while 71 percent -- more than three times those respondents 
answering in the negative -- said participation is "necessary" 
or "probably necessary." These results show that most people 
think it is natural for the SDF to participate in UN-led 
international contribution programs. However, regarding the 
question of unfreezing its participation in UN peacekeeping 
forces (PKF) acting as buffer forces and in other missions, 
which is a focal point in revising the PKO Cooperation Law, 
nearly one-half of the respondents answered, "the ban should 
remain as it is for the next several years." Thus, most 
respondents expressed a cautious view. 

