CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Rasul Bayram ogly Kuliyev, chairman of the </F>
Supreme Council, by Elmira Akhundova; place and date not given: 
"'We Need Peace and Radical Reforms'"] 
  [Text] As distinct from the previous speakers of 
parliament, he cannot be called an "office individual." He is 
actively involved in military organizational development and 
spends more time in the areas of combat operations than in 
parliament itself. Before he was elected to the office of 
chairman of the republic Supreme Council, he worked for a long 
time in industry and was in recent years head of a major Baku 
oil refinery. He is a practical expert and manager. A fierce 
supporter of the market. The main hope of Azerbaijan's 
businessmen and entrepreneurs. Today Rasul Bayram ogly Kuliyev 
is the main and most influential figure in Geydar Aliyev's team. 
He is interviewed by our correspondent Elmira Akhundova. 
  [Akhundova] The war, negotiations with the leaders of 
Armenia, economic reforms. Is not the plethora of duties getting 
in the way of your main activity--work as chairman of parliament? 
  [Kuliyev] I don't believe so. On the contrary, parliament is 
now working very productively. It is not, after all, a question 
of the number of bills that are adopted but of their qualitative 
level and their correspondence to the laws of civilized states. 
As far as the military questions are concerned, when it is a 
question of defense of the motherland, I am no longer speaker 
here but an ordinary citizen. I consider myself simply duty 
bound to go to the areas where combat operations are being 
conducted and resolve on the spot the problems that arise. 
Implementation of the economic reforms, on the other hand, is 
for me a most important question. We will acquire genuine 
independence only with the creation of a developed economy that 
operates, truly, according to market laws of economics. If, on 
the other hand, we continue to live and work according to the 
laws of the totalitarian system that held sway in the former 
USSR for many decades and that continue to exist in Azerbaijan 
to this day, we will never create an efficient economy and will 
constantly be on the verge of a loss of state independence, 
which we acquired with such difficulty and such sacrifices. I 
see as the purpose of my life and present activity in the office 
of speaker of parliament, therefore, the implementation of 
fundamental economic reforms. 
  [Akhundova] Unfortunately, there has been virtually no 
movement in the republic in this respect. What or who, in your 
opinion, is impeding the implementation of radical economic 
reforms in Azerbaijan? 
  [Kuliyev] The majority--80 percent--of the representatives 
of 
the state-bureaucratic nomenklatura that are in power at this 
moment do not at all represent the essence and meaning of the 
economic reforms. They are far from any market notions whatever. 
Had this been entrusted to me, I would not have ventured the 
implementation of economic reforms with them. I cannot say here 
that there are no personnel in Azerbaijan capable of tackling 
the urgent problems of the day. But they need to be sought among 
the incipient new growth of young, vigorous entrepreneurs, 
scientists, economists aged 30 to 40. They have made their 
presence felt in the past five or six years and have already in 
practice assimilated all the subtleties of the market economy, 
commerce, and so forth. These people should come to power. 
Personnel and personnel policy are the main and most important 
"painful" problem in Azerbaijan. A concept of the systemic 
restructuring of the organs of state administration has been put 
together in the republic at this time. But without 
professionally trained personnel, no concept, even the most 
dazzling, will do anything. The war, the need to liberate the 
occupied territory, the most complex political situation in the 
Caucasus as a whole--all this is having a negative effect on 
internal processes in the republic and fettering our actions. 
But I believe that the coming month will be a turning point in 
this respect. Generally, if you want to know my opinion, I am a 
supporter of shock therapy and of the broad and instantaneous 
introduction in the republic's economic organism of the 
processes of denationalization and privatization. Strenuous work 
on the creation of a package of laws that would make it possible 
to embark on the accomplishment of this task is being performed 
in parliament at this time. 
  [Akhundova] What is happening today on the 
Armenian-Azerbaijani front? Despite the fact that the 
Azerbaijani Army has managed to halt the advance of the Armenian 
formations deep into Azerbaijani territory, it has scored no 
appreciable successes. Are such significant losses justified? 
Perhaps the path of peace negotiations would bring the two sides 
more rapidly to the desired goal? 
  [Kuliyev] We have never rejected the path of negotiations, 
the peaceful path. Yes, the negotiating process is proving 
difficult, and finding a mutually acceptable version is very 
hard--too much blood has been spilled, there is too much mutual 
distrust in the parties to the conflict. But there is no 
alternative: Continued military confrontation is fraught with 
mass new casualties and the final exhaustion of the physical and 
moral resources of the two peoples. It is for this reason, I 
believe, that I did right to append my signature to the Bishkek 
Protocol, recording Azerbaijan's good will and its readiness for 
a long-term cease-fire and political negotiations. 
  [Akhundova] This protocol has evoked a stormy reaction in 
Azerbaijan. The opposition has for about a month been using your 
name every which way, and the most irreconcilable have even 
accused you of a betrayal of national interests and have 
demanded your resignation. The main charges amount to the 
following: First, in having appended your signature alongside 
that of the representative of the Armenian community of Nagornyy 
Karabakh you de jure recognized the self-proclaimed Republic of 
Nagorno-Karabakh and, second, your signature gave the "go-ahead" 
for the version of a settlement of the conflict within the 
framework of the CIS and the deployment of a Russian military 
contingent on the territory of Azerbaijan. 
  [Kuliyev] I consider all these charges a malicious invention 
of the destabilizing forces in the republic that have for 
several years now been playing the "Karabakh card" in the turbid 
water of political commotion and populist speculation in their 
endeavor to come to power. No one in the world, not even Armenia 
itself, has recognized the so-called Republic of 
Nagorno-Karabakh. At the same time, on the other hand, we need, 
finally, to recognize the current realities: A war is being 
fought on the territory of Azerbaijan, and Nagornyy Karabakh is 
a party to the conflict. As far as the question of the plan of a 
settlement of the conflict that is preferable for Azerbaijan is 
concerned, there is a good opportunity, I believe, for combining 
two plans--the Russian plan and the one proposed by the 
international community in the shape of the CSCE and its Minsk 
Group. There is one "but" here.... If peace is offered 
Azerbaijan on shameful terms, I want no part of the conclusion 
of this peace. The main thing is that the four UN Security 
Council resolutions must be fulfilled and all the occupied 
territory of our republic unconditionally liberated. All other 
questions may be decided in the process of political 
negotiations. And I disagree, incidentally, with your assertion 
that we have scored no military successes. We have advanced 
along the entire perimeter of the front from 5 to 50 km. And 
this in just two months. Yes, we have sustained certain losses, 
but I am not afraid to say that we have to pay in blood for the 
liberation of our territory. 
  [Akhundova] And how do you view the idea of the commitment 
to 
the conflict zone of a peacekeeping force, primarily Russian? 
  [Kuliyev] The leadership of Azerbaijan is a supporter of 
peacekeeping actions by the forces of international observers. 
Since there is a need for the commitment to the conflict zone of 
a disengagement force, let it be composed of representatives of 
a mixed contingent, not just Russia. The leaders of leading 
Western states that are participants in the CSCE's Minsk Group 
agree with us on this issue. I am generally an opponent in 
principle of the deployment of the armed forces of Russia or any 
other state on the territory of Azerbaijan, of the creation of 
military bases here even more. This would infringe the 
republic's national sovereignty to this extent or the other. 
Russia and Azerbaijan should, in my opinion, strive for the 
consolidation and revival of the common economic and cultural 
space, but by no means for political or, even less, military 
dependence on one another. I spoke about this in the course of 
my recent visit to Moscow and am pleased that my position 
encountered understanding among the leaders of the Russian state. 
  [Akhundova] Your forecast as to how events will develop in 
the coming months in the political, economic, and military 
spheres? 
  [Kuliyev] Much will depend, of course, on the foreign policy 
macro-situation. Unless something unexpected happens, we will 
embark on radical economic reforms in the very near future. We 
can no longer delay--we could find ourselves hopelessly behind. 
Unless we resolve the problem of Nagornyy Karabakh peacefully, 
we shall continue to liberate our land. True, I greatly hope 
that the Armenian side and the leaders of the neighboring 
republic will finally understand that the path of confrontation 
and continued military opposition will bring them nothing. 
Armenia is in a most difficult situation. With the help of the 
overseas diaspora and foreign injections it may hold on for some 
length of time, even score a number of military successes, but 
this will not last long. 
  Our political strategy? We must show the world community 
that 
we are truly building a civilized state. After all, however much 
we praise ourselves, we are still a long way from a truly 
democratic, civilized society. So there is an abundance of work 
to be done. 

