Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec by Alena </F>
Borovickova; place and date not given: "Our Relations Are 
Special"] 
  [Text] Relations between the Czech Republic and Slovakia 
and the fundamental aspects of the Czech Republic's foreign 
policy were the main topics discussed in an interview granted to 
PRAVDA by Czech Foreign Minister Josef Zieleniec. 
  [Borovickova] It was often emphasized during the breakup of 
Czechoslovakia that very close, sui generis very special, 
relations will continue to exist between the Czech and Slovak 
Republics. This certainly applies in relations between people, 
but not at the government level. Can it be said that our 
relations are closer in some things--or different--from what 
they are with the Czech Republic's other neighbors? 
  [Zieleniec] I would even say that our relations are very 
close and special. I do not believe that this applies only to 
people and not to the governments. Not only relations between 
the individual ministries, but also between their individual 
employees are routine, something that, after all, is not typical 
in foreign political relations--for example, in our relations 
with Poland and Hungary. I am not even talking about more 
distant countries. Almost all communication between governments 
is held via the foreign service. This is not the case in our 
relations. The intensity of the links between the two countries 
in the economic, legal, social insurance, health insurance 
spheres, and so forth is unique. In essence, it is possible to 
say that we have succeeded in maintaining for the long-term the 
things that, following the breakup of the state, were special 
and very important for the practical lives of our citizens: 
Their status with regard to the citizens of the other state, 
employment opportunities, and the possibility of unrestricted 
movement. You can cross our common border, although we have 
technical problems with it, wherever and whenever you like, even 
in a forest. It would be difficult to find something like this 
anywhere else in Europe. However, because our relations are so 
remarkable and close, there are also problems. 
  [Borovickova] Is there any coordination of stances on major 
international issues between the Czech and Slovak Foreign 
Ministries? For example, you have the Sudeten Germans and we 
have the Carpathians.... 
  [Zieleniec] The kind of coordination you are talking about 
is engendered because we have a common interest in many areas. 
Our national interests and the national interests of Slovakia 
logically coincide. We lived for a long time in a common state 
and we inherited many commitments. Our nations are close to 
each other, and they feel an affinity and affection for each 
other. All of this is projected into what is called state or 
national interests. It is of fundamental interest to the Czech 
Republic that Slovakia is democratic and prosperous and that it 
has the same foreign policy orientation as the Czech Republic. 
That is, an orientation toward Western Europe. This is also 
prompted by simple geopolitical reasons. It is good to have 
friends for neighbors. 
  [Borovickova] Do you believe in the existence of spheres of 
influence in present-day Europe? 
  [Zieleniec] Not only do I believe this, but I am convinced 
that, as it was for centuries, so will it be in the future. 
Europe--Central Europe, in which we live--is the object of the 
power-wielding interests of various states and powers. This is 
something that we have been very well aware of in the past 45 
years. This is something that we know we will have to face in 
the future. The issue, however, lies in ensuring that we orient 
our state in the long term toward political cooperation with 
those countries with whom we have a similar scale of values and 
with whom we share the same way of life. This is a matter that, 
in this context, is very important; and, for us, this is 
indubitably Western Europe. 
  [Borovickova] In this context, what is your view of Russia? 
  [Zieleniec] Russia is a large country, a power, even a 
superpower. It is a country that has played and will continue 
to play a very important role in the history of Europe and the 
world. It is important for us that it succeeds in becoming 
stabilized and that a parliamentary democracy, a market economy, 
and an efficient economy is asserted there; this is also a 
prerequisite for political stability in this huge country. 
Incidentally, this is not only what we want; it is also what 
the Russian democrats want. 
  [Borovickova] What is your assessment of Czech-Austrian 
relations in view of the completion of "undesirable" Temelin? 
  [Zieleniec] This is a time-sensitive issue. Discussions are 
under way on more finance for it. This is also an issue of some 
significance on the Austrian domestic political scene. 
Elections are coming up. I do not think this issue can have a 
long-term influence on Czech-Austrian relations, which are very 
good. We have historical ties to Austria, there are ties 
between our people, and I believe that not only Austrian 
politicians, but also Austrian citizens are aware of this. 
  [Borovickova] Do you know how many of the staff in your 
ministry are Slovak nationals? 
  [Zieleniec] We place no emphasis on nationality. We have an 
unequivocal criterion--citizenship. Naturally, it is a 
condition that we employ only Czech citizens in our diplomatic 
services. 
  [Borovickova] So, Slovak nationality plays no role even in 
the decisionmaking on appointments to senior posts? 
  [Zieleniec] Take a look around the ministry and you will see 
that we pay no attention to this. 
  [Borovickova] Since we are talking about nationality, you 
are of Polish origin, your deputy, Mr. Bratinka, is of Slovak 
origin, and it is rumored that Mr. Vondra is of Hungarian origin 
and was called Csapo. Is this true? 
  [Zieleniec] I do not know. I acknowledge my Polish origin. 
Whether Mr. Bratinka derives his origin from the fact that he 
was born in Slovakia, I do not know. As far as Mr. Vondra is 
concerned, I simply do not know. You see, we do not bother 
about this.... 
  [Borovickova] How do you feel as foreign minister in a 
state where, apart from yourself, foreign policy is also 
"formulated" by the Office of the President of the Republic, the 
chairman of the parliamentary Foreign Committee, the prime 
minister, and recently also the defense minister, while not all 
of them always agree with one other? Do you manage to sleep 
peacefully? 
  [Zieleniec] I have been sleeping peacefully since childhood. 
If you look at our Constitution, you will see that there are 
many constitutional officials in the Czech Republic who have 
authority in foreign policy. We are not an exception, however. 
It is the same elsewhere. The authority is different, but it 
exists. Therefore, foreign policy is the result of cooperation 
among these officials. The problem is in coordinating these 
issues, in preventing aberrations. This is my job; at least, 
this is what I am trying to do. It does not always succeed, but 
I think some progress is being made here. We meet regularly 
with those constitutional officials you mentioned, and we 
discuss key foreign policy issues. If you look at Germany, 
Austria, or the United States, there are also more 
constitutional officials active in foreign policy there. Their 
opinions are not unanimous. Each one emphasizes a slightly 
different point of view, depending on his constitutional 
function. If there were only one opinion, it would be like it 
was under communism. People now have the opportunity to look a 
little deeper into the process of the evolution of political 
opinion. By the way, even in Slovakia this opinion is not 
unanimous. 
  [Borovickova] There is currently a great deal of discussion 
about the Walderode case. Mr. Bratinka recommended to the 
Interior Ministry some time ago the names of several individuals 
who are "worthy of special consideration" from the point of view 
of speeding up the process of granting them Czech citizenship. 
Was this preceded by discussions at your ministry. or was this 
his own initiative? 
  [Zieleniec] First of all, Mr. Bratinka did not recommend Mr. 
Walderode to anyone. He did write a letter to the Interior 
Ministry containing several names, but Walderode was not one of 
them. When he wrote this letter, Mr. Bratinka was entrusted 
with running the section whose authority also included 
expressing an opinion on domestic political issues from the 
foreign policy point of view. It is necessary to view his 
recommendation within the framework of the normal procedure 
between individual state administration bodies in the Czech 
Republic. The Agriculture Ministry expresses an opinion from 
its point of view, the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs from 
the point of view of its jurisdiction, and the Foreign Ministry 
from its point of view. The final decision fell to the Interior 
Ministry, and it made it. I think that the whole case has been 
blown out of proportion, especially the attestation that Deputy 
Bratinka provided. 
  [Borovickova] These "aristocratic" cases are juxtaposed in 
the Czech media with the Volhynian Czechs. What is your opinion? 
  [Zieleniec] I do not view this as an extraordinary course of 
action. I think we have to view this as a normal civil 
procedure, regardless of whether someone has a name that was 
once aristocratic. According to the law in our country, the use 
of aristocratic titles is prohibited, and everyone is equal 
before the law, whether he is the descendant of a famous 
aristocratic family or a Volhynian Czech. The problem is 
something else. It is associated especially with property 
restitution, and this concerns the former group of people. The 
issue of the Volhynian Czechs involves mass citizenship, and I, 
as a citizen, am of the opinion that, because we are a civic 
state, these issues should be resolved individually. It is 
necessary to view each applicant as a potential citizen of this 
state. 
  [Borovickova] How did Moscow crop up in your curriculum 
vitae? 
  [Zieleniec] I was born there because, at that time, my 
parents were working in Moscow. I was there for three months. 
  [Borovickova] You are going to Bratislava on Friday [11 
March]. What will you do there inasmuch as you do not have a 
counterpart? 
  [Zieleniec] I am going privately at the invitation of the 
Slovak Foreign Policy Association. 
  [Borovickova] Can you tell us anything more about this? 
  [Zieleniec] I will deliver a lecture on the Czech Republic's 
foreign policy. This is not an official visit. I do not have 
any extraordinary meetings planned. 

