CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Hiroshi Kashiwagi, Director General, Agency of </F>
Industrial Science and Technology, MITI] 
  [Text] Taking this opportunity, I wish all of you a Happy 
New Year and offer my views on the coming year. 
  The world still is feeling the aftershock of a tremendous 
historical change which effectively ended the structure built by 
the East-West Cold War. Regional conflicts are breaking out in 
various areas of the world. Finally freed from the problem of 
military security, the United States and Western European 
countries are giving their domestic economic issues their first 
priority. Triggered by the worldwide economic recession, these 
countries are moving toward regionalist and protectionist 
economy. Thus economic frictions increasingly are becoming 
acute. In spite of this, Japan was strongly urged to maintain 
and strengthen its free-trade system, to assist in the recovery 
of world economy, and to play a leading role in dealing with 
problems on a global scale, including those of global 
environment, in a responsible manner. 
  The Japanese economy, however, is far from robust, as 
indicated by weak consumer spending and drastic cutbacks 
business is making in capital investment. Combined with these is 
some worrisome turn of events, such as the drastic rise in the 
value of the yen, which further exacerbates our recessionary 
economy. Judging from the maturity of the Japanese market, 
combined with the clouded future outlook and the sense of being 
blocked in, it now appears that it will be a long time before 
the Japanese economy can come out of the recession. These 
conditions may eventually affect the industry's R&amp;D divisions 
hitherto considered sacred. Moreover, with the rising value of 
the yen, Japanese companies are increasingly moving their 
manufacturing bases abroad, creating concern for eventual 
deindustriarization of Japan. The question we face now is one of 
how Japan can maintain its technological base which thus far has 
supported its economic development. 
  The Ministry of International Trade and Industry is keenly 
aware of the importance of Japan's role as a leading member of 
the international community in achieving full economic recovery 
and in meeting the challenge of the 21st century, full of 
vitality and richness, while overcoming restraining factors of 
aging society and the problem of energy versus environment. 
Our future actions will be focused on the theme of "a 
contribution to outside world and a reform within Japan." In 
other words, we will be reviewing the past economic structure 
and be prepared to endure the pains accompanying such a reform 
in part. It is important that we take down "creatively" the 
existing systems suffering from structural fatigue so that, 
through change and investment, we can achieve further economic 
development. 
  It is especially essential for Japan to open up a new 
industrial field and maintain its vitality. In order to achieve 
this, we must promote original basic R&amp;D, searching for 
technical seeds which will be the "seed" of a new industry. 
Original basic R&amp;D will enable Japan to contribute not only 
to 
its own economic and technological development but also to 
international development, as well, by dispatching to the rest 
of the world the knowledge gained. 
  Moreover, in dealing from the overall standpoint with global 
environmental problems and the limits imposed by resource and 
energy, we feel that our solution to these problems must be 
based on the findings of R&amp;D. It will be necessary to 
transfer 
energy and environment technologies that will be developed by 
Japan to other countries. 
  To be in line with MITI's basic policies, AIST has built up 
its R&amp;D systems by the following means: (1) the creation of 
the 
Industrial Science and Technology R&amp;D System by combining the 
existing Large-Scale Industrial Technology R&amp;D System with 
the 
R&amp;D Project of Basic Technologies for Energy and Industrial 
Technology Development Future Industries; and (2) creation of 
Exploratory Energy and Environment Technology Development 
Project (New Sunshine Project) by combining the New Energy 
Technology R&amp;D (Sunshine Project), the Energy Conservation 
Technology R&amp;D (Moonlight Project), and the Research 
Institute 
of Innovative Technologies for the Earth (RITE). Moreover, we 
have changed the designation of each region's industrial 
technology test laboratory to governmental industrial technology 
research institute and, at the same time, reorganized and 
improved its research setup. Moreover, with the enactment and 
enforcement of laws regulating the R&amp;D of "medical welfare 
equipment and tools" and promotion of their use, we have put 
into effect a new policy designed to aid private sectors engaged 
in the R&amp;D of "medical welfare equipment and tools." 
  For fiscal 1995, AIST will continue pursuing the following 
measures designed to deal with both international and domestic 
problems mentioned previously. 
  First of all, in order to strengthen the structure of the 
R&amp;D 
systems, we will continue to work on the industrial science and 
technology research and development guidelines which both 
generally and specifically present the direction and course of 
R&amp;D which MITI will pursue. Moreover, we will continue 
improving 
AIST's research facilities and equipment so that solid 
advancement will be made in the fields of creative basic R&amp;D 
and 
the research undertaking closely connected to people's 
livelihood. 
  Secondly, we will work on achieving full capabilities of our 
industrial science and technology R&amp;D systems. The creative 
basic R&amp;D; the New Sunshine Project designed to deal with 
energy 
and global environmental problems in appropriate fashion; 
R&amp;D of 
medical welfare equipment and machinery, a type of R&amp;D 
designed 
to achieve comfort and abundance in life, will be conducted 
under the government research institutes and industrial science 
and technology R&amp;D system (more commonly known as the 
"industrial technology system"). Moreover, we will pursue the 
type of research and development using excellent regional art 
and craft technology. We will continue to promote regional 
large-scale projects and other regional technology R&amp;D aiming 
for the establishment of a unique industrial technological 
foundation. Also, under the industrial technology system now 
entering upon its second year, we are planning to start a new 
R&amp;D project on "synergy ceramics." 
  Thirdly, in order to ensure the medium- and long-range 
development bases, we will support the private sector's 
industrial technology developments. We will promote R&amp;D 
through 
financial investments and a system of taxation. In order to step 
up the private sector's experimental research in basic 
technology, we will provide support through the Japan Key 
Technology Center. We will also continue to work on a measure 
designed to support small- and medium-sized businesses' unique 
technology development which will emerge as Japan's next 
generation of industries. 
  Fourthly, we will reorganize and improve Japan's R&amp;D 
foundations. In order to step up the type of R&amp;D efforts 
extending throughout Japan, we must improve industrial 
technology networks through which research manpower and research 
data can be obtained. Moreover, in order to carry out R&amp;D 
effectively, as a preliminary step, we will conduct basic 
research for the purpose of providing guidance. Moreover, we 
will proceed with the reorganization of the research system 
dealing with the foundation of standards, aimed at achieving the 
kind of society which will provide people with a comfortable and 
enriched lifestyle as well as a harmonious environment. The 
reorganization of the system used in the preservation and 
creative utilization of the industrial technological history so 
that the historical materials can be put to use in training of 
superior research personnel. 
  Finally, international research cooperation through the 
advancement of international joint research projects involving 
the United States and other advanced countries, developing 
nations, the former Soviet Union, and eastern European 
countries; the Human Frontier Science Program; and the Subsidies 
for International R&amp;D Cooperation (funded by a NEDO grant). 
Moreover, we will continue working on a measure which will 
enable us to actively cooperate with the OECD Commission on 
Science and Technology Policy (CSTP) to achieve an 
internationally harmonious technological policy. 
  At the risk of sounding repetitive, let me say that the 
establishment of new industrial science technology will be 
crucial to the construction of a foundation for the medium- and 
long-range developments, without which it would be difficult to 
make both Japan and the rest of the world a place of vitality 
and abundance. Consequently, under the cooperation of 
industrial, academic, and governmental sectors, it will be 
extremely important for us to make every effort to advance the 
basic R&amp;D involving Japan and never to backpedal it. 
  Through the enforcement of these policies, I wish to fulfill 
my heavy responsibility as the director general of AIST. Your 
understanding and cooperation in this connection will be greatly 
appreciated. I wish you all a happy and prosperous New Year. 

