BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 1 May (PL) -- The current year will continue 
to be difficult for the Cuban economy, but some sectors' results 
show the first signs of recovery, Osvaldo Martinez, chairman of 
the Parliament's Economic Affairs Commission, said today. We 
cannot yet speak of short-term recovery, but we must refer to 
things that are going well and allow ourselves to anticipate 
good results, the deputy stated in a lengthy interview with 
Sunday's weekly JUVENTUD REBELDE. 
  Martinez also explained that the country is moving toward an 
economic model that, without abandoning the basic principles of 
socialism, will function without disregarding the market, with 
forms of private property and a strong presence of foreign 
capital. Martinez cited tourism, which has a 30-percent annual 
growth rate, as the first positive aspect of the island's 
economic performance, adding that it will shortly exceed the 
sugar industry as the main source of revenue for the nation. He 
also mentioned the growing production of petroleum, which is 
expected to exceed [word indistinct] 1.1 million tons produced 
last year. 
  There is an investment process of foreign capital in the 
area 
of petroleum, which shows interest in Cuba's petroleum 
potential, Martinez noted. He added that the fact that these 
companies challenge the blockade and U.S. threats demonstrates 
that there are reasonably good prospects for finding petroleum 
deposits. 
  He also explained that new forms of exploiting state-owned 
land, granted for the use of former workers, now organized in 
cooperatives, will permit a significant increase in food 
production. The measures the government will adopt to cleanse 
internal finances, he remarked, will have immediate positive 
results for the economy, although its basic effect will require 
no less than one and a half years to mature. 
  He said measures will undoubtedly have positive effects on 
the recovery, namely to return to the path of growth. Martinez 
added that by the end of the century, Cuba will begin overcoming 
this adverse situation and will do so by "not only returning to 
the path of economic growth, but achieving a qualitatively 
different economy." 
  The lawmaker affirmed the country will have greater levels 
of 
efficiency expressed in high worker productivity, as well as 
domestic and export-related productive efficiency. He said it 
must be an economy with a strong state sector that outlines the 
economic path and operates following decentralized 
administration mechanisms in which economic categories play a 
more important role than administrative mechanisms. Martinez 
said the model being designed will attach greater importance to 
the market and to a strong presence of foreign capital. 
  A sector of self-employed workers, which is expected to grow 
in the future, will coexist together with the guiding role of 
the state and a very important cooperative sector in 
agriculture, Martinez declared. He stressed that these changes 
will not alter the basic foundations of Cuban society, forced to 
make its way in a world governed by capitalism. 
  Our economy will continue to be socialist. This means that 
political decisionmaking will be central and politics will 
govern the economy, in that it is subordinated and directed 
towards the achievement of the social objectives of socialism, 
Martinez concluded. 

