Language: <F P=105> Korean </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [By reporter Kang Tae-ho] </F>
  [Text] Anticipating the post-unification period, most 
businesses, and particularly conglomerates, view North Korea as 
a market they are destined to enter. This means that, although 
there be many obstacles and investment dangers, they are 
prepared to risk these for the sake of long-term investment. 
  However, as long as government policy does not support this, 
there will be limits to North-South economic cooperation. Even 
through early 1993, businesses interested in economic 
cooperation with North Korea, filled with expectation following 
the birth of the new government, forecast that 1993 would be an 
epoch-making turning point in North-South economic cooperation. 
That forecast missed the mark, however. Set in the context of 
the February resolution on special inspections by the 
International Atomic Energy Agency and North Korea's 
announcement that it would withdraw from the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty following this, the government's policy 
of linking the nuclear issue with economic cooperation tied the 
hands of business. Actually, the results of 1993's North-South 
economic cooperation show that it is just marking time. 
  Beginning on 7 October 1988 with the announcement of an 
economic opening toward the North, a follow-up measure to the 7 
July Proclaimation, trade with North Korea is now in its sixth 
year. During that time, the scale of North-South trade reached 
$200 million annually. Besides conglomerates such as Lucky Gold 
Star, Samsung, and Daewoo, small- and medium-sized firms are 
actively getting involved, bringing the present total to over 
270 companies. 
  By what motives or opportunities are these firms getting 
involved in trade with North Korea? What are the actual problems 
in North Korea trade? What do working-level officials on site 
think is needed for full-scall trade with North Korea? 
Examples of North-South Trade [Nambuk Kyoyok 
Saryejip], published by the Unification Board at the end of last 
year, answers these questions at least partially. 
Examples are found in the experiences of 
working-level officials of companies which had constantly 
participated in North-South trade. These show us the present 
state of North-South trade. 
  -- Commissioned Processing Trade. Using the opportunity 
provided by Mr. P, a middleman in trade with North Korea, when 
he proposed a venture in the commissioned processing of clothing 
while describing his visit to North Korea at their Beijing 
office during the summer of 1992, Lucky Gold Star pursued trade 
in the commissioned processing of work uniforms. First of all, 
it was most important to learn the level of North Korea's sewing 
work. One month after sending subsidary materials for making 
samples via a North Korean Koryo Airlines flight, Lucky Gold 
Star received test products and evaluated their quality. 
Responsibility for risk concerning subsidiary materials, quality 
control, delivery period, and shipping were brought up as 
predictable problems. To prepare against inferior quality, 
factory work uniforms were chosen for commissioned processing. 
It was decided to bear the increased financing-cost that would 
result from delayed delivery. As for shipping, because this was 
the first commisioned-processing transaction, it was decided to 
used a Pusan-Hong Kong-Nampo route even if it was more expensive. 
  This transaction, as a first attempt, was completed almost 
perfectly and Mr. P did an excellent job as an agent. It was 
noted, however, that two conditions must be met for the 
vitalization of commissioned processing in the future. One is 
that at least a limited visit to North Korea for a fixed period 
by a team of technicians is urgently needed. Even problems which 
can be solved if a technical team does direct consultation have 
to pass through very complex precedures. The other is the 
problem of shipping. If products pass through Hong Kong, 
shipping expenses increase, possibly becoming an obstacle to the 
competitiveness in exports to third countries which could be 
achieved through North-South cooperation. Speeding the opening 
of sea and land routes, although limited, is the most basic 
measure to be taken for North-South economic cooperation. 
  Stressing the importance of the precise delivery of supply 
materials and detailed work instructions, Samsung Products, 
which did commissioned processing trade in men's pants, pointed 
out that two-way traffic and communications for this must be 
easy. Shipping through a third country acts as the greatest 
factor in delayed delivery. In such a case, there are limits to 
making clothing, which is so sensitive to fashion. 
  Hanil Synthetic Fiber, which traded in the commissioned 
processing of semimanufactured sweaters, revealed that although 
the product-quality level of clothing processed in the North 
tends to be very good, there are noticeable product defects due 
to the use of worn-out machinery. Thus, consideration must also 
be given to spare parts supply. 
  -- Commodities Trade. Songbo Sangun, which imported walnuts 
from North Korea's Choson Agricultural Products Trade Company, 
came by chance to promote trade with North Korea. 
Representatives of the company were introduced to a Mr. S, who 
frequently visited China and claimed to be close enough to a 
Choson employee to carry on business transactions. The 
conditions presented by middleman Mr. S were that if Songbo 
Sangun would only send a ship to Nampo, it would load and take 
out 100 tons of walnuts with payment was to be made within 20 
days of the ship's arrival at a domestic port. Loading and 
taking out the walnuts without even a leter of credit was 
unbelievable. However, domestic production of walnuts was 
absolutely insufficient compared to consumption and if the 
walnuts would only arrive around the middle of December, they 
could be sold for New Year's Day and Porum [the 15th day of the 
first month of the lunar new year] and a considerable profit 
could be had, they thought. Negotiations were held with several 
shipping companies brokering ships for North Korea, but they 
demanded 3-4 times the commercial freight rates. They said that 
this was because there was a danger of accidents due to 
difficult communications and because there were even cases in 
which ships had to wait on cargo which had not been prepared 
correctly, or worse, returned empty. 
  Renting a ship at an expensive rate, they sent it to Nampo. 
Even though contact was made through an agent, not even an ant 
showed up on ship. Finally after 10 days, they had no choice but 
to withdraw the empty ship. They figured that the North Korean 
side had no confidence they could receive payment after the 
walnuts were shipped. However, at this time Mr. K from another 
trade company said that all they would have to do is send a ship 
again. Fortunately ship of company T was in port at Nampo and 
was able to load and bring the walnuts for a low price. 
  The problem was customs. With customs officials trying to 
push responsibility off on each other, they ended up going all 
the way to the Unification Board to have their documents 
inspected. What is worse, it was reported on television that 
people may be bringing in Chinese walnuts disguised as North 
Korean walnuts, so customs procedures were delayed because they 
were unable to confirm that the walnuts were North Korean. 
Ultimately, it took a month and a half to pass customs, so they 
missed the high-demand season and could not get a good price for 
the walnuts. 

