Language: <F P=105> Norwegian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jan Gunnar Furuly] </F>
  [Text] Ever since 1986 the minke whale has been on a par 
with the rhinoceros, the elephant, and the panda in the 
Washington Convention's list of especially endangered species, 
known as the List 1 species. The Norwegian Government wants to 
have the minke whale transferred to List 2 in order to 
facilitate international trade in minke whale products. 
  "The present listing of the minke whale is unheard of from a 
scientific point of view. The minke whale has no business being 
in the same category as the rhinoceros and the panda," Bjorn 
Reppe, special adviser in the Fisheries Ministry, said. 
<H5>  120,000 Animals </H5>
  The demand for a change in listing has been sent to the 14 
nations in the North Atlantic region that would be affected. 
The Norwegian overture follows initiatives from the Directorate 
for Natural Resources Management, the Fisheries Ministry, and 
the Environmental Protection Ministry. 
  Norwegian authorities say that research shows that there are 
120,000 minke whales in the regions around Great Britain, 
Iceland, and Norway. 
  Of these, 87,000 belong to the northeast Atlantic variety 
that Norwegian whalers want to hunt commercially. Researchers 
estimate that there are about 1 million minke whales globally. 
<H5>  Norwegian Exception </H5>
  Norway is one of 120 nations that have signed the Washington 
Convention regulating international trade in endangered plant 
and animal species. At any given time there are a couple of 
thousand species on the CITES [Convention on International Trade 
in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora] list. The list 
is drawn up as the result of regularly held meetings of the 
member countries. The minke whale was put on the list in 1986 
following a suggestion from the Seychelles. Norway took 
exception to prohibiting export and import of minke whale, 
finback, and sperm whale. The Norwegian authorities believe 
that this legally enables them to allow trade in such products. 
  The Washington Convention strictly prohibits export and 
import of List 1 species that are defined as especially 
endangered. Only controlled exchanges of material between 
researchers and museums are permitted. Trade is allowed for the 
species on List 2 if the CITES secretariat issues a license. 
The control remains stringent, however, to ensure that the 
licensed trade does not exceed certain limits. 
  "The polar bear and the walrus are among northern species on 
CITES' List 2," Oystein Storkersen of the Directorate for 
Natural Resources Management said. He is not too optimistic 
about getting the Norwegian proposal accepted by the majority of 
the members of the Washington Convention. "Unfortunately the 
countries are governed by feelings, not facts, in their view of 
the whale," he said. 

