Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by V. Zilanov, deputy chairman of the Russian </F>
Fisheries Committee: ``Caspian Dialogue''] 
  [Text] Negotiations by representatives of the 
governments of all five Caspian states: Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, 
Iran, Russia, and Turkmenistan about preparation of the draft of 
an agreement on conservation and utilization of bioresources of 
the Caspian Sea took place in Ashgabat, the capital of 
Turkmenistan. Vyacheslav Zilanov comments on results of the 
Ashgabat meeting. 
  With the disintegration of the Soviet Union and formation of 
new states with access to the Caspian Sea there was not only a 
shift in the geopolitical situation here but some radical 
changes in economic ties in every sphere as well, including 
utilization of bioresources and primarily the fishing resources 
of the Caspian Sea. They have always played a significant role 
in the feeding of the population of the Caspian states, while 
the sturgeon resources also constituted a legacy of the entire 
world community. The Caspian Sea basin is a world larder of five 
main species of the sturgeon family: beluga, starred sturgeon, 
Russian sturgeon, sturgeon Acipenser, and sterlet, which account 
for up to 90 percent of the world catch. Thanks to the efforts 
of domestic scientists and practical workers a scientifically 
substantiated system was worked out for reproduction, 
conservation, and rational fishing of the sturgeon family under 
conditions of regulated rivers and a deterioration in the 
ecological condition of the water systems. It is based on 
prohibition of sea fishing, restriction of river fishing, 
controls over fishing and a complex of reproductive measures. 
  Unfortunately this system which was operating successfully 
for more than 30 years, started disintegrating. There is a 
tumultuous increase in sea poaching since funds for protection 
services are lacking in the new states, and even Russia eased 
control over its own fishing operations because of financial 
difficulties, inadequacies of the legislative basis, creation of 
numerous owners, and for other reasons. In addition to that 
Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, and Turkmenistan want to fish 
independently in their fishery zones, as formerly done by Iran, 
at the same time cooperating with Russia in the conservation, 
reproduction, and rational utilization of sturgeon reserves. 
  Thus, in the past cooperation was organized between two 
states--USSR and Iran, whereas at present there is the task of 
reaching agreement on equal and mutually advantageous 
cooperation in the conservation of Caspian Sea bioresources of 
five states. It was for that purpose that the third and final 
round of negotiations took place in Ashgabat (previous talks 
were held in Astrakhan and Enzeli (Iran). 
  In the course of the Ashgabat talks (and they were 
difficult!), with the exception of two points, it was possible 
to reach agreement among all the Caspian delegations with regard 
to the text of the agreement on conservation and utilization of 
Caspian Sea bioresources. This agreement provides for the 
creation of a reliable legal basis for broad mutual cooperation 
among all Caspian Sea states in rational fishing on the Caspian 
Sea exclusively on the basis of scientific data and appropriate 
international control over fishing. It is planned to create an 
international organ--the committee for conservation and 
utilization of bioresources of the Caspian Sea, in which 
representatives of Caspian Sea states will be able to discuss 
and adopt decisions on issues of interest to them dealing with 
conservation of reserves and fishing. An international 
inspection service is also being created. 
  With respect to the sturgeon family all delegations agreed 
in 
principle to the prohibition of fishing at sea with the 
exception of special cases under the control of an international 
organ and the inspection service. Fishing for sprat, however, 
will be continued in areas of the sea traditionally used for 
that, but significant legal changes may take place in this area 
as well. The matter is that the main assimilated sprat fishing 
grounds are located close to the coasts of the Azerbaijan 
Republic and Turkmenistan whose delegations during the 
negotiations declared their intention of establishing fishing 
grounds 40 miles wide. These proposals found the support of 
delegations from Iran and Kazakhstan, which proposed narrower 
grounds of 25 to 30 miles. It should be noted that at the start 
of negotiations Turkmenistan declared the establishment of 
12-mile territorial waters which was not anticipated by our 
delegation. Russia, however, considers that under conditions for 
preserving the traditions of sprat production and creating equal 
fishing conditions for fishermen of all the Caspian Sea states 
it would be best to preserve the existing fishing ground with a 
width of 10 to 12 miles and a maximum of 15 miles. A final 
decision was not made specifically because of differences with 
regard to that issue. 
  The second matter in dispute was the site of a future 
headquarters of the committee's international organ. Two states 
are currently seeking it: Russia (Astrakhan) and Iran (Enzeli). 
I believe that in this case a decision may be reached with 
consideration of the scientific base available to each side and 
the possibilities of ensuring appropriate work by the commission 
secretariat. Our delegation, which included Anatoliy Guzhvin, 
head of administration of Astrakhan Oblast, promoted the 
selection of Astrakhan. No final decision has yet been reached. 
  After three rounds of negotiations it became absolutely 
clear 
that with any expansion of the fishing grounds losses would be 
suffered primarily by Russian fishermen from Astrakhan, 
Dagestan, and Kalmykia. With the different variants of the 
grounds of from 20 to 40 miles, these losses of the Russians 
will amount to from 40 to 100 percent of the annual catch for 
sprat. In that connection achievement of an agreement regarding 
the width of the grounds, in my opinion, is up to the 
politicians. A delay, however, could lead to the uncontrolled 
development of extensive sea fishing which poses a great threat 
primarily for the sturgeon family. It would be highly desirable 
to sign the agreement in early 1994. We are hoping that this is 
understood by all Caspian Sea states. At Ashgabat the 
delegations agreed to thoroughly study the viewpoints of the 
sides, reporting them to their governments and coordinating a 
final decision on the width of the fishing grounds and the site 
of the committee's headquarters through diplomatic channels. 
  Unfortunately there are ``underwater reefs'' confronting the 
draft fishing agreement. I have in mind the hullabaloo around 
the prospecting and extraction of oil and gas on the Caspian Sea 
shelf. In that connection some of our partners wanted to create 
wide fishing grounds for the sake of ``the black gold'' and even 
divide all of the Caspian Sea into sectors. Biological 
resources, however are indivisible, they are interrelated, while 
fish, and especially sturgeon, do not recognize any borders. I 
am assuming that the ``underwater oil and gas reefs'' can halt 
the ``fishing vessel'' of five Caspian Sea states en route to a 
common agreement only temporarily, but it is impossible to 
ground it. The fishermen know only too well that biological 
resources can benefit mankind forever only with their wise 
utilization on the basis of equal and mutually advantageous 
collaboration. 

