Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Prague, March 15 (CTK) -- Czech Prime Minister and 
Civic Democratic Party (ODS) Chairman Vaclav Klaus stressed 
after a ministers' meeting today the need to respect the 
independence and sovereignty of the Slovak state. 
  Asked how he assessed the recent developments there, he 
answered that he might have his own personal opinion on the 
personalities of foreign politicians, but that it was forbidden 
for him to pass any sort of judgment of this type. "Let us 
fully respect our Slovak partner, the Slovak Government, and let 
us negotiate with it in the same correct way as we have done so 
far," he said. 
  The Christian Democratic Party-Czechoslovak People's Party 
(KDU-CSL) deems it positive that a fast decision has been made 
on who is to put together the new government, party spokesman 
Jaroslav Orel told CTK. 
  "If the whole government is appointed just as fast, it is a 
good certificate for the hitherto opposition, since it certifies 
to their responsibility for Slovakia's fate," he said. 
  Chairman of the Christian Democratic Party (KDS) Ivan Pilip 
said he considered the very fact that Meciar had been removed a 
step in a democratic direction. However, Pilip said, he was 
afraid that this change had come at a time when Meciar was still 
very strong and the alternative to his government had as yet no 
clear profile. "Mr. Moravcik is known for being a restrained 
politician, and this could contribute to the stabilization of 
the situation in Slovakia, Pilip said. 
  A spokesman for the fourth coalition party, the Civic 
Democratic Alliance (ODA) said that the party would give CTK a 
statement after the party's political council finished its 
meeting this evening. 
  Of the Czech opposition parties, the Czech Social Democratic 
Party (CSSD) and the Free Democrats (SD) welcome the entrusting 
of Josef Moravcik with the composition of the new Slovak 
government. The Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia (KSCM), 
the Left Bloc (LB) and the Liberal National Social Party (LSNS), 
however, expressed fears concerning the further political 
development in the country. 
  CSSD Chairman Milos Zeman called Moravcik a very capable 
politician, while SD Chairman Jiri Dienstbier said he was one of 
the most reasonable and responsible Slovak politicians. "I hope 
he manages to put together a government which gains authority 
through an objective approach and is actively against demagogy 
and extremism of all kinds," Dienstbier told CTK. 
  The LSNS fears that ex-Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar's 
departure to the opposition and the fact that the present 
opposition is, as the LSNS sees it, little prepared, could cause 
a power swing to the left and Meciar's return to power for a 
third time, LSNS chairman Pavel Hirs said at a press conference 
today. 
  He said that the LSNS believed a government of experts, who 
would prepare early elections, would be a reasonable solution to 
the present situation in Slovakia. 
  KSCM press spokeswoman Vera Zezulkova said that Moravcik 
would, in the best of cases, only be able to rely on a very weak 
majority and a heterogeneous bloc of political forces. This 
situation reflected not only the character of the present 
governing classes in Slovakia but also the inner weakness of 
"post-communist" capitalism and its inability to fulfill basic 
social functions. "From this point of view we do not see a great 
abyss of difference between development in the Czech and Slovak 
republics," she said. 
  LB Chairman Jaroslav Ortman also saw the basic problem of 
the 
newly-forming coalition as lying in its heterogeneity. 

