Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Colin Randall in Belfast: "Hepatitis Check for </F>
100,000 Mothers"] 
  [Text] At least 100,000 women are being offered blood tests 
for hepatitis C after the Irish Republic's blood transfusion 
service discovered they could be at risk from contaminated blood 
products used over a period of 21 years. 
  Thousands of mothers swamped call lines yesterday amid fears 
that some could have contracted the virus from anti-D 
immunoglobulin injected between 1970 and 1991 to women about to 
give birth to babies of a different blood group. 
  The nationwide screening programme was announced after the 
Irish Blood Transfusion Service Board's discovery that an 
infected batch produced in 1977 could be responsible for 
hepatitis anti-bodies found recently in a small number of female 
blood donors who had given birth during that year. 
  Dr. Terry Walsh, the board's chief medical officer, said 
yesterday that all the women were clinically well and that the 
total number of infected women was likely to be very low. "It is 
important to say that there is no panic but there is a need for 
concern," he said. "Otherwise we would not be carrying out the 
screening." 
  Anti-D product has been given to rhesus negative women 
expecting rhesus positive children since 1970 to protect the 
unborn babies from haemolytic disease, which can cause 
stillbirth, brain damage or severe anaemia. 
  About 7,000 rhesus negative women in Ireland now receive the 
treatment, regarded as a valuable pregnancy aid that is 
estimated to save as many as 100 babies in the country each year. 
  Hepatitis C can cause jaundice or, in the most extreme 
cases, 
potentially fatal liver disease in later life. 
  However, medical experts in the Republic believe that most 
women affected by contaminated anti-D would be likely to suffer 
benign liver inflammation at worse. 
  The blood transfusion service's discovery of hepatitis C 
antibodies in blood donors was made last month by its Cork 
regional director, Dr. Joan Power. 
  She said that while women who gave birth in 1977 were the 
focus of the screening programme, the board wished to ensure 
there was no risk at other times. 
  The source of the contamination has not yet been identified 
but Dr. Power stressed that the product concerned was not 
administered to any women outside Ireland. 

