Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Serhiy Lavrenyuk: "Our Nuclear Weapons Are </F>
Already Gone. We May Also Be Deprived of Gas Pipelines"] 
  [Text] As we already reported, a Ukrainian Government 
delegation headed by Vice Prime Minister V. Landyk held 
negotiations in Moscow with representatives of the Russian 
"Gazprom" [Gas Industry] Joint Stock Association on gas supplies 
to Ukraine. According to the Russian side, Ukraine owes the 
"Gazprom" more than 1.5 trillion rubles [R] and, for that 
reason, the joint stock association adopted a decision to 
suspend the supplies of gas to our state if the debt is not 
repaid. However, as the gas pipelines run through the territory 
of Ukraine, Russia has been accusing the "Ukrgazprom" [Ukrainian 
gas industry] of regularly pumping out more than 40 million 
cubic meters of gas a day from the quantity of gas intended for 
Western Europe. As is known, Ukraine previously signed an 
agreement with Russia in accordance with which Ukraine took it 
upon itself to ensure the transit of 111.5 billion cubic meters 
of Russian gas to Western Europe. Russia, in turn, promised to 
supply to Ukraine between 50 and 70 billion cubic meters of gas. 
  However, the situation developed in such a way that Russia's 
pressure failed to affect Ukraine, because, by reducing gas 
supplies to our state, the joint stock association would also 
automatically reduce supplies to its European customers. In 
this way, Ukraine might try and reach an accord that would be 
most advantageous for it, as more than 90 percent of Russian gas 
is exported to Western Europe via Ukraine. In other words, 
Ukraine had an opportunity to dictate its own terms since Russia 
would hardly risk halting gas supplies, otherwise, this action 
would have primarily hit the "Gazprom." This is even more true 
since, in the opinion of specialists, gas reserves stored in 
underground reservoirs enable Ukraine to endure, without great 
difficulties, even full discontinuance of gas supplies for one 
month. 
  Russia, taking care of its own strategic interests, did not 
remain idle either. Back in September 1993, when Ukraine's debt 
reached R750 billion and the volume of gas supplied to Ukraine 
was reduced from 220 million cubic meters a day to 50 million, 
in order to test Ukraine's seriousness the "Gazprom" Joint-Stock 
Association made the proposal that Ukraine lease to the 
joint-stock association on a long-term basis some of Ukraine's 
gas-processing and gas transporting enterprises. Among them, 
the Russian side wanted to see gas supply depots in Kiev, 
Uzhhorod, and Nikolayev, underground gas reservoirs in western 
Ukraine, and mooring lines and port structures in Odessa and 
Illichevsk. The seriousness of the "Gazprom" intentions was 
also attested to by the fact that the association reacted 
extremely negatively to the proposal that the cost of nuclear 
weapons be compensated for by Ukraine by canceling its debt for 
energy sources, primarily natural gas. The reasons given were 
that "Gazprom" has its "major" interests in Ukraine. 
  Some of the results may be quoted. The negotiations ended in 
Russia's agreeing to resume gas supplies to Ukraine in full 
extent. Russia will also compensate for the 80-percent reduction 
in the supplies of Turkmenian gas. Ukraine, in turn, promises 
to repay, within one month, its debts for this year's gas 
supplies with Russian rubles and freely convertible currency and 
last year's debts -- both with money and equipment for the gas 
extraction industry. Besides, during the meeting, accords were 
reached on joint ownership of gas pipelines and underground gas 
reservoirs. The share of the "Gazprom" is to be determined 
during the next meeting, which will be held on 10 April. Thus, 
as one can see, Russia is steadily heading toward its goal: To 
take into its (although partial) ownership, gas pipelines and 
gas reservoirs and do anything it wants with Ukrainian gas 
consumers. 

