Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Gilles Campion] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, Jan 20 (AFP)--The International Committee 
of the Red Cross (ICRC) said Thursday [20 January] it had 
completed a first round of "positive" talks with the Chinese 
Government on making possible visits to political prisoners. 
  A four-member Red Cross delegation, led by the general 
delegate for Asia and the Pacific, Jean-Michel Monod, held 
meetings with officials from the foreign affairs and justice 
ministries from Sunday to Thursday. 
  "This first structured meeting should allow us to go farther 
with the talks," Monod told AFP, adding: "The contact in itself 
was positive, and it's a good first step. We have begun to 
identify the points where we agree and where we differ." 
  The talks come as Washington hikes pressure on China for 
progress on human rights, raised by U.S. Treasury Secretary 
Lloyd Bentsen during his visit to Beijing, observers said. 
  Monod refused to link his negotiations to the dispute 
between 
Beijing and President Bill Clinton, who has threatened to scrap 
the lucrative "most-favoured-nation" customs access for Chinese 
imports if China fails to improve its record on human rights. 
  "It is unlikely that an agreement between the Chinese 
government and the ICRC would be signed before June," Monod 
added. "To negotiate such a document is a long-term job, and 
the talks could go on for several years if there is no consensus 
within the government." 
  In November, just before the summit meeting between Chinese 
President Jiang Zemin and Clinton in Seattle, Chinese Foreign 
Affairs Minister Qian Qichen said: "If the Red Cross asks to 
have such talks (on the visit to Chinese prisons), we will 
consider this request in a positive manner." 
  Another contact was made in November, at the ICRC's 
headquarters in Geneva, to focus on the details of the first 
round of talks. 
  "The Chinese asked good questions during this meeting (in 
Beijing) and in view of the quality of these questions, there 
is an interest in learning," Monod said. The negotiations, he 
said, would take "at least several months...we have no interest 
in pushing them. The decision will come when they have all the 
necessary facts." The ICRC has been asking unsuccessfully "at 
least since 1985" to visit Chinese prisons, Monod said. 
  "We have decided to completely explain the ICRC's work in 
order to avoid a lack of understanding and disagreements," Monod 
said. "It's necessary that we begin to agree on the type of 
detainees of we are talking about. These are not common 
criminals, but individuals detained because of their activities 
or events," he said. "We are going to see what the difficulties 
are for the Chinese, and we will consult our experts to try to 
iron out these difficulties," he said, adding that a second 
meeting would be set up "in a few weeks," in Geneva or Beijing. 
  The delegation, which left Beijing Thursday, included Angelo 
Graedinger, chief of the Geneva-based ICRC's prison division, 
Christophe Swinarski, regional delegate for East Asia and Daniel 
Glinz, delegate for East Asia. 
  The ICRC is concerned with humanitarian needs, not human 
rights, and holds to a rule of confidentiality, which prohibits 
it from publishing its reports and allows the organization to 
mention the reports only to the authorities of the visited 
country. Analysts said that the confidentiality probably 
appeals to the Chinese government. Organizations which defend 
human rights in China, of which there are many financed by the 
United States, irritate Beijing with their publicized actions. 
According to the Chinese ministry of justice, China has 1.2 
million prisoners, of whom 3,600 are described as 
"counter-revolutionaries." 

