Language: <F P=105> Vietnamese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed essay] </F>
  [Excerpts] Dear friends: Every year when the traditional 
Tet New Year arrives, those who manufacture and trade imitation 
goods pour large amounts of goods into the market to hoodwink 
consumers. 
  Incomplete statistics reveal that 19 large provinces and 
cities in the country have, over the past nine months, 
discovered and taken legal action against the more than 600 
cases involving the manufacture of and trade in imitation goods. 
It is certain that this figure is far below reality. 
  The Hanoi market control sector lately has inspected various 
liquor stalls at the Hang Da Market and on Tran Xuan Soan Street 
near the Duc Vien Market. Initial reports show that seven 
stalls were found selling imitation whisky. Currently, there 
are only small quantities of preserved fruits presently on sale 
for consumption during the Tet New Year. But intense 
preparations are being made by counterfeiters of preserved 
fruits with famous brand names. The places from which 
counterfeit goods are produced are located mainly in suburban 
blind alleys or in provinces adjacent to Hanoi. An example is 
the case where the Ba Dinh Precinct Security Police captured 
red-handed Nguyen Van Che of Phu Lo Village in Dong Anh, a 
suburban district of Hanoi, as he -- together with three other 
accomplices -- was canning fake Beer 33. Two thousand 
counterfeit beer cans, 100,000 metal top pieces, and a pressing 
machine were seized on the spot. The offenders testified that 
they had counterfeited and marketed 20,000 cans of Beer 33 over 
the past three months. 
  Last week, Hanoi market control forces arrested three 
counterfeiters in Phuc Tho District of Ha Tay Province and Dinh 
Bang District of Ha Bac Province. The forces seized nearly 
5,000 packs of counterfeit brand name cigarettes. 
  Not long ago, the Vung Tau Customs Office discovered 106 
bales of imported goods. These imports, weighting 4,000 tons, 
were found to be sub-assemblies for wrist watches. The wrapping 
paper shows these products were manufactured in Japan, but an 
inspection of the contents found that they were low-quality 
watch sub-assemblies manufactured in another territory. [passage 
omitted] 
  At present, as many as 50 percent of production 
establishments have not registered their trademarks, qualities, 
and copyrights. [passage omitted] 
  The state currently does not have any policies available to 
encourage market control forces to strive harder to fight 
imitation goods. Funds allocated to this kind of operation are 
still too small. Almost all of the imitation goods confiscated 
should be destroyed or recycled. Moreover, efforts to verify 
imitation goods are facing difficulties because of a lack of 
cooperation among laboratory testing organs, the trade firms 
concerned, and the imitation goods control force. [passage 
omitted] 

