Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Madeleine Albright, U.S. ambassador to the 
United Nations, left Zagreb this morning. [passage omitted] 
  I visited the mass grave at Ovcara and saw the devastation 
of 
nearby Vukovar in order to express U.S. support to the newly 
founded war crimes tribunal in The Hague, Ambassador Albright 
said at a news conference in Zagreb prior to her departure for 
Warsaw. All those who killed innocent children, women and men, 
must be brought to trial, she went on to say. I talked with 
President Tudjman about this. Individuals, the perpetrators of 
the crime, are those who must be brought to trial. The 
imposition of collecive guilt on a nation should be avoided, she 
said. 
  President Tudjman has confirmed that Croatia is willing to 
offer its full support to the gathering of evidence on committed 
war crimes. The UN Security Council demands the same from all 
other countries. The United States will not support the 
alleviation or the abolition of sanctions against Serbia if the 
Serbian side hampers the work of the war crimes tribunal, nor 
will amnesty of war criminals be supported, Ambassador Albright 
said. [passage omitted] 
  I am again expressing American firm support for Security 
Council Resolution No. 871 and for the territorial integrity of 
the Republic of Croatia. I wish to thank President Tudjman and 
the Croatian Government for the support they have lent us in the 
course of our stay in Croatia, and would also like to thank the 
UN Protection Forces for for having enabled us to visit Vukovar 
yesterday, Madeleine Albright said. 
  Replying to a journalist asking if the imposition of 
sanctions against Croatia will be examined because of its 
behavior toward Bosnia-Herzegovina, the American Ambassador said: 
  [Begin Albright recording, in English fading into 
superimposed Croatian translation] I discussed this with 
President Tudjman; we spoke about how important it is for the 
Croatian Government to use whatever influence it has over the 
Croatian Defense Council not to obstruct the dispatch of 
humanitarian aid, which is of vital importance. [end recording] 

