BFN 

  [Text] La Paz, 10 Jun (EFE) -- The Banks Superintendency, 
the Association of Bolivian Banks, and financial organizations 
have decided not to lift the bank secrecy but to implement a 
code of ethics to prevent the Bolivian banking system from 
engaging in money laundering. 
  This and other agreements were reached at the end of a 
seminar on money laundering held in La Paz, sponsored by the 
United Nations and attended by drug enforcement experts. 
  The possibility of lifting the bank secrecy was ruled out 
during the seminar and it was announced that a draft code of 
ethics for bankers would be proposed seeking to safeguard the 
credibility of the banking system. It was also announced that 
mechanisms to control illegal operations will be implemented. 
  Banks Superintendent Ramiro Cabezas explained that "bank 
secrecy as such does not exist," because the law provides for 
the supply of information at the request of a judge 
investigating alleged illegal financial operations. 
  Cabezas said the Bolivian financial system, which is not yet 
contaminated by the money laundering, is very small in 
comparison with the volume of money "laundered" or legalized in 
the rest of the world. 
  According to the United Nations, $500 billion annually are 
laundered. Some $2.2 billion are deposited in the Bolivian 
banking system. 
  Javier Zuazo, president of the Association of Bolivian 
Banks, 
explained the need to include in the new banking law some 
mechanism to identify laundering and to punish those responsible. 
  Zuazo said: "One cannot overlook the evidence. It is a 
scourge that affects all financial systems of the world," adding 
that the banks "have the duty to supply information" in cases of 
deposits of dubious origin. 
  Superintendent Cabezas recommended some measures, among them 
the setting of a ceiling for cash operations to prevent 
laundering and the need for bankers to identify their clients in 
order to protect themselves from illegal operations. 
  Bolivia is the second coca producer in the world, after 
Peru, 
and the second drug processor in the world, after Colombia, 
although experts say the benefits of this illegal trade do not 
return to this country, the poorest in the region. 

