BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Hungarian Socialist Party Chairman Gyula </F>
Horn by Jozef Uram in Budapest; date not given: "For Horn, 
There Is No Alternative to the Pro-Western Orientation"] 
  [Text] Budapest -- The opinion polls in Hungary have been 
indicating for several weeks that the government of this country 
will most probably change. The Hungarian Socialist Party 
(MSZP), for which -- according to the latest polls -- almost 40 
percent of citizens want to cast their votes next Sunday [8 
May], has the greatest chance. The chairman of this political 
formation, former Foreign Minister Gyula Horn, deserves much of 
the credit for this trend. Mr. Horn, who will most likely be 
the next Hungarian prime minister, granted MLADA FRONTA DNES an 
exclusive interview. 
  [Uram] What result is your party expecting in the elections? 
In the event that the MSZP wins, will you become prime minister? 
  [Horn] I do not want to hazard a guess, but I would be very 
satisfied if we were to win almost 40 percent of the votes, as 
the recent polls indicate. We have no candidate for the office 
of prime minister; it is not important whether it is I or anyone 
else from our party who attains this responsible post. 
  [Uram] It is being said that, after your victory, you want 
to form a government of experts. In your opinion, what does 
this mean? 
  [Horn] There is a great difference between a caretaker 
government or -- as we say in our country -- a government of 
experts and a government composed of experts. In our case, the 
situation is such that the country's economic and social changes 
and the pressures from abroad -- I mean here, first and 
foremost, the major recession in the West that somehow does not 
want to pass and whose repercussions are also affecting Hungary 
-- are placing huge demands on managing the transformation 
process. In this situation, it is essential that people who are 
the best in their field obtain posts in the government. 
  [Uram] There is a great deal of speculation about whether 
the MSZP will cooperate with the liberal bloc, specifically the 
Union of Free Democrats. In your opinion, is such a coalition 
possible after the election? 
  [Horn] It is possible; the choice of coalition partners is 
not so broad. However, we would not want to form a coalition 
that would be incapable of cooperation or that would just hamper 
it. Moreover, the vast majority of people want a change of 
government. The voters would be cheated if the parties from the 
present coalition were to return to the government. Therefore, 
it is mainly the current opposition parties that are being taken 
into consideration. We are open to them, but in order to do 
business, two are necessary. 
  [Uram] What is the socialists' attitude toward the Hungarian 
minorities abroad? What is the difference between the policy of 
the current government and your party in the issue of minorities 
abroad? 
  [Horn] We want a historic settlement with Hungary's 
neighbors. This settlement means that we must not deal with 
historic wrongs. In other words: This is not a matter for 
topical policy, but is a matter for the historians and 
scientists. It is also important that we meet each other half 
way and do so by taking steps that will boost mutual trust. It 
is wrong if two sides frequently misinterpret various statements 
that are subsequently portrayed as the official point of view of 
one of them. It is necessary to proceed from what government 
representatives, official circles, parliament, and political 
parties say and not from what certain extremist groups say. We 
would be happy to conclude basic treaties with both Slovakia and 
Romania, as we have already done with Ukraine. 
  [Uram] Including the borders issue? 
  [Horn] Yes; these treaties should express unequivocally our 
point of view on the issue of the unchangeability of the present 
borders. On the other hand, it is essential to guarantee 
thoroughly -- and I would like to emphasize the word thoroughly 
-- the minorities' universal rights. This is not just a 
Hungarian demand or the demand of local Hungarians. It ensues 
from the international commitments that neighboring countries 
have also adopted. I think that, in any case, it would be 
essential to actuate economic, political, and other contacts 
with our neighbors, because these are not developing the way 
they should. Western markets are opening up to us very 
restrictively; the conditions are extraordinarily tough. We are 
convinced, however, that there is no alternative to the pro- 
Western orientation. We all want -- whether it is ourselves, 
Slovakia, or the Czech Republic -- to catch up with the West and 
we want to join the European Union. At the same time, however, 
we must not neglect relations with each other. In this way, we 
can also do more in the interest of Hungarians abroad. 
Definitely more than by making irresponsible statements. 
  [Uram] It is sometimes said of Vaclav Klaus -- who came to 
power as an unequivocally right-wing politician -- that he is 
implementing a socially more effective policy than many 
politicians who defend social interests. Do you put this down 
just to the economic strength of the Czech Republic? Could this 
policy be an example for other countries? 
  [Horn] I cannot assess precisely the economic situation in 
the Czech Republic; this much I do know, however, that the 
really major changes, which have a drastic impact, have not yet 
been carried out in the Czech lands. The fundamental changes -- 
without wanting to make comparisons -- began in Hungary much 
sooner. Privatization, developing the banking sector, and many 
other areas of transformation have already made their onerous 
consequences felt. This is one thing. There is, however, 
something else and there is a certain misunderstanding here. It 
is said that the left is opposed to a sound economic performance 
out of consideration for the social aspects. This is not true. 
The left is not opposed to sound performance. Look at Austria 
where a social democratic government has been in power for more 
than 20 years. It is indeed impossible to accuse Austria of a 
poor economic performance. It is, however, possible to agree 
with the right on taking more social issues into consideration. 
I would not divide this issue into black and white. In 
practice, it is necessary to indicate who represents what under 
these concepts. The conservative right wing in Eastern Europe 
has not achieved major successes; on the contrary. I think it 
is no coincidence that these governments are being replaced more 
and more in our region. 
  [Uram] Let us return again to Hungarian domestic policy. 
Are you concerned about the threat from the extreme right wing? 
Is there a real danger that the extremists will gain strength 
in the elections or even win them? 
  [Horn] Such a danger exists. To be more precise: There are 
militant extremist groups in our country. They manage to 
influence many people by intimidation and whipping up hatred. 
They lead people astray, for example, in relation to our 
neighbors. This extreme right wing is as a rule strongly 
nationalistic and we all know where nationalism leads. This 
danger exists and we must not underestimate it. Hungarian 
experiences indicate, however, that the extreme right wing is 
limited to a very narrow group of people. We have a mature 
society that will not gravitate toward extremes. People want 
balanced conditions and a moderate policy. They want 
reconciliation, both within the country and with our neighbors. 

