BFN 

  [Text] Supreme Commander Air Chief Marshal [ACM] Woranat 
Aphichari has cancelled his planned trip to Cambodia next week, 
according to a Thai military source who gave no reason for the 
decision. The decision followed Cambodian Co-Prime Minister Hun 
Sen's cancellation of a planned trip to Thailand to discuss 
border security problems, but there was no confirmation the two 
were linked. 
  An ASSOCIATED PRESS report from Phnom Penh yesterday quoted 
First Premier Norodom Ranariddh as saying Second Premier Hun 
Sen's trip had been cancelled. The report said Ranariddh did not 
explain why. Hun Sen had announced earlier that he intended to 
make an "urgent working visit" to Bangkok, and that he intended 
to arrive yesterday. 
  A reliable source at the Foreign Ministry confirmed Hun 
Sen's 
cancellation, but said there had been no fixed date for his 
arrival. "It seems there is a communication gap between Hun Sen 
and Ranariddh," said the source, who asked not to be named. The 
Cambodian Foreign Ministry had advised nine days ago that Hun 
Sen wanted to visit Thailand after the Songkran holidays, from 
April 14- 16 in Cambodia, but no date had been fixed, the source 
said. 
  Hun Sen said a few days later he would visit Thailand on 
April 16, but was informed that would be inconvenient, and the 
date of his arrival was left open. The Cambodian Foreign 
Ministry advised on Thursday that the trip was off. 
  The Thai Military source said yesterday Woranat's planned 
trip had nothing to do with current Thai-Cambodian border 
tensions, triggered by the fighting between Phnom Penh 
government troops and guerrilla forces around the former Khmer 
Rouge base of Pailin. 
  Woranat's trip had long been scheduled for April 19-20 and 
was at the invitation of Cambodian co-Defence Ministers Tie Banh 
and Tea Chamrat, but the Cambodian government had attempted to 
link the trip to the current tensions. The announcement of the 
changed travel plans came as the two governments are embroiled 
in a war of words over Thailand's alleged support for the Khmer 
Rouge. Both countries have threatened to bring the matter to 
the United Nations' attention. 
  The Thai Embassy in Phnom Penh was informed of the change in 
Woranat's plans on Friday. Cambodian authorities informed the 
embassy on Thursday that Hun Sen's trip to Thailand was 
cancelled, according to the sources. 
  An embassy source told THE NATION yesterday the decision to 
cancel Woranat's trip had still not been conveyed to the Phnom 
Penh government because Cambodians were still on holiday. 
Cancellation of ACM Woranat's visit followed a meeting on 
Friday of senior Thai government and military officials 
concerning security along the Thai-Cambodian border. The 
officials resolved to send a diplomatic note protesting 
"continued groundless accusations" by some Cambodian leaders 
that Thailand is still supporting the Khmer Rouge, and to verify 
Bangkok's position. 
  Although the protest letter has not been delivered because 
of 
the holiday, an unofficial copy was faxed to the Cambodian 
Foreign Ministry on Friday night. The officials at Friday's 
meeting also discussed the next steps if the diplomatic note 
fails to achieve rapprochement. 
  Complaints from Cambodian leaders that Thailand is assisting 
the Khmer Rouge have become more frequent and more public since 
Phnom Penh troops captured Pailin on March 19. The town had 
been a vital economic lifeline for the Khmer Rouge, serving as a 
centre for the export of logs and gemstones to Thailand. 
  The guerrilla group refuses to abide by the terms of a 1991 
peace agreement intended to end more than a decade of civil war, 
and boycotted UN-supervised general elections. The elected 
government was subsequently formed without them. 
  Ranariddh said on Wednesday he was losing patience with 
Thailand for failing to crack down on Khmer Rouge forces, which 
he charges take refuge in Thai territory. He and Cambodian 
military leaders have also charged without presenting any 
evidence that Khmer Rouge tanks threatening government forces 
around Pailin have been operating from Thailand. 

