Language: <F P=105> Albanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement by KOHA JONE's Editorial Board addressed to the </F>
International Federation of Journalists, Brussels; the Committee 
for the Defense of Journalists, Washington; the Balkan 
Confederation of Journalists, Thessaloniki; the International 
Federation for the Defense of Human Rights, Helsinki; the 
Council of Europe; the European Parliament; all diplomatic 
representations accredited to Albania; the editorial boards of 
newspapers, news agencies, and "our friends and colleagues in 
Europe and throughout the world," issued in Tirana on 31 
January: "The Arrest of Our Two Journalists -- A Serious 
Warning for the Albanian Political Climate and European 
Civilization"] 
  [Text] Dear Sirs, politicians, men of state, diplomats, 
deputies, and fellow-journalists, wherever you may be: 
  The Editorial Board of KOHA JONE, the largest independent 
daily newspaper in Albania, brings you ominous news: Yesterday 
morning, the Albanian state arrested Aleksander Frangaj, our 
newspaper's editor-in-chief, and Martin Leka, one of our 
best-known journalists. This development has deeply shocked us 
all. 
  The two journalists' arrests were made on a charge raised by 
one of the departments of the Albanian state. The current 
political establishment in Albania has subjected the independent 
newspaper KOHA JONE and its journalists to a continual 
inquisition. In 1993 alone, the State Control authorities 
conducted 30 inspections of the newspaper's finances, thus 
subjecting the newspaper and its readers to extreme tension and 
stress. Five journalists faced criminal charges or were under 
investigation by the prosecutor for all or part of this time; 
the newspaper's director and editor-in-chief were brought to 
court and sued by two ministers of the Albanian Government, but 
they emerged innocent; three of the newspaper's journalists have 
been prohibited by the state from moving freely among the 
country's cities, and are categorically prohibited from 
traveling abroad. Everybody in Albania has heard of and been 
touched by this disaster brought about by the state authorities, 
which have continually burdened the young, keen, and talented 
journalists who are determined to see KOHA JONE be part of a 
free press. The reason for the savage state attack against KOHA 
JONE is this: This newspaper and these journalists were the 
first in Albania, immediately after the start of democratic 
processes, to create a press free of political parties and the 
government. This newspaper has given the Albanian reader real 
information about what is happening (unfortunately, our country 
has seen major scandals, with corruption as far as the pinnacle 
of the state pyramid, implicating the masters of this pyramid 
themselves). This newspaper has never been scared by state 
repression, and has never become a servile and conformist rag at 
the behest of the government, the political establishment, and 
the party that wields total power in our country. 
  Our two colleagues were arrested today without being tried 
by 
the courts or the judiciary. Large cars full of policemen came 
for them with a deafening noise of alarm sirens and horns that 
told everybody that "we are settling accounts with the 
journalists." This savage police measure does not only affect, 
and is not only aimed against, these two colleagues of ours, who 
are now languishing in appalling prison cells, but threatens 
every journalist and every free citizen of our country. Mark 
well, friends and colleagues: At any time of the day or night, 
in the street, the office, a restaurant, or at home, fairly or 
unfairly, and without any court warrant, the police can come and 
take you to prison. This was the message learned by the free 
citizens of our country today as our two colleagues were 
arrested. This is the saddest message for the freedom of 
everybody. 
  It was the blind rage of the most spiteful section of our 
political state that arrested our two journalist colleagues 
today. They were charged by the Defense Ministry; immediately 
after this, the police, the state's other armed wing, arrested 
the journalists without waiting for warrants. Last year, it was 
this very same defense minister who placed criminal charges 
against our editor-in- chief, Aleksander Frangaj. He succeeded 
in unjustly imprisoning him for 35 days, but lost his case in 
court. He lost twice over, even though he twisted the charges 
in every direction. Another minister called Blerim Cela, 
chairman of the State Control Commission, also lost against our 
newspaper KOHA JONE, and returned from the court with 
discredited witnesses. It was spite over this that impelled the 
ministers and the most savage departments of the state to take 
revenge against the independent newspaper KOHA JONE. 
  The two journalists, our colleagues, were arrested today on 
a highly absurd charge. They have been accused over the same 
article published in the newspaper, but on different charges. 
While Editor-in-Chief Frangaj has been accused on a charge of 
publishing state secrets in a newspaper, the journalist Leka has 
been accused of slander and the publication of false 
information. Notice how our prosecuting authorities contradict 
themselves. It calls the same fact both a state secret and a 
lie. We have asked the state a thousand times to explain this 
absurdity, and now we ask you to ask whether a state secret is a 
lie or a lie is a state secret. The simple truth is as follows: 
A few days ago, the newspaper KOHA JONE published an original 
document signed by Defense Minister Safet Zhulali ordering 
officers to leave their weapons at their units when they go 
home, alongside a commentary by journalist Leka about this 
document. The document did not include anything secret, and the 
commentary merely commented on this document. 
  Our two colleagues were arrested today on the basis of the 
old Penal Code from Enver Hoxha's time, when freedom of 
expression and of the press was totally absent and agitation and 
propaganda were punished with life imprisonment. The fact that 
the charge is over a state secret suffices for us to judge. We 
do not know of any democratic regime in the world that would 
prosecute a journalist for publishing true facts and evidence 
that he succeeds in obtaining in the course of his work as a 
journalist. Even the Press Law recently approved by the 
Albanian parliament itself, although it shows no great love for 
a free press, does not dare forbid a journalist from obtaining 
and publishing a secret. Without even heeding its own Press 
Law, the Albanian police state reaches for the old laws of the 
disctatorship, and on the basis of these arrests our two 
colleagues. 
  Dear friends and colleagues, the arrest of our two 
journalists Aleksander Frangaj and Martin Leka poses a serious 
warning for the climate in our country and simultaneously for 
European civilization. The new democratic processes that began 
three years ago in Albania are now in great danger. The 
political pluralism that was achieved in our country is now 
seriously threatened. The freedom of the press and of speech 
that was gained is now under a fatal threat. The most ominous 
evidence of this is today's arrest of our two colleagues. The 
Albanian state imprisons journalists and, at the same time, 
leaves criminals and thieves who commit murders and acts of 
vandalism against people's freedom and lives to roam free. The 
supposed democratic appearance of the Albanian state is a mere 
facade and has no connection with the truth and reality of the 
Albania state today. In reality, this state is heading toward 
violence. On this occasion, we appeal to every personality in 
politics, diplomacy, the law, journalism, and in democratic 
philosophical life throughout Europe and the world, to carefully 
and realistically study the bitter truth of the threat to human 
freedom in Albania. 
  We appeal to you and, with great resolution and respect, 
call 
on you, all of you in whom we believe, to defend our freedom and 
the freedom of our two colleagues, to remove the handcuffs from 
their wrists and from the free Albanian press. 
  We ask you to use all your statesman-like, diplomatic, and 
professional skills to show genuine European and world 
civilization what is happening here. Help us, stand by us, and 
support us on our path toward achieving the necessary degree of 
freedom. We want our colleagues, who are free and innocent 
journalists, to be free among us, and ourselves to be free 
together with them. 

