Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Following his return on 12 January from the Dakar 
summit on the CFA franc devaluation and the conference of Air 
Afrique member states, President Ange-Felix Patasse received 
French charge d'affaires (Georges Roneaud) on the afternoon of 
13 January. The charge came to inform the head of state of the 
new French ambassador's arrival on the morning on 13 January. 
He took the opportunity to speak to the president about issues 
regarding auxiliary measures for the franc zone countries 
following the CFA franc devaluation. 
  Foreign Minister Simon Bedaya-Ngaro, presidential legal 
advisor (Jean-Jacques Delafousse), financial and economic 
advisor (Eric Dang Dimandi), and (Marcel Loubegue), secretary 
general to the presidency, were present at the meeting. Mr. 
Morel, head of the French cooperation mission, and Mr. Moudiard, 
director of the French Development Fund, represented France at 
the meeting. At the end of the meeting, the French charge 
d'affaires spoke to Jean Brassidi on the reason for his meeting 
with the head of state: 
  [Begin recording] [(Colraux)] Following the meeting of heads 
of state in Dakar and the devaluation of the CFA franc, France 
has put forward auxiliary measures based on two considerations: 
France is proposing the annulment of debts incurred as a result 
of cooperation as well as those which need to be paid up until 
the year 2020. That is the first point. The second point, 
which stems from the first, is our solidarity with African 
countries, since we remain part of the franc zone and we hope to 
continue cooperation and assist each of the African countries 
(?to cushion) the disastrous effects that have been felt by the 
population, which does not seem to be the case of [words 
indistinct] Central African Republic. A third point which is 
extremely important and which we hold dear is the creation of a 
special development fund with funds to the tune of $300 billion 
put in place by France for the 14 countries within the zone, but 
it is a fund which will manage funds contributed by financial 
backers. As of this evening, we will set to work to create here 
in Bangui, as well as in each capital of the franc zone, a 
special development fund to initiate development structures 
which will be [word indistinct] on the recommendation of suburbs 
or local authorities or nongovernmental organizations, and which 
(?will develop) not only the capital but also the provinces. 
  [Brassidi] These measures will be phased out. Does that 
mean they will take the form of short-, medium-, and long-term 
measures? 
  [(Colraux)] The measures concerning debt are immediate ones. 
Regarding the setting up of the special development fund, we 
will first have to arrange a meeting of donors, among whom 
France is a major contributor. This could be done within a few 
weeks; that is, a few weeks to sensitize the financial backers 
as well as those who are in need of aid, for instance, the local 
authorities, since this kind of project will not exceed 200 
billion CFA francs. If there are problems of water somewhere or 
problem in developing food crops in an area, or setting up a 
school [words indistinct] or the provision of blackboards or 
furniture to schools under the project -- all of which do not 
require long periods of feasibility study -- the (?measures) 
could be implemented with very short notice. [end recording] 

