Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ida Martirosyan: "We Do Not Put Off Anyone"] </F>
  [Text] "Free, sovereign!" When we declaimed these words, 
intoxicated with their very sound, hardly anyone pondered over 
such a category as human rights. Not because its significance 
was underestimated, but because it was assumed as self-evident 
within the same freedom over its entire multispectrum. To what 
extent have these expectations been realized? Rafael Papayan, 
chairman of the Commission on Human Rights of the Supreme Soviet 
of the Republic of Armenia, answers this question: 
  "With regard to freedom of speech, of the press, of 
religion, 
and of political convictions hardly anyone will be able to say 
that in our country they are restricted to any degree. On the 
contrary, according to statements by numerous Westerners to whom 
I have talked, in this respect we can have no claims against the 
authorities. After all, the spectrum of political views is 
represented in the party press and in the independent press and 
even on state television and radio. However, there is another 
aspect of human rights, that is, the social aspect, where the 
situation is by no means so comforting. This is understandable. 
After all, the social sphere is determined by the state of the 
economy--it is no secret to anyone in what deplorable state it 
is. Of course, there are objective reasons explaining this. 
However, they are so well known that there is no point in citing 
them. Although there are spheres, where order can be introduced, 
even with the barrage of attacks on the part of the same 
independent press. I have in mind the quite tough measures, 
which must be applied in transport, in power supply, and so 
forth. I do not doubt that people will perceive this not as a 
deviation from legal democratic norms, but as a purposeful 
attempt on the part of the authorities to introduce order where 
possible for the purpose of easing people's life. In the final 
analysis, this is protection of citizens' social rights. I will 
not reveal a secret if I say that our commission is swamped with 
letters containing all possible complaints about literally all 
matters. Often they have nothing to do with our work. It is 
obvious that, not finding a solution for their problems 
anywhere, people appeal to the parliament, since there is 
already an appropriate commission. I must say that we do not 
leave a single appeal unanswered. It happens that we are late, 
but only because we have too much to do. It is obvious that we 
can really help a very small part. If the matter is not within 
our competence, we turn it over to the relevant authorities. 
However, I can say one thing for sure: We do not put off anyone." 

