Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Station commentary] </F>
  [Text] Gentlemen: Israeli officials have expressed hope 
that the expected talks between President Hafiz al-Asad and U.S. 
President Bill Clinton in Geneva in the middle of this month 
will result in tangible progress that will help implement the 
Palestinian-Israeli agreement on which negotiations were held in 
Oslo. The objective of the Israeli officials' insinuations is 
to place part of the blame on Syria for the stumbling of the 
aforementioned agreement. Syria, along with the world, truly 
wants to push along the peace process in the Middle East on 
entrenched, just, and comprehensive bases. However, it did not 
act to foil the Oslo agreement, especially since it bears enough 
defects and gaps to preclude its own succeed. The agreement, as 
everyone knows, has provoked Palestinians inside and outside the 
occupied Arab territories. It has also provoked Arab feelings. 
This agreement has seriously relinquished the national rights 
of an entire people, given the Israelis a free hand in the 
occupied territories, ignored Jerusalem and the issue of 
settlements, and constituted a serious precedent in the region. 
The Arab parties participating in the Madrid conference and 
Washington talks have agreed on a just and comprehensive peace 
based on the implementation of the UN Security Council 
resolutions on all the fronts of the conflict in a way that 
restores the usurped rights and all the occupied territories. 
The agreement did not ignore the Palestinian people only, but 
it also ignored all the Arabs in general, and Syria, Lebanon, 
and Jordan in particular. It is natural that many sides have 
expressed reservations on this agreement, especially since it 
constitutes a separate deal that essentially conflicts with the 
bases of a just and comprehensive peace agreed upon at the 
Damascus, Amman, and Beirut meetings. 
  The truth is that the events that have occurred since the 
signing of the agreement, including the recent lengthy talks in 
Taba, Oslo, Paris, and Cairo, have revealed to all sides that 
the Palestinian side was dragged into a well-planned trap. No 
sooner had the Israelis hinted at some temptations than it 
hastened to sign an ambiguous agreement, which seeks to achieve 
peace in appearance, but in essence, it seeks to entrench 
occupation and settlements, and to subjugate the Palestinian 
people to further pressure and coercion. The withdrawal from 
Gaza and Jericho has turned into a redeployment of forces, the 
Jericho District has turned into a small, isolated, and besieged 
city, and the self-rule into a true ghetto through which the 
Israelis control the border, the crossings, the roads, and the 
strategic areas, and fully monitor the Palestinians' movements. 
  Despite the recent tough negotiations to give some positive 
attributes to a negative agreement, the Israelis did not budge 
an inch. As the Palestinian side admitted, they were dictating 
their terms and deciding what should be and what should not be. 
So, the stumbling of the Gaza-Jericho plan is attributed to two 
main things; namely, to the serious defects it contains, and the 
Israelis' intransigence. 
  The truth is that by concluding such a separate deal, 
Israel sought to deal a blow to the entire peace process which 
started in Madrid and continued in Washington, through 
torpedoing its bases and excluding the UN Security Council 
resolutions adopted as its basis. This is because Israel does 
not want to withdraw from the occupied territories. It believes 
that occupation and peace can go together. Based on this, it 
refused to withdraw its forces from Gaza and Jericho and 
negotiated with the Palestinian side on every meter in the 
Jericho area. The relevant question is: If Jericho required 
all these negotiations, taking into consideration that it is a 
small town, how would the case be concerning the big Palestinian 
cities in the West Bank. It is fully clear to everyone that the 
Israeli intransigence, which uses security as a cover, seeks to 
entrench occupation, usurpation, expansion, and settlements. 
The intransigence we see in the Oslo agreement negotiations is 
only part of Israel's multifarious maneuverings, which are aimed 
at foiling the entire peace process. 
  Israel is blackmailing the Palestinian side in a very 
serious 
manner. It is also exploiting its weakness, which was the 
result of its deviation from Arab consensus and involvement in 
partial and separate settlements, in order to dictate to it on 
its humiliating terms. If we have lessons to learn from this 
stumbling agreement, then we clearly see that Israel is utterly 
separated from peace and that it has not yet dissociated itself 
from the objectives of expansion and settlements. This issue 
will certainly be discussed by Presidents al-Asad and Clinton in 
Geneva. All past events proved that peace in the region hinges 
on Israel's full withdrawal from the occupied territories and on 
the restoration of all Arab rights. No agreement will be of any 
value, regardless of the propaganda surrounding it, if it is not 
just and fair and if it does not meet Arab aspirations to 
restore their rights and territories. In fact, such agreement 
will turn into an obstacle to peace. 
  Syria has frequently said that peace goes with justice, and 
that peace and occupation cannot go together. If Israel refuses 
to free itself of delusions and expansionist plans in order to 
move to the world of peace, right, and justice, then the 
international community will be required to assume its 
responsibilities -- to clarify matters and to take whatever 
steps are necessary to implement its resolutions and to end the 
Israeli intransigence. Peace is the issue of all peoples, and 
an aggressive entity must not be allowed to endanger mankind as 
a result of its insistence on its aggressive course. 

