Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Focus on Africa" program] </F>
  [Text] In Sierra Leone, the RUF [Revolutionary United 
Front] rebels of Foday Sankoh launched an audacious attack on 
the headquarters of the 5th Battalion in the south of the 
country yesterday. Despite the Strasser government's repeated 
attempts to contain the RUF, the evidence is that the RUF threat 
is by no means over. Our Bo correspondent, Al Hassan Sillah, is 
in Freetown at the moment, where he has been monitoring events. 
He sent this report. 
  [Begin Sillah recording] Rebels of Foday Sankoh's 
Revolutionary United Front, numbering over 150, at dawn 
yesterday attacked the military headquarter town of Koribundu, 
seat of the Army's 5th Battalion, and engaged troops in what 
military sources have described as one of the fiercest battles 
fought with rebels in recent times, with the impact of its force 
said to be heard in Bo, some twenty miles away. 
  According to reports monitored from the area, the rebels, 
dressed in black overall outfits, attacked the town at about 5 
AM yesterday, and troops battled them for four hours till about 
9 o'clock in the morning. According to the SIERRA LEONE NEWS 
AGENCY in Bo, some 50 rebels were killed in the battle, while 
government troops had five of their men killed and three 
officers, including a major, critically injured. Reports also 
say that some 20 civilians were killed as the rebels launched 
rocket-propelled grenades into residential areas of the town, 
while they are also said to have abducted a number of people as 
they fled the scene of the battle. The headquarters of Koribundu 
serves as the most important military guard post in the entire 
southern region and as the battle raged yesterday, the 
authorities made swift moves to protect the rest of the region, 
particularly the headquarter town, Bo. 
  In Bo yesterday, a 10 PM-to-dawn curfew was imposed. All 
social activities and entertainment sessions banned, and several 
roadblocks to and from the township mounted. Panic-stricken 
residents were advised by the military to stay calm. This 
morning, Muslim 'Id al- Fitr prayers were held in individual 
mosques rather than the open (?durbar) grounds in Bo, apparently 
for security reasons, and there is a heavy military presence in 
the town as troops patrol Bo township in vehicles, armored cars, 
and tanks. Most people are spending their 'Id al-Fitr holiday 
indoors. [end recording] 

