CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Pierre Langereux: "ESA Agreement on Manned </F>
Flight Projects"; AIR &amp; COSMOS/AVIATION MAGAZINE 
INTERNATIONAL 
introduction is "Europe prepares a manned module, a crew 
transport capsule, and a `space tow vehicle.'"] 
  [Text] The European Space Agency [ESA] Council that met on 
15 February in Paris adopted the "Council act" authorizing the 
effective launch of the Columbus manned orbital component and 
MSTP [Manned Space Transport Program]. This was as expected (see 
AIR &amp; COSMOS/AVIATION MAGAZINE INTERNATIONAL No. 1457-58). 
  The "act," says the ESA, provides the legal and financial 
bases for starting up the MSTP and Columbus programs 
immediately. The programs will be funded for 203 and 267 million 
AU (Accounting Units) respectively for the 1994-95 period. 
  It also confirms the creation of a single management 
structure for the two programs, which will be combined into a 
comprehensive one for "manned flight space ventures" beginning 
in March of 1994. As planned, the program will entail the 
construction of a ballistic crew transport vehicle (CTV), an 
automated interorbital transfer tow vehicle (ATV), and a manned 
Columbus laboratory-module (APM). Europe's new Ariane 5 rocket 
will launch all three. The program also calls for European 
astronaut flights aboard the Russian orbital station Mir or U.S. 
space shuttles. 
  "With this decision, member states have confirmed their 
willingness to take part in the worldwide effort to collaborate 
on an international space station and to negotiate with all the 
partners involved (United States, Russia, Japan, and Canada)," 
the ESA notes. The agency stresses that "these decisions free 
up--for the next two years--the resources needed to lay the 
foundations of European space programs in the year 2000!" 
  Furthermore, the ESA Council confirmed that the observation 
satellite programs Envisat and polar Platform will also be 
managed within a single organization, and that the DRS [data 
relay satellite] design phase and new studies of future orbital 
transport systems (FESTIP) had begun. 
  ESA general director Jean-Marie Luton feels the decisions 
"take into account the economic realities and political changes 
in Europe and the world" and "indicate the Agency's willingness 
to forcefully and coherently pursue its ambitions in the areas 
of environmental studies, science and its applications, 
telecommunications, and manned flight launch capabilities." 
  In addition, the Council has suggested that the ecu be used 
as the sole standard currency for ESA payments beginning in 1997. 

