Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> Article by the Management Board of the People's Bank: "We </F>
Suggest That Yu. M. Luzhkov, Moscow's Mayor, and V. V. 
Gerashchenko, Chairman of the Russian Federation's Central Bank, 
Investigate."] 
  [Text] Moscow's government has adopted a decision to 
transfer the servicing of the city's budget from the People's 
Bank to a group of so-called proxy banks. The question of which 
bank organizes the affairs of the moneyowner best is being 
solved. However, the trouble is that everything is not being 
done in a completely civilized manner. 
  The mass information media are conducting a purposeful 
campaign to discredit the People's Bank, which has serviced 
Moscow's budget for many years. We are officially stating that 
the accusations directed at us are false and are aimed at 
harming the bank's reputation and that we are prepared to prove 
our case with documents. 
  Our bank is competent enough not to fear for its reputation; 
however, the malicious nature of the libelous campaign compels 
us to give an explanation. The bank is not related to a single 
so-called delay of payment. Moreover, they are trying to accuse 
us of delaying wages to on-budget organizations that are, on the 
whole, not clients of the People's Bank. It is a pity that the 
mass information media are not finding time to check the 
reliability of their information. 
  We continuously receive letters from numerous clients who 
express gratitude for the long years of fruitful collaboration 
and who are puzzled about why they are being compelled to leave 
us against their wishes. 
  Our opinion regarding the transfer of budget assets to other 
banks is a simple one: If the government thinks that the other 
banks can service it better, it is advisable and we have no 
complaints. However, this does not mean that the People's Bank 
has serviced the city's budget poorly. On the contrary, it means 
that the People's Bank has serviced the budget normally. 
  If Moscow's government thinks that a group of other banks, 
called proxies, will do it better, it has a right to transfer 
the budget's management to them. In this case, however, all 
responsibility for the consequences rests with those who made 
this decision. 
  However, this normal approach to the matter evidently does 
not suit the authors of the campaign directed against us. They 
must prove that the People's Bank implemented the budget poorly 
and nothing remained for Moscow's government to do except to 
transfer the budget's servicing to others. In our view, the 
false and juggled information and facts about our bank's poor 
work begin here. 
  The procedure for transferring the budget also appears 
extremely strange. Everything was done in secret. They did not 
inform us about the criteria, which guided the government when 
selecting the proxy banks. Despite repeated promises, Moscow's 
mayor did not receive the chairman of the board of the People's 
Bank. Other leaders of the capital's government also did not 
wish to talk with us. 
  We do not want to praise ourselves but our achievements are 
well-known. For many years, we have not received any censures 
from our clients. We are ready to say and show that everything 
was done in the interests of the capital's inhabitants. We will 
do this with the help of the mass information media that has 
maintained its objectivity. 
  We are addressing an urgent request to Moscow's mayor and 
the 
chairman of Russia's Central Bank to investigate carefully what 
has happened, study the documents impartially and meet with the 
chairman of the board of the People's Bank. 
  We are requesting our customers, whom we have never refused 
to support and assist, to express their unbiased opinion about 
the work of the People's Bank. 
  We are turning to our banking colleagues: Today, a libelous 
campaign has been organized against us; tomorrow, it will be 
your turn if we do not give the necessary rebuff through our 
joint efforts to those forces, which are not disdaining any 
means to achieve their advantage. 
  Board of the National Bank. 

