Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Renate Ell: ``Metalworks spew out dioxin''] </F>
  [Text] 
<H3>  Experience in Bremen Shows That Plants on the Rhine and Ruhr 
Could Also Be Cleaned Up </H3>
  Not all plants in Germany from whose chimneys dioxins stream 
into the environment are equal before the law. Whilst the 
Emmission Control Order imposes a limit of 0.1 nanograms 
(millionth of a gram) per cubic meter of waste gas on garbage 
incineration plants, there are no such rules for other thermal 
plants such as steel, nonferrous metal or aluminum works. But a 
single metalworks can emit as great a quantity of dioxins as 
several garbage incinerators combined. 
  Dioxins build up in the environment because these 
chlorinated 
hydrocarbon composites are very hardly degradable, some of them 
almost completely nondegradable. They also enter the human body 
via the food chain. TCDD [expansion not provided], often called 
Seveso dioxin, is the best researched and at the same time the 
most toxic of the total of 120 different dioxins. It is 
therefore used as a reference: The total quantity of dioxins 
and the very similar furanes in a sample is stated in toxicity 
equivalents (TEQ) and TCDD. 
  All dioxins have proved toxic in animal experiments and 
caused cancer and mutations in offspring. The effects on man 
are known mainly from examinations of the population of Seveso, 
chemical industry workers, and Vietnam veterans (the defoliant 
Agent Orange was contaminated with dioxins). Dioxins and 
furanes occur as unwanted byproducts of reactions involving 
chlorine, chiefly in thermal processes such as garbage 
incineration or metal smelting. The contaminants are mainly 
bound to dust particles. 
  There is at present little data available on dioxin 
emissions 
from metallurgical plants. In recent weeks and months 
discussion has centered mainly round steel sintering plants, for 
which the Environment Ministry of North Rhine-Westphalia 
undertook a measuring program last year. 
  Sintering plants prepare ore dust for the blast furnace by 
heating it to 1200 to 1300 degrees together with coke slack, 
lime, and other additives. At the same time, sintering plants 
are also used to recycle a wide variety of iron-containing 
materials, so- called ``metallurgist's residues,'' which make up 
as much as 30 percent of the sinter mass. But apart from iron 
and other metals, these materials also contain a large number of 
other ingredients, including chlorine and hydrocarbons, creating 
the conditions for the production of dioxins, furanes, and other 
toxic chlorinated hydrocarbons. 
  Dioxin concentrations of three to five nanograms TEQ per 
cubic meter gas were measured in the waste gas from sintering 
plants. This does not look so shocking at first sight as some 
garbage incineration plants are also still in this range 
(although about one half of Germany's 40 plants do now keep 
within the 0.1 nanogram limit). What makes sintering plants 
probably the largest single source of dioxins among thermal 
installations is their high volume of waste gas: About 10 
million cubic meters per hour for all German sintering plants 
taken together. (By comparison, the total waste gas output of 
all German garbage incineration plants is in the region of 2 
million cubic meters.) Thus, German sintering plants give off a 
total of 200 to 400 grams TEQ dioxins every year. According to 
environment minister Matthiesen, Krupp-Hoesch Stahl AG's 
Westphalia works in Dortmund alone gives off 250 grams of dioxin 
a year. Matthiesen says that the waste gas from the Duisburg 
copper plant also contains extremely high concentrations of the 
Seveso poison and in the hot briquetting plant of the Duisburg 
firm Berzelius Metalworks GmbH peaks of as much as 70 nanograms 
per cubic meter of air are reached. 
<H5>  Disposal Bottleneck </H5>
  The theoretically simplest solution to the sintering plant 
problem would be to keep recycled materials, or at least those 
containing chlorine, out of the plant. But what would be done 
with them then? There would immediately be a disposal 
bottleneck. But in the long term finding alternative means of 
disposing of some of these materials will be an important aspect 
of reducing sintering plant emissions. Krupp-Hoesch in Dortmund 
have already excluded a particularly suspect material from the 
sintering process. And North Rhine-Westphalia's Environment 
Ministry has instructed the labour inspectorate to issue 
regulations ensuring that no residues from other firms and no 
materials containing oil are added to the sinter mass. 
  The ministry and the firm are hoping that a measurement 
program in November, experimenting with other operating 
parameters, will give them more information. The authorities 
and the firm agree that the measurements currently available are 
insufficient to form a basis for further measures. Krupp-Hoesch 
also wants to improve the effectiveness of its electrostatic 
filter by means of so-called continuous precipitation 
electrodes, but these will not be ready for use until the end of 
1994. 
  They have got a lot further at Kloeckner's steel works in 
Bremen, where they have been successfully trying to reduce dust 
emissions for three years. With the financial support of the 
Federal Environment Office, the firm in August installed a 
fibrous filter, which has proved very promising, behind its 
electrostatic filter. The filter is like a sort of large nylon 
stocking which catches dust and ash. The fabric is coated to 
make it even more effective at collecting harmful substances: 
with activated carbon for dioxins and with calcium hydroxide for 
acid pollutants such as hydrochloric acid. The filter plant is 
constantly being improved: Emissions will be further reduced 
next year by waste gas recirculation. The highly contaminated 
filter dusts are incinerated in the sintering plant; 
temperatures around 1,200 degrees Celsius also destroy dioxins. 
  So only approximately 2 nanograms TEQ of dioxins and furanes 
now enter the atmosphere in Bremen instead of 5.7 previously. 
Emissions of polluting dust are also below 10 milligrams per 
cubic meter, far below the limit applicable from 1.3.1994 under 
the Air Pollution Control Regulations (50 milligrams per cubic 
meter); other sintering plants give off between 75 and 200 
milligrams. Kloeckner has contractually promised the city of 
Bremen to reduce emissions to below 1 nanogram TEQ per cubic 
meter by January 1994 and to reach the 0.1 nanogram per cubic 
meter limit for garbage incineration plants by the start of 
1997. If the firm fails to do so, it is threatened with closure. 
  With this contract Kloeckner demonstrates that far lower 
emissions than are now usual are technically possible. In 
December the laender of Bremen and Lower Saxony will therefore 
be tabling a motion in the Upper House of Parliament to have 
corresponding limits prescribed by law for the country as a 
whole. 

