BFN 

  [Text] Minister of State of Foreign Affair Mr. Talal 
al-Hasan has conferred with the Danish delegation [of the 
Foreign Policy Association in Denmark which is currently 
visiting Jordan]. The minister explained the efforts Jordan is 
making under the leadership of his majesty the king to advance 
the peace process in the region and to achieve just, durable, 
and comprehensive peace in accordance with the international 
legitimacy, represented in Security Council Resolutions 242 and 
338. He said this is also based on the principle of bartering 
land for peace, as well as safeguarding the rights of the 
Palestinian Arab people on their national soil. It is also 
based on safeguarding Jordan's rights as far as land, water, 
security, and the resolution of the refugee problem. 
  The minister said the blockade imposed on the Gulf of Aqaba 
is leaving a negative impact on the Jordanian economy. He said 
his majesty the king is making persistent efforts to secure the 
lifting of the blockade. These efforts included a meeting 
between his majesty and the ambassadors of the five permanent 
members of the Security Council. His majesty told the 
ambassadors that this question should be dealt with as quickly 
as possible, and that there is no justification for this 
blockade, particularly that Jordan has been constructively 
cooperating with the peace efforts in the region. 
  Mr. al-Hasan said that the massacre committed by Jewish 
settlers in the Ibrahimi Mosque in Hebron has undermined the 
peace process in the region. He added that the international 
community should shoulder its responsibilities to prevent the 
recurrence of such a crime and to secure the necessary 
protection for the Palestinians in the occupied territories. 
  Mr. al-Hasan pointed out that the Israeli settlements are 
dangerous to the peace process and should be removed, and the 
Israeli occupation should be ended if we were to achieve just, 
comprehensive, and durable peace in the region. Mr. al-Hasan 
commended the good relations existing between Jordan and Denmark 
in all fields, pointing in particular to the relationship of 
friendship and mutual respect that exist between His Majesty 
King Husayn and the monarch of Denmark. 
  The Danish guests said they were very appreciative of the 
great role Jordan is playing in giving momentum to the Middle 
East peace process and achieving peace, security, and stability 
in the region. 
  The meeting was attended by the Danish ambassador in Amman 
and the honorary consul of Denmark in Amman. 

