BFN 

<F P=106> [Communique issued by RPF Chairman Alexis Kanyarengwe in </F>
Mulindi on 30 April] 
  [Text] The Rwandan Patriotic Front [RPF] informs national 
and international public opinion about the following points: 
  First, a human tragedy of unprecedented scale is currently 
taking place in Rwanda, openly and publicly witnessed by the 
entire international community. This tragedy has now truly 
become an act of genocide and a crime against humanity, 
perpetrated by a clique of extremist individuals and a faction 
of the government army. In less than three weeks -- since 6 
April -- the clique has decimated the democratic opposition and 
orchestrated the massacre of more than 200,000 people of all 
ethnic groups. 
  Second, these massacres are part of an extermination plan 
prepared long ago by high-ranking officials from the dictatorial 
regime of the late President Habyarimana. To this end, arms, 
ammunition, military training, and all sorts of preparations 
were given to Habyarimana's party, the Republican National 
Movement for Democracy and Development-Coalition for the Defense 
of the Republic militias backed by the Presidential Guard. The 
fact that a plan for political extermination was being prepared 
was exposed long before the signing of the Arusha agreement, by 
various sources inside and outside the country. 
  Third, negotiations for a peace agreement are used by this 
clique of extremists as diversionary movements, the aim of which 
are to gain enough time to finalize this extermination plan 
which includes, for example, organizing militias, setting up a 
propaganda radio station, and deploying agents of violence 
throughout the entire country. 
  At the same time, the clique has done everything possible to 
prevent the implementation of these very peace agreements. All 
these diversionary moves were monitored closely by the 
international community. 
  Fourth, given the shock expressed by this same international 
community towards the horrors committed since the beginning of 
the Rwandan conflict and during the entire Arusha peace talks. 
The RPF was somehow expecting that, in the face of the ongoing 
massacres, the international community assumed all its 
responsibilities to contribute to end them by unreservedly 
condemning all these criminal acts, providing all necessary 
humanitarian aid to those in danger, and by refusing both 
political and diplomatic support to these murderers who are 
attempting to place themselves in power in Kigali. 
  Fifth, these criminals were so far condemned only by a few 
governments and international and humanitarian organizations. 
Many others continue to hide behind diplomatic silence and a 
general lack of concern, while large-scale genocide and crimes 
against humanity take place in front of their very eyes. What 
is even worse, the French Government, received at the highest 
level, a delegation of these criminals, which supports their 
extermination policy and inhumane acts. 
  Sixth, the RPF: 
  a. Reminds the international community of its full 
responsibility in the face of the genocide and crimes against 
humanity being committed in Rwanda in front of its very eyes. 
  b. Condemns all forms of relations that may give this group 
of murderers backing to its extermination policy and an 
opportunity to strengthen its political and diplomatic position. 
  c. Urges the international community to isolate this clique 
of criminals by refusing to hold any form of dialogue with it, 
and not to give any form of political support and advice to this 
clique. 
  d. Refuses to yield to the murderous blackmail of a clique 
of 
criminals that has established as a method of governance the 
massacre of people, the taking of hostages and the assassination 
of the democratic opposition. 
  e. Thanks governments and international organizations, as 
well as all well-wishers who denounce the clique of the 
murderers and help people in danger. 
  Issued, Mulindi, 30 April. 
  Signed, Colonel Alexis Kanyarengwe, RPF chairman. 

