BFN 

<F P=106> [EC Information Memo No. MEMO/94/32: "Negotiations on the </F>
Accession of Austria, Sweden, Finland, and Norway to the 
European Union -- Summary of the Results"] 
  [Excerpts] 
<H5>  Introduction </H5>
  Following applications made by Austria, Sweden, Finland, and 
Norway to join the European Communities, accession negotiations 
with Austria, Sweden, and Finland were opened officially on the 
1 February 1993 and with Norway on the 5 April 1993. The 
negotiations with the candidates were conducted in parallel, at 
various levels, in the framework of separate conferences meeting 
at ministerial or deputies (ambassadors) level. As the Treaty 
of European Union entered into force on 1 November 1993 they 
were formally transformed into negotiations for accession to the 
European Union. The negotiations on an important number of 
chapters were facilitated by the existence of the free trade 
agreements between the Community and the candidates, and the 
recent entry into force of the European Economic Area Agreement 
whereby the candidate countries were already committed to take 
over in their national legislation most of the acquis concerning 
the single market. A basic principle of the negotiations was 
the requirement that the candidate countries should accept the 
actual and potential rights and obligations attaching to the 
Community system, its legislation and its institutional 
framework -- the Community acquis -- subject (if necessary) to 
technical adjustments and exceptionally to temporary (not 
permanent) derogations and transitional arrangements. 
  The negotiations were concluded at the political level with 
Austria, Sweden, and Finland on the 1 March 1994 and with 
Norway, slightly later, on the 16 March owing to the need to 
negotiate further on some remaining issues, notably fisheries. 
Following this political agreement between the Union and the 
candidates on all points raised by them, the final outstanding 
chapter, institutions, was settled by the Union at Ioannina on 
the 27 March 1994. The accession conferences then agreed on all 
negotiating chapters on the 30 March. It was then necessary to 
put these political agreements into legal form for the 
establishment of the instruments of accession (a treaty, an act 
of accession with annexes and protocols, declarations). Texts 
were being drafted as negotiations progressed, and eventually 
were agreed upon at the final session of the accession 
conferences at deputy level on the 12 April 1994. 
  What follows is a general description of the outcome of 
negotiations, without being exhaustive, in the main chapters. 
<H5>  Free Movement of Goods </H5>
  One of the major concerns of the applicant countries during 
the negotiations was to maintain a high level of health, safety, 
and environmental standards after accession. It became clear, 
however, during detailed expert discussions that the scope of 
the difference between their own regulations and the EC 
provisions was relatively limited. For a number of exceptional, 
well-justified cases, it was agreed that each acceding country 
could maintain its national rules for a transitional period of 
four years. The derogations, which vary in coverage between the 
four countries, relate to the classification, packaging and 
labelling of pesticides and certain other dangerous substances, 
the marketing and use of certain chemical products (including 
cadmium, arsenic, pentachlorophenol) and the composition of 
fertilizers and batteries. The enforcement of the national 
rules during the transitional period must not be achieved by 
means of border control. During the transitional period the EC 
provisions will be reviewed according to normal procedures and 
at the end of the period the acquis will apply to the new member 
states in the same way as to the present member states. [passage 
omitted] 
<H5>  Road Transit -- Austria </H5>
  The problem of transit through Austria by heavy lorries was 
one of the most important subjects in the negotiations with 
Austria -- perhaps the most sensitive subject in Austrian public 
opinion. 
  Heavy goods vehicles normally enjoy unrestricted passage 
through member states of the Union, provided that they comply 
with the rules on weights, dimensions and so on. However, in 
view of the environmental threat to the alpine passes, and the 
narrow valleys leading to them, the Community had concluded in 
1992 a bilateral agreement with Austria to control the number of 
vehicles by means of an "Ecopoint" system of transit licences. 
In the accession negotiations, Austria requested a special 
derogation so that this agreement could be continued after 
membership. It was agreed, therefore -- and this was the last 
and most important problem to be solved in the negotiations with 
Austria -- that the essential objective of the transit agreement 
will be honoured, namely the reduction (by 60 percent by the end 
of the year 2003) of pollution from heavy lorries in transit 
through Austria. In addition, other measures to deal with the 
transit problem will be accelerated, including the creation of 
extra rail capacity, and a decision on the construction of a new 
tunnel under the Brenner pass. [passage omitted] 
<H5>  Environment </H5>
  In respect of the conservation of natural habitats, wild 
fauna and flora, and wild birds, a number of adaptations are 
made to EC provisions, reflecting the specific environmental 
conditions and the different conservation status of certain 
animal and plant species in the acceding countries. [passage 
omitted] 
  Austria can maintain its provisions on the import, export 
and 
transit of waste for a transitional period of two years. Norway 
is granted a transitional period until 1997 for the application 
of EC provisions on pollution caused by waste from the titanium 
dioxide industry. Austria, Norway, and Sweden may maintain 
their bans on the recycling of polychlorinated byphenyls and 
polychlorinated terphenyls (pcbs/pcts). 
<H5>  Energy </H5>
  Discussions under this heading concentrated on the question 
to what extent different national energy policies in the 
candidate countries could be continued after accession. 
  In particular, some of the implications of membership of 
EURATOM [European Atomic Energy Community] caused concern among 
candidates, given that for instance Austria has by law rejected 
the use of nuclear energy, that Sweden intends to do so in a 
number of years and that Norway does not have any commercial 
nuclear installations. 
  Furthermore, the Treaty transfers certain competencies from 
national authorities to the EURATOM supply agency in the field 
of trade in nuclear materials and to the Commission as regards 
safeguard measures concerning the use of these materials, all 
matters of a highly sensitive political nature in the countries 
concerned. To meet the concerns of the candidates on these and 
other points, the following was agreed upon: 

  -  A joint 
declaration relating to Austria, Sweden, and Norway noting that 
member states are free to decide whether or not to produce 
nuclear energy according to their specific policy 
orientation; 
  -  The recognition that Articles 105 and 106 of the 
EURATOM Treaty allow agreements and contracts concluded before 
accession to continue unchanged; 
  -  A joint declaration concerning 
the fulfillment by Sweden of obligations under the 
Non-Proliferation Treaty; 
  -  A transitional period of two years for 
Austria, Finland, and Sweden to implement the "acquis" on basic 
safety standards for health protection against the danger of 
ionizing radiation. 

  A separate question was the Norwegian demand concerning 
sovereignty over petroleum resources. This demand was met by a 
protocol recognizing this sovereignty within the limits of 
Community law. Finland was granted a transitional period of one 
year to implement the obligation to maintain minimum stocks of 
crude oil and/or petroleum products. 
<H5>  Agriculture </H5>
  Agriculture naturally involved detailed and difficult 
negotiations in view of accession, because it is the economic 
sector in which the acceding countries will have to make the 
biggest adjustments as a result of membership. 
  Austria, Sweden, Finland, and Norway each have a distinctive 
national system of support for agriculture, which -- unlike the 
industrial sector -- never figured in their mutual free trade 
under EFTA [European Free Trade Association]. The objectives of 
their national policies, similar to those of the Union's Common 
Agricultural Policy, have been to support the incomes of 
farmers, maintain rural society, and ensure security of food 
supplies. [passage omitted] 
  In the negotiations, therefore, the main problems to be 
resolved were: 

  -  The transitional period for agricultural 
prices requested by Austria, Finland, and Norway; 
  -  The adaptation 
of the instruments of the Common Agricultural Policy in such a 
way as to take account of the particular problems of the new 
members. 

  The Union insisted that, in view of the single market, and 
the need to avoid border controls for trade between member 
states in the enlarged Union, the acceding countries should 
adopt common agricultural prices immediately on accession, 
without a progressive adaptation of prices (accompanied by 
charges on trade between members) as was the case in previous 
enlargements. The acceptance of this principle by Finland, 
Austria, and Norway was a key stage in the final round of 
negotiations. It was accompanied by: 

  -  Agreement on the 
payment of national aids to farmers in those countries, to 
compensate for the reduction of prices; these aids, payable over 
a period of five years, will be degressive, and their cost to 
the national budgets will be offset by a special 
"agro-budgetary" contribution from the Community over four 
years. 
  -  The introduction of a "safeguard clause", for rapid 
action by the European Commission in case of disruption of their 
markets for agriculture and food as a result of the opening of 
free trade with other members of the Union. 

  In addition to these transitional measures, many technical 
adjustments were agreed to the Union's rules on agricultural 
markets, structural policy, and so on, to permit the full and 
effective implementation of the Common Agricultural Policy in 
the new member states. [passage omitted] 
<H5>  Fisheries </H5>
  The fisheries issue, particularly with respect to Norway, 
was 
one of the more difficult and complex subjects of the 
negotiation. This was the result of the need, on the one hand 
to incorporate into the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP) a large 
fishing nation that had developed its own comprehensive approach 
to fisheries policy and, on the other hand to find solutions to 
a number of internal concerns of the Union in this sector. In 
this connection it has to be recognised that Norway has 
developed a sophisticated and high quality fisheries policy and 
that it was in the common interest to maintain certain aspects 
of it in order to safeguard the sustainable management of 
resources. 
  On the assumption that new entrants cannot be better treated 
than existing member states, on the key issue of access to 
waters it was necessary to agree that Norway, Sweden, and 
Finland should be subject, where relevant, to a regime 
equivalent to that currently applied to Spain and Portugal for a 
transitional period. In practice, this transitional regime 
will, overall, enable the new member states and the present 
Union to maintain the status quo in the Baltic and the North Sea 
in their fishing relations until the Community establishes a CFP 
that is uniform for all member states and until the adoption of 
a Community fishing permit system, external trade and customs 
Union. [passage omitted] 
<H5>  External Trade </H5>
  External trade was one of the less difficult chapters of the 
negotiations. The acceding countries agreed to apply the common 
external tariff immediately on their accession, with some very 
limited exceptions for Finland and Norway, which may reduce some 
higher tariffs progressively over a period of three years, and 
will benefit from a duty-free quota for imports of styrene for 
five years. 
  The new members will become parties, immediately on 
accession, to all the Union's international agreements with 
nonmember countries, and will apply them according to the normal 
rules. However, in cases where it is necessary to adapt these 
agreements to take account of enlargement (for example, the 
textile quotas) the necessary negotiations will be undertaken 
with the third countries before accession. 
  In response to the request of Sweden, Finland, and Norway to 
maintain their free trade arrangements with the Baltic States 
(Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania), the Union promised to do its best 
to ensure that the Union's new trade agreements with those 
countries, already proposed by the Commission, will be in force 
by the date of enlargement. [passage omitted] 
<H5>  Institutions </H5>
  The appropriate adjustments to the institutions of the Union 
were made on the basis of existing institutional provisions in 
the Treaty on the Union. Consequently, in the European 
Parliament the total of members will be increased by 74 to 641 
(Sweden 22, Austria 21, Finland 16, and Norway 19). In the 
Council the current weighing of member states' votes is 
maintained, in addition Sweden and Austria will have four votes 
each and Finland and Norway three votes each. The qualified 
majority is fixed at 64, which maintains the current balance. 
The Commission is to be increased from 17 to 21, with one 
additional member to be designated by each new member state. 

