Maritime   Kray Criticized 

<F P=102> 94WN0226A Moscow IZVESTIYA in Russian 15 Mar 94 p 4 </F>
<F P=103> 94WN0226A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow IZVESTIYA </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by journalist Natalya Ostrovskaya: ``Temptation by </F>
the Dollar: Why the Administration of Maritime Kray Is Turning 
Its Back on an Effective Domestic Project for Purification of 
Radioactive Waste''] 
  [Text] The scientific-research vessel Okean of the 
Far Eastern Institute of Hydrometeorology has left Vladivostok 
for Niigata (Japan) and subsequently the South Korean port of 
Tomhe. 
  IZVESTIYA reported on this joint Russian-Japanese-South 
Korean expedition to study radioactive contamination of certain 
regions in the Sea of Japan as long as two months ago. However, 
the date of putting out to sea was repeatedly postponed. 
Finally, everything was decided and coordinated. Most 
importantly, there is money, $540,000 from Japan, which is 
alarmed over its ecological security. 
  Chemical specialists of the Pacific Fleet and scientists 
from 
the institutes of the Academy of Sciences in Vladivostok shrug 
their shoulders in bewilderment when it comes to this official 
alarm. The total radioactivity of last year's dumping of liquid 
radioactive waste (ZhRO) in the so-called region No. 9 of the 
Sea of Japan, which has gained scandalous notoriety throughout 
the world, was 0.37 curies--that is all! This is insignificantly 
little even according to relevant international norms. 
  Meanwhile, the actual, visible, and palpable problem abides 
in Vladivostok's backyard, in the city of Bolshoy Kamen, rather 
than on the free expanse of the sea. For half a year the 
Maritime area has had a delayed-radioactive action mine there, 
at the Zvezda defense plant, through the efforts of the Russian 
and Japanese Governments. These are two old special tankers of 
the navy, the TNT-5 and the TNT-27 with 2,000 cubic meters of 
``liquid radiation'' on board. One of them has been 
decommissioned and moored for two years now. The second, moving 
with assistance from a tugboat, quietly transported liquid 
radioactive waste to the ill-fated region No. 9 before the ban. 
  As quite competent sources inform us, the decommissioned 
TNT-5 lost air-tightness as long as a year ago because of its 
rundown and unfit condition. However, this is not at all to say 
that radioactive wash from its tanks leaks right into the bay. 
Everything is exactly the other way around: According to the 
laws of physics, outside water seeps into the tanks of the ship. 
What is the danger of this? The spontaneous sinking of the old 
tub. 
  It is hard to say how many Japanese companies and 
corporations proposing their own projects for solving the 
problem of liquid radioactive waste have visited Vladivostok in 
recent months. They are undertaking to erect a complex for waste 
processing in Bolshoy Kamen with money from the Government of 
Japan. As the saying goes, with God's help, and the sooner the 
better, before the TNT-5 sinks to the bottom. However, what will 
the common Maritime area taxpayer say about this once he learns 
what the yearly operation of such a shore complex would cost? 
  According to calculations by scientists of the Far Eastern 
Division of the RAN [Russian Academy of Sciences], this will be 
quite an impressive sum. The complex is extremely 
energy-intensive; therefore, billions of rubles a year will be 
spent to pay for electricity alone. In addition, hundreds of 
thousands of dollars will be spent to purchase imported 
consumable materials which are not produced in our country. 
  Characteristically, this project, major in every respect, 
was 
discussed by the Maritime Kray Administration. At that time, a 
detailed memorandum signed by Doctor of Chemical Sciences 
Valentin Sergiyenko, deputy chairman of the RAN Far Eastern 
Division, was addressed to Governor Yevgeniy Nazdratenko. An 
alternative variant for solving this problem, which is without 
parallel in world practice, was proposed in the memorandum. 
  In this variant, the waste would be purified by using the 
so-called composite sorbent. It would be manufactured from of 
local, Maritime Kray raw material--zeolite from Chuguyevskiy. 
Only a few scientists are aware of the secrets of sorbent 
``nitty-gritty''; they have kept this secret for a while since 
they do not have the funds to acquire a foreign patent which 
guarantees the protection of inventors' rights. 
  By all signs, the time has come. The scientists approached 
the technical administration of the fleet and received the 
famous liquid radioactive waste for laboratory testing; it is 
turbid dirty water which is rich not only in radiation but also 
in fuel oil and paraffin. Directing this water through the 
sorbent, they purified it to such a degree that the content of 
radioactive cesium, strontium, magnesium, and cobalt in it ended 
up several orders of magnitude below the maximum permissible 
concentration. In other words, the sorbent soaked up all the 
radiation; therefore, the processed water could be dumped right 
into the sea without any fear of an international scandal. 
  The scientists who were inspired by the initial results 
started to make calculations. It turned out that the total 
annual outlay associated with such technology for processing 
7,000 cubic meters of liquid radioactive waste a year (the fleet 
just does not generate more than that), the operation of the 
installation, and so on would comes, tentatively, to 350-400 
million rubles [R]. This is much cheaper than the Japanese 
project. 
  This information was brought to the attention of the 
governor. However, no response to this appeal followed. In 
January, Sergiyenko wrote to the head of the kray administration 
for a second time, with the same result. Nonetheless, Yevgeniy 
Nazdratenko held a conference with the agenda ``On the Selection 
of an Optimal (!) Variant for the Storage and Processing of 
Low-Activity Liquid Radioactive Waste in 1994 and for the Period 
Until 1996.'' 
  Judging by the minutes of this event, the kray officials in 
attendance, as well as the representatives of the Pacific Fleet 
Command, consider the construction of on-shore tanks for 
draining liquid radioactive waste, including that from the 
aforementioned tankers, to be the optimal variant. 
  Everything would appear to be clear; their services were not 
needed there. However, the obstinate Sergiyenko--was it a matter 
of principle?--wrote to the governor for the third time. He 
insisted that all projects be accepted on an equal footing and 
considered on a competitive basis. 
  Incidentally, Sergiyenko knows the Zvezda Plant well and has 
a clear notion of where and how an installation with the miracle 
sorbents can be placed there. 
  I was shown the text of a telephone message which was 
received in Vladivostok from high Moscow spheres. In response to 
a request of the Japanese to be given an opportunity to see the 
TNT-5 and the TNT-27 firsthand, the message stated that this was 
only permissible if the tankers were brought out beyond the 
confines of the ``classified'' bay. Apparently, the fact that 
the tankers cannot be moved was left out of the picture. 
  It would be naive to think that the funds promised by the 
Government of Japan can be spent on something new, something 
that has not been tested in the worldwide practice of nuclear 
waste disposal. As Valeriy Danilyan, chief of the chemical 
service of the Pacific Fleet, remarked reasonably, ``the 
Japanese will only give money for something they are in a 
position to control.'' However, could this be precisely the case 
in which we should try to do without the now very customary 
``humanitarian aid'' and solve our problems ourselves, all the 
more so if this independent path is economically advantageous? 

