CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by W. Mock: ``Japan Strives for Independence in </F>
Space''; Subhead: ``Rocket Development to Drive Technology, No 
Serious Competition for Europe's Ariane Booster Rocket in Short 
Term''] 
  [Text] Duesseldorf, 18 February 1994 -- Japan intends to 
use its new H-2 booster rocket to situate itself in the market 
for commercial rocket launches. But times are bad: the market is 
shrinking, the number of competitors is growing and it is 
difficult to realize a high frequency of launches in Japan. 
  With the successful launch of its H-2 rocket early this 
month, Japan finally managed to situate itself in one of the few 
markets where it is still scarcely represented: aerospace. 
  In the aviation sector Japanese firms are predominantly 
active as subcontractors for U.S. firms like Boeing and 
McDonnell Douglas as well as Europe's Airbus Industrie. In the 
space sector the Japanese have a small but relatively autonomous 
satellite development, but until early this year they were 
completely dependent in the case of booster rockets on U.S. 
licenses, above all, from McDonnell Douglas, Rocketdyne and 
Thiokol. The price that was paid for this was, for example, that 
the H-1, the precursor of the H-2, was not allowed to place any 
commercial satellites in earth orbit. 
  A year later than originally planned and after two major 
incidents that cost the life of one engineer, therefore, as 
Japan's Nikkei Weekly put it, with the H 2 ``a 260 t declaration 
of independence'' for Japan's aerospace industry was also 
launched. In the words of Hiroshi Harada, responsible for 
aerospace activities at Mitsubishi Heavy Industries: ``We 
developed the H-2 so we would have our own technology. Only 
after that will we be able to emerge as equal partners in 
international cooperative activities.'' 
  H-2 is supposed to be able to place an approximately four 
ton 
payload in the geostationary transfer orbit that is of interest 
particularly for communications satellites, and up to 10 t in 
near earth orbit, for example, for a space station at a distance 
of 400-500 km. 
  Under the leadership of Mitsubishi, Ishikawajima-Harima 
Heavy 
Industries, Nissan and Kawasaki Heavy Industries, nearly 70 
Japanese aerospace companies have combined in the Rocket Systems 
Corporation [RSC] to market the booster rockets. Commercial 
operation of the rocket is supposed to begin with the third 
launch of the H-2 this coming winter. 
  This will not be an easy task for the RSC. The 50 m long H-2 
is competing on the market with the Ariane 4 that is another 
five meters longer, with the U.S. Atlas and Delta rockets, 
Russia's Proton and China's Long March rocket. 
  Simultaneously, there is expected to be a perceptible 
decline 
in launch orders over the next few years. The reason is that in 
both the European and U.S. space programs, demand for new 
satellites is stagnant. 
  The Japanese are also coming up against a well-entrenched 
competition. In the past year, Arianespace, the European company 
operating the Ariane rocket, signed contracts for the launch of 
16 satellites. As reported by Arianespace, total competition 
from Atlas, Delta, Long March and Proton amounted to only five 
such launch contracts. Consequently, over the past year 
Arianespace was able to capture nearly 75 percent of the 
worldwide market for orders for the launching of civilian 
satellites. If only commercial satellites that were actually 
launched are counted, in 1993, Arianespace still had more than 
50 percent of the international market. That international 
market is estimated to be worth nearly DM2 billion annually. 
  Still, Ariane's supremacy is by no means as secure as its 
full orders books might suggest. The rocket-launch market is 
very temperamental and subject to major fluctuations. Hence, it 
was a big boost for Ariane when, in the mid 1980's, U.S. booster 
rockets and the Shuttle were forced into a string of failures. 
  On average, in recent years seven rockets per year have been 
launched from Kourou in French Guiana, often with two or more 
satellites on board. It was planned to increase the frequency of 
launches for 1994 to at least 10 launches. The goal is one 
launch per month. 
  This year's first launch, however, was a failure. About 
seven 
minutes after takeoff a fuel pump failed and Ariane 4's upper 
stage with Turkey's Turksat 1 communications satellite and the 
Eutelsat IIF5 plunged into the Atlantic Ocean. 
  An analysis of the causes will take at least four weeks. 
Only 
then will the engineers proceed to prepare for the next launch. 
In the words of one observer: ``Two back-to-back failed launches 
like this one could noticeably knock the market out of kilter.'' 
  Charles Bigot, Arianespace's director, however, is confident 
that by the end of 1996 it will be possible to launch at least 
another 30 Ariane 4, if need be, even at an interval of only 
three weeks. The reason for the urgency is that Arianespace has 
a backlog of orders for 37 satellites worth nearly $3 billion. 
  Therefore, the H-2 is still far from being a real challenge 
to the Ariane. Launch prices are at least 50 percent more than 
the $120 million for an Ariane launch. What is more, the 
Japanese government has promised the country's fishers' unions 
that it will engage in launches only during a 45-day window in 
the summer and a comparable time period in the winter. 
Tanegashima, the H-2's launch site, is located at a distance of 
only 40 km from the coast of Kyushu, Japan's southernmost 
island. Given these conditions, it is hardly possible to have, 
at most, more than four launches per year. 
  According to an Institute for Economic Research [Ifo] study 
at yearend, what matters most for Japan, however, is that space 
is viewed as a key technology for the future. Therefore, as 
early as 1991, the government allocated nearly 2.2 billion, when 
converted, for promoting space activities. Public research 
facilities have requested an increase in funding for space 
research to more than DM6 billion for fiscal year 1994. But even 
here Japan's sorry economy has had an impact. Whereas in 1993 
R&amp;D outlays by industry and government still increased by 
nearly 
one percent, in the same time period funding for space declined 
by about 6.7 percent to a total of nearly DM3.3 billion. 

