Language: <F P=105> Turkish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Taha Akyol: "To the Polls"] </F>
  [Text] The PKK [Workers Party of Kurdistan] terrorist 
organization and the Democracy Party [DEP], which decided to 
boycott the elections in line with the instructions of the PKK, 
are trying to prevent people from voting in the upcoming 
elections. Kemal Burkay, who has never been involved in 
terrorism, on the other hand, has made a different appeal. 
Burkay's PSK [Socialist Party of Kurdistan] issued this 
statement: 
  "During the nationwide local elections to be held on 27 
March, support progressive, patriotic, and democratic 
candidates. If there are no such candidates in your area, then 
cast an invalid vote." 
  It is clear that these remarks defy the PKK. Kemal Burkay's 
separatist PSK has long made it clear that it is boycotting the 
PKK and that it will not attend its meetings. In actual fact, 
all Kurdish circles, who are not supporters of the PKK, are 
extremely uneasy about boycotting the elections. The separatist 
newspaper AZADI carries the following caption next to [DEP 
leader] Hatip Dicle's picture: "Those who effectively 
eliminated the People's Toil Party by attaching it to the Social 
Democratic Populist Party in the past, have now effectively 
terminated the DEP by withdrawing it from the elections." 
  Groups, which display hardly any differences with regard to 
ideological fanaticism, but which differ on whether to resort to 
terrorist or democratic methods, will present an interesting 
picture at the elections: 
  If the polls yield an exceptional number of invalid votes, 
over and above the normal levels, this will be an indication of 
the mass support for Kemal Burkay and anti-PKK separatists. 
  Although the PSK statement appeals for votes to 
"progressive, 
patriotic" candidates, if such candidates exist, the uncertainty 
with regard to these qualities and the differences in the number 
of invalid votes in the 27 March elections will give us an 
indication about the power of the appeal. 
  Low participation rates, on the other hand, will allow us to 
assess the grassroots of the PKK-DEP pair. Of course, the PKK 
is a terrorist organization. In places where terrorism is 
effective, it will be necessary to significantly deduct a 
"terrorist share" from nonvoter numbers. 
  In any case, if the PKK and the DEP had believed that they 
would receive significant votes, would they have decided to 
boycott the elections and threatened the candidates "to face the 
consequences if they participate in the elections?" 
  AZADI, which is aware of developments within the DEP and 
which has a faction in the party, condemns "state terrorism" in 
the known style and states that "the DEP should have 
participated in the elections even if it did not believe that it 
would receive sufficient votes." Those who cannot face free 
elections resort to terrorism. 
  Given these facts, I say that the citizens must certainly go 
and cast their votes in the elections. Even if you do not 
sympathize with any party, you should vote for one of them. 
Every vote you cast will help reduce the democracy foes in our 
society as well as the marginal elements to their ordinary 
levels. 

