BFN 

<F P=106> ["Political Talk" column article by Shih Chun-yu (2457 0689 </F>
3768): "Clinton Reiterates that the United States Attaches 
Importance to Europe"] 
  [Text] Clinton Delivered a Speech at the French 
National Assembly 
  The commemorative activities solemnly conducted to mark the 
50th anniversary of the landing on the Normandy coast by the 
Allied Forces on 6 June a half-century ago is over. Taking 
advantage of participating in this activity, Clinton also 
visited several countries, including Italy, Britain, France, and 
so on, where he has made a series of speeches. When invited to 
address the French National Assembly at 1700, 7 June, his 
remarks on overall U.S. policy in Europe were followed with 
highest interest. This is Clinton's first visit to France since 
he took office as U.S. President. 
  He said emphatically, among other things, that "although 
Europe will be integrated, the United States will still 
strengthen its relationship with Europe. For this reason, the 
United States hopes to see an even more powerful Europe. A 
powerful Europe is the prerequisite for promoting this 
integration, so the United States will give positive support to 
it. Given the reduction of U.S. forces in Europe, the United 
States will still take the security in Europe very seriously." 
  In fact, there is nothing new in these remarks. The United 
States always pays serious attention to Europe. Even though 
there are signs that the goal of U.S. economic development has 
been "shifted from Europe to Asia" owing to the economic 
slowdown in Europe and the United States itself, yet this does 
not mean that it has ceased to attach importance to Europe. 
Now, Clinton sang the old tune at the French National Assembly 
again, which reflects that the relationship of allies between 
Europe and the United States has not come to an end. Instead, 
taking the 50th anniversary of the D-Day as a juncture, it will 
begin all over again from a new starting point. 
<H5>  Looking Forward to the Future in Europe </H5>
  Viewing the changes in Europe since the D-Day half a century 
ago, people have all sorts of feelings well up in their minds. 
However, it is more necessary for them to look into the future 
with regard to how Europe and the United States will maintain 
peace and development in Europe. 
  The landing on the Normandy coast in 1944 was the largest 
campaign in the European history. Paris was liberated in August 
that year. Seeing that not much could be done to save the 
situation, Hitler committed suicide and was burnt to death in 
May the next year, and then Nazi-Germany surrendered 
unconditionally. At this time, the two arch-criminals who 
started the war in Europe -- Mussolini (who was hanged in public 
with his corpse was lashed afterward) and Hitler had come to an 
ignominious end and had left their bad names that will stink 
through the ages. 
  After the end of World War II, Western Europe was in a state 
of serious devastation and numerous tasks remained to be 
undertaken. The U.S. Marshall aid plan made considerable 
contributions to the rejuvenation in Europe. The Coal and Steel 
Union, which was the predecessor of the Common Market, was set 
up in Western Europe, and was the embryonic form of an economic 
integration. Under NATO's protection over the past 50 years, 
Europe has advanced from a community to a political union of 
today, and will ultimately move toward an integrated Europe. 
<H5>  It Is Difficult To Resolve the Yugoslav Issue </H5>
  After the end of the Cold War in which the East and the West 
confronted each other, Europe eventually headed for 
reconciliation. However, new problems have cropped up again, the 
most thorny one being the national dispute in the former 
Yugoslavia which has bedeviled the European countries, and 
which, so far, has shown no signs of a solution. This problem 
also exposed the insufficient strength in Europe and tested its 
inferior ability for coordination. Now there is another problem 
of sending U.S. troops to Bosnia, which has exposed U.S. 
intentions of establishing its own European defense beyond the 
pale of NATO, and has aroused inharmonious arguments between 
Europe and the United States. If the situation worsens, the two 
sides will lose their mutual trust. 
  The Balkan region is also in a state of unrest, as Greece 
and 
the Republic of Macedonia, a territory of the former Yugoslavia, 
are at odds with swords drawn and bows bent, and Albania and 
Italy are on bad terms over disputes about illegal emigrants. 
All this shows that Europe lacks strength to cope with their 
internal conflicts and difficulties. 
  In addition, people are greatly worried about how the large 
number of heavy nuclear warheads will be handled if the 
turbulent situation in Ukraine worsens. What is more, Europe 
has not pulled out of its economic recession at present, and the 
unemployment rate remains at 13 percent, with the total number 
of unemployed people (excluding those in Eastern European 
Russia) reaching 30 million. Against this background, although 
the United States and Europe can still be allies, yet they are 
confronted with more complicated political and economic problems 
than before. This is a new reality that the United States and 
Europe must face. 

