Language: <F P=105>Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by National People's Congress deputies Qu </F>
Geping, Lin Zongtang, and Yang Jike with domestic and foreign 
correspondents at the International Hotel in Beijing on 15 
March; from a "Special News Feature" on the Second Session of 
the Eighth NPC -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Moderator] How are you, ladies and gentlemen? At 
today's news conference we have invited...[rest of sentence 
edited out by source] 
  [Qu Geping, chairman of the National People's Congress (NPC) 
Environmental Protection Committee (EPC]) Today, we are very 
glad to have this opportunity to meet you and exchange views 
with you on China's environmental protection. I have already 
given you my written statement. Now my two colleagues and I are 
ready to answer your questions. 
  [Dong Zhixiang] I am KEJI RIBAO [SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
DAILY] reporter Dong Zhixiang, what plans does the EPC have for 
China's future environmental protection? What will China's 
environment be like in the future? Thank you. 
  [Qu] China faces many environmental issues today and the 
situation is quite severe. So we must take a series of 
effective measures to deal with problems in this area or it is 
unlikely China will continue to have sustained, rapid, and 
healthy economic growth in the future, especially next century. 
To protect the environment, we must take measures in several 
major respects. First of all, the NPC must intensify 
legislation and come up with the laws that are urgently needed 
today. During our present term of office, the NPC will revise 
or draw up 14 laws for control of environmental pollution and 
protecting natural resources. But it is important that these 
laws are enforced after they have been enacted. We have to urge 
the government to come up with effective measures for carrying 
out strict supervision of the environment according to law. 
Third [as received], as far as protecting the environment and 
natural resources are concerned, the state must appropriately 
increase spending. Generally, China's environmental condition 
is severe. But we hope that, after taking necessary measures, 
we will have an environment favorable for our natural resources 
as well as for sustained economic development. 
  [Unidentified correspondent in English, fading into Mandarin 
translation] I am from ASSOCIATED PRESS [AP]. Local Chinese 
governments at various levels have now given greater priority to 
economic development than to environmental protection. How 
serious is the problem? Moreover, the fines [fa kuan] imposed 
on the polluters are quite low. What measures have do you have 
planned to correct the situation? 
  [Qu] We have conducted many years of investigation and study 
on the economic losses which environmental pollution has causes 
in China. The approximate annual economic losses caused by 
pollution amount to 100 billion [yi qian yi] yuan. As far as 
your second question is concerned, the fees levied for pollution 
discharge [pai wu shou fei] are indeed too low. Some 
enterprises would rather pay the fees than take measures to 
control pollution. We have taken note of this problem. We are 
ready to raise the rates to force these enterprises to take 
remedial measures. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] I am a reporter with the Hong 
Kong SING PAO DAILY NEWS, I have something to ask related to a 
question from the AP correspondent. You said you plan to raise 
pollution discharge fees, can you tell us something about the 
collection of the fee? How big will the increase be? When 
(?will the increase become effective) and [words indistinct] 
fines? 
  [Qu] The total figure of pollution discharge fees we collect 
each year is less than 3 billion yuan, or a little bit more than 
0.1 percent of our gross industrial output. This is a very 
small figure. Therefore, the State Environmental Protection 
Bureau raised the rates by one-third last year. But it seems 
the new rates, which are being implemented, are still too low. 
So they will be raised further. Another measure adopted last 
year was the establishment of higher standards, by nearly 50 
percent, for pollution discharge by all newly-built factories. 
So the standards for pollution discharge are much higher now. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] I am a China Central Television 
reporter, and I have a question for Chairman [as heard] Yang 
[EPC Vice Chairman Yang Jike]. You have been engaged in making 
economic laws for many years. The way certain impoverished 
areas have chosen to develop their economies has had a big 
impact on the ecology, can you tell us whether legislation can 
be passed to control these areas? Do you have such a plan? 
Thank you. 
  [Yang] The NPC plans to establish a legislative system 
compatible with (?sustainable) development by the end of this 
century, or a little later. This means that (?sustainable) 
development should be incorporated with our legislative system. 
Our work will include improving the Environmental Protection 
and Resources Protection Laws; speeding up economic legislation; 
and applying the (?sustainable) development principles to 
legislative affairs concerning development, population, 
production, and social security. China is a sprawling country. 
Different regions have different characteristics. And so local 
authorities should also have their own laws about the 
environment. So we hope that, around 2000, local authorities 
will have improved their legislative affairs relevant to 
(?sustainable) development. We hope our laws can converge with 
similar international laws. We will also adopt as many as 
possible legal provisions that have proven to be effective in 
other countries. Of course, China has its own specific 
situation. Since China has a large population, our population- 
related legislation may be different from that of developed 
countries. Except for this, we will do as much as we can to 
adopt the good experiences of countries in the West and learn 
from them. Finally, we will also propagate the ideas and 
information of (?sustainable) development, and train the 
personnel we need to make laws in this area. 
  [Correspondent, in Mandarin] I am a Hong Kong Wireless 
Television reporter. You mentioned that China has sustained 
economic losses amounting to 100 billion yuan annually [from 
environmental pollution]. How did you come up with this figure? 
My second question is: In recent years, the Chinese Government 
has planned to develop its nuclear power industry and has built 
some nuclear power stations, especially in southern Chinese 
provinces, such as Guangdong. These nuclear power stations are 
potentially dangerous with respect to their nuclear materials 
and wastes, which have to be properly treated, and accidents 
that might occur. Is there a contradiction between 
environmental protection and the development of nuclear power? 
As a state organ in charge of environmental protection, what is 
your comment on the policy of developing nuclear power? 
  [Qu] Your first question is about how the pollution-caused 
losses are calculated. It is a figure which experts have come 
up with through extensive investigation and study. The losses 
include those of material resources and the damage caused to the 
ecology, as well as the calculable harmful effects on physical 
health. This is a very complex issue. I can only give you a 
general picture. As for your second question about nuclear 
power development, it should be answered by [EPC Vice Chairman] 
Lin Zongtang, he is an expert in this area, but he asked me to 
comment on it briefly. China has only two nuclear power 
stations -- the Dayawan and Qinshan Nuclear Power Stations. We 
also plan to build more nuclear power stations in Guangdong and 
energy-deficient areas along the coast. Compared with 
traditional power plants that generate electricity by burning 
coal or oil, nuclear power stations should be considered a 
source of clear energy. The key requirement is that these 
stations must have safety measures. So when the nuclear power 
stations were built, China attached top priority to their 
quality and safety. The two nuclear power stations are very 
safe. They have the highest safety coefficient in the world. 
As as long as we strengthen management, nuclear power stations 
will not endanger the environment. The two nuclear power 
stations are now operating very well. As for the problem of 
treating nuclear wastes, this is a global problem. But this is 
not a big problem for China. Why? We have only two nuclear 
power stations. In addition, China has very large, very 
efficient, and very safe vaults [ku] for the storage of nuclear 
wastes. So the treatment of nuclear wastes is not a problem as 
far as China is concerned. 
  [Lin Zongtang] We have very good storage facilities in the 
Gobi Desert [laughing heartily]. 
  [Qu] So, countrymen in Hong Kong do not have to worry about 
this problem at all. 
  [Yang Jike] Just recently I invited six professors -- 
prestigious experts in the fields of energy and environment -- 
from Sweden, the United States, Britain, Italy, and Canada to 
inspect the Dayawan Nuclear Power Station. We found that this 
station has the world's best system for ensuring security. This 
system can continuously monitor the way nuclear wastes are 
treated and how the hardware installed in the station can cope 
with nuclear accidents. Moreover, all the personnel in the 
station must receive rotational training every year to make sure 
they can deal with any accident. So we were very impressed. All 
the professors were very satisfied. So countrymen in Hong Kong 
can feel at ease. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] I am a FANGZHI RIBAO [TEXTILE 
DAILY] reporter, I want to ask Vice Chairman Lin Zongtang this 
question. During last year's (?campaign) for enforcing the law 
for environmental protection, some rhinoceros horns and bears' 
gallbladders were found. How were these findings handled. What 
is the result of the handling? 
  [Lin] China attaches very great importance to protecting 
wildlife and enforcing the Wildlife Protection Law. Last year, 
China joined the Convention for Protecting Endangered Wildlife 
and Plant Species. We are earnestly implementing this 
convention which we joined in 1980 [as heard]. Last year, the 
State Council formally issued a circular to strictly ban the 
illegal hunting and trading of tigers, rhinoceros, and other 
wildlife. For those rhinoceros horns already imported through 
normal channels, they are all sealed up and properly kept, 
pending handling. As for bears' bile, it is a very important 
ingredient in Chinese medicine and it plays a significant role 
in ensuring people's health. In the past, a bear had to be 
killed for its bile, which would later be processed into 
medicine. Now we keep the bear alive and draw the bile from the 
bear. So there is no need to kill the bear when obtaining its 
bile for medicinal purpose in such a manner is available. By 
raising one bear, we can prevent the slaughtering of 220 bears. 
However, we are still studying whether or not we can use 
another substance to replace bears' gallbladders. 
  [Qu] China has large numbers of bears. When the number of 
bears becomes too high [guo duo], they have to be (?thinned). I 
think this is a principle commonly followed by the International 
Fund for Wildlife Protection and other similar organizations. 
  [Moderator] Now the news conference has ended. Thank you 
all. 

