BFN 

<F P=106> [By JORDAN TIMES staff reporter P.V. Vivekanand] </F>
  [Text] Amman--Jordan's senior delegate to negotiations with 
Israel on water said on Wednesday [30 March] the Kingdom was not 
party to an Israel proposal to desalinate water from the 
Mediterranean Sea to meet the water needs of both countries in 
the 21st century. 
  Mundhir Haddadin, head of the Jordanian delegation to the 
multilateral working group on water, said the Kingdom had its 
own concept of integrated solutions to water shortages and had 
repeatedly turned down Israeli overtures to include it in the 
so-called "new Jordan river" project and other proposals. 
  Dr. Haddadin also said he was not aware of any involvement 
by 
any Jordanian company in the project, which was reported in the 
Israeli press on Monday. 
  "It is purely a unilateral project proposed by a group of 
academics financed by a German company," Dr. Haddadin told the 
JORDAN TIMES. "Jordan has nothing to do with it. We have 
repeatedly rejected Israeli proposals that we take part in it." 
  The purported plan was among four proposals submitted to 
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin last week in light of the 
28-month-old Arab-Israeli peace talks, according to a report by 
the Associated Press. 
  The agency quoted Israeli sources and the YEDI'OT AHARANOT 
as 
saying that the proposal was made by the Israeli Military 
Industries and includes the construction of a "new, artificial 
Jordan river." 
  It would involve laying a 120-kilometre pipeline from the 
Mediterranean to a desalination plant in the Bet She'an area in 
northern Israel. The water would flow down a 320-metre decline 
and provide hydroelectric power for desalination. The clean 
water would then be piped to a long narrow dam stradd;ing the 
Jordanian-Israeli border and the new "Jordan river," offering 
water to both sides. 
  According to the report, the plan envisages that about a 
billion cubic metres of water would flow through the dam 
annually. The cost of the project was estimated at $3 billion, 
to be mostly financed by German partners, the report said. 
  Israel experts have also cast doubts on the feasibility of 
the project, which was reported as "brand new." 
  "It is not a new idea, it was first floated in 1870," said 
Dr. Haddadin, adding that he himself had presented the Jordanian 
viewpoint on the project when it was dusted off and presented 
again during recent water negotiations with Israel. 
  "There is no Jordanian involvement in the project and I am 
not aware of any Jordanian companies getting involved in it 
either, "Dr. Haddadin said. 
  Dr. Haddadin, a former head of the Jordan Valley Authority 
(JVA) and one of Jordan's top experts on water resources in the 
Middle East region, said Jordan's concept of solution to the 
water shortages in the region involved the construction of a 
pipeline canal from the Red Sea from al-'Aqabah to the Dead Sea. 
This project, estimated to cost around $1.5 billion, will raise 
the Dead Sea to its historic level and protect the ecological 
features of the area, he said. 
  Dr. Haddadin has said that protecting the ecological 
features 
of the Dead Sea was of benefit to all parties around it, 
including the Palestinians and Israelis as well as Jordan, and 
that the project could not go ahead without approval by all of 
the parties concerned. 
  The project could bring in an annual average of 1,300 
million 
metres of Red Sea water to the Dead Sea, will be a source of 
supply to desalination plants, can develop agriculture in the 
mostly arid southern regions of Jordan and also generate power, 
Dr. Haddadin said. 
  Israel informed a recent Beijing meeting of the multilateral 
working group on water that it was abandoning a similar project 
to bring Mediterranean water to the Dead Sea, Dr. Haddadin said. 
  According to reports from Israel, the government now 
considered the Med-Dead canal project as prohibitive in terms of 
cost. When the project was first proposed in the early 80s, it 
was estimated to cost $3 billion. 
  The working group, chaired by Austria, has asked the World 
Bank to assess the pros and cons of the Jordanian Red-Sea 
project, Dr. Haddadin said. 

