BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, May 27 KYODO -- International Trade and 
Industry Minister Eijiro Hata on Friday voiced concern over a 
possible revival of Japan-U.S. wrangling over "numerical trade 
targets." Failure to define numerical targets in the latest 
bilateral talks has left "a source of contention" for upcoming 
sectoral trade negotiations, Hata told a news conference. 
  Japan and the United States agreed Tuesday to restart the 
stalled trade "framework" talks in the three priority fields. In 
the accord, Washington pledged not to seek numerical targets for 
"objective criteria" in measuring the openness of Japan's 
markets. But both parties avoided a definition of numerical 
targets, a chief factor that has divided them since February, 
apparently placing more emphasis on getting the deadlocked talks 
moving again. 
  Hata said what to use or not to use for objective criteria 
will be decided in the upcoming trade talks on a 
sector-by-sector basis. Criteria to be set should not be close 
to the idea of numerical targets, Hata added. 
  Immediately after Tuesday's accord to reopen the bilateral 
trade talks, a senior Japanese trade ministry official said he 
is convinced that a major hurdle for establishing a new trade 
framework between Japan and the U.S. has been cleared with 
Washington's commitment not to seek numerical targets. But U.S. 
Trade Representative Mickey Kantor said Washington's trade 
stance regarding Japan remains unchanged, noting it will pursue 
"result-oriented" accords on sectoral talks. 
  Turning to utility charges, the trade minister indicated 
conditional support for extending the current discounted rates 
beyond the expiration of September 30. Charges on gas and 
electricity were cut last fall as part of efforts to pass on to 
consumers windfall profits from the yen's sharp appreciation 
against the dollar. The discount should be taken as a temporary 
measure and whether or not to keep the current rates is 
basically a matter for the private sector, Hata said. But the 
discount could remain in place depending on exchange rates and 
crude oil prices, Hata said. 
  Hata welcomed the latest U.S. decision to extend China's 
most- favored-nation trade status, saying China's economy will 
be "vitalized." 

