Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Victory of Revolution is Victory of Faith and Will" -- </F>
KCNA headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, January 28 (KCNA) -- The victory of 
revolution is the victory of faith and will, declares NODONG 
SINMUN in a by-lined article today. 
  It quotes the dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il as saying: 
  "The stand and resolution with which the leader shapes 
politics may lead the country and the nation to prosperity and 
development or to decay and ruin." 
  The article notes: 
  What is of decisive significance in steadfastly defending 
the 
cause of socialism and carrying it to completion is the 
unshakable faith and will of the leader who guides the 
revolution in the van. 
  We cannot think of uninterrupted, great advance in our 
revolution and construction apart from the dear leader Comrade 
Kim Chong-il who is leading our party, people and revolutionary 
Armed Forces to victory with iron will and faith. 
  The firmness and steadfastness of his faith and will are 
fully demonstrated in that he meets and foils whatever challenge 
of the enemy, undaunted by it in the slightest. 
  No matter what offensive the imperialists launched in all 
fields of politics, military, economy and diplomacy, rendering 
the situation complicated, he has smashed it with bold offensive 
spirit and superb operation. 
  His firm grit and will was invariable in the hard time last 
year when a touch-and-go situation was created due to the 
enemy's reckless nuclear clamor and the "Team Spirit" joint 
military maneuvers. The decisive self-defensive measure in 
putting the whole country, the entire people and all the Army in 
a semi-war state and the militant slogan calling for launching a 
great revolutionary offensive in the same spirit displayed in 
the rigorous Fatherland Liberation War -- this was our answer to 
the enemy who was trying to crush the sovereignty of the nation 
with the sword of aggression. 
  This indomitable will of our party encouraged our people to 
display unyielding heroism. 
  The firmness of Comrade Kim Chong-il's faith and will is 
also 
manifested in that once he makes a decision and sets a target he 
fulfills them without fail in any circumstances. 
  When difficulties and obstacles lie ahead, he finds a 
solution and takes the lead in making a breakthrough. He also 
inspires the soldiers with the conviction of sure victory and 
optimism, cultivates their courage as revolutionaries and 
encourages them to perform heroic feats. And once a thing is 
started, he daringly carries it to completion, although many new 
political matters crop up. Such revolutionary spirit, 
revolutionary leadership and stubbornness are the traits of his 
leadership. As he has such a strong will, all his plans and 
instructions bear fine fruits. 
  Our party has unfolded a grand plan to further increase our 
economic might and remarkably improve the people's living in the 
near future and is now dynamically stepping up the grand 
socialist march to carry it into practice. Led by the great 
party our people will surely fulfill the heavy revolutionary 
tasks successfully and secure a new base for reaching a higher 
level in socialist construction. 
  The steadfastness of Comrade Kim Chong-il's faith and will 
finds a clear expression also in that he always firmly maintains 
the principles of revolution and the stand of the working class 
in any circumstances. 
  It is the unshakable stand of the dear leader that one must 
not depart from the principle, although flexible tactics and 
methods may be adopted depending on the given circumstances, and 
one must not make any concession in the fundamental interests of 
the revolution, no matter which way the wind may blow and 
whatever thorny road one may traverse. 
  The resoluteness of our party in keeping to the principle of 
the revolution to the end is demonstrated more clearly when the 
ruling parties in socialist countries have degenerated and 
socialist system has collapsed. When others vociferated about 
"political pluralism" and "multi-party system", it has cemented 
the singlehearted unity of the whole society and tirelessly 
increased its leading function in every way. When others were 
introducing corrupt and degenerated bourgeois ideology and 
culture under the motto "liberalisation of thought", it has made 
the whole society pervade with the sound way of life of the 
working class and communist traits. This eloquently shows the 
unshakable principled stand of our party. 
  The dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il is leading the party, 
the people and the revolutionary Armed Forces with his iron 
faith and will because he is unfailingly loyal and devoted to 
the revolutionary cause of chuche started by the great leader. 
  Comrade Kim Chong-il has been able to lead the cause of 
socialism with steadfast faith and will because he firmly 
believed in the inexhaustible strength of the Korean people. 
  As long as there is the strong bond between the leader and 
the people, all the victories of the Korean revolution will in 
the future, too, shine as victories of revolutionary faith and 
indomitable will. 

