BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Alvin Hazizaj: "Change in the Concept of </F>
Murder"] 
  [Text] The Justice Ministry has just given internal 
approval in principle to the draft of the new penal code. This 
draft code has been prepared by a group of lawyers known as the 
Codification Directorate. The completion of the draft civil 
code has been followed by the draft penal code, which will soon 
go to the government for approval and subsequently to the 
Albanian parliament. Before this draft code goes to the 
government, it has been sent for discussion, by order of 
Minister Cela, to the Higher Appeal Court, the 
procurator-general, the Public Order Ministry, and the Tirana 
Law Faculty. The aim is to sound out the views of specialists 
in the field and to apply as closely as possible the Law on 
Basic Human Rights and Freedoms and all the international acts 
that Albania has signed. 
  This draft code has gone to pains to preserve the categories 
of the existing Penal Code, which came into effect in 1977 and 
led to serious consequences in the unfair conviction of a huge 
number of Albanians. However, the group preparing it has tried 
to change some things. For instance, the old code was divided 
into chapters, but now we have headings. The new idea of 
sections has also been added. The old code had 250 articles in 
all, whereas the new one has been able to provide for a series 
of crimes that were unknown under the old order. 
  The draft penal code is divided into two parts, one general 
and one particular. The general part describes the basic 
principles of Albanian penal justice, in which one is struck by 
the inclusion of the punishments of iife imprisonment and fines. 
This latter is a new notion in criminal justice, as far as 
crimes are concerned. The code provides for fines of between 
5,000 and 1 million leks for crimes and between 1,000 and 
100,000 leks for misdemeanors. The general part includes 73 
articles assembled under eight headings, compared to the 42 
articles of the existing code. 
  As for the part on the particulars of the code, it must be 
said that the group has been at great pains to include all the 
different varieties of crime that have occurred in recent years 
and which are expected to occur in the future. 
  This part begins with the heading on crimes against human 
life and concludes with crimes affecting free elections and the 
democratic electoral system. The 254 articles are assembled 
under 10 headings, with many special sections. Under the first 
heading of this part, which deals with crimes against human 
life, one is struck by the new division of murder into 
premeditated murder and wilful murder. This is a new notion 
that was not present in the previous code, but the new code does 
not explain the distinction between these two. 
  In another section, the age of 14 remains the limit for the 
notion of acts of indecency. Despite the changes that have 
taken place in Albania, and are still occurring, not all of them 
have found a place in this draft code. For instance, 
homosexuality continues to be prosecuted as an act of indecency, 
at a time when many European states allow homosexuals to marry 
freely. There are special articles forbidding pornography, 
including the creation of conditions for pornography and the 
import, publication, and sale of pornographic material. 
  A new section has been opened to cover crimes against 
freedom 
of religion. We now find three articles defending what the 1976 
Constitution and other laws forbade. There are also new kinds 
of crime and special sections in the area of bankruptcy and 
crimes against the environment. 
  What is most striking in this draft code is the special 
protection given to state personalities. Thus Heading 8 covers 
"crimes aimed against the authority of the state." The chairmen 
of the parliament and government and the president himself are 
named as the highest authorities. Thus Articles 169-170 state 
that "Insulting the president of the Republic is punishable by 
two years' imprisonment or a fine, and an insult in public by 
between six months' and three years' imprisonment. Slander 
against the president is punishable by three to five years' 
inprisonment. There is thus special protection for the figure 
of the head of state. [no concluding quotation marks as 
published] 
  Thus it is hoped that the new draft penal code, completed on 
10 March 1994, will soon pass to the government for approval and 
thence to the parliament. There only remains the final word 
from the specialists of the institutions to whom the draft has 
been passed. Its approval as soon as possible is of pressing 
urgency. 

