Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By RENMIN RIBAO reporter Pan Gang (3382 1511) and XINHUA </F>
reporter He Jingsong (6320 0513 2646)] 
  [Text] Beijing, 28 Jan (XINHUA) -- Minister of Internal 
Trade Zhang Haoruo pointed out at a national conference on the 
work of commerce, grain, and supply and marketing cooperatives 
today: Departments in charge of commodity circulation at all 
levels should give full play to their role as the main channel 
of circulation under the conditions of the socialist market 
economy; strengthen macroeconomic regulation and control in the 
circulation of commodities; make efforts to establish a system 
of stockpiling important commodities and risk-regulating funds; 
institute and improve a system of market monitoring and control; 
and maintain a balance between the demand and supply of 
important commodities, such as grain, cotton, oil, pork, sugar, 
and chemical fertilizers, so as to keep the markets stable. 
  Zhang Haoruo stressed: Maintaining a balance between the 
total demand and total supply of important commodities is a 
prerequisite for stabilizing commodity markets. Now the state 
has stockpiled certain quantities of grain, cotton, oil, pork, 
sugar, pesticides, steel products, copper, aluminum, oil 
products, and other commodities, but most commodity stockpiling 
systems are not sound enough. From now on, vigorous efforts 
should be made to establish the system of stockpiling and 
managing commodities and to promote the enactment of a law in 
this regard so as to manage stockpiled commodities according to 
law. At the same time, we should increase the quantities of 
stockpiled commodities; we should purchase commodities at the 
right moment to expand the commodities kept in stock and to 
enable these commodities to play a significant role in 
regulating markets. He emphasized: The right to use state- 
stockpiled commodities is in the hands of the central 
authorities; without the approval of the State Council, no 
locality or department can presumptuously use such stockpiled 
commodities. To stabilize markets across the country, it is 
necessary to give full play to the initiative of both the 
central and local authorities. Efforts should be made to 
establish a local commodity stockpiling system as soon as 
possible so as to stabilize regional markets. Commodity 
circulation departments in various localities should actively 
brief their local governments on the situation and be determined 
to allocate some funds for stockpiling commodities; they should 
determine the categories of commodities suitable for local 
stockpiling and the rational amount of each commodity to be 
stockpiled; local authorities should coordinate with the central 
authorities in commodity stockpiling to work together to 
stablize markets. To prevent excessive fluctuation in market 
prices, vigorous efforts should be made to set up market risk 
funds and to protect the interests of farmers and consumers. In 
some localities, funds have been established to regulate the 
prices of vegetables and pork which should be retained to 
stabilize market prices. Local and central risk funds should be 
put to use together to promote market stability. Meanwhile, 
various localities should establish a highly efficient market 
monitoring and control system, pay attention to market 
forecasting, and ensure the rapid collection and distribution of 
information. They should strengthen market analysis and 
forecasting and have a good grasp of market prices so that they 
can take timely measures to stabilize the markets. 
  Zhang Haoruo pointed out: State-owned and cooperative stores 
should play the role of a major channel for competition. They 
should take the initiative in entering and participating in the 
market. They must control the sources of commodities that are 
sufficient to stabilize markets. Grain departments should grasp 
the purchasing links and retain the initiative to arrange market 
supplies. It is necessary to make the production, supply, and 
marketing of pork, vegetables, and other commodities a 
coordinated process. Vigorous efforts should be made to set up 
various wholesale markets. Big and medium-sized cities should 
experiment on setting up wholesale markets which practice 
standardized management and in which trading is conducted with 
modern methods, in order to give full play to the advantages of 
state-owned and cooperative stores as a group and to conduct 
appropriate-scale trading. Departments in charge of state-owned 
and cooperative stores should resolutely implement macroeconomic 
regulation and control measures adopted by the state to 
stabilize markets and to ensure the supply of commodities 
closely related to people's livelihood. 

