CSO 

<F P=106> [Francois Lenglet article including interview with European </F>
Affairs Minister Alain Lamassoure; place and date not given: 
"The End of Europe a la Francaise"--first paragraph is 
L'EXPANSION introduction] 
  [Text] With monetary union on the back burner, the failure 
of a common foreign policy, and Jacques Delors' upcoming 
departure, the influence of French ideas is flagging in Europe. 
  His face surly and drawn, a senior French official looks 
back 
over his years with Jacques Delors in Brussels: in the 
beginning, the exaltation of the small community of Eurocrats 
that had managed to mesmerize an entire continent with the "1993 
objective"; the apotheosis of Maastricht; the brutal depression 
that followed Denmark's rejection; and now, an uncustomary, 
disorienting calm--nothingness. "It is the end of an era," he 
says to conclude his retrospective, "and perhaps the end of a 
dream." The upcoming departure of Jacques Delors--the 12 heads 
of state will designate his successor in June--sounds the death 
knell for a certain kind of Europe, the one envisaged by Jean 
Monnet and the other French pioneers around him who sought to 
meld the nations of the free world into a sovereign, federal 
whole. 
  These pioneers had a proclaimed motive, preventing the 
outbreak of a third world war on the continent, and a more 
subtle but equally essential one: providing France with a sphere 
of political influence that would make it the interlocutor of 
the two rival superpowers of the era. Those two objectives could 
be attained only with a high degree of economic and political 
integration. Today, however, everything conspires to push the 
European Union towards a looser, more uncertain form of 
association in which France will count for what it really is, a 
"small-to-medium-sized power" henceforth unable to influence the 
course of the continent now taking shape, the Europe of nations. 
  From the economic standpoint, Jacques Delors' departure 
coincides with the total victory of market-based policies over 
economic and monetary integration. "Europe today is shaped more 
by competition law and administrative regulations than by the 
political will of the member states," says Elie Cohen, research 
director at CNRS [National Center for Scientific Research] and 
an informed observer of European integration. What is working 
are industrial standards, the free circulation of goods and 
capital, and the control of business mergers. What is not 
working is concerted action to jump-start the European economy 
and decrease unemployment, as illustrated by the pitiful 
"European growth initiative," for which only a few billion ECU's 
[European currency units] were released. Another failure is 
industrial policy, once the core of "French-style Europe," the 
stillborn, prematurely obsolescent D2 MAC standard for high 
definition television being only the latest in a long series of 
defeats. If there were any vague desires subsisting in this 
area, the Maastricht Treaty put paid to them: industrial policy 
may in no case justify "any measure which may cause distortions 
in competition," according to Article XIII. One could not be 
clearer. Market mechanisms and market players must be allowed to 
operate. 
  As for monetary union, which was supposed to result in a 
sharing of power, one need only observe the cautious Bank of 
France to see that its vaunted independence is a myth. It does 
no more than translate the decisions of the Bundesbank into 
French and is incapable of setting French real interest rates at 
the German level (approximately 4 points in Paris compared to 2 
in Frankfurt). Not only is integration going nowhere, but the 
French authorities' room to maneuver has also shrunk since the 
laborious ratification of Maastricht, as France now has the dual 
handicap of high interest rates and a weak currency. 
  Of all the common policies, creating the single market was 
actually the "easiest" and the most natural. First, it is the 
only existing basis for agreement among the Twelve; beyond the 
market, the various conceptions of Europe differ increasingly 
and even clash, as do conceptions of economic and monetary 
policy. Second, eliminating borders was in step with the times. 
The Single Act never did any more than ride the wave of 
deregulation and trade liberalization that swept the 1980's. 
National sovereignty, which the member states feared would be 
encroached upon by Brussels, had in any case already been 
reduced by the internationalization of capital and goods flows. 
In the end, the single market has more of the marks of U.S.- and 
English-inspired liberalism than European federalism. 
  What is more serious for France is that Jacques Delors' 
great 
legacy has not in the least resolved the initial ambiguity of 
European unification. The French see the single market as the 
beginning of a process that will lead to a European currency, 
while the British and the Danes continue to consider it an end 
in itself. We are all still clinging to our positions. What 
about the Germans, who hold the real power? Skeptics will say 
that, at the least, Germany has used this ambiguity to compel 
its partners to peg their currencies to the mark so that it can 
maintain its own competitiveness in Europe, the market for most 
of its exports, and that it has done this without sharing any of 
its power to set interest rates, dazzling its neighbors with the 
glitter of the single currency each time they balked at the 
effort. 
  From the political standpoint, the very purpose of the 
project was radically altered by the fall of communism. 
Sheltered behind the comfortable Iron Curtain, yesterday's 
Community could unworriedly contemplate strengthening economic 
and political ties among its existing members while carefully 
controlling the influx of new ones. Today's Union, which no 
longer has a wall to lean on, needs to think first about 
expanding so that the many countries that have emerged from the 
former East bloc can coexist peacefully. While the goal of the 
Europe envisaged by its founding fathers was the sharing of 
power and the abolition of nations, today's Europe has a very 
different objective: to bring nations into an organized 
structure that will replace the old order. 
  Today's nations, especially the youngest ones, the ones to 
our east, are afraid--afraid of their unpredictable, 
mob-infested former master, Russia. The motivation of these 
latest applicants to the EU is essentially political. In April, 
Hungry applied for membership in order to solve its security 
problem, as did Poland: Budapest and Warsaw are knocking at the 
Union's door, not to lose themselves in the whole, but to 
preserve their existence. The former neutral countries (Austria, 
Sweden, and Finland) also warmed to the Union for political 
reasons, because neutrality no longer guarantees their security 
on a "monopolar" continent with no easily identifiable enemy. 
  France has lost much in its reluctant acceptance of this new 
Europe. If sharing of power does not occur--and it will become 
more and more difficult as the Union expands--each member 
country will find itself with the economic and political weight 
that history has given it. "This will not be a very good deal 
for France, whose political influence was artificially prolonged 
by the division of Europe," a source close to Delors says. 
  Still, there is no point in trying to halt the expansion, 
because doing so would drive a solid wedge between France and 
Germany, which is under constant political, economic, and 
immigration pressure from the east. These pressures have led 
Chancellor Kohl, who once favored greater integration over 
expansion, to issue numerous invitations to his eastern 
neighbors. "Opening up the European institutions is vital to 
Germany's interests," he said in February in Munich. "German 
unity and European unity are two sides of the same coin." In 
other words, Germany prefers a larger, stable Europe to a 
federal Europe with chaos at its eastern door, because this door 
just happens to be the German border. 
  These changes will be all the more painful for France since 
they will go hand in hand with a loss of control over European 
institutions. There is, of course, the end of the president's 
term of office (see box, p 98). But there are also the simple 
consequences of the admission of Sweden, Austria, Finland, and 
Norway approved in March. As of 1 January, the Union will be 
headed by an executive body of 21 commissioners (for 16 
countries) within which France's relative influence will be 
diminished. The same is true of the Council of Ministers, which 
will have proportionally fewer French ministers. It will no 
longer be possible to "create a majority" by agreeing with the 
Germans on the essential points in order to carry the undecided. 
As a consequence, it will be harder to achieved a victory like 
the one Paris obtained last 20 September when it rallied its 11 
partners to its position on the Uruguay Round. 
  French influence could be further diluted by the growing 
congestion of the European institutional and legal landscape. 
Alain Lamassoure, minister for European affairs, counts no fewer 
than 19 ways of enacting a European law: by unanimous vote of 
the Council, by the approval of a qualified majority, by vote 
with approval by Parliament, by joint decision.... The list of 
inventions owed to the fertile imagination of European jurists 
is long, especially since the Maastricht Treaty. Such a 
cumbersome system, in which it is no longer clear who makes the 
decisions or how they are taken, is becoming very difficult to 
understand--or to explain to voters. 
  Furthermore, additional politico-administrative bodies will 
be created to carry out the Union's new tasks under Maastricht. 
Because the heads of state refused to increase the Commission's 
powers, the 16 member states will handle some of these 
duties--those that come under foreign policy, for example--at 
the intergovernmental level. To that end, they will need at 
least a common secretariat with several dozen employees. A 
committee of permanent representatives of the foreign ministers 
will be instituted at the Corfu summit in June. This committee 
will join the ranks of the longstanding Committee of Permanent 
Representatives (COREPER) of the member states, the Schengen 
Committee (an intergovernmental structure for the common 
administration of borders), the Committee of Regions created by 
Maastricht, and all the other pre-existing committees. "The web 
is getting harder and harder to untangle," says Yves-Thibault de 
Silguy, Edouard Balladur's advisor for European affairs. Where 
the process of European integration was once guided by a small 
executive body with the support of a homogenous administrative 
apparatus, it will now be spread among a plethoric Commission 
and obscure intergovernmental structures whose shape varies with 
the subject. With this as the engine, how can the project be got 
to move forward? 
  To preserve the chances of an integrated Europe, 
institutional reform will be necessary. It was not attempted 
before Austria and the three Scandinavian countries joined, 
Elisabeth Guigou reminds us, because Maastricht had not yet been 
adopted and it would have reduced the chances for ratification. 
Instead, the treaty itself calls for the holding of an 
intergovernmental conference on the subject in 1996 to prepare 
the institutions for future membership increases. 
  The topics the conference will have to tackle are clear. 
First, there is the question of how to create a more "compact" 
executive body by reducing the number of commissioners in order 
to facilitate its decisions and break their ambiguous ties with 
their countries of origin (the current rule giving each country 
at least one commissioner will be abolished). In compensation, 
it will be necessary to strengthen the Parliament's role by 
changing the voting system for European elections. Electing 
Eurodeputies by district (as only the British do today) would 
probably be more to the point of European integration, since 
candidates would have to fight for their seats, which is 
currently the case neither for those at the head of the list, 
who are guaranteed election, or those at the bottom, who are 
guaranteed defeat. 
  In order not to weaken the process of monetary integration, 
it will be necessary to create a sort of "antechamber" to hold 
off East European applicants a while longer. While this idea has 
been advanced frequently, in the past it has been a matter of 
increasing trade between the Union and countries to the east 
through "association agreements" or through the European 
Economic Area, which would enable its members to export freely 
within the Community. However, the eastern applicants' priority 
need is for a political antechamber, since their major concern 
is security. They want a defense treaty that will protect them 
from aggression. Is Europe ready for this? 
  These institutional and political reforms will mean 
tremendous work, and work in which France can still play an 
important role, since it will have the good fortune of presiding 
over the Union at the very time the preparations for the 
intergovernmental conference are to begin, in the first half of 
1995. However, to bring off this role and defend its vision of 
Europe, it will have to resist two temptations. The first is to 
turn a deaf ear to the requests of the East Europeans and to 
refuse to allow the Union to prepare to accommodate them 
rapidly. If the Russian threat were then to grow, the impromptu 
incorporation of the countries of Eastern Europe would place a 
tremendous strain on the Union's budget, because they would have 
to be provided with assistance. The cost would be so high (an 
estimated 330 billion francs a year) that it could lastingly 
destabilize the Twelve--or the Sixteen. 
  The second temptation is for France to do as it has 
sometimes 
done and adopt the Gaullist attitude of wanting both a powerful 
Europe and powerless institutions. A German negotiator remembers 
having seen France and Great Britain make common cause in order 
to limit the Commission's prerogatives during the drafting of 
the Maastricht treaty. Can we complain about the slow pace of 
integration and at the same time refuse to transfer the 
sovereignty that it supposes? Probably not. To breathe new life 
into France's vision of Europe, France will have to become more 
European. 
<H5>  [Box, pp 94-95] </H5>
<H5>  Our Influence Will Be Exerted Differently </H5>
  [L'EXPANSION] Isn't France's influence over a larger Europe 
condemned to decline, especially once Jacques Delors leaves 
Brussels? 
  [Lamassoure] Of course it will never again be what was in 
the 
days of the founding fathers, when France exercised de facto 
leadership because it was dealing with a divided Germany, a weak 
Italy, and the three little Benelux countries. Our influence 
will be exerted differently now. We will have to build 
majorities around our positions, exactly as we did in the case 
of GATT. As for Jacques Delors, the French vision of Europe 
predated him, and it will survive him. We should not 
overestimate the role of the Commission's president, even if 
Jacques Delors made a profound impact on it as the architect of 
the single market. 
  [L'EXPANSION] Isn't there a danger that expanding to include 
the countries of East Europe may slow economic and political 
integration, which is the heart of this "French vision" of 
Europe? 
  [Lamassoure] I do not think so, provided we manage to build 
a 
Europe made up of concentric circles that will allow the 
strongest economies to get on with integration while at the same 
time offering the other countries credible prospects. This is 
necessary, anyway, because we have entered a new century. The 
objective is no longer to construct an ideal, federal Europe 
around the Franco-German axis, but to achieve a "twice Twelve" 
Europe that will ensure our prosperity and the security of our 
eastern neighbors. 
  [L'EXPANSION] This cannot be done without changing the 
institutions. 
  [Lamassoure] Yes, there are at least two preconditions for 
successful expansion. The first is to manage to settle minority 
and border-related issues of these young democracies at the 
Paris Conference at the end of April 1994. The second is to lay 
the groundwork for the 1996 institutional reforms stipulated in 
the Maastricht Treaty so that we can clarify the respective 
roles of the Council of Ministers and the Commission and make 
them more democratically accountable by strengthening the power 
of the European Parliament and the national legislatures. 
<H5>  [Box, p 98] </H5>
<H5>  The Presidency Changes Hands </H5>
  Jacques Delors' successor at the helm of the Commission will 
be chosen during the European summit in Corfu early this June. 
There are three men in the running: the only declared candidate, 
Leon Brittan, who does not stand a chance because he is British; 
the favorite, the Netherlands' former prime minister, Ruud 
Lubbers, who does not want to declare his candidacy for fear of 
being rebuffed; and an outsider, Belgian Prime Minister Luc 
Dehaene, who would have a good chance if his departure for the 
Commission did not endanger the fragile political-linguistic 
equilibrium of the Belgian government. 
  Once designated, the president will, with the member states, 
put together the Commission that will take over on 1 January. 
Each country will then appoint its commissioner or commissioners 
and will negotiate their assignments. France, which has two 
posts, is aiming for the competition portfolio, but without much 
hope, given that no one is prepared to abandon it since the 
incumbent, Karel Van Miert, has done nothing untoward. It may 
make do with another big "ministry," external affairs (currently 
headed by Leon Brittan), and industry, which is less valuable 
because there is no real power attached to it. 
  However, from now on it will be necessary to compromise more 
with the other countries because, with the loss of President 
Delors and his cabinet, France will be losing the power of 
initiative and its control over the Commission's agenda. True, 
Jacques Delors has always maintained scrupulous neutrality on 
votes concerning matters of particular interest to France, such 
as Aerospatiale's takeover of De Havilland. The president is 
bound by impartiality during the consideration of the problems 
of "the country he knows best," to quote the phrase used in the 
Commission. However, repeated salvaging of the Common 
Agricultural Policy's and the Twelve's support for the French 
position on GATT were not unrelated to the nationality of the 
president and the patient, determined work of his collaborators. 
There is reason to fear that a Ruud Lubbers may not be as 
understanding of France's vital interests. 

