Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Lieutenant General Nie Li, newly elected NPC </F>
Standing Committee member and All-China Women's Federation vice 
president, by reporters Zhang Mingxin (1728 2494 2450) and Zhang 
Rongzhou (1728 2837 3166) in Beijing on 21 March] 
  [Text] Beijing, 21 March (ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE)--Lieutenant 
General Nie Li was elected to the Standing Committee of the 
National People's Congress today. 
  Long wishing to interview this general who has the highest 
military rank among all women of the country, we were overjoyed 
when we had a chance encounter with her at the Jingxi Hotel, 
where the NPC deputies are residing. 
  Nie Li was sent to study in Leningrad in her early years and 
specialized in automatic control. Since her return to the 
country, she has long been engaged in the scientific and 
technological national defense industry. Beginning in 1982, she 
worked as the vice chairman of the Science and Technology 
Commission and the vice minister of the Commission of Science, 
Technology, and Industry for National Defense. Although she was 
relieved of her office last September, she is, as a Standing 
Committee member of the China Association for Science and 
Technology, still concerned with the country's scientific and 
technological development. 
  As General Nie is currently the vice chairman of the 
All-China Women's Federation, our interview naturally focused on 
"women." As soon as we took our seats, she started to talk 
enthusiastically about the Fourth International Women's 
Conference, which is scheduled to be held in Beijing next year. 
She said: 
  "Premier Li Peng said in his government work report: `The 
Fourth International Women's Conference is scheduled to open in 
Beijing in 1995, and the Chinese Government and people are now 
preparing for it.' This is the first time an Asian country and 
region has hosted the International Women's Conference. The 
previous three sessions were respectively held in Latin 
American, European, and African countries. We Chinese women can 
undoubtedly take pride in the United Nations' designation of 
Beijing to host this session of the Women's Conference." 
  General Nie had deeper thoughts. She continued: "This 
conference is the biggest international event ever hosted by 
China. It is estimated that over 30,000 guests will come to 
Beijing to attend this grand event. The theme of this 
conference is equality, development, and peace. Just as hosting 
the Olympics is not merely a matter of the sports circles, the 
significance of hosting the International Women's Conference 
goes well beyond the progressive women's movement. China's 
hosting of this century's last session of the International 
Women's Conference is a good opportunity for us to display to 
the world both the glamour of Chinese women and China's 
accomplishments in reform and opening up. We must firmly seize 
this favorable opportunity." 
  Nie Li briefed us: Apparent improvements have been 
registered over recent years in the employment, education, and 
social status of the Chinese women. The contingent of female 
cadres and female scientific research personnel is expanding. 
There are more and more female academicians, female professors, 
and female PhD holders (among whom 26 are female academicians, 
over 1,300 doctoral candidates, and over 174,000 senior 
professionals in various fields). Most provinces, prefectures, 
and counties have female leading cadres, while those provinces 
without provincial-level female cadres are being engaged in 
considering and selecting some. The number of female generals 
has also risen from five to 12. 
  We said: "You are the only female Lieutenant General in the 
Chinese Army." She replied with a smile: "With the enhancement 
of the qualities of the Chinese women, I believe there will be 
more female generals in the future." 
  Although she is primarily engaged in the work of the 
All-China Women's Federation, General Nie still follows the 
development of the scientific and technological cause with close 
interest. She attended and acted as vice chairman of the 
Appraisal Committee for the 1993 National Award-Conferring 
Ceremony on Scientific and Technological Progresses, which was 
held in the Great Hall of the People in Beijing last weekend. 
  As we shook hands at parting, General Nie continued to chat 
about women's issues. She said excitedly that the year 1995 is 
the 50th founding anniversary of the United Nations and the 20th 
anniversary of the International Year of Women initiated by the 
United Nations. The International Women's Conference, which is 
to be held in the same year, will be China's contribution to the 
United Nations. 

