BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Adam Struzik, speaker of the Senate of the </F>
Polish Republic, by correspondent Anna Fastnacht-Stupnicka; 
place and date not given] 
  [Text] [Fastnacht-Stupnicka] Before the latest 
parliamentary election, there was talk in the Polish Peasant 
Party [PSL] about dissolving the Senate. 
  [Struzik] To be more precise, the talk was about the need to 
transform the Senate into a parliamentary chamber representing 
local self-government structures. 
  [Fastnacht-Stupnicka] The debate on this subject has died 
down now. Do you view it differently these days? 
  [Struzik] The debate has not died down, and I have to answer 
this particular question at least once every few days. We 
recently organized a conference on local self-government for 
parish aldermen, city mayors, and PSL deputies. At the end of 
the conference, our deputies issued a resolution declaring that 
we would strive to transform the Senate into a chamber 
representing local self-government. The simplest way to do this 
is to introduce a provision into the electoral law enabling 
local self-government representatives to run for the Senate in 
parliamentary elections. It is not difficult to do, but we are 
currently preparing for a constitutional debate, which should 
take place soon, and to decide whether we want to have a 
two-chamber parliament. 
  [Fastnacht-Stupnicka] What position will you take in that 
debate? 
  [Struzik] I am in favor of the second chamber representing 
local self-government structures while retaining its present 
constitutional rights. I believe that, in this way, we could 
ensure that local self-government structures exert real 
influence on the legislative process in our country. 
  [Fastnacht-Stupnicka] Minister Miller said recently: "The 
reason we have our own senators in the Senate is to enable them 
to weaken that body from within." Have you yourself seen any 
evidence of such action on the part of senators representing the 
Democratic Left Alliance [SLD] group? 
  [Struzik] Not only have I not seen any such evidence, I 
actually witnessed the extreme indignation with which SLD 
senators reacted to Mr. Miller's utterance. Indeed, they chose 
to distance themselves from his words. I must say that the 37 
SLD senators are far from idle in the Senate. Their contribution 
to its work is most valuable and useful. 
  [Fastnacht-Stupnicka] The Senate kept out of the latest 
conflict between the Belweder and the government coalition. It 
could even be said that you took a position at some distance 
from the fray and only watched and waited for its outcome--with 
you yourself, as Senate speaker, acting as the principal 
observer. 
  [Struzik] This was to some extent the result of the fact 
that the political climate in the Senate is slightly more 
moderate than in the Sejm. As far as this particular case was 
concerned, I applied my own personal philosophy as a politician. 
  [Fastnacht-Stupnicka] Could you disclose its principles to 
us? 
  [Struzik] First, I am pragmatic as a politician; second, I 
believe in keeping calm and maintaining a commonsense attitude. 
The conflict in question erupted very rapidly, and, when the 
president stated that he would aim for dissolution of 
parliament, I declared unequivocally that, as Senate speaker, I 
could and would not acknowledge or approve any decisions by the 
president tantamount to a breach of the laws in force. 
  [Fastnacht-Stupnicka] Does this mean that you were 
prepared to ignore the president's decision and carry on with 
the Senate sessions? 
  [Struzik] It means precisely that. Unless, of course, I was 
interned. 
  [Fastnacht-Stupnicka] How do you assess the present 
political situation--the continuous arguments between the 
government coalition and the Belweder, and the balancing act 
performed by Prime Minister Pawlak between the coalition and the 
president? 
  [Struzik] Well, you see, politics is like a game of 
chess--indeed--like a major "simultaneous" game because it is 
often played on several boards at once. People should really 
appreciate this. For many decades, Polish society, 
including--and I trust you are not going to take offense 
here--journalistic circles, was trained to take a unanimous view 
over virtually everything. But then an unprecedented condition 
of democracy erupted among us, and everyone felt free to quarrel 
with everyone else. Now we are making slow progress toward a 
more normal state of affairs, and, in my opinion, we must learn 
to distinguish between real problems that we must solve and 
certain stratagems typical of the political game. 
  [Fastnacht-Stupnicka] Society take a very critical view of 
these games. Opinion polls among our readers demonstrate that 
people are not even remotely interested in the warfare going on 
"at the top"; worse, they are getting impatient with them. They 
are interested in their daily lives, and they do not wish to be 
pawns that are forever moved about on the political chessboard. 
  [Struzik] We must understand that, too. However, to do 
this, we must first change our mentality and abandon for good 
the accustomed way of picturing the people who run the country 
as "them," as opposed to "us." After all, we had a democratic 
election, and it is the representatives of the people who are 
running things now. Just as society is varied in its political 
views, so are its representatives varied in theirs. They must 
be able to articulate these views. The only thing we must 
ensure is that the end result of their disputes is constructive 
and not destructive. 
  [Fastnacht-Stupnicka] I believe that these disputes would 
not annoy us so much if we had a stable economic situation. As 
it is, however, all the time and energies of these 
representatives of the people are wasted on mutual struggles and 
skirmishes instead of being usefully engaged in sorting out the 
country's problems. That is something the voters can be 
justifiably resentful about. 
  [Struzik] I would not agree with this view because we have 
recorded regular economic growth over the first three months of 
this year, inflation is lower than expected, and our debts have 
been reduced through the assistance of the Paris Club and the 
London Club. We neither notice nor appreciate these changes 
properly. It is true that there are still areas in which 
political quarrels abound, but the people will be able to assess 
these properly when the next election comes along. Please note 
that those who expressed extreme views in the previous elections 
have been effectively prevented from running again. 
  [Fastnacht-Stupnicka] Mr. Speaker, are you not afraid that, 
once a compromise is reached between the president and the SLD, 
the position of the latter will be strengthened, and the PSL 
with Prime Minister Pawlak will be pushed aside and forced to 
take a back seat? 
  [Struzik] Oddly enough, it so happens that the position 
attributed to the PSL is either confrontation with the Belweder 
or collaboration with the president and opposition to the SLD. 
You yourself have been influenced by this way of viewing its 
position. 
  [Fastnacht-Stupnicka] Is it not a correct viewpoint? 
  [Struzik] No. Let us look at it from a different 
perspective: The PSL is a sovereign party of a typically center 
position, a party of common sense and the middle way. It has a 
chance of developing into a large and very strong party of a 
Christian democratic type. Therefore, we cannot assume a 
unanimous position with the SLD: It has different roots. I will 
not deny that a minor game of chess is being played here, too, 
but it is not a question of who can cheat the opponent better. 
Rather, it is a question of different outlooks. 
  [Fastnacht-Stupnicka] If I understand you correctly, your 
party is at the moment forced by circumstances to exist in 
coalition with the SLD, but you are doing everything in your 
power to stop the public from identifying you with the Alliance 
and, instead, treat you as a separate, independent force. 
  [Struzik] I would not draw such far-reaching conclusions. 
I would rather say that things are the other way round: The 
PSL can function just as well in a center-left as in a 
center-right configuration. My view is that it is not the PSL 
that is forced by circumstances to exist within a coalition. In 
the previous arrangement of power and political forces, we 
actually functioned in opposition. That was our situation for a 
short while under the Olszewski government. 
  [Fastnacht-Stupnicka] But now you are in power, and, if you 
want to keep it, you can only achieve this in coalition with the 
SLD. 
  [Struzik] I think that neither of our two political groups 
has any alternative. On this point I would agree with you: The 
coalition is, in a sense, dictated by necessity. We talk of 
building a democratic system in Poland, introducing changes in 
the economy, or promulgating a new constitution: But we can 
only do it if and when we have a definite majority in the Sejm 
and the Senate. 
  [Fastnacht-Stupnicka] Mr. Speaker, during a press conference 
in Opole, you said that Poland now faces a major opportunity, 
but we must want to take advantage of it. 
  [Struzik] If I did not feel and believe this very deeply, I 
could not be discharging my present function. I often play host 
to representatives of major Western firms, I receive ambassadors 
and heads of state, and they speak of the changes they see in 
Poland now, the perceptible progress, the building of a 
democratic system, the transformations in the economy. Apart 
from this, we are now, after many years, a free country again: 
We can realize our own destiny. 
  [Fastnacht-Stupnicka] Do you not get the impression that our 
public has been a bit too quick to forget that we have regained 
our freedom? 
  [Struzik] Yes, it has forgotten. Just as it has forgotten 
what democracy means. Some say we could do with an "iron fist" 
rule now. This is not true. Have they already forgotten the 
days when they could not say what they thought? They could only 
think it and curse the reality in silence. However, you cannot 
maintain that the past was all grim and black. Many of us 
gained our education in those times; we built roads, hospitals, 
and universities. We must judge reality fairly and objectively. 
  [Fastnacht-Stupnicka] What will the PSL promise its voters 
before the local self-government elections? 
  [Struzik] First of all that there is a good chance that the 
needs of their local communities will be met and that they will 
have exactly as much as they are prepared to do themselves. 
What can we promise them? Instead of promising them things, we 
will rather speak of administering Poland together, of the fact 
that it is perfectly possible to assume responsibility for their 
parishes--that is, their "little homelands"--and change them for 
the better. 
  [Fastnacht-Stupnicka] Thank you for talking to us. 

