BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS diplomatic correspondent Vladimir Solntsev] </F>
  [Text] Moscow June 10 TASS -- "Russia's idea to hold an 
international conference on the Korean peninsula's security and 
nuclear-free status are meeting with increasing understanding 
and support", Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Aleksandr Panov 
told ITAR- TASS. The diplomat met North Korean Ambassador to 
Russia Son Sung- pil on Wednesday [8 June], and Chinese 
Ambassador Wang Jinqing -- on Friday. 
  According to the deputy foreign minister, "nobody objects in 
principle" to an international conference, which should be 
attended, in Moscow's opinion, by representatives from North and 
South Korea, Russia, the United States, China, Japan, and also 
the United Nations and the International Atomic Energy Agency. 
  Panov noted that "the Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
is now calling much more persistently for such a conference". A 
sufficiently positive assessment of the Russian initiative was 
made by the North Korean Ambassador and somewhat earlier, in 
Kiev, by North Korean Foreign Minister Kim Yong-nam. "They said 
that they regard our idea with full understanding, because it 
pursues the purpose of achieving a peaceful settlement of the 
problem. They are prepared to study it carefully," Panov stated. 
  According to the deputy foreign minister, "some people 
believe that first it is necessary to impose sanctions on North 
Korea and then to hold such a conference. We believe that this 
is a strange approach. There will most probably be no 
conference if the sanctions are clamped down". 
  Panov recalled that the procedure proposed by Russia was 
determined by President Boris Yeltsin. He believes that "the 
conference should be held first in order to make full use of all 
the available political opportunities, including talks. After 
that North Korea could be warned about the sanctions and then 
subjected to them. However, we think that things will not go to 
such length." 
  "At present," the Russian diplomat said, "we regard the 
conference as the only alternative, because the bilateral talks 
between the United States and the Democratic People's Republic 
of Korea have landed in an impasse". He recalled that Moscow 
"did not object to the bilateral format, but since it has been 
exhausted, we must try to use the international version". "We 
proceed from the premise that it is necessary, first and 
foremost, to try this approach," the deputy foreign minister 
stressed. 

