BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by journalist Iku Aso in cooperation with the </F>
editorial staff of BUNGEI SHUNJU: "The DPRK Will React This 
Way: `Government Internal Document' Obtained"] 
  [Text] By the time this article is read by BUNGEI SHUNJU 
readers, the tension will probably be at its peak in the 
argument over whether or not the issue of economic sanctions 
against the DPRK should be referred to the UN Security Council 
[UNSC]. 
  In fact, since the latter days of the Hosokawa regime, the 
Japanese Government, at the instruction of the prime minister's 
office, has been conducting a full-scale, confidential 
simulation by assembling several related ministries and 
government agencies. 
  This has not been publicized at all. The scale of the task 
force is so huge that a staff member of the prime minister's 
office commented that it was "the first time since the end of 
World War II that so many ministries and agencies have been 
assembled." Strict control of information has prevented word of 
it leaking out. 
  The "top secret internal document" obtained by the writer of 
this article was compiled by a Japanese Government agency and is 
titled: "In Reference to the Effects of Economic and Military 
Sanctions Against the DPRK." 
  More than 30 pages long, the confidential paper was compiled 
last November, long before the prime minister's office issued 
its specific instructions. It is, however, extremely 
interesting because the paper outlines the present government 
simulation. The analysis was made into such wide fields as: 
economic sanctions, military sanctions, reactions of various 
domestic organizations and so on, revealing serious security 
problems facing Japan. Let me introduce the contents. 
1. Effects of and Reactions to Economic Sanctions 
  (1) Predictable Forms of Economic Sanctions 
  The following actions may be considered by the Security 
Council under the authority granted by Article 41 of the UN 
Charter, namely: "complete or partial interruption of economic 
relations and of rail, sea, air, postal, telegraphic, radio, and 
other means of communication." 
  First, suspension of Japan-DPRK trade. 
  Second, a ban on all traffic of people and the entry of DPRK 
ships into Japanese ports. 
  Third, severance of fund remittance routes to the DPRK. 
  Fourth, restrictions on communication by telegraph and 
telephone between Japan and the DPRK. 
  Among these, the first, second and third are considered 
likely to be effective as economic sanctions against the DPRK. 
So we will now look at the effects these measures could inflict 
on DPRK and the reactions to them by DPRK and Chosen Soren 
[North Korean Residents Association in Japan]. 
  (2) Effects of Economic Sanctions 
  a. If Japan-DPRK Trade is Banned Completely 
  Trade between Japan and the DPRK in 1992 registered 4.4 
billion yen in favor of the DPRK, 28.3 billion yen in exports to 
the DPRK and 32.7 billion yen in imports from the DPRK. In the 
last six years Japan-DPRK trade has been in favor of DPRK. It 
is an important means of obtaining valuable foreign exchange for 
the DPRK and a means of procuring goods and materials difficult 
to produce domestically. When measures are taken to ban 
Japan-DPRK trade it is predicted the following effects will be 
seen. 
  * Last year's figures reveal that the major commodities 
exported from Japan to the DPRK were textiles for spinning and 
textile products, about 27 percent of the total export, followed 
by machinery, which made up about 18 percent, electrical 
machinery and tools, which comprised about 11 percent, and 
transportation machinery and tools, which made up about 8 
percent. Of single items, various textiles, aerial pumps and 
compressors, automobiles, and agricultural chemicals were the 
leaders on the export list. 
  If the DPRK was unable to import such items, its export of 
clothing to Japan using Japanese textile materials would cease 
and the DPRK economy would come to a standstill through the lack 
of machinery, transportation equipment, and tools. Stopping the 
import of agricultural chemicals would greatly escalate damage 
to DPRK agriculture, which is already suffering from noxious 
insects. 
  On the other hand, there is almost no foodstuffs or fuel 
exported from Japan to the DPRK and if trade was suspended there 
would be little effect on the DPRK as far as these items are 
concerned. 
  However, when North Koreans living in Japan travel to the 
DPRK and DPRK ships visit Japanese ports, they take out of Japan 
a considerable quantity of foodstuffs and fuel which do not 
appear on the customs statistics. When ships and people are 
prohibited from moving between the two countries, it will have a 
certain effect. (See subsection b. in case travel is banned and 
DPRK ships are prevented from entering Japanese ports) 
  * In addition, trading firms affiliated with Chosen Soren 
have long been suspected of exporting COCOM prohibited 
contraband goods to the DPRK via third countries. If this is 
true, sanctions will not be effective unless exports to third 
countries by Chosen Soren affiliated trading companies are 
stopped. In addition, an increased watchdog system may be 
necessary to prevent smuggling and secret transactions by sea. 
  (Writer's Note 1) When imposing economic sanctions, the 
DPRK's oil supply situation is a major factor. The biggest 
concern of the Japanese, U.S., and ROK Governments in imposing 
economic sanctions is the threat of "military adventure" on the 
part of DPRK. In order to prevent it, stopping oil imports 
which provide the fuel for armored troops and military aircraft 
is an absolute condition. 
  U.S. and ROK military sources differ in their assessment of 
the DPRK oil stockpile, with some guessing that the DPRK has 
fortified underground oil storage dumps. Although no figures 
are available, Western diplomatic sources in Seoul share the 
view that the DPRK probably has "six month's worth of reserves 
in store." 
  Many experts therefore point out that DPRK troops are likely 
to invade when they are left with only three to four months' 
supply of oil, judging from its ability to wage war. 
  DPRK exports Nodong-1 or Scud-C ballistic missiles and 
other, 
small-caliber, firearms to Middle East countries including Iran 
and Syria in exchange for imports of oil from these countries. 
Using a sea blockade to prevent freighters carrying on this 
trade requires not only vigilance but powerful military 
strength. The term "sea blockade" is easily used in the press, 
but in Japan there is little recognition that this is the final 
stage of "economic sanctions," meaning a "state of war." 
  On top of this, there is the little known fact that 
violations and attempts to violate Cocom [Coordinating Committee 
for Multilateral Export Controls] embargoes on DPRK have 
frequently taken place in the past. For instance, in September 
1988 the vice chairman of the Korean Association of Commerce and 
Industry in Japan was prosecuted for deceiving the Japanese 
authorities into thinking he was sending clothing aboard S.S. 
Samjiyon leaving Niigata, while he was, in fact, loading more 
than 30 corrugated cardboard boxes filled with over a 1,000 NEC 
personal computers and integrated chips which were subject to 
Cocom embargo. The incident was seen as part of organized crime 
committed by Chosen Soren and others. 
  In March 1987, a false application was submitted to the 
Ministry of International Trade and Industry for a permit to 
export 700 computers to Indonesia. It was discovered that the 
export was intended for DPRK via Singapore, and the application 
was turned down. 
  It must be pointed out that Chosen Soren utilizes its 
subordinate organizations in methodically sending a large number 
of books on high-technology and that the subordinate Association 
of Science and Technology of (North) Koreans in Japan has, under 
its fold, members engaged in highly advanced technology and 
leaders who are specialists and have been trained by the 
Japanese authorities in nuclear physics. [end of note] 
  b. In Case Travel is Banned and the Entry of DPRK Ships Into 
Japanese Ports is Banned 
  Last year an aggregate total of about 6,600 North Koreans 
visited the DPRK from Japan and by August this year about 1,800 
had made the visit. About 4,300 Japanese visited DPRK last 
year. DPRK ships made a total of 510 entries to Japanese ports 
last year. 
  * When Korean residents in Japan affiliated with Chosen 
Soren visit DPRK they ship clothing, automobiles and so on to 
the DPRK as part of their handcarry luggage (treated as 
travelling goods) and goods sent under separate cover 
(automobiles and others recognized as daily use items by the 
sender) aboard DPRK ships that make port calls in Japan. 
  Aboard such ships last year, about 32 tons of rice (the 
maximum quantity a person can take out of Japan is 100 
kilograms), and a large quantity of sugar, soy sauce, cooking 
salt, automobiles, personal computers and so on (they are 
excluded from customs statistics) were sent to the DPRK as 
"takusohin" -- consignment (items sent care of the captain and 
others to be used individually by the consignee.) 
  Most such goods were either intended as gifts for various 
organizations in the DPRK or were sent to relatives of those 
visiting the country. If visits to the DPRK by North Koreans in 
Japan and the entry of DPRK ships into Japanese ports were 
banned, it would affect the work of various DPRK organizations 
and the daily lives of those who have repatriated from Japan 
(approximately 93,000 people). 
  * Among the Japanese who visited the DPRK last year, about 
600 were engaged in either trade negotiations or technical 
counselling. Japan ranks second after China as a DPRK foreign 
trade partner and the majority of the timeworn plant facilities 
in the DPRK which have been brought in from Japan need frequent 
repairs and checks. If visits by Japanese technicians were 
restricted, it presumed plant operations would be affected a 
great deal. 
  About 3,000 Japanese tourists visited DPRK last year, and 
this year about 600 have visited so far. It is said that a 
Japanese tourist spends about 50,000 yen while in DPRK, so it is 
estimated that the DPRK earns about 150 million yen annually in 
tourism revenue. The Japanese constitute the largest number of 
tourists to DPRK and a ban of their travel would certainly 
affect the DPRK's foreign exchange earnings. 
  * DPRK vessels load several times the volume of crude oil 
needed for the voyage, claiming the oil as goods needed 
following departure from Japanese ports and letting Chosen Soren 
affiliated trading companies pay the bill. 
  Assuming the 510 DPRK ships that entered Japanese ports 
last year loaded crude oil in quantities more than actually 
required, several hundred thousand tons of crude oil are 
supposed to have been transported into the DPRK. 
  Banning DPRK ships from entering Japanese ports will result 
in a lack of fuel required for voyages of these vessels. 
  c. In Case Routes of Fund Remittances Are Closed 
  Although the DPRK's foreign exchange reserves have not been 
made public, it is presumed that country is in an extremely 
serious situation, in view of the facts that the DPRK has not 
succeeded in reversing its deficit figures in foreign trade and 
that its method of trade transaction with China and Russia has 
changed from the barter system to settlement by international 
currencies. 
  In view of this, a constant flow of funds from Japan to the 
DPRK (trade payments, contributions from Chosen Soren, and so 
on) is one of the DPRK's major sources of foreign exchange. 
  * The amounts of money sent to the DPRK from Japan as 
investments in DPRK companies exceeding 30 million yen, for 
which a report to the Ministry of Finance is required; credits 
in excess of 10 million yen for non-business purposes, for which 
a report is also required; and contributions or gifts exceeding 
5 million yen except among family members totalled approximately 
1.3 billion yen in 1989, about 130 million yen in 1990, and 
about 260 million yen in 1991. In addition, about 32.7 billion 
yen was remitted to the DPRK as trade payments between the two 
countries last year. 
  These payments constitute an extremely small part of the 
remittances from Japan to the DPRK. If the payments not 
required to be reported to the Finance Ministry are counted, a 
considerably large amount of money is presumed to be sent to the 
DPRK through banks. Thus, the DPRK will be dealt with a big 
blow if remittances to the DPRK through banks are prohibited. 
  As for the Japanese banks which have signed correspondent 
transaction agreements with DPRK banks, see the diagram below. 
[Diagram 1 -- to be sent separately] 
  In addition, the Tokai Bank, Ltd., the Daiwa Bank, Ltd., the 
Hokkaido Takushoku Bank, Ltd., the Hokuriku Bank, Ltd., the 
Industrial Bank of Japan, Ltd., the Long-Term Credit Bank of 
Japan Ltd., the Mitsubishi Trust and Banking Corporation, the 
Mitsui Trust and Banking Co., Ltd., and the Central Bank for 
Agriculture and Forestry signed correspondent contracts with the 
Foreign Trade Bank of the DPRK. 
  *Chosen Soren makes enormous contributions for various DPRK 
celebrations and brings an average of 1 million yen for each 
visitor to the DPRK as aid money for relatives living in the 
DPRK (5 million yen per person is the maximum amount one can 
take out of Japan). The organizational and individual 
contributions by Chosen Soren reportedly amount to a total of 60 
to 70 billion yen. 
  These contributions include amounts not required to be 
reported to the Ministry of Finance and amounts sent to the DPRK 
via third countries or remitted skillfully concealed in export 
goods to the DPRK. Some North Koreans living in Japan are 
suspected of taking more money than allowed as the maximum 
amount with them to the DPRK, by skillfully scattering and 
concealing them in their luggage. 
  In order to cut off remittances by Chosen Soren to the DPRK, 
therefore, it is necessary to examine such measures as stepping 
up checking into remittances via third countries and more severe 
inspections of goods exported to the DPRK, restricting travel to 
the DPRK, and lowering the ceiling on the amount of money that 
can be taken out of Japan. 
  (Writer's Note 2) When Koreans living in Japan remit money 
to 
their families in the DPRK without giving specific reasons for 
doing so, leaders of the Korean Association of Commerce and 
Industry in Japan concede that "before families receive the 
money, about 30 percent is taken off the top, under various 
pretexts, by the DPRK authorities." More serious problems exist 
as well. Because many of the leaders of the association are 
aged, anxiety is spreading among them that the DPRK Government 
may exact portions of the enormous estate left by them when 
their families attempt to bequeath the fortune. 
  In fact, a daughter in Japan and a son in the DPRK are in 
legal dispute over a inheritance following the death of their 
father, an important association member from Mito City, Ibaragi 
Prefecture. It is said that the DPRK authorities are behind the 
court dispute. 
  The writer has a classified document on hand entitled: "List 
of Those Who Made Large Contributions." The list says that 
leading businessmen, including operators of "pachinko"-related 
businesses, are making large contributions (more than 100 
million yen a person on such occasions as Kim Il-song's 
birthday). Everyone associated with the Chosen Soren knows this. 
  (Writer's Note 2 -- continued) According to a simulation 
conducted at the Ministry of Finance, "banning payments" 
(freezing remittances, receipts and payments -- so-called 
freezing of assets) defined in Article 16 of the Foreign 
Exchange Law, will be amended from a license-system notice. 
Payments "not authorized," which provide for "banning grants of 
foreign credits" and "banning direct investments," will be 
regulated by ordinances of the Ministry of Finance. 
Preparations are under way to issue a joint amendment with the 
Ministry of International Trade and Industry for ordinances 
which provide for "banning providing services and labor." 
  But many Japanese Government experts say in unison that it 
is 
impossible to completely stop the remittances by North Koreans 
living in Japan. 
  For example, it is said to be impossible to get hold of 
remittances when a North Korean resident in Japan sends money to 
an account in a Swiss bank accessible only by a secret 
identification number or an account opened under a foreigner's 
name, or DPRK diplomats carry money with them or money sent by 
diplomatic pouch via third countries. 
  In recent days, there are many instances of remitting money 
to the DPRK after collecting it overseas, rather than directly 
remitting it from Japan. [end of note] 
  (3) Reactions of the DPRK and Chosen Soren 
  a. The DPRK 
  Domestic Reaction 
  When concerned nations impose economic sanctions in 
accordance with a United Nations resolution demanding economic 
sanctions against the DPRK, the following trends are considered 
possible. 
  *Frequent Riots May Occur Due To Food Shortages 
  It has so far been reported that the DPRK has witnessed 
riots 
due to food shortages. Serious food shortages may spread once 
economic sanctions are imposed. If riots take place 
continuously throughout the country and are organized as a form 
of outrage against the present system, they may quite possibly 
lead to the collapse of the present regime. 
  In order to avoid such a situation, the DPRK party and 
government will tighten its control of people's thoughts and 
step up arrests and imprisonments of rebels. 
  *Exodus of DPRK Residents 
  It is thought that when the domestic economy of the DPRK 
becomes impoverished and food shortages become worse due to 
economic sanctions, cases of DPRK residents escaping to China or 
Russia or attempting to seek asylum in the ROK will occur, but 
the number of such cases may be small unless the DPRK's current 
system collapses. The DPRK party and government are expected to 
strengthen border patrols to prevent such actions from occurring 
in large numbers. 
  *Seeking Assistance From Friendly Nations 
  The DPRK may seek assistance from China to overcome economic 
sanctions. Bilateral trade between China and the DPRK is about 
700 million dollars. Of this, the frontier trade between the 
DPRK and China's three northeast provinces amounts to $100 
million. Furthermore, smuggling is reported to be rampant along 
the border between the two countries. If the DPRK can 
acquisition vital goods such as oil and food from China, making 
good use of geographical advantage, economic sanctions cannot 
expect to yield results. Therefore, as long as China does not go 
along with economic sanctions and show a cooperative response, 
economic sanctions may be less effective. 
  *Requests for Chosen Soren Assistance 
  The DPRK may request that Chosen Soren help acquire 
materials 
and provide foreign exchange. For Chosen Soren to carry this 
out while sending materials and money from Japan to the DPRK is 
banned, it may resort to smuggling or sending material via third 
countries in order to avoid Japanese safeguards. 
  There is a possibility that the DPRK may attempt to take 
over 
a total of approximately 2,400 billion yen held by the Chosen 
Credit Union in Japan, an organization subordinate to the Chosen 
Soren, by claiming that the money belongs to the DPRK. 
  *Decline of Military Strength 
  The DPRK may face difficulties in maintaining its military 
strength due to the declining morale of its soldiers caused -- 
in addition to food shortages -- by shortages of fuel for 
aircraft, battleships, and military vehicles. 
  *Military Repulsion 
  The DPRK may attempt to keep up a stubborn posture 
externally 
and attempt to solidify the people's unity by putting the 
country in a semi-warlike state (ordered in March this year in 
reaction to Team Spirit, a joint U.S.-ROK military exercise). 
When the situation develops into such a state that the domestic 
economy goes completely broke and the system faces a crisis, it 
is expected to threaten concerned countries by test-launching 
missiles and concentrating its troops along the border in order 
to imply that continued economic sanctions are dangerous. Also, 
it cannot be denied that the DPRK would be prepared to launch 
missiles and may actually attack ships on watch duty at sea if 
concerned nations impose a sea blockade in order to maximize the 
effectiveness of economic sanctions. 
  *Countermeasures Against Japan 
  The DPRK announced the following countermeasures when the 
Japanese Government imposed sanctions against the DPRK following 
the bombing of a Korean Air passenger plane: 
  1. DPRK diplomats will cease all contacts with Japanese 
diplomats. 
  2. Japan's national public service personnel and 
pro-government personalities are banned from entering the DPRK. 
  3. When Japanese fishing boats illegally trespass in the 
DPRK's exclusive economic zone, their fishermen will be punished 
according to law. 
  The above-mentioned measures could be an acknowledgement of 
the effects basically caused by the sanctions measures imposed 
by the Japanese Government, which Japan enforced in a passive 
manner. 
  Therefore, the DPRK is expected to respond to the Japanese 
Government's imposition of economic sanctions measures such as 
severing economic and personal exchanges with our country. In 
concrete form, these are presumed to be as follows: 
  *Stopping Payments on Trade Liabilities 
  Approximately 90 percent of Japan-DPRK trade is handled by 
businesses and firms operated by North Koreans living in Japan. 
Therefore, these businesses and companies are expected to be 
driven into financial difficulties. 
  *Banning Fishing Inside the DPRK's Exclusive Economic Zone 
  Fishing inside the exclusive economic zone may be banned and 
either abrogation or refusal to renew the private fishing 
agreement between Japan and the DPRK (to expire on December 31 
this year) will be considered. Even if fishing inside the 
economic zone is not prohibited, it is expected that Japanese 
fishing boats may be illegally apprehended, detained, and 
severely punished. 
  *Breaking Off Intergovernmental Negotiations 
  The DPRK steadfastly maintains the posture that it would not 
respond to Japan-DPRK normalization negotiations as long as the 
Japanese side insists on a solution to the nuclear issue as a 
precondition. The DPRK may reiterate its inflexible position 
for domestic consumption -- so the people can see their 
government's "resolute stance" -- rather than impose sanctions 
against Japan. 
  *Restriction of Human Traffic 
  Japanese have been restricted from entering the DPRK since 
late May this year; when such restrictions will be cancelled is 
not known. If the DPRK's restrictions on visits by Japanese are 
not cancelled by the time economic sanctions are imposed, such 
restrictions will continue. 
  b. Chosen Soren 
  If Japan starts to impose economic sanctions against the 
DPRK, Chosen Soren is expected to bring up the issue of the 
suspension of human traffic as a humanitarian problem. Chosen 
Soren will demand the cancellation of sanctions and stage 
furious protest activities at Japanese Government organizations, 
United Nations agencies in Japan, and the U.S. Embassy. In this 
event, it is possible that certain outlaw elements may commit 
violence against those on watch duty, and illegally destroy and 
inflict damages on related facilities. These elements are also 
expected to react excessively to criticism from the mass media 
and right-wing organizations opposing the DPRK and to launch 
violent counterattacks. 
  Following the DPRK's announcement of its intention to 
withdraw from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty [NPT], Chosen 
Soren insisted that "the organization must wholeheartedly 
support the DPRK people who are staging a heroic struggle to 
defend their fatherland and to build up their economy." It sent 
foodstuffs and clothing to the DPRK People's Army and made 
enormous contributions on such occasions as the birthday of 
President Kim Il-song, the 40th anniversary of the ceasefire of 
the Korean War, the founding anniversary of the Workers' Party 
of Korea, and so on. In addition, it is sending versatile 
production facilities and tools to the DPRK. These include a 
"vaccine production plant" to prevent type-B hepatitis, which is 
said to be spreading due to food and sanitation problems, and 
the "Mankyongdae Clothing Plant," which has been set up to earn 
foreign exchange. 
  While the international community is hotly debating the 
possibility of economic sanctions following the DPRK's 
declaration to withdraw from the Nuclear Nonproliferation 
Treaty, central cadres have been telling local chapters that "we 
have to support the economy of the DPRK, even by illegitimate 
means, in case economic sanctions are imposed against the 
republic." In this connection, Chosen Soren is expected to 
further step up its support of the DPRK economy, even if 
economic sanctions are applied. Since it is on record as 
violating COCOM restrictions, it is fairly predictable that 
again it will use similarly illegitimate methods to take out 
money and materials from Japan. 
  (Writer's Note 3) Chosen Soren's chairman Han Dok-su, who is 
87 years old and has held the organization's number-one position 
for nearly 40 years, suddenly visited the DPRK in late April. 
Until recent days, he was hospitalized and growing weak due to 
breathing difficulties and dim consciousness caused by problems 
with his thyroid gland. He is thought to have gone home forever 
this time. 
  So it is said that Chosen Soren will be engulfed by a power 
struggle in the future. Properly speaking, First Vice Chairman 
Yi Chin-kyu is the closest to the chairmanship by rank order. 
But in reality, Ho Chong-man, vice chairman in charge and a 
cadre among the top leaders of the commerce and industry 
association, is far ahead in reaching true hegemony in Chosen 
Soren. It is expected that an internal struggle will continue 
until a general meeting is held next year. 
  What matters is the fact that Vice Chairman Ho Chong-man has 
broad connections in the Japanese political world and has 
engaged in active lobbying among influential Diet members 
concerning the issue of economic sanctions against the DPRK. It 
is feared that political maneuvering is being staged in favor of 
the DPRK. [end of note] 
  2. Effects and Reactions of Military Sanctions 
  (1) Predictable Forms of Military Sanctions 
  As for military sanctions against the DPRK, the Security 
Council is given such authority by Article 42 of the United 
Nations Charter: "action by air, sea, or land forces as may be 
necessary to maintain or restore international peace and 
security (including demonstrations, blockades, and other 
operations)." In theory, the following actions are considered 
possible: 
  1. Coercion by deployment of military strength, such as 
conducting large-scale maneuvers. 
  2. Sea blockades to maintain the effectiveness of economic 
sanctions. 
  3. Attacks by exclusive use of aircraft and missiles. 
  3-1. Limited attacks against nuclear development-related 
facilities and missile bases. 
  3-2. Limited attacks to eliminate the DPRK's supreme leader. 
  3-3. Large-scale attacks to make the DPRK's military 
strength powerless. 
  4. An allout invasion by land, sea, and air forces to occupy 
either partial or the whole territory of the DPRK. 
  Among the realistically possible measures that can be taken 
against the DPRK in relation to the nuclear issue are: 1, 2, 
3-1 and 3-2. 
  Next, the effects these measures will have on the DPRK and 
the reaction of the DPRK and Chosen Soren against them will be 
examined. 
  (2) Effects of Military Sanctions 
  a. If either measure 1 (coercion by force) or measure 2 (sea 
blockade) mentioned above is adopted: 
  The DPRK will inevitably have to strengthen its combat 
mobilization readiness to the highest level in order to resist 
such a measure. 
  In that case, the DPRK will presumably mobilize its massive 
organization of men in the reserve and militia (thought to be 
approximately 4-5 million men, about one-fifth of the whole 
population); and additionally redeploy a considerable number of 
regular People's Army troops who have been dispatched to many 
sectors of the economy including construction sites, from 
production to the military field to step up combat mobilization 
readiness. When that occurs, the economic sector will have to 
bear a serious burden. And if the situation drags on for a long 
time, shouldering the burden of maintaining combat mobilization 
readiness is expected to become unbearable for the economy, 
which is already in a wretched situation and faces many 
difficulties. 
  If this situation turns out to be a reality, it is 
considered 
possible that criticism from every social stratum will pour out 
against Secretary Kim Chong-il -- who is reputed to be the 
planner as well as promoter of the stubborn foreign policy -- 
for inviting such a situation. Meanwhile, incited by "external 
threats," chauvinistic as well as nationalistic sentiments may 
well be enhanced at the same time. It is therefore difficult to 
determine whether the DPRK leadership's authority will 
immediately become shaky. 
  b. If measure 3-1 (attacks on nuclear facilities and so on) 
mentioned above is adopted: 
  The United States will most likely launch or lead limited 
bombing on specific facilities and the operation will probably 
be highly successful militarily (destroying the targets with 
minor damage to the attacker), when the United States' and the 
DPRK's military hardware is compared. 
  Under these circumstances, Secretary Kim Chong-il, who 
recently assumed the most responsible military position in the 
DPRK, will suffer an inevitable fall in his authority. In 
combination with an inquiry into who is responsible for bringing 
about the results of pursuing a stubborn foreign policy, 
criticism of Kim Chong-il may surface. 
  In addition, the military will once again be aroused to 
recognize the poor quality of its equipment and leading cadres 
may criticize the whole military policy centered around 
party-led "thought." 
  c. If measure 3-2 (attacks on the supreme leader) mentioned 
above is adopted: 
  The United States has a past record of carrying out military 
action (bombing and missile attacks) apparently intended to 
eliminate (kill) the supreme leaders of Libya and Iraq. It 
cannot be denied that similar military action may be taken 
against the DPRK, based on the understanding that the 
elimination of both Kim Il-song and Kim Chong-il might hopefully 
bring about a change in that country's political system. 
  As past experiences shows, however, these operations did not 
accomplish their objectives and it is highly unpredictable as to 
which of the following results will be brought about if the 
operation is launched: 
  (a) Both Kim Il-song and Kim Chong-il die. 
  (b) Kim Il-song survives, while Kim Chong-il dies. 
  (c) Kim Il-song dies, while Kim Chong-il survives. 
  (d) Both Kim Il-song and Kim Chong-il survive. 
  In the case of (a), as a short-term effect, national unity 
will be solidified as the result of anger at the killing of 
their leaders. But after the excitement dies down, a succession 
struggle for leadership will take place following the loss of 
absolute centripetal force; the authority of the party and 
government will be gone, thus developing a situation in which 
the possibility of the regime's collapse is undeniable. 
  In the case of (b), the confusion envisaged in case (a) will 
not occur immediately because Kim Il-song is alive. But in 
consideration of Kim Il-song's advanced age, it is inevitable 
that unrest will occur among the leadership with respect to 
expectations revolving around the succession problem. Moreover, 
considerable unrest can be anticipated because there would be no 
immediate successor on the death of Kim Il-song, such as Kim 
Chong-il who has been prepared over a long time. 
  In the case of (c), it is expected that the effects of 
solidified unity centered around Kim Chong-il will occur. In 
this case, there is high probability that asking Kim Chong-il to 
take responsibility as supreme military leader as mentioned 
earlier will not surface immediately, because indignation over 
the killing of Kim Il-song will surpass considerations of the 
former. 
  In the case of (d), the authority of Kim Chong-il as supreme 
military leader will be promoted and there is a considerably 
strong possibility that it may serve to strengthen the system, 
because propaganda then becomes possible claiming "the enemy 
attack has been repulsed" on top of domestic indignation over 
such an attack. 
  (Writer's Note 4) Another factor to be taken into 
consideration is the health of 88-year-old President Kim 
Il-song. In spite of various rumors, little data is available. 
  The clinical records of Kim Il-song, whom a former East 
German secret police surgeon examined in Pyongyang, were made 
available in the West after the Cold War came to an end. 
According to them, President Kim Il-song is suffering from 
hearing difficulties, high blood pressure, and heart trouble 
which requires the aid of a pacemaker. The well-known goiter 
behind his neck (photographs and television images intentionally 
do not to show it) has become larger lately and its removal is 
impossible because the blood vessels within it are very complex. 
It has been diagnosed as a benign tumor. [end of note] 
  (3) The DPRK and Chosen Soren's Response and Their Effects 
on Japan 
  a. The DPRK 
  (a) Forms of Response: 
  From an outsider's perspective, the DPRK has frequently 
taken 
unpredictable actions and it is therefore extremely difficult to 
forecast how it will respond if emergency measures such as 
sanctions are taken. But theoretically, its general responses 
are presumably: 
  *"Flexibility": Realistic responses to settle the nuclear 
issue will be shown in the making of new compromise proposals, 
reopening of interrupted negotiations, and so on. 
  *"Propaganda": By stepping up external propaganda to stress 
"the DPRK is a victim of U.S. power policy" and making appeals 
to win the sympathy of world opinion, it will aim at stopping 
sanctions from being imposed. 
  *"Threats": It will make public that the DPRK will launch 
appropriate armed retaliation against concerned nations (the 
ROK, Japan, and the like) if sanction measures such as the sea 
blockade are not suspended. This is aimed at applying pressure 
on the concerned countries to win the suspension of sanctions. 
  *"Terrorism": Letting DPRK agents, foreigners, ROK citizens, 
and North Koreans living abroad engage in terrorist activities 
against the countries involved in sanctions. With the DPRK's 
involvement in such schemes remaining hidden, this is aimed at 
winning the suspension of sanctions and retaliation (there may 
be occasions when both propaganda and threats are used at the 
same time). 
  *"Retaliation": Limited military retaliatory actions 
(missile attacks on specific areas, for example) to a degree 
corresponding to sanctions will be taken. 
  *"War": In declaring the DPRK deems sanctions "a declaration 
of war," it will begin an allout armed invasion of the ROK. 
  (b) Various Sanctions and Predictable Responses 
  The responses listed above will be specifically made in 
response to the form of sanctions taken and they are as follows: 
  In the case of measure 1 (armed threats) or measure 2 (sea 
blockade), the DPRK is expected to mainly carry out "propaganda" 
and at times it will be mixed with "threats" and "terrorist 
acts," to shake up international opinion and have sanctions 
canceled in the end. But if sanctions are imposed for an 
extended period of time and the domestic economy is driven to an 
unbearably difficult state, there is a chance of "flexibility." 
  Regarding measure 3-1 (attacks on nuclear facilities), there 
is a high probability the DPRK -- based on the judgment that 
"armed retaliation increases the possibility of far larger 
attacks from opponents and leads to a crisis in the system" -- 
will attempt to wage a propaganda war to win the sympathy of 
international opinion, thus restoring its authority. But if the 
DPRK comes to the conclusion that such a lukewarm response will 
not recover its fallen authority and put down discontent among 
the military, the possibility of its choosing "terror" and 
"retaliation" cannot be eliminated. 
  Regarding measure 3-2 (attacks on the supreme leader), the 
result of the attack will produce varied responses. Generally 
speaking, the more serious the unrest within the system, the 
greater the possibility it will react violently in despair. On 
the other hand, if the system's stability is maintained, a 
self-controlled response is expected in place of a radical one. 
  (c) Effects on Japan 
  If the DPRK shows the above-mentioned responses, Japan will 
be affected in the following ways: 
  *"Propaganda" 
  If some sort of sanctions are imposed on the DPRK including 
real military attacks, a sea blockade, and armed coercion, and 
Japan is involved in some way -- especially if they allow U.S. 
Forces in Japan to use their bases to assist such measures -- 
seasoned pro-DPRK elements as well as a considerably large force 
consisting of so-called "peace loving organizations" and so on 
within Japan, are expected to show a critical response; there is 
a great possibility DPRK propaganda will win a considerable 
amount of sympathy and support within domestic opinion. 
  *"Threats" 
  If U.S. bases in Japan are used in a sea blockade and armed 
coercion against the DPRK and the DPRK makes it clear that these 
bases will be attacked by force including missiles unless the 
use of the bases is stopped, it is possible that the 
above-mentioned groups will assert Japan will be dragged into a 
war; make appeals to stop Japan's involvement in military 
sanctions; and they will be supported by residents on the 
periphery of the bases, thus dividing national opinion. 
  *"Terrorism" 
  If the DPRK carries out terrorist actions in Japan, it will 
likely: 1) Dispatch DPRK agents; 2) utilize South and North 
Koreans in Japan under its influence; or 3) hire international 
terrorist organizations. In view of the character of Japanese 
society which has experienced hardly any terrorist threats and 
existing security preparedness, the DPRK's actions will be 
comparatively easy to execute; the ensuing human and material 
losses will be heavy and serious social unrest will follow. 
  *"Retaliation" 
  Regarding armed attacks against Japan, the DPRK is 
supposedly 
able to: 1) Launch Nodong-type missiles; 2) conduct air 
bombings; 3) use submarines to intercept and attack Japanese 
ships; and 4) launch army troops to land on Japanese soil. Of 
these, items 2, 3, and 4 have a low possibility of success when 
the DPRK's military capability is compared with Japan's defense 
capability. Realistically speaking, it is highly inconceivable 
they will be adopted. 
  But, as to item 1), Japan has no effective defense methods 
-- 
as generally discussed -- and if the missiles are loaded with 
chemical warheads, there will be heavy damage. 
  *"War" 
  If large-scale hostility breaks out on the Korean Peninsula, 
needless to say Japan will be subject to direct and indirect 
effects, including a large influx of refugees. 
  b. Chosen Soren 
  Chosen Soren is expected to launch a multitude of propaganda 
critical of sanctions, whatever form they may take. It will 
presumably stage furious protest actions including demonstration 
marches to Japanese Government organizations, the U.S. Embassy 
in Japan, and U.S. Force's facilities in Japan. 
  And in that process, activists carried away by passion may 
conceivably attempt to break into buildings en bloc or assault 
guards. 
  Since March this year, when tension started to mount in 
connection with the DPRK, Chosen Soren began making repeated 
appeals to members of "Haksup-cho" Study Unit -- (an 
organizational entity of the Workers' Party of Korea, consisting 
of activists over 18 years of age who pledge absolute allegiance 
to Kim Il-song and Kim Chong-il, father and son) -- to 
unconditionally support the instructions given by Secretary Kim 
Chong-il, and to live or die with the secretary. 
  In this connection, it is highly probable that mass violence 
and disturbances will occur like during the time of "Minchong" 
-- the Democratic Front for Unification of the Koreas in Japan 
-- as the result of highly elated anti-Japanese and anti-U.S. 
sentiment, if military sanctions mentioned above in 3) or 4) are 
imposed. 
  Especially if President Kim Il-song and Secretary Kim 
Chong-il are killed, it is undeniable that under DPRK 
instructions, Chosen Soren will resort to retaliatory actions 
including terror. 
  However, it is also highly conceivable that unrest will 
spread within the organization, and more and more activists and 
members will leave when criticism mounts as Chosen Soren resorts 
to organized and premeditated subversive violence, because about 
90 percent of members are second through fourth generation born 
and raised in Japan. Confrontation between the radical group 
centered around the Study Units and the group critical of 
violence is expected, and this may develop into internal splits. 
(Other details omitted) 
  [Writer's note] An important problem completely left out in 
Japanese mass media reports is "panic." 
  As the confidential paper points out: "Japanese society has 
hardly ever experienced terrorist threats," and it is not an 
exaggeration to say that panic is a characteristic trait of the 
Japanese. 
  As one of the DPRK's methods is to cause panic through 
small-scale terrorism and military attacks, Japan needs to have 
risk management. 
  At the Prime Minister's Office, simulations are being 
considered by three agencies -- the Cabinet Security Affairs 
Office, Cabinet Information Research Office, and Foreign 
Ministry's Consolidated Foreign Policy Bureau with Deputy Chief 
Cabinet Secretary Nobuo Ishihara presiding. But the trouble is 
the instability of the Hata regime. 
  Depending on the Chinese attitude, it is certain that 
U.S.-led multi-national economic sanctions -- not at the UN 
level -- are inevitable, driving a Japan deprived of the royal 
banner of the United Nations into an extremely difficult 
situation. It requires strong political leadership but the Hata 
cabinet cannot be relied on to tackle the biggest security 
problem since the end of World War II. On the contrary, the 
Hata cabinet includes one minister suspected of having friendly 
relations with Chosen Soren. 
  From whom can we expect the political power of manly 
decisions, unafraid of DPRK intimidation? [end note] 

