BFN 

<F P=106> [Directive of the Central Committee Secretariat on some </F>
problems concerning woman cadre-related work in the new 
situation] 
  [Text] The party Central Committee Secretariat has issued 
the Directive on a Number of Problems Concerning Woman 
Cadre-Related Work in the New Situation. The directive takes 
into account the growth, great contributions, competence, 
political quality, and good fulfillment of tasks in the new 
situation by the contingent of women cadres. 
  However, the percentage of women cadres at leadership and 
management agencies remains low and tends to decrease. This 
situation is caused, first of all, by the fact that party 
committee echelons, administrative organs at all levels, and 
sectors do not fully realize the role and capabilities of women 
cadres; they lack practical policies and measures to foster, 
train, utilize, and promote women cadres; and they let 
themselves be affected seriously by the tendency to look down 
upon women cadres. No close and constant efforts are made to 
direct the implementation of woman cadre-related work. Some 
women cadres still are resigned to their fate and lack the 
determination to effect changes for the better. 
  To guarantee the good implementation of woman cadre-related 
work in the new situation, the Secretariat requests all echelons 
and sectors to carry out satisfactorily a number of tasks as 
follows: 
  1. Continued efforts are needed to help cadres and party 
members improve their knowledge of the party's concepts on women 
cadres, thus making everyone understand profoundly the Political 
Bureau's Resolution 04-NQ/TW dated 12 July 1993 regarding the 
need to "strengthen and renovate woman cadre-related work in the 
new situation." It is important to increase the percentage of 
women cadres in charge of state and socioeconomic management 
agencies because this move really helps guarantee equality and 
democracy for women. Furthermore, it creates conditions for 
women to bring into full play their talents and wisdom and 
enhance their social role. It is necessary to do away with the 
bad practice of looking down upon women and of adopting a too 
strict and narrow-minded attitude when it comes to evaluating 
and promoting women cadres. 
  At the same time, it is necessary to take into full account 
women cadres' characteristics, show understanding to women 
cadres, and provide them with practical assistance so they can 
effect changes for the better. The support and encouragement of 
each woman cadre's family is also important in this regard. 
  Women cadres themselves should work actively to overcome 
difficulties, improve their quality and capabilities in all 
domains, remain self-assertive in the performance of duties, and 
know how to combine family affairs with social activities in a 
harmonious manner. 
  2. It is necessary to implement woman cadre planning and 
woman cadre resources development, training, and improvement. 
  We need to work out measures to train, foster, and utilize 
women workers in general and women cadres in particular. As an 
immediate objective, all echelons and sectors from the central 
down to grassroots levels must implement woman cadre planning. 
  Early steps must be taken to determine sectors and areas of 
activities suitable for women to develop their strong points, as 
well as leadership and management positions that need women 
cadres, and henceforth, work out woman cadre resources 
development, training, improvement, and utilization plans. 
  It is necessary to discover young talent and work out 
adequate plans to help them train and improve themselves so they 
can be promoted and put to work at an early date. 
  Due attention must be given to the training of women cadres 
in charge of scientific-technological, economic, legislative, 
administrative, and state management work, as well as to women 
cadres belonging to different ethnic groups and religions or 
coming from deep or remote areas. 
  Training schools and classes run by the party, state, and 
mass organizations must establish an appropriate ratio of female 
trainees to male trainees when admitting new students. These 
schools must introduce knowledge on sexual differentiation to 
their training curriculum. They should adopt training and 
refresher training forms suitable for women cadres such as 
organizing their courses in different grassroots, areas, and 
regions; breaking their training program into short sessions; 
and creating favorable conditions for female students to attend 
their training. 
  3. The percentage of women cadres in all levels and sectors 
must be increased. 
  The placement and promotion of women must conform with the 
planning and they must be trained to meet the standards required 
by their job description. 
  On the basis of the current number of female employees, 
measures must be applied to deploy more women cadres to 
positions suitable to their abilities and work requirements. 
  The number of female cadres, including nonparty member 
cadres, from the grassroots to central levels must be increased. 
In fact: 
  -- The number of female members and female standing members 
in party committees at all levels must be increased. 
  -- The number of women cadres in state organs, elected 
bodies 
(the National Assembly and people's committees), mass 
organizations, and fatherland fronts must be increased. 
  -- The number of women cadres must be a corresponding 
percentage of the total work force in state industries and 
enterprises with many female workers (more than 30 percent); 
sectors which have functions and duties related to women's 
issues; and state organs in charge of organizational work, 
cadre-related work, planning, and social welfare. These groups 
must have women holding key leading positions in all levels. 
  4. Policies must be established to create favorable working 
conditions for women and encourage them to develop their 
abilities. 
  Women-related policies must be established to create 
conditions for women to accomplish their maternity duty together 
with their social function. 
  It is necessary to provide allowances for kindergarten 
services for woman cadres attending training courses. Policies 
should be established to encourage sectors and production and 
business enterprises to employ more female workers. 
  Female talents in schools and in all activities should be 
given particular attention. Gifted female scientists and 
skillful female managers must be given priority in employment; 
when it is necessary, they can extend their retirement age to 
60, the same age as their male colleagues. 
  It is necessary to encourage and mobilize all social forces 
to improve living conditions, health care service, child care, 
and household work so women can have better conditions to relax, 
entertain, study to improve their knowledge, and perform their 
work. 
  5. Party development tasks for women must be accelerated. 
  All party organs must regularly propagandize, foster, and 
admit more members from amongst female youths and workers in all 
sectors, levels, and production and business enterprises, 
especially in ethnic, isolated, and religious areas. The 
admission of potential female party members for cadre planning 
work must be given special attention. 
  It is necessary to understand special characteristics of 
female party members in order to assign them proper work. 
Wherever there is a high percentage of female members leaving 
the party, it is necessary to analyze the causes before adopting 
measures to overcome that situation. 
  6. Organizing and instructions for the implementation of 
this 
directive. 
  Party committees at all levels, party affairs organs, youth 
unions, and leaders of all sectors need to thoroughly understand 
this directive, disseminate it to cadres and members of 
grassroots party organs, and outline programs and planning for 
its successful execution. 
  In cadre-organizational organs, a sector specializing in 
women cadres must be set up to help the party committee 
satisfactorily carry out this work. 
  The party affairs organs are entrusted with the duty to 
direct state organs to institutionalize this directive into 
practical policies and guidelines. 
  The party organizational committees, party propaganda 
committees, youth unions, and women's unions are responsible for 
helping party committees at all levels to guide, keep watch, 
motivate, and check on the implementation of this directive. 

