BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Shlomo Dror] </F>
  [Excerpts] "It was an ordinary business meeting," Hanan 
'Ashrawi stated at the end of a one-hour meeting U.S. Secretary 
of State Warren Christopher held yesterday at the U.S. Consulate 
in East Jerusalem with a group of Palestinian figures that 
included Faysal al-Husayni and Hebron Mayor 'Abd-al-Nabi 
al-Natshah. 
  "We touched upon all possible issues," said al-Husayni upon 
emerging from the meeting, in which he asked Christopher to 
intercede with Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin to lift the closure 
on Jerusalem. "The occupied territories and Jerusalem are one," 
he said, "and it is inconceivable that the Israelis are creating 
an unnatural division." Al-Husayni emphasized that there is no 
difference between the Arabs of Jerusalem and those living in 
the West Bank. According to him, the closure splits up 
families, affects their economic situation, and denies them the 
right to worship in Muslim holy places. [passage omitted] 
  Due to the brief nature of the session, the participants had 
no time to discuss the continuation of the process or special 
aid requests. "The meeting was meant to present urgent 
problems," 'Ashrawi said. Christopher promised to raise the 
problems with Rabin in their next meeting. "The difficulties 
will disappear as time goes by, and when everything starts 
working out, the Israelis will be more flexible," he said. 
  The Palestinians emerged disappointed from the meeting. 
Other than promising to raise the problems they presented with 
Rabin, Christopher did not commit himself to anything. 
Palestinian sources said that Christopher knows he cannot 
conclude anything with the people with whom he met even if he 
wanted to. "The Americans are in Rabin's pocket," one 
Palestinian said. "Now that he has given back Jericho and Gaza, 
he cannot be pressured; the U.S. secretary of state knows it, 
and we know it." 
  'Ashrawi also noted that as far as the Palestinians are 
concerned, it would have been better to negotiate directly with 
Israel, but that constraints in the field preclude it. [passage 
omitted] 

