BFN 

<F P=106> ["DPRK Government Informs the United States of its Decision </F>
To Withdraw From IAEA" -- KCNA headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, June 15 (KCNA) -- Foreign Minister Kim 
Yong-nam sent a notice on June 13 to Warren Christopher, 
secretary of state of the United States of America, the 
depository state of the statute of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency [IAEA], in accordance with paragraph D of Article 
XVIII of the IAEA's statute, informing him of the decision of 
the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to 
immediately withdraw from the IAEA. 
  The notice was correctly conveyed to the permanent mission 
of 
the USA at the United Nations through the permanent mission of 
the DPRK at the U.N. on June 13. 
  With this, the Government of the Democratic People's 
Republic 
of Korea completed all the legal procedures to withdraw from the 
IAEA. 
  The notice sent by Foreign Minister Kim Yong-nam to the U.S. 
state secretary says: 
  I wish to remind you that the Secretariat of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA/agency) invoked the 
authority of the agency's Board of Governors to adopt on June 
10, 1994 an unjust board's "resolution," imposing "sanctions" 
against the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK), an 
action that has jeopardized the supreme interests of the DPRK, 
flagrantly encroached upon its sovereign rights and dignity, and 
created such a circumstance which makes it impossible for the 
DPRK to maintain normal relations with the IAEA any longer. 
  The further inspections for the continuity of safeguards we 
have accepted with goodwill despite our unique status based on 
the temporary suspension of the effectuation of our declared 
withdrawal from the treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear 
weapons, and the more we have dealt with the agency Secretariat, 
the worse the problem has become rather than be resolved. This 
is the serious lessons and conclusion that we have drawn from 
what we have so far experienced in accepting the agency's 
inspections. 
  All the facts demonstrate that the IAEA Secretariat has 
pursued the dishonest political purposes of stifling the DPRK 
under the pretext of its inspections rather than seek a fair 
resolution of the nuclear issue. 
  With regard to the recent adoption by the agency Secretariat 
of another unjust "resolution" despite our strong opposition and 
warnings, I have been authorized to inform, through you, the 
Government of the United States of America, the depository 
government, that, in accordance with paragraph D of Article 
XVIII of the IAEA's statute, the Government of the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea decided to withdraw from the 
International Atomic Energy Agency as of June 13, 1994. 

