Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Hannes Reichmann: "The Serbian Sleepers"] </F>
  [Text] When Ljubisa Ristic enters the "Halali" restaurant 
in Vienna's First District, which is famous for its game 
specialities, the waiters and even the owner himself still hurry 
to respectfully greet the "Director General." 
  "Tell them," Ristic encourages the owner with an expectant 
face, "how many people I used to bring here for lunch week after 
week." The owner is all too pleased to confirm the merchant's 
tales: "Sometimes there were 20, 25 people." However, even 
though the "Halali's" special room is still unofficially called 
"Combick room," the owner has been complaining about a dramatic 
loss in turnover for some time. 
  For Ljubisa Ristic, the 57-year-old boss of the Combick 
Foreign Trade Company, on the other hand, the term "turnover" is 
slowly turning into a foreign word, because since the beginning 
of last May the formerly powerful Vienna subsidiary of the 
nationalized Belgrade trading company General-Export (Genex) has 
not been permitted to transfer one single schilling. The 
impressive figures of the dramatic fall: During the last 
business year under normal conditions -- 1991 -- more than 2 
billion schillings went across the Combick accounts in Vienna. 
In the 400-square-meter office Rastic was master of 20 
employees, received delegations of visitors from all over East 
Europe, and prepared the founding of new companies to expand 
Vienna as a business location. 
<H5>  Bizarre Administrator of a Deceased's Estate </H5>
  Today the merchant from Belgrade, together with two 
secretaries and an accountant, holds the bizarre position of an 
administrator of the decedent's estate: One half of the office 
is already taken over by a subtenant. In order to pay the 
monthly fixed costs, which have shrunk to a fraction of the 
former amounts, he needs approval from the Genex headquarters, 
because each day might be the last, as Ristic notes somberly: 
"We are just waiting for the 1993 balance sheet, then Belgrade 
will decide whether we close down." 
  His fate is shared by hundreds of companies all over 
Austria. 
It applies to trading companies, which used to juggle with 
goods of all kinds and with billions, just as to innumerable 
one-man companies and even shows an effect on a bank right here 
in Vienna. Since the UN Security Council -- as a result of the 
warmongering by Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic -- imposed 
"comprehensive sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro" at the 
end of May 1992, they are all sliding into ruin in the most 
varied ways. 
  Last May, the absolute low point was reached, largely 
ignored 
by the public. A tightening of the UN embargo prohibits those 
Austrian companies, whose capital comes from mostly from Serbia, 
from also conducting so-called third-country business. However, 
it was exactly this third-country business that had been the 
last rescue for the Austro-Serbian businessmen after the 
introduction of the rigorous economic sanctions. Franz 
Brandsteidl, an official in the Economics Ministry who is 
responsible for making sure that the UN resolutions are 
observed, notes: "Companies operated by Serbs in Austria are 
moving to Russia with increasing frequency, where criminal 
organizations from the most varied countries are obviously 
establishing themselves." 
  This was precisely the development which the Austrian 
National Bank tried to counteract last May. A list of the 
National Bank, which is still kept under lock and key, lists a 
total of 28 companies which have been excluded from any kind of 
business for the past 10 months. The list contains practically 
everything that is renowned in the state-organized economic 
structure of the Belgrade regime: the Combick Trading Company 
of Ljubisa Ristic as well as the Inex Petrol AG oil company, the 
large Yugotours travel agency, or the Metal and Steel Trading 
Company (a subsidiary of Belgrade's Jugometal), which had a 
turnover of billions in the past. 
  "These 28 companies are clear cases," Friedrich Nowak of the 
National Bank's legal department argues. "In addition, there 
are hundreds of companies where the shareholders are private 
individuals. There we still have difficulties." Even Serbs or 
Montenegrins, the lawyer says, who are already Austrians but 
still have a Serbian passport, fall under the rigorous embargo. 
Nowak: "We constantly have problems with constructions where 
the shareholder is in Liechtenstein or in some other tax 
paradise and where there is the suspicion that Serbs are still 
the real owners." 
<H5>  The Specter of Smugglers </H5>
  Such merchants get only into real difficulties, when they 
meet the customs investigations teams of the "Sanctions 
Assistance Mission" (SAM) during their attempts to do illegal 
business. From the Brussels EU [European Union] Commission SAM 
has been watching the observation of the trade blockade for more 
than one and one-half year at all border checkpoints with Serbia 
and Montenegro: SAM teams inspect freighters at the Iron Gates 
in Romania as well as trucks at the Hungarian-Croatian border 
checkpoints. At the monthly routine meeting of SAM in Vienna 
last week, Richardt Vork, a native Dane, who is the head of SAM 
and thus the incarnate specter of all blockade breakers, 
described his experiences in drastic words: "Our inspectors are 
increasingly encountering armed smugglers." 
  Even though the prospects for success are rather low even 
for 
crisis-tested smugglers, the investigators have so far 
registered a total of 244 violations of the embargo in Austria. 
The colorful range of smuggled goods ranges from frozen fruit 
from Serbia to pharmaceutical primary products of a renowned 
Austrian producer, which were discovered during an attempt to 
import them into Serbia. In contrast, the number of cases 
pending in the courts remains surprisingly low. The simple 
reason: Anyone who is still successfully smuggling and 
illegally selling, uses an international network of companies 
which veils the origins of the goods almost perfectly. The 
Austrian customs service is, for instance, tracing a gang of 
Serbian merchants whose skillfully camouflaged empire reaches 
from Hong Kong via Cyprus to Barcelona and Moscow. "We cannot 
do anything," an investigator complains, "if they open a credit 
line for oil deals in Nicosia at an Austrian bank and in Nicosia 
the Beogradska Banka is involved." 
  Petrovic's Sad Job 
  Dusan Petrovic is in Vienna at precisely this bank. The head 
of the information office of Beogradska Banka laments about his 
sad job: "In 1990 our bank alone opened credit lines of 30 
billion shillings at Creditanstalt in Vienna. Today there is 
not a single schilling moving anymore." 
  In February 1993 the 62-year-old banker thought he had found 
a way out when he founded his own trading company, Beofinex 
Trading Company, to stay in the game via third-country business 
and on his own account. However, only a few months later, this 
kind of business was banned by the decree of the Vienna National 
Bank. As representative of Beogradska Banka, Dusan Petrovic 
regularly consults with Adria Bank in Vienna, where his employer 
from Belgrade still holds 21 percent of the shares. (footnote 
1) (The main Austrian shareholders of Adria Bank are Bank 
Austria--24 percent--and Creditanstalt 12 percent. A total of 
24 percent is held by the Slovene Lubljanska Banka and 21 
percent by the Croatian Zagrebacka Banka.) 
  After the outbreak of the military conflict, Adria Bank had 
to put considerable sums into reserves. Promptly, inspectors of 
the National Bank turned up, who investigated the institute for 
weeks, "but did not find any reason for complaints," as Director 
Alfred Scherhammer notes with satisfaction. At the meetings of 
the board of governors in Vienna time seems to stand still: 
Slovenes and Croats are still peacefully facing Serbian 
shareholders, who come from Belgrade. 
  Forced to do nothing, since the imposition of the embargo 
Petrovic has been dealing with comparably smaller sums and with 
individual cases such as the pensioners in Serbia and Montenegro 
who get a pension in Austria as former guest workers and have 
involuntarily gotten between the frontlines of the trade war. 
Petrovic: "This applies to a total of more than 30,000 
inviduals. Because transfers to Yugoslavia are banned, they 
must come to Austria. Among them there are people who get 1,000 
schillings per month. The trip alone costs that much." Borislav 
Kosanov, the highest-ranking diplomat of Milosevic's regime in 
Austria, says: "This is extremely inhuman." 
  While Kosanovic sees good prospects for an end of the UN 
blockade in June, Combick chief Ristic is already packing. 
Ristic has found an interesting tenant to succeed him on half 
of his 400 square meters of office area. It is the Viennese 
Oweka Trading Company of Montenegrin Petar Ivanovic. While all 
his compatriots in Austria are groaning because of the embargo, 
Ivanovic is obviously going through a period of expansive 
growth. The only plausible reason for this is a friendship 
between two men, in which he has invested much time for months 
and which opens many doors for him in Moscow. 
  After all, his new bosom buddy is Vladimir "Adolfovich" 
Zhirinovskiy. Some weeks ago host Ivanovic invited the Russian 
ultranationalist and a group of dubious advisers on a business 
trip to Belgrade and also accompanied him there. 

