Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, January 22 (BTA) -- "This cabinet can set 
the reforms going only if it finds in itself the will to govern. 
A will to govern -- this is essential for Lyuben Berov's 
cabinet," President Zhelyu Zhelev said in an interview aired in 
tonight's Panorama political roundup on national television. 
Berov's cabinet was elected in late 1992 on the mandate of the 
Movement for Rights and Freedoms. It was voted in by the 
Bulgarian Socialist Party and the New Union for Democracy. 
  The cabinet should learn to put its foot down and deliver 
what it promised to do, reckoning with no political force or 
group, Mr. Zhelev stressed, adding that the same applied, to an 
even higher degree, to crime control. According to him, "all 
kinds of considerations and compromises inevitably erode the 
cabinet and its potential as the executive branch." "Leaning on 
the law, the cabinet must show it can run the country and break 
the neck of organized crime," President Zhelev said. According 
to him, then the cabinet "will be respected and supported both 
by parliament and the judiciary, and there will be fewer 
attempts to pull its strings." 
  Asked whether this statement is supposed to mean that the 
cabinet has shown no will to govern so far, the president said: 
"Indeed the cabinet has not shown the will to govern which is 
much needed in the circumstances. The cabinet reckoned with too 
many things in the past year." That is why, Mr. Zhelev said, 
the cabinet scored no success in privatization, and the land 
reform, though it reached a certain point, left much to be 
desired. 
  Asked who should take responsibility for bailing the country 
out of the crisis, President Zhelev said: "The government, 
first and foremost." "I believe the executive is the fuse which 
is the first to blow under tension, being directly responsible 
for the country's development, followed, of course, by 
parliament, which elects and supports that cabinet," the 
president added. 

