Language: <F P=105> Urdu </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "The U.S. Offer of Effective Defense in Exchange </F>
for Nuclear Program Is Not Acceptable"] 
  [Text] According to press reports, a five-member delegation 
of the U.S. State Department's "Arms Control and Disarmament 
Agency" has come here to hold extensive talks with Pakistani 
authorities on the nuclear nonproliferation issue. A proposal 
will probably be made by the U.S. side that if Pakistan abandons 
its nuclear program, then it will be offered a package which 
will include the supply of the most modern conventional weapons 
and steps to make the Pakistani Armed Forces more effective in 
the battlefield. 
  Pakistan's nuclear program has long been an eyesore for the 
United States and heavy pressure is being exerted on Pakistan so 
it will abandon the program. The United States, through a 
constitutional amendment, has suspended military and economic 
aid to Pakistan. The irony is that the delivery of F-16 planes, 
for which Pakistan already paid, also has been withheld. A 
notice was also issued to pay the storage charges for those 
planes. The United States has not only taken a number of 
serious steps against Pakistan to punish it for the nuclear 
program, but also instructed the rest of the world to strangle 
Pakistan. Despite having an agreement, France withheld the 
supply of a nuclear reactor. Last year, Japan also curtailed 
its aid to Pakistan. China is the only country which is 
unwilling to bow to U.S. pressure. The United States has made 
the whole world, with the exception of China, hostile toward 
Pakistan. 
  The United States is pursuing a double-standard policy on 
the 
nuclear program issue. It vehemently dislikes Pakistan's 
nuclear efforts. It, however, did not even say a single word 
about India, which already carried out a nuclear explosion in 
1974. About a dozen nuclear research centers are active 
throughout India, and according to a report of the United 
States' own CIA, India possesses enriched uranium sufficient to 
produce 40 to 100 nuclear bombs. India's past history also 
proves that it has the habit of launching aggression and it has 
ventured into military adventure with all its neighbors. 
Pakistan was made the target of the Indian aggression in 1949, 
1965, 1971, and 1984. And now, for the last five years, Indian 
forces are engaged in bloodshed and massacre in occupied 
Kashmir. The danger is always there that India might embark on 
an onslaught against Pakistan in its disgust with the Kashmir 
freedom movement. Indian leaders are also threatening Pakistan 
with a limited war. 
  Pakistan is left with only one option given this situation. 
That is to use the nuclear program as a deterrent. It is 
because of Pakistan's nuclear program that India dared not 
launch any aggression against Pakistan since 1971 despite the 
Siachen and Kashmir incidents. The fact is that it is not 
possible for Pakistan to match India in the field of 
conventional weapons. India not only possesses nuclear 
capability, it has amassed conventional weapons as well. Unlike 
Pakistan, the United States has not imposed any restrictions on 
India on the acquisition of conventional weapons, nor does India 
care for any pressure from the United States either. Therefore, 
for Pakistan, relinquishing the nuclear program is tantamount to 
inviting its own death, God forbid. 
  As far as the possible U.S. offer -- that Pakistan's 
position 
in conventional weapons will be bolstered and its Army will be 
strengthened -- is concerned, we will only say that it is 
difficult to trust any U.S. promise. The United States 
concluded a defense agreement in 1959 accepting the 
responsibility to defend Pakistan in the event of a communist 
aggression. But when India, as a protege of the Soviet Union 
and with the strength of Soviet weaponry, launched a naked 
aggression against Pakistan in 1965, then the United States 
suspended defense aid to Pakistan and also stopped supplying 
spare parts rather than honor its commitment. When India again 
launched aggression against Pakistan in 1971, the United States 
again remained a silent spectator. Consequently, Pakistan was 
dismembered by India using its massive military might. India, 
which then entered into a defense agreement with communist 
Soviet Union, was openly supported by it. Pakistan's allegiance 
to the United States on the other hand can be gauged by the fact 
that it offered its territory for the U.S. U-2 spy planes, 
thereby angering the Soviet Union. The situation today on the 
part of Pakistan still remains same. According to a report, the 
U.S. spy planes are stationed at Chaklala air base. Obviously, 
these planes will spy on Pakistan itself or will pick up our 
friendly country China as its target. India is a friend of the 
United States. 
  The U.S. commandos have left after completing their 
exercises. Reports say that the U.S. naval fleet is now engaged 
in joint naval exercises with the Pakistani Navy. Recently, 
General Joseph P. Hoar, the U.S. Central Command chief, also 
paid a visit to Pakistan. The U.S. ambassador enjoys the status 
of a viceroy in Pakistan. On the other hand, the treatment 
given to Pakistan by the United States is evident to everyone. 
During the last year, the United States tried hard to declare 
Pakistan a terrorist state. It is now feared that the United 
States might divide Kashmir in a way which suits its own 
interests. Pakistan is sometimes accused of being a 
fundamentalist or religiously fanatic state. 
  Given this situation, under no circumstances can Pakistan 
trust the U.S. promises. We do not know why our government 
leaders want to hold talks on acquiring a U.S. defense umbrella 
in exchange for abandoning the nuclear program. The United 
States did not help Pakistan when it needed it. How can we 
expect that it will help in the future? U.S. support for the 
Afghan mojahedin or Pakistan during the Afghan war was due to 
its own interests. The proof is that as soon as the Soviet 
Union disintegrated, the United States turned its eyes from the 
Afghan mojahedin and Pakistan. Afghanistan is still reeling 
under bloodshed and Pakistan's difficulties are still the same 
as before. Pakistan should clearly say "no" to the U.S. 
delegation and accept no U.S. offer at the cost of abandoning 
the nuclear program. The United States should also understand 
Pakistan's compulsions in the region and impose no condition 
which makes Pakistan vulnerable to Indian aggression. Pakistan 
should have the right to defend its independence and sovereignty 
and it is not possible without the nuclear deterrent. 

