Language: <F P=105> Swedish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Defense Minister Anders Bjorck under the </F>
"Debate" rubric: "Give Consideration to Increased Defense 
Spending!"] 
  [Text] Almost two years ago, on 23 March 1992, I spoke in 
Lund about the security situation in the world around us. I 
pointed to the problematic political, economic, and social 
developments in Russia and noted that despite everything it had 
proved possible to more or less control the situation in that 
country. But my summary of the situation did contain one 
proviso: 
  "The possibility should not, however, be ruled out that 
further deterioration could create a breeding ground for the 
populist message. The fascist, Vladimir Zhirinovskiy, who won 
six percent of the vote in the Russian presidential election, 
wants to restore what was once the Russian empire.... For 
Zhirinovskiy it goes without saying that both Finland and the 
Baltic states should form part of this Russian empire. 
  "Today it is possible to dismiss Zhirinovskiy as a mad 
demagogue, but what happens tomorrow in a Russia which has never 
in history been the liberal democracy it ought ideally now to 
become? This gives us an idea of what uncertainty the future 
holds for Russia and the CIS." 
  The debate on Swedish defense and security is often 
dominated 
by domestic considerations. The day-to-day debate's ups and 
downs for views on everything from neutrality policy to tanks 
seem to have a greater effect on the views of many who take part 
in the debate than developments in the rest of the world. What 
is currently fashionable is of crucial importance when it comes 
to voicing views about the size of the defense budget. 
  But sometimes the real world makes itself felt. As when the 
Russian people in last Sunday's [12 December] parliamentary 
elections sent a useful reminder to all the pundits who had 
dismissed the risk of setbacks in developments inside our 
powerful Eastern neighbor. 
  The first predictions sent a shock wave through Europe. It 
looked as if ultranationalist agitator Vladimir Zhirinovskiy 
would win over half the seats in the revamped parliament, the 
Duma. When more votes were had later been counted it emerged 
that the result was not quite so devastating for the democratic 
forces. But the fact remains: Almost one quarter of the 
Russian people voted for Zhirinovskiy. 
  Zhirinovskiy generally describes himself as a strong 
anticommunist. However, the fact is that his political program 
contains many thing that are similar to things contained in that 
of the communists. He is no fervent support either of 
democratic or market reforms. He and the communists share the 
aggressive tone vis-a-vis the rest of the world, and the 
covertly threatening talk of "protecting" allegedly oppressed 
Russian groups in "nearby foreign countries." These apparent 
extremes are also united in their loud demands for more money 
for the Russian military and military industry. 
  Both Zhirinovskiy and the communists play on a distrust of 
the West that is deeply rooted in Russian popular consciousness. 
Peter the Great in his day considered himself forced to execute 
Russians for their attitude of hate toward foreign advisers and 
their influence. It is an obvious conclusion to reach that it 
is the West and Western-inspired reforms in Russia will be 
today's scapegoats for the almost unbearable living conditions 
of so many people. 
  In the West too this myth seems to have gained ground. 
People blame today's problems on "Yeltsin's shock therapy." 
But, on the contrary, the political situation has blocked 
radical but necessary market reforms and the transition from a 
plan to a market economy is still only half-implemented. The 
countries which really have carried out radical market reforms 
-- Poland, Estonia, the Czech Republic, and Hungary, too -- can 
point to palpable positive results in contrast to the Russian 
crisis. 
  Last Sunday's election did not bring to an end the 
confrontation between president and parliament. On the 
contrary, today it seems as if this confrontation will continue 
for the foreseeable future. Yeltsin's opponents have won a 
political victory. The power of parliament may have been cut 
back a little as a result of the new constitution, but it has on 
the other hand won new legitimacy. It will be difficult for 
Yeltsin to dismiss his opponents in the same way as before. 
  When the Swedish Riksdag adopted the current Defense Bill in 
the spring of 1992 the view was taken that the deep-seated 
problems in Russian society make long-term prognoses impossible. 
The risk of setbacks was assessed as great. However, at the 
time certain people tried to assert that this view was 
excessively pessimistic. What has happened since then has not 
proved them right. We do not know how the confrontation in 
Russian political life will end. Victory for the democratic 
forces is by no means certain. 
  In the short term the new political situation in Russian 
does 
not represent a threat to Sweden. At the same time the risk 
that Russia is entering a period of nationalism, increased 
expansionism, and a less open and more implacable attitude 
toward the West has not lessened. This affects our long-term 
assessments, and it is these which are of significance for 
defense and security policy. 
  The reemergence of Russian nationalism reinforces our 
reasons for joining the European Union [EU]. Membership is our 
chief protection against crises and conflicts in the East. Our 
own immediate environs will become part of the Union's immediate 
environs. There is less of a risk that Sweden would be seen as 
an isolated part of Europe and could therefore find itself at 
the center of attention of a possible future aggressive regime 
in Moscow. It is unthinkable that an attack on one of the EU's 
member countries would not lead to very difficult repercussions 
-- political and other repercussions -- for the attacker. 
  Today's Swedish defenses are a legacy of the defense policy 
of the seventies and eighties. And today we are shaping 
tomorrow's defenses. We are now embarking on the analysis and 
planning work for the next defense bill, in 1997. In the run-up 
to this work of analysis there have been calls for dramatic 
reductions in defense spending. A figure of minus 30 percent 
per year has been mentioned. 
  What has happened in Russia -- in combination with the 
fact that the Russian combat forces which are to be found in 
Sweden's immediate environs have not been disarmed -- means that 
it is more urgent than ever to also look at a continued increase 
in investment in defense. If in a time of unrest characterized 
by growing Russian nationalism and rearmament Sweden wants to 
continue to assert its nonalignment, there will be a price to 
pay. 
  We do of course hope for developments in Russian in the 
direction of democracy, prosperity, and far-reaching integration 
with the West. However, we must not be so naive as to mortgage 
this brightening future today. This would be the same as 
repeating the madnesses that occurred on the Swedish property 
market in the eighties. Mortgages were taken out for ever 
rising property prices until the market collapsed. The risks 
linked to repeating the same mistakes in the field of defense 
and security policy are considerably greater than the billions 
in credit losses which were a consequence of the property 
carousel. 
  It is important that Sweden's future defense policy is 
characterized by more realistic security assessments than has 
been the case in some quarters. 
  The 1992 Defense Bill meant considerable investment in 
modernization and quality. The so-called stabilization bill did 
eat away at the edges of the bill a little, but not so much that 
it will be impossible to implement the Defense Bill in all 
important respects. 
  As long as developments in Russia involve a great deal 
of uncertainty the calls for cutbacks in Swedish defenses must 
be firmly rebuffed. The Defense Bill must be implemented. If 
in the run-up to the next defense bill in 1997 we are to analyze 
the effect of 30 percent cutbacks, it seems just as important to 
analyze the effects of an increase on the same scale. 
  If we do not have the clarity of vision to realize the 
dangers inherent in Zhirinovskiy's successes we run the risk of 
repeating the irresponsible defense policy of the twenties and 
early thirties. 
  It is not difficult to see before us an unpleasant scenario 
in which an aggressively nationalistic government in Russia puts 
significant resources into recreating its scope for large-scale 
military action. At the same time Sweden has chosen to remain 
outside the EC and the opportunities it offers for increased 
stability and security. We would then be completely dependent 
on our own capacity to defend our nonalignment, our peace, and 
our independence. If we have also mismanaged our defenses so 
that they no longer appear credible in the eyes of the rest of 
the world we would be very exposed. More exposed than at any 
time since 1945. 
  It is of course possible to raise the objection that such a 
scenario is unthinkable. But who thought a mere five years ago 
-- and five years is the normal defense planning cycle -- that 
the Soviet Union would break up, that three new Baltic states 
would be set up on the shores of the Baltic, or that the Russian 
people would go to the polls and in free elections cast their 
votes for a man who has talked about reincorporating Finland 
into the Russian empire? 

