BFN 

  [Text] Tallinn, June 01, BNS -- George Soros, the 
investment tycoon well-known in the Baltics and in the whole 
eastern Europe for his large-scale culture and education funding 
projects, met with Estonian Prime Minister Mart Laar in Tallinn 
today. 
  The Estonian leader at the meeting praised the billionaire 
supporter of arts and humanitarian projects for the funding 
programs he has launched also in Estonia. Discussed in more 
detail were three projects in the field of education, of which 
Soros himself underlined as most important a prospective 
half-million dollar plan in support of Estonia's school reform. 
Also spoken of were programs in support for higher education 
and research, and one on legal education. 
  Finally at the meeting, Soros asked the Estonian leader 
about 
the country's economic development and its prospects, the 
government press office reports. He asked if Estonia's current 
"progressive" government didn't fear a possible setback with the 
possibility that former Communists might return to power. 
  Laar in his answer said that Estonia had already crossed 
that 
critical stage when the former Communist party "nomenklatura" 
could be elected to power. But he didn't rule out possible 
success of a more leftist and less radical way of thinking. 
  Soros at a separate press conference in Tallinn later in the 
day focused on the activity of the Open Estonia Foundation, set 
up to channel Soros' money for charity and assistance projects 
in Estonia. The Open Estonia Foundation projects together with 
financial assistance coming through Soros International Science 
Foundation amount to more than three million dollars in Soros' 
support for Estonia this year. 
  Soros declined to give a detailed assessment of the 
political 
developments in the three Baltic countries. But while 
commenting on some critical remarks he had made at a meeting 
with Latvian President Guntis Ulmanis on the country's 
citizenship law, he today said he was glad to find Estonia's 
citizenship law much more liberal. 
  The billionaire investor said it was clear that Latvia 
during 
the era of Soviet rule had suffered much, had "undergone nearly 
genocide." But he spoke up against leaving any groups of the 
country's population without many essential rights as means of 
retaliation. 
  He called on the Baltics not to allow the notion of whatever 
nation being collectively guilty for some misdoings -- a notion 
which he stressed was absolutely wrong -- to have an influence 
on their decisions. 
  George Soros was born in Budapest on Aug. 12, 1930, but 
emigrated to Britain in 1947. Lives in New York since 1956. He 
is currently the president of Soros Fund Management and main 
adviser for Quantum Fund over investments. His humanitarian 
project support funds operate in 21 Central and East European 
countries, as well as one in South Africa. 

