Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Zhanjiang, Feb 7 (XINHUA) -- Some 230 kilograms of 
rhino horns were set on fire today in Zhanjiang, a booming town 
of south China's Guangdong Province as part of the efforts by 
the Chinese Government to perform its international obligations 
to stamp out smuggling and poaching and protect wildlife. 
  The rhino horns were part of the 825 kilograms confiscated 
by 
the Zhanjiang municipal government from smugglers and illegal 
trading. As 595 kilograms of rhino horns were identified as 
having been seized before China joined the Convention on 
International Trade of Endangered Species (CITES) of wild fauna 
and flora in 1980, they were exempt from being destroyed. 
  Hundreds of local residents watched the police poured 
gasoline and set the huge pile to fire under the supervision by 
representatives from the Ministry of Forestry, the Ministry of 
Public Security, the State Administration for Industry and 
Commerce and the State Office on the Control of Import and 
Export of Endangered Species. Among the audience was a 
four-member delegation from the CITES headed by its Chairman 
Murray Hosking and Secretary General Izgrev Topkov. 
  The move was hailed by the CITES delegation as a 
``courageous 
act of the Chinese Government.'' 
  ``We find this burning ceremony very much a demonstration of 
the commitment of the Chinese Government to wild life 
conservation,'' said Murray Hosking, CITES chairman. 
  ``We think it is a very important gesture,'' he said. ``It 
would help people in other countries to understand the efforts 
made in China to protect endangered wildlife.'' 
  According to the Chinese official, since the country joined 
CITES in 1980, it has stopped importing rhino horns. 
  ``Though no rhinos are found in the wild in China, the 
Chinese Government has listed it as one of the key wild animals 
for national protection, banning its sales, purchase, 
transportation and import and export,'' he said. 
  It was the second time for the Chinese Government to burn 
rhino horns in public this year. Earlier this year, 50 
kilograms of tiger bones (including fake ones) and rhino horns 
were burnt in Harbin in the country's northeastern Heilongjiang 
Province. 
  According to Chinese officials, all of the rhino horns which 
entered China before 1980 have been sealed by the government and 
will be used by Chinese scientists for experiment to find out 
substitutes for rhino horns, an important and very efficacious 
ingredient in many of the traditional Chinese medicine. 
  In the meantime, the Zhanjiang people's police has arrested 
a 
group of people headed by Lin Chengjie from the Wuchuan County 
Pharmaceutical Group Company for unsealing the rhino horns 
confiscated by the government to attempt to smuggle them out of 
the country. 
  Smugglers from overseas had colluded with Lin and bribed 
him. 
Chinese police said that it has the right to investigate 
overseas smugglers involved in the case and may demand them to 
stand witness in the court. 
  According to officials from the Ministry of Forestry, rhinos 
mainly live in economically less-developed countries and 
poaching and smuggling there were very serious. Natural 
disasters are also destroying the rhino population. 
  The number of rhinos have been reduced by 85 percent since 
the 1970's and only an estimated 10,000 are found in the world. 

