CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by R. Remila: "What Strategy for the Postpetroleum </F>
Era?"] 
  [Text] What strategy should be adopted to activate the 
much-awaited trigger mechanism that will start a real and 
effective recovery of our economy? At the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs yesterday, Mustapha Mekideche, president of the Algerian 
Exporters Club (CEA), tried to provide a few answers to that 
question in a paper entitled: "Nonhydrocarbon Exports and 
Industrial Restructurings in Algeria: Stakes and Strategies." 
  The speaker said that regardless of the effects of the 
expected agreement with the IMF for dealing with the debt, 
overcoming the crisis in the Algerian economy will necessarily 
involve a qualitative change in the country's trade structure 
for the coming 10 years. 
  According to him, "that is the only step that will ensure 
Algeria of successful integration with the international 
division of labor--that is, the continuation of its economic and 
social development at a high and sustained rate of growth." 
  Mekideche also said it was now practically certain that 
hydrocarbon revenues for 1994--estimated at $8 billion--would 
not be enough to cover debt service. He explained: "Even the 
expected quantitative increase in hydrocarbon exports beginning 
in 1996 or 1997 will not be enough to satisfy our foreign 
exchange requirements." 
  He also said that petroleum taxes have so far accounted for 
two-thirds of the state's budget resources. 
  "Those resources," he said, "are going to decline 
significantly beginning in 1994, when the austere budget 
policies go into effect." 
  He added that the Algerian economy was facing financial 
challenges reflected in a double crisis: 
  The first is the crisis in its model for international 
integration, in that demand can no longer be financed, and the 
second is the crisis in its operating model, which is sustained 
administratively and geared to a protected domestic market--the 
source of unearned income and wasted factors of production. 
  What is at stake for the international community is the 
emergence of a successful and reliable Algerian economy in the 
flow of international, domestic, physical, and monetary trade. 
  So what strategies are possible for establishing a different 
and more efficient operating model? 
  According to Mekideche, that depends on the promotion of 
exports, but he points out that first, "it is necessary to 
reject the prejudice, which says that Algeria has nothing to 
export except hydrocarbons, because such a prejudice is actually 
aimed solely at keeping up the illusion of safeguarding an 
economy based on unearned income that is no longer capable of 
renewing itself according to the same pattern." 
  In the opinion of the CEA's president, the service sector 
appears to be the one most prepared for exports in the short 
term. The reason is that it is not much affected by variations 
in the allocation of foreign exchange and consumes little in the 
way of imported goods and services. Moreover, Algerian firms can 
be competitive in niches involving general infrastructures and 
public works and industrial and energy infrastructures. 
  The implementation of dynamic and innovative industrial 
policies remains the sine qua non if we are to breathe new life 
into the Algerian economy. 
  That strategy consists of "remodeling industrial branches 
and 
firms with a view to their rationalization so as to set up 
productive segments that are coherent, balanced, and 
profitable," a move that can generate "foreign exchange cash 
flow to help finance the overall growth of the economy." 
  The new industrial policy should make it possible to reduce 
the factors of national dependence, specialization, and 
integration, to abandon declining industries, and, lastly, to 
promote export industries. 

