CSO 

<F P=106> [Article with no byline] </F>
  [Text] The Defense Agency disclosed that Mitsubishi Heavy 
Industries, as well as Kawasaki Heavy Industries, made 
presentations seeking the prime contractor status for UH-X, the 
next-generation multi-purpose helicopter for the Ground 
Self-Defense Force (GSDF), slated to be purchased in the next 
Mid-Term Defense Program (1996-2000). The agency will initiate 
the selection work immediately and pick the prime contractor by 
the end of FY93 so that its procurement can be included in the 
Defense Agency budget of FY95. 
  UH-X is a successor to UH-1H, which GFD is currently using 
for personnel transport and rescue operations. In addition to 
UH-X, there is another successor to UH-1H -- UH-1J. 
  UH-1J is a modification of UH-1H and is already being 
manufactured by Fuji Heavy Industries, the prime contractor 
under license from Bell Helicopter. The Defense Agency purchased 
12 units in FY91 and 13 each in FY92 and FY93 and will purchase 
14 units each in FY94 and FY95, according to the current 
Mid-Term Defense Program. 
  On the other hand, UH-X will be a larger helicopter than UH- 
1J, with improved performance including a higher load-carrying 
capacity and improved range. 
  Although the details of the presentations of the two 
companies have not been disclosed, UH-X is going to have a range 
of 1,300 km, which is about three times that of UH-1J. In 
addition to substantial increases in the maximum engine output 
and the personnel carrying capacity, equipment is also generally 
upgraded according to the Defense Agency's request standard. 
  Mitsubishi Heavy is proposing to meet the required 
specification by modifying the rescue helicopter, UH-60J, which 
has been manufactured and delivered to the Maritime Self-Defense 
Force and the Air Self-Defense Force under a manufacturing 
license from Sikorsky (U.S.); while Kawasaki Heavy is proposing 
to do the same, modifying the Cougar, a military helicopter made 
by Eurocopter of France. 
  The production is scheduled to start in FY95, the last year 
of the current Mid-Term Defense Program, to be delivered in 
FY98. Although the procurement quantity is unknown at this time, 
as the budget for the next Mid-Term Defense Program has not been 
prepared yet, it is expected that the procurement of several 
units will be included in the FY95 budget. 

