CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sofiane Bensalem: "One of Kasdi Merbah's </F>
Assassins, Toufik Hattab, Was Killed Yesterday in 
Benzerga"--first paragraph is EL WATAN introduction] 
  [Text] One of the leaders of the terrorist group operating 
in the Ain-Taya/Bordj-El-Bahri area, Toufik Hattab, was killed 
yesterday on a road near Benzerga, we learned from reliable 
sources. He was one of the assassins of Kasdi Merbah, president 
of the MAJD [Algerian Movement for Justice and Development], and 
Mustapha Abada, the former ENTV director. 
  Around 1500, a national police patrol was driving past a 
spot 
were peddlers are in the habit of setting up their stalls. 
  Suddenly, the police vehicles were sprayed with bullets. A 
group of 20 armed men, with Toufik Hattab at their head, had 
been hiding among the peddlers, waiting for the patrol. The 
counterattack was fierce. 
  Three policemen were killed on the spot. Several citizens 
were seriously wounded. During the chase that started after the 
encounter, Toufik Hattab was killed. His accomplices fled in 
stolen cars. A submachine gun was recovered. According to our 
sources, the weapon belonged to a policeman murdered in March 
1992 at Beni-Amrane. 
  Toufik Hattab, 31, was one of the closest associates of 
Abdelkader Hattab, also known as Mouloud, 46, a terrorist leader 
operating in the Boumerdes area. 
  On several occasions, the Algiers Special Court issued a 
warrant for his arrest. Toufik trained in guerrilla warfare in 
Afghanistan for three years. Early in October 1993, after the 
preliminary investigation, the security departments discovered 
that the Hattab group (there are three of them belonging to the 
same family) was behind the murder of Kasdi Merbah, former prime 
minister and MAJD president, on 21 August 1993. 
  Thirty-six persons were arrested. Mazaei Tayeb, technician; 
Aissa Rachid, imam; and Boukersi Djamel, unemployed; were 
questioned and brought before the court. They were charged with 
supporting the Hattab group's activities. 
  The other three members of this hard core are Berriah Lyes, 
Tarzout Said, also known as Tolier, and Aissani Ahmed Abdelkader 
(nicknamed Youcef). Assuredly, the elimination of this dangerous 
leader is a serious blow to the local terrorist network. 

