BFN 

<F P=106> [Lale Sariibrahimoglu report: "Tanks From Greece to South </F>
Cyprus"] 
  [Excerpt] Ankara--Reports that several French-made AMX 30 
tanks, which are covered by the Conventional Forces in Europe 
[CFE] Treaty, have been dispatched to south Cyprus have prompted 
Ankara to prepare to warn France and Greece. The issue of 
several AMX 30 tanks, which were decommissioned in accordance 
with the CFE and then renovated in France and sent to south 
Cyprus, was on Turkey's agenda when Defense Minister Mehmet 
Golhan visited France last week. The decomissioned tanks should 
have been kept where they were parked. 
  France informed Golhan that it has received the tanks to 
renovate, because it is the country which manufactures and sells 
them. However, the French officials also informed Golhan that 
France has not reached agreement with Greece to dispatch those 
tanks to south Cyprus. Nevertheless, Turkey was not satisfied 
with the French disclosure. Recalling that the matter has been 
on Turkey's agenda for the past two years, the diplomatic 
sources say that Ankara will caution France and Greece either in 
bilateral contacts or in international platforms. It will ask 
Athens and Paris to provide information on the renovated tanks. 
Turkey will ask Greece to explain "whether or not it has 
dispatched to south Cyprus several tanks that have been 
decommissioned in accordance with the CFE Treaty and should have 
been kept in Greece's inventory." It will also ask that country 
"if it has transferred several tanks to France, which, according 
to the CFE Treaty, should have been based in Western Thrace, and 
if so, why it has failed to inform Turkey on the matter." 
  Meanwhile, Turkey will ask France to explain "whether the 
tanks referred to have been dispatched to south Cyprus and why 
Paris has failed to disclose the number of tanks France has 
received for renovation if it exceeds the number established by 
the CFE Treaty?" 
  Recalling that France has concluded an agreement with Greece 
to prevent that country from supplying the arms it buys from 
France to third countries, the diplomatic sources said: "If 
Greece intends to supply arms to south Cyprus, then France is 
obliged to caution Athens that it cannot do so." [passage 
omitted] 

