Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Antonio Urdinola: "The Wealth of the </F>
Colombian Mafia"] 
  [Text] Nearly all the studies made regarding the drug 
traffic's economic impact on Colombia have been focused on the 
issue of the foreign currency entering the country through that 
activity, and its effects on monetary management and the balance 
of payments. Nevertheless, these criteria are insufficient for 
assessing the real dimensions of the business and, hence, its 
social and economic implications. 
  Last week, it was stated in this column that drug 
traffickers 
are currently accumulating assets in Colombia at an annual rate 
of approximately $2.5 billion. This figure was reached through a 
series of rather elementary considerations. In the first place, 
it is well known that most of the contraband entering the 
country is financed with Mafia dollars. It is paid for in pesos 
once the merchandise has been sold. The same device is used in 
the case of underbilling imports, especially consumer goods. 
  It has been estimated very conservatively that, for every 
$4.00 worth of legal imports, another dollar is now entering 
through contraband or underbilling, taking advantage of the 
indiscriminate commercial openness practiced by this 
administration. This means that, through such expedients, drug 
traffickers are accruing income in the country that could be 
estimated at $1.5 billion per year. 
  To be added to this are the dollars of illegal origin 
arriving as direct transfers from abroad, in banknotes from 
dealings such as fictitious tourism, or from overbilling of 
exports, which could amount to another $600 million annually. 
  Finally, we should remember that much of the acquisition of 
assets in the country is being done by drug traffickers through 
the purchase of properties paid for abroad. Through this device, 
large sums of illegal origin have been accumulated, and are in 
the hands of Colombian citizens completely dissociated from the 
drug business. 
  If we assume that the total value of the nation's material 
wealth (natural resources, including land, construction, and 
equipment) is four times the value of the GDP [gross domestic 
product], estimated at nearly $60 billion for 1993, we would 
find that, at the current rate, drug traffickers are acquiring 
one percent of that material wealth annually. Recalling that we 
have had 20 years of that business in Colombia, it does not seem 
absurd to think that the Mafia probably now owns 10 percent of 
the country's goods, as well as a similar volume abroad. The 
latter is disguised in a thousand different ways, through the 52 
notorious tax havens. 
  Fortunately for Colombia, that 10 percent of the national 
wealth is distributed among the 10 or 15 drug cartels, with 
their several thousand members. This causes the political power 
generated by that wealth to be established primarily on the 
regional level. 
  So long as drug consumption and trafficking continue to be 
illegal internationally, the Colombian drug traffickers will 
inevitably keep on accruing enormous earnings abroad. They will 
be brought into the country on a large scale if future 
governments do not change the extremely lax and indiscriminate 
commercial and exchange policies existing at present, and if tax 
amnesties as extensive as the previous ones continue to be 
enacted. 

