CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Katarina Koivisto: "Nordic Natural Gas Network </F>
`Utopia'"] 
  [Text] Sweden will be able to develop its natural gas 
network only on the basis of strictly commercial principles, and 
if those principles are followed, it will not be possible to 
make natural gas pay its way. That makes Sweden the missing link 
in a Nordic natural gas network, and a network supplying Finland 
with Norwegian natural gas will not come into being. 
  That is the conclusion drawn by Danish researcher Niels Moe 
of the Trade and Technology Development Board (NUTEK) in 
Stockholm. 
  Moe has drawn up a report for the Nordic Council of 
Ministers 
on "energy policy as planned and in actuality in the Nordic 
countries." The views in that report are Moe's own, however, and 
were not discussed by the Council of Ministers. 
  And disagreeing with Moe completely is the Council of 
Ministers' information group on gas issues, which is to submit a 
report of its own to the council next fall. The attitude toward 
a Nordic natural gas network is more positive within that group. 
It feels that there is in Sweden a disguised energy requirement 
that is not yet being talked about because many questions 
surrounding the phasing out of nuclear power are unanswered. At 
any rate, more and more political initiatives in favor of 
natural gas are now appearing in Sweden. 
  Niels Moe also notes in his report that the political 
attitude toward natural gas has recently turned more favorable 
in Sweden. But while it is easy to show political will, it is an 
entirely different thing to actually implement a decision on 
natural gas, he says. 
  "As I see it, the matter has actually already been decided," 
says Moe. "There will not be a Nordic natural gas network. A gas 
network requires new infrastructure, Sweden is big and sparsely 
populated, and it is very hard to make gas pay today. It is not 
enough to express political will; one must follow up those 
expressions of will with other measures." 
<H5>  No Champion </H5>
  At the moment, there is no champion -- no company or 
combination of companies -- that would exploit natural gas in 
Sweden. Getting a gas project going in central Sweden would 
require such a champion, and if no Swedish champion can be 
found, there may be a possibility that foreign interests would 
step into the Swedish natural gas market. 
  The advocates of natural gas feel that the entire gas issue 
must be looked at from a longer perspective, even though 
concrete decisions are gradually becoming more and more urgent. 
The Norwegians will be forced within a couple of years to decide 
where to export gas from the new Haltenbanken field: to the 
Nordic Region or to Germany and Central Europe. 
  The possibility that the Nordic countries will join the 
European Union (EU) is also placing the gas issue in a new 
light. The EU is offering support for the construction of new 
infrastructure, meaning, for example, a gas pipeline. The same 
support may be considered for Finland when the decision on a 
pipeline from the Stockmanovskoye field in northern Russia is 
made. 
<H5>  No Market in Sweden? </H5>
  Niels Moe is very pessimistic about the Swedish market for 
gas. There is no market in Sweden that would be big enough even 
if electricity production were based on natural gas, he feels. 
In today's situation, a Nordic natural gas network amounts to 
unrealistic wishful thinking. 
  It is not just the Swedish market for natural gas that is 
too 
small, according to Moe. There is also a possibility that 
natural gas use in the network already developed in Finland will 
not be as high as expected. In a situation of free competition, 
there may be many suppliers in Finland offering cheap energy -- 
district heating plants and thermal power plants, for example -- 
to today's big users of natural gas. The government's policy of 
facilitating the market position of gas through environmentally 
motivated energy taxes may improve the position of gas, Moe says. 
  Moe also discusses Finland's other energy sources in his 
report, pointing out that Finland has an all-round supply with 
many different energy systems and a concentration on many 
different fuels that, combined with a well-developed district 
heating system, provide it with good opportunities for 
converting to environmentally friendly energy systems. But 
Finland's rejection of additional nuclear power will cause 
discharges of nitrogen, sulfur, and carbon dioxide to increase. 
  Finland has supported the use of domestic fuels such as 
peat, 
Moe notes in his report. But with a deregulated energy market in 
Finland, the danger exists that firms will choose the cheapest 
way to produce energy, and in today's price situation, that 
favors the use of oil and natural gas over domestic fuel 
production. 

