BFN 

<F P=106> [By Froilan Arencibia] </F>
  [Text] Cairo, 1 Jun (PL) -- Today, Cuban Foreign Minister 
Roberto Robaina demanded that the veto power held by members of 
the UN Security Council be abolished, calling the veto an unfair 
and unequal right. 
  According to a reliable source, Robaina said in a 
closed-door 
meeting of the 11th ministerial conference being held in this 
city that the Nonaligned Movement (NAM) should oppose those who 
attempt to use the Security Council to implement their foreign 
policies and to intervene in the affairs of other governments. 
  We not only have to defend our right to participate but also 
our right to know, the head of Cuban diplomacy official 
proclaimed, according to the same source. 
  The Cuban foreign minister added that nonaligned nations and 
other developing countries have to claim their legitimate right 
to participate on equal footing in the council and to demand 
that the privileges enjoyed by a handful of powers be eliminated. 
  He stressed that it is as urgent to broaden this UN 
organization as it is to reform its methods and to introduce 
transparency in the way it conducts business. 
  On this issue, he pointed out that not only does the 
Security 
Council give itself the authority to try to dictate its will 
worldwide, but it usually does this covertly. 
  "The steps we must take to revitalize the General Assembly 
and to allow it to exercise the power and functions actually 
granted to it by the UN Charter should be a top priority of the 
NAM," the foreign minister emphasized. 
  In addition to discussing the need to democratize the United 
Nations, the ministers and delegation heads at the meeting 
studied ways to introduce transparency in the activities of the 
world organization, the need to deal with regional conflicts, 
and how to give the NAM a more active role in the international 
community. 
  The ministers and delegation heads agreed on the importance 
of revitalizing the role and functions of the General Assembly 
and outlined the possibility of broadening the Security Council. 
  The draft of the final declaration of the NAM meeting -- 
which PRENSA LATINA was not able to obtain -- defends the 
essence of the group, despite the end of the Cold War and the 
disappearance of the bloc policy. 
  Furthermore, it asserts the validity of the movement and 
calls for the intensification of efforts to make it more 
effective in the international area to give it greater 
negotiating power with industrialized nations. 
  The document recognizes the work done by Indonesia as head 
of 
the organization and expresses satisfaction that many of the 
NAM's principles and positions at the Jakarta summit were 
reflected in the resolutions issued by the 48th Session of the 
UN General Assembly. The ministerial meeting also looked into 
regional conflicts such as the ones in Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
Yemen, Ruanda, Angola, among others. 
  During the day, the Cuban foreign minister held meetings 
with 
the delegation heads and foreign ministers of Kenya, Belize, 
South Africa, Ghana, Qatar, Palestine, Algeria, and Ecuador. 
  At the inaugural meeting on Tuesday, Robaina pointed out 
that 
the NAM's top priority should be the promotion of the Third 
World's economic and social development. He said his country 
believes the best guarantee for a firm and lasting peace is the 
absence of hunger. Only in this way, he added, will human 
rights for all of the inhabitants of the planet flourish, and 
not simply for a small part of mankind. 
  The head of Cuban diplomacy met with his colleagues from 
Zimbabwe, Iraq, Vietnam, Honduras, and the secretary general of 
the Arab League on the previous evening. The NAM meeting is 
expected to end with the approval of a final document on Friday. 

