Language: <F P=105> Lithuanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] We have just received a report by Nerijus 
Maliukevicius, the president's spokesman for the press, 
concerning the weekly SOBESEDNIK [published in Russia]: 
  Pictures of former members of the CPSU Central Committee 
Political Bureau and candidate members of the Central Committee 
who are presently heads of CIS countries are published on the 
front cover of the Russian weekly SOBESEDNIK's fourth issue of 
this year. Among them, under the title "The CIS Politburo and 
The Central Committee" is a photograph of Lithuanian President 
Algirdas Brazauskas. 
  I have been tasked to state the following concerning the 
above publication: Algirdas Brazauskas has never been member of 
the CPSU Politburo or a candidate member to the CPSU Politburo. 
  At the time when the CPSU Politburo was functioning the 
Lithuanian Communist Party headed by Algirdas Brazauskas left 
the CPSU at the end of 1989. Therefore, after this date, any 
search for cooperation with the above organization cannot be 
fruitful and is even illogical. 
  On 11 March, 1990 Lithuania restored its independence and in 
1991 the people of Lithuania expressed their will through a 
referendum that Lithuania will never join any new political, 
military, or economic or any other kind of union or commonwealth 
which had been set up on the basis of the former Soviet Union. 
This concept has been reinforced by the Supreme Council 
Constitutional Act of 8 June, 1992. Therefore, to regard 
Lithuania and its leader within the context of the CIS is an 
evident case of ignoring historic facts and present day reality. 
  The foreign policy pursued by the president of the republic 
does not give the slightest grounds to claim that there are 
intentions to change the articles of the Constitution of the 
Republic of Lithuania. Therefore, there are no grounds to 
associate the leader of Lithuania, who was directly elected, 
either with the former Central Committee Politbureau or with the 
present CIS. 
  It is difficult to see what the objectives of the 
publication 
in SOBESEDNIK are. However, it is evident that it belittles the 
sovereignty of the Republic of Lithuania and attempts to play up 
to those who would like to again draw Lithuania into the sphere 
of their interests. 

