Language: <F P=105> Lithuanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] Five press conferences were held at the Seimas 
Palace today. Here is Madona Luckaite reporting about some of 
them. 
  [Luckaite] Chairman of the Center Union and Seimas member 
Romualdas Ozolas spoke on issues of Lithuanian foreign policy. 
In two weeks time a meeting of the presidents of the Baltic 
states should be held in Palanga during which the question of 
whether it is expedient to appeal to the United Nations 
concerning the recognition of the past occupation of the Baltic 
states. He said that Russia was making all efforts that no 
document would testify to the occupation of the Baltic States. 
Therefore the Lithuanian president should once again speak at 
this meeting for the strengthening of the security of all these 
countries. 
  Speaking about the Lithuanian-Polish treaty, Romualdas 
Ozolas 
said that a treaty where there is no assessment of the 
Zeligowski aggression, at least in a declaration, is not worth 
signing at all. The following version is even better: the treaty 
has been signed, however, the declaration has not. This would be 
a clear assessment of the aggression. The presently existing 
text of the treaty cannot be signed. International documents 
have to be worded clearly and [words indistinct] truth should be 
placed between Lithuania and Poland, Romualdas Ozolas stressed. 
Gediminas Vagnorius, member of the Lithuanian Seimas and 
chairman of the Lithuanian Conservative Party administration 
board, speaking at the press conference held by the Seimas 
opposition, said that 16 months have already passed after the 
Seimas elections; however, the Lithuanian Democratic Labor Party 
had not yet started to carry out its duties. It is looking 
backwards and it is firmly aspiring to satisfy personal property 
interests. 
  So far it is impossible to see any signs of stabilization 
because the industrial output has fallen even by 2.5 times since 
the Seimas elections and continues to decline by ten percent 
every month. The real income of the population is maintained by 
using the credits received from abroad, yet in spite of this the 
average wages in the country at the beginning of this year 
reached only 290 litas while in the autumn of 1992 it was more 
than 600 litas. 
  Last year, ten percent of enterprises have been registered 
according to the law on primary privatization as separate 
companies avoiding the privatization departments and thus 
avoiding any payment. 
  Attempts are made to transfer property worth six or seven 
billion litas which is almost the amount of capital which had to 
be transferred to saving and other banks for the compensation of 
peoples lost savings. [passage omitted] 

