Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "&pound;70 Million Cocaine Haul `Marks End of </F>
Territorial Policing': Ed Vulliamy on the three-nation effort 
behind a record drugs seizure"] 
  [Text] The leaders of an international operation which led 
to the seizure of a record 263 kilos of cocaine at Felixstowe on 
Christmas Eve said yesterday that it was "only the end of the 
first phase" in breaking a drugs ring tied to the highest levels 
of the mafia. 
  They said in Rome that the ring was part of a push into the 
British drugs market, where street prices are high. 
  An Italian and a British citizen have been charged in 
London, 
and another two people have been bailed. Seven men were arrested 
in Colombia and another three in Sicily, where three more men 
are being sought by police. For the first time in the campaign 
against drugs, the arrests were simultaneous. 
  Douglas Tweedle, Customs and Excise's chief investigations 
officer and leader of the British end of Operation Angel 2, said 
British street prices for hard drugs were the highest in Europe, 
making the country a prime target. 
  The Christmas Eve shipment--organised in Sicily and sent 
from 
Colombia--was worth &pound;70 million. The authorities said that 
most was for distribution in Britain, although 108 kilos was 
destined for Sicily. 
  Mr Tweedle--accompanied by senior Italian anti-mafia figures 
and the head of the Colombian anti-drugs unit, General Campo 
Gomez--said the operation set a new benchmark in co-operation 
and intelligence-sharing between countries. The agencies were 
now investigating other important international traffickers in 
the same ring and their financial havens. 
  Mr Tweedle said: "What made this special was the scale--the 
way the law enforcement agencies have come together to do 
maximum damage to these criminal organisations--and the decision 
to look at the problem with a broad view.'' 
  "There was unprecedented confidence, with the sharing of 
sensitive intelligence between Great Britain, Colombia and Italy 
which has never happened before." 
  The Palermo public prosecutor, Giancarlo Caselli, said: "For 
us in Palermo, the containment of these attacks on society is a 
matter of our survival. Any country polluted by mafia money 
which tries to go it alone from now on is committing a fatal 
error." 
  The chief of Italy's anti-drug unit, Pietro Soggiu, said the 
era of "jealously and territorial policing has ended." 
  The operation illustrates the roles of the Sicilian command, 
the South American export barons and the alleged cells of mafia 
operatives and their contacts on the ground. 
  The trail began with documents found at the Palermo home of 
an infamous and then fugitive mafia boss, Salvatore Gallina, in 
September last year. 
  Mr Gallina was arrested a month later in Venezuela, by which 
time the use of a police informer and a series of telephone taps 
had been allowing the three agencies to follow the consignment 
"every inch of the way," Mr Soggiu said. 
  If the authorities' allegations are correct, the operation 
would be the first proof of a three-cornered cartel covering 
Sicily, the Colombian barons and Britain. 
  Mr Tweedle said the cocaine had been concealed in the false 
bases of two containers full of coffee, with a layer of lead to 
prevent X-ray detection. "Without the Colombian intelligence 
work, we would not have detected the consignment." 
  In Colombia, the alleged leader of the ring is a Sicilian, 
Giuseppe "Old Man" Triolo, said to have been sent by the Cosa 
Nostra to oversee its Latin American interests after the arrest 
of the Venezuelan-based Cuntrera brothers in 1992. He was 
arrested together with a big Colombian landowner, Edgar Troquez, 
and five others. 
  Those arrested in Sicily include Francesco Maniscalo, son of 
the head of the Corso delle Mille clan in Palermo. 

