Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Uladzimir Hlod: "The End Crowns the Work..."] </F>
  [Text] It was almost 11 PM when a plane with the 
Belarusian delegation on board took off from Vnukovo airport to 
Minsk. Less than 10 minutes later, [Belarusian Prime Minister] 
Vyacheslav Kebich came out of the airplane's lounge to greet his 
aides and experts with the successful completion of negotiations 
in Moscow. 
  We, journalists, were told as follows: 
  "The government, headed by me, has always followed the 
course 
of establishing firm ties, as well as stable and mutually 
profitable relations with Russia. This day crowns the complex 
and exhaustive work. Therefore, I do not conceal my deepest 
satisfaction." 
  On 5 January at Moscow's White House, into which the Russian 
Government had moved just few days ago, three documents were 
signed. At the beginning, Vyacheslav Kebich and [Russian Prime 
Minister] Viktor Chernomyrdin signed a statement on the upcoming 
unification of both countries' monetary systems; afterward, 
Deputy Prime Ministers Stanislav Bryl [Belarus] and Aleksandr 
Shokin [Russia] placed their signatures under a document on 
deliveries of Russian gas to Belarus and the construction of a 
system of gas pipelines on Belarusian territory. 
  This way, the long-awaited unification of the monetary 
systems of Belarus and Russia came into effect. Asked whether 
any secret points had been included in the document, Vyacheslav 
Kebich stated the following: 
  "No, and I believe that the full text of the statement not 
only can but also should be published in the press. This should 
be done to prevent all possible misunderstandings and 
insinuations." 
  As a matter of fact, my task is much easier now -- any 
reader 
can carefully study the text of the statement. I would only 
like to point out that the statement is accompanied by a package 
containing 10 documents which outline the mechanism for 
implementing the unification. The documents are to be signed in 
Minsk in January, and, as the Belarusian prime minister pointed 
out, "due to the upcoming visit to Minsk by U.S. President Bill 
Clinton, the signing ceremony will be held in the second half of 
the month." 
  The documents signed in Moscow were agreed to not only by 
government heads. Also Russian President Boris Yeltsin has 
approved them. He, as the Belarusian Cabinet leader noted, 
expressed hope that the package on unification of the monetary 
systems will become effective as soon as possible. 
  As experts explained, following the signing of all the 
documents, the Russian ruble will be freely circulated on 
territories of both states, and for a certain period of time, we 
will return to the situation in which we have already been, 
meaning coexistent circulation of two currencies. Probably, the 
process of transition to the Russian ruble will be considerably 
protracted. Some experts believe that this will last three to 
six months, others do not exclude the possibility that the 
process will be protracted to the end of the year. This is 
connected with purely technical capabilities of providing 
Belarus with cash. 
  Journalists were interested as to why Russia assumed the 
responsibility for curbing inflation in Belarus. In response, 
Vyacheslav Kebich said: 
  "There is no inflation. If we enter the joint economic space 
and the ruble zone; if we unify prices for energy sources for 
Belarus and Russia, even given Belarus' financing exploration 
work and the drilling of new wells; and if we introduce the one 
to one currency exchange rate, we will not join the union as a 
yoke around Russia's neck, but as an equal state." 
  Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin described the 
signing of the statement as "an important frontier, for which we 
have headed." According to his words, Russia and Belarus have 
closely approached not only the unification of their monetary 
systems, but also deepening of the economic integration in the 
framework of the CIS. Asked by a BELINFORM correspondent 
whether the Belarusian-Russian union would become a precedent 
for broadening cooperation among other countries of the former 
Soviet Union, the two prime ministers replied affirmatively. 
  Viktor Chernomyrdin noted that the establishment of the 
ruble 
zone "is mutually beneficial -- neither one of us wants to 
exploit the other." The Russian prime minister stated that, by 
signing the statement, "Russia does not encroach on Belarus' 
sovereignty. The document is aimed at deepening coordination of 
our economic activities. All of Europe is developing in the 
same direction today." The Belarusian prime minister also 
voiced his viewpoint: "I have always said, and will continue to 
do so, that the signing of the documents we signed today means 
saving Belarus' sovereignty. Had we not done this, we would not 
have preserved our sovereignty." 

