BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ivan Rodin from the "Collision" column: "The </F>
President Has Upstaged the Opposition in the Propaganda Contest. 
Although To Do This, He Had To Break the Current Constitution"] 
  [Excerpts] The State Duma is planning to react tomorrow to 
the 14 June Presidential Edict 1226 "On Urgent Measures To 
Protect the Population Against Gangsterism and Other 
Manifestations of Organized Crime." Putting to the vote a 
motion to include the question of the edict on the agenda, Duma 
speaker Ivan Rybkin said that "this edict should be backed up by 
a law on amendments and additions to the Criminal Law Code." 
According to Rybkin, the Duma may either soften or, on the 
contrary, tighten the edict propositions. Interestingly, it was 
the Russia's Choice faction that initiated a public -- albeit 
very weak -- reaction from the State Duma. The president's 
traditional opponents kept silent although reaction in the lobby 
was rather sharp. For instance, Legislation Committee Chairman 
Vladimir Isakov said that the edict goes way beyond the bounds 
of the current Fundamental Law. [passage omitted] 
  However, the most noteworthy part of the edict is the one 
that allows leaders of executive power bodies in Russian 
Federation components "to define lists of cities and particular 
localities which need to be placed under special control 
following proliferating instances on these territories of 
gangsterism and other manifestations of organized crime." It 
can be supposed that in the very near future, in particular in 
Moscow, this special control may well be imposed. It is known 
that an early issuance of the anticrime edict was prompted by, 
among other things, a well organized stream of appeals from 
representatives of the Moscow business community. Will the 
edict help fight the crime that most bothers the average 
man--street crime? Apparently not: Financial checks will not 
stop muggings in doorways and dark lanes. In the final 
analysis, the reasons for the edict's promulgation are 
political. Although some economic rationale can also be seen: 
The actual annulment of banking and commercial secrets is a 
good method of competition. 
  Yet political considerations prevail. The fact is that in 
the last couple of months presidential analysts have considered 
several scenarios for extending the term of the incumbent 
president or, to be more accurate, the political elite that is 
associated with him. The option of making amendments to the 
Constitution consolidating presidential power was rejected 
pretty soon due to its absolute nonviability. The attempt to 
introduce a state of emergency in the economy and through it 
cancel presidential, if not all, elections was postponed owing 
to resistance from the head of government. Presumably, the 
scenario of cracking down on crime was deemed most beneficial 
from this point of view owing to its high propaganda value, 
which automatically strengthens the president's authority: It 
should not be forgotten that crime will be dealt with by 
departments fully subordinated to Yeltsin. 
  Boris Yeltsin's retaining his post so far is advantageous to 
all rival groups around and under him because they are fighting 
exclusively for influence on the president. Therefore, one can 
expect a favorable reaction from regional authorities. The 
Federal Assembly, notably its lower chamber, will need to frame 
the edict, as soon as possible, with corresponding laws: 
Revoking it is impossible for political reasons since that 
would damage the deputies' image. The most that can be done 
with the edict is to tone down some of its more odious 
provisions--on 30-day detention, and so forth. It is 
interesting that the opposition's negative reaction--and it is 
precisely such--must be due to the fact that the president has 
outdone it in the propaganda contest. 

