Language: <F P=105> Finnish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jukka Perttu: "Finland Promises To Help Estonian </F>
Oil Cleanups"] 
  [Text] A bill has still not been issued for the Kihnu 
incident. 
  Finland supports Estonian oil cleanup efforts at sea. The 
environment ministers of both countries, Andres Tarand and Sirpa 
Pietikainen, agreed last Wednesday in Helsinki that Finland 
would support Estonian oil cleanup operations by offering, among 
other things, training, equipment, and expert help. Finland also 
agreed not to charge Estonia for all the costs involved in 
cleaning up after oil spills in Estonian waters. 
  The Finnish aid is financed by, among other things, adjacent 
area cooperation funds. 
  Finland intends to continue its support during a five-year 
transitional period, but the period may be extended, if 
necessary. 
  On the other hand, the permanent agreement signed by the 
environment ministers is based on equality, as each country is 
obligated to lend assistance in case of oil spills. The 
agreement provides the basis for cooperation between 
environmental protection authorities in case an oil spill 
accident happens in the Gulf of Finland. 
  Russian oil, for example, is exported through Estonian ports 
for foreign destinations. 
  Estonia's defenses against oil spills are still quite weak. 
The country has two vessels with oil recovery equipment. In 
addition, the Estonian Board of Navigation has ordered from 
Finland two 18-meter-long workboats. There is also some other 
oil spill equipment in the country. Senior inspector Olli 
Pahkala from the Ministry of the Environment said that the oil 
companies at the new oil terminal in Tallinn had acquired their 
own oil spill equipment. 
<H5>  Cooperation and Experiences </H5>
  The cooperation between Finland and Estonia was put to the 
test last January when the coastal tanker Kihnu leaked oil into 
the waters of Tallinn. Two oil cleanup vessels and a sea rescue 
helicopter were rushed from Finland to provide help. 
  Sources at the National Board of Waters and the Environment 
told us that a bill covering the expenses had not yet been sent 
to Kihnu's owners. The board has been unable to issue a bill as 
it has not yet, in its turn, received all the outstanding bills 
from other agencies that participated in the operation. 
<H5>  Tarand Thanked for the Help </H5>
  The ministers also signed a joint planning agreement and 
program for 1994. In addition, Tarand and Pietikainen have 
conducted negotiations regarding environmental cooperation 
between the two countries . 
  Tarand thanked for the help with a pleased smile: "Of all 
environmental aid received by Estonia, about half has come from 
Finland." 
  Pietikainen, on her part, praised the Estonian efforts to 
protect its shores. The country's coastline has been protected 
from builders. 

