Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on environmental issues monitored through 9 March. 
<H5>  Bolivia </H5>
  Urgent measures must be adopted to preserve the Chiman 
forest, located in Beni Department, which is being ravaged by 
the saw mills. This is one of the country's richest forests 
because of its wood and fauna species which are now facing an 
accelerated process of destruction. Experts and ethnic groups 
warn that mahogany, which accounts for 80 percent of the timber 
exports, could disappear in two or three years. It is estimated 
that 190,000 cubic meters of mahogany are being exploited 
nationwide per year. The pollution of rivers by the saw mills 
and the destruction of the fauna are also seriously threatening 
the Chiman forest. (La Paz PRESENCIA in Spanish 27 Feb 94 pp 1,6) 
<H5>  Brazil </H5>
  Today in Rio Branco, Uruguay, Brazilian Environment Minister 
Rubens Ricupero gave Uruguayan Foreign Minister Sergio Abreu 
four atmosphere monitors that will be used to measure the level 
of gas emanating from the Candiota thermoelectrical plant in Rio 
Grande Do Sul. Brazil has thus fulfilled an agreement contained 
in the Jaguarama Declaration signed in August 1980. The 
equipment will be installed in Melo and Vichadero towns to 
determine whether the gases emanating from the Candiota Plant 
are responsible for the acid rain affecting northern Uruguay. 
(Brasilia Voz do Brasil Network in Portuguese 2200 GMT 7 Mar 94) 
<H5>  Chile </H5>
  Chile's final position on measures to protect whales will be 
decided during the administration of President-elect Eduardo 
Frei who, during his 1993 presidential campaign, expressed his 
opposition to hunting whales. Frei will have to face the 
Japanese Government's oposition to the establishment of a whale 
sanctuary near the Antarctic. (Santiago Radio Cooperativa 
Network in Spanish 1000 GMT 26 Feb 94) 
  The National Environment Commission, Conama, on 5 March 
launched a plan designed to reduce by 60 percent the national 
consumption of substances that harm the ozone layer in Chile. 
Conama Executive Secretary Rafael Asenjo said that the plan 
includes a campaign to mobilize the public, a system to 
subsidize the technological retooling, and the use of an "ozone 
stamp" on products that do not harm the ozone layer. This 
program will last three years. (Madrid EFE in Spanish 1657 GMT 5 
Mar 94) 
  Conama Executive Secretary Rafael Asenjo will, on 9 March, 
deliver to the media publications summarizing all the updated 
documents about the Environment Impact Evaluation and National 
Soil Preservation Plan. The first document is an evaluation of 
the impact that new industries have on the environment. There 
are five books in all, containing more than 1,500 pages. 
According to Conama these are the first publications about this 
subject in Chile. The basic environment law which was recently 
promulgated establishes the obligation to evaluate the 
environmental impact of any public or private investment project 
before it is constructed. (Santiago Radio Cooperativa Network in 
Spanish 1000 GMT 9 Mar 94) 
<H5>  Paraguay </H5>
  German experts and the Agriculture and Livestock Ministry 
have carried out a complete study on the forest areas which 
existed in many departments between 1945 and 1992. The study 
shows that 57 percent of Concepcion Department was covered with 
forests in 1945, but in less than 50 years a large part of the 
zone has been deforested. In 1991 the deparment had only 8 
percent of the native forests, and 92 percent of the zone lacked 
a reforestation program. The native forests covered 64 percent 
of San Pedro Department in 1945, but they were reduced to 22 
percent by 1991. (Asuncion NOTICIAS in Spanish 6 Mar 94 p 44) 

