Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by LIAOWANG WEEKLY reporters Fang Jinyu (2455 6651 </F>
3768) and Li Dahong (2621 1129 1347): "People Across the Strait 
Say `No' to Hijackers"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 21 Jan (XINHUA) -- According to the Civil 
Aviation General Administration, it began implementing new 
stipulations on security checks since the middle of last 
November on passenger airliners serving the southeastern coastal 
regions. These include: a strict check of passengers, opening 
and checking passengers' limited hand-carried luggage, and 
forbidding passengers to carry aboard any hand tools and cutlery 
which could be used to hijack aircraft. 
  A responsible person at the Civil Aviation General 
Administration told us that the administration was forced to 
make this decision, and he called for the understanding of all 
domestic and foreign passengers. 
  Behind the Civil Aviation General Administration's 
unprecedentedly strict decision, which nearly borders on 
"harassment," lies a shocking fact: China's passenger airliners 
were hijacked several times in 1993 by criminals from different 
spots in China to the same Chinese airport -- Taibei's [Taipei] 
Taoyuan Airport! 
  People cannot help wondering: Are there really any benefits 
to be reaped from hijacking planes to Taibei? Who is "to blame" 
for the constantly occurring cross-strait hijackings? 
<H5>  "Memorandum" for Cross-Strait Hijackings </H5>
  Cross-strait hijackings can be traced back 10 years. 
  Only two passenger planes were hijacked across the strait in 
the early 1980's. On 25 July 1982, a China Civil Aviation 
airliner was hijacked by Sun Zhiping and other four mainland 
criminals. Crew members, assisted by passengers, fought bravely 
with the criminals. One of the criminals was killed and the 
other four were arrested. Seven crew members and passengers were 
wounded. The hijacking attempt was foiled. 
  On 5 May 1983, Zhuo Changren and five others, after shooting 
and wounding crew members, hijacked a mainland passenger plane 
to South Korea. Zhuo Changren and the other criminals were 
brought to Taiwan without having fully served their prison terms 
in South Korea and were deemed "anticommunist heroes." What was 
most "dramatic" about the Zhuo Changren case was that in the 
very beginning Taiwan thought that the mainland had "lost face 
greatly." But now, even the former Taiwan "ambassador" to South 
Korea regrets that Taiwan "made such a great effort to bring a 
bunch of murderers to Taiwan." 
  Facts have shown that all hijackers are cruel and violent. 
He who "loses face" is precisely the party that "shelters the 
hijackers." 
  In the mid-1980's, it was "all quiet" on the two sides of 
the 
strait. 
  On 12 May 1988, the mainland criminals Zhang Qingguo and 
Long 
Guiyun hijacked and forced a mainland plane to land on a Taiwan 
military airfield. It should be noted that the plane hijacked 
by Zhang Qingguo and Long Guiyun was the first mainland 
passenger aircraft to be directly hijacked to and landed in 
Taiwan. As usual, Zhang Qingguo and Long Guiyun said that their 
reason for the hijacking was "to seek freedom." But the 
treatment they received from the Taiwan authorities was: no 
title of "anticommunist hero," no cash award, and a 
three-and-a-half-year prison term, with their being "paroled" 
after serving 21 months and being allowed to "settle" in Taiwan. 
  In December 1989, the criminal Zhang Zhenghai hijacked a 
passenger plane destined for Taiwan, but the plane was forced to 
land in Fukuoka, Japan. Japan did not allow him to proceed to 
Taiwan. Zhang Zhenghai was repatriated to the mainland to stand 
trial. He was given an eight-year prison sentence. 
  It should be said that although the hijackings by Zhuo 
Changren, Zhang Qingguo, and Long Guiyun, as well as the shelter 
given to them by and the connivance of the Taiwan authorities 
did not produce for mainland civil aviation a tragedy of plane 
crashes and human casualties, these did indeed "set up" an 
extremely dangerous "time bomb." To the mainland's criminal 
elements, the Taiwan authorities' actions are like their sending 
them this "message: "If you hijack a plane to Taiwan, all you 
have to do is to `sit' in prison for several years and then you 
may be allowed to `settle' on the island." 
  This "time bomb" finally exploded on 2 October 1990. 
  On that day, the criminal Jiang Xiaofeng, when he realized 
that the captain, far from following his "hijacking order," had 
landed the plane at Guangzhou's Baiyun airport, in a rage beat 
the captain, caused the hijacked plane to collide with two other 
planes parked on the runway, and created a great tragedy in 
which 128 people were killed, 53 people were injured, and the 
three planes were completely destroyed. Not only mainland 
people and the mainland civil aviation company were victims of 
this hijacking tragedy; 30 Taiwan compatriots also perished in 
that incident. Compatriots on both sides of the strait were 
greatly shocked! This incident caused an uproar among the 
international public. 
<H5>  The Kind of People Hijackers Are </H5>
  In 1990, Taiwan's relevant authority, yielding to the 
pressure of public opinion, announced that Taiwan would not 
welcome hijackers and anyone hijacking a plane to Taiwan would 
be promptly repatriated. Hence, the sky across the Strait was 
quiet for a while. However, the Taiwan authority did not keep 
its words. Following the hijacking on 4 April 1993, Taiwan, 
instead of promptly repatriating the hijackers, emphasized the 
"judicial jurisdiction" and "kept" the criminals in Taibei. 
Thereafter, the cross-strait sky has not been so quiet. 
Although the Taiwan authority failed to keep the promise, 
people began to notice some "improvement" in Taiwan's handling 
of hijackers. 
  Did the series of hijackers from the mainland really have a 
sweet taste of their "fruits" in Taibei? A review of hijackers' 
criminal records in the mainland and their "comic" show in 
Taibei would set people roaring with laughter. 
  Take hijackers Huang Shugang and Liu Baocai for instance. It 
has been verified by our Public Security Ministry that criminal 
Huang is the culprit of a major graft case involving over 
200,000 yuan. When he was brought to the court in Taibei, he 
had the audacity to beg the police to remove his handcuffs 
during public appearance. As he said, he would never dream of 
becoming a "captive" when he hijacked the plane to Taibei. 
Hence, we can see from this single instance the whole picture 
of the depicable, pitiful, ludicrous face of hijackers. 
  Let us take a further look at more recent hijackers. 
  Hijacker Shi Yuebo (a self-employed man from Xiaoli 
Township, 
Rongcheng County in Hebei Province), who had no previous 
criminal record, hijacked a plane to Taibei 10 August because he 
was in arrears of a 150,000 yuan-loan he had obtained through 
illicit connections. 
  Yang Mingde and Han Fengying were the couple who hijacked a 
plane 30 September. Yang, after resigning from a forestry farm 
in the northeast, took his wife and son to Shandong's Dongying 
City to set up a family-run business. Due to poor management, 
he was in debt for more than 10,000 yuan. He thought hijacking 
would be a "good way out." 
  Zhang Hai, who hijacked a plane 5 November, was a former 
driver of the Tangshan City Government. In the late eighties, 
his mother visited her father, who lives in Taiwan. According 
to Taiwan press reports, Zhang's maternal grandparents had sent 
tens of thousands of dollars to help his mother in recent years. 
In his confession in Taiwan, Zhang boasted of spending as much 
as over 10,000 yuan at song and dance halls in a single night. 
Furthermore, Taiwan's LIAN HE BAO [LIEN HE PAO] cited Zhang 
Hai, who had left behind his aging mother and infant son, as 
saying after arriving in Taibei: I have come to my maternal 
grandfather for help. However, both his grandfather and uncle 
told reporters that they did not want to see him. 
  Wang Zhihua, who hijacked a plane on 8 November, was very 
straightforward. Upon the hijacked plane's arrival in Taibei, 
he told the Taiwan police: I had a fight with my plant director; 
therefore, I hijacked the plane. Later he said: As I had 
committed a crime in the mainland, I hijacked the plane before 
the mainland police could get me. It is understood that culprit 
Wang, age 36 and a native of Heilongjiang's Hulan County, is a 
former worker of the Harbin No. 4 Pharmaceutical Plant. There 
is evidence of him embezzling 80,000 yuan; and he is suspected 
of a major larceny case.... 
  Li Xiangyu and Han Shuxue, who hijacked a plane on 12 
November, committed the crime also to evade debts. It is 
understood that Li, divorced and living by himself, is a former 
studio employee in Jilin's Tongyu County. In 1991 when he set 
up the "Donggang Tourist Company," he borrowed a 22,000 yuan 
loan with two guarantors. However, when the loan repayment was 
due, he could not make it. Hence, the two guarantors filed a 
lawsuit with the court which ruled that Li should auction his 
house to repay the loan. On 5 November, Li sold his house for 
15,000 yuan and told friends he was going to "fly far and high." 
Han, a hospital doctor of the same county and who has been 
divorced twice and is living by himself, reportedly has incurred 
heavy debts.... 
  Taiwan's newspapers have portrayed hijackers from the 
mainland as ill-informed and poorly educated people shouting 
political slogans to pursue individualistic aims. 
  Zhang Xin, senior honorific research of the Chinese 
University of Hong Kong, has incisively pointed out: To 
alleviate the trouble for Taiwan and reduce the hostility 
between the two sides of the Strait, the Taiwan authorities 
should turn hijackers over to the mainland. 
<H5>  Taiwan's Public Opinion Says: "We Do Not Welcome Hijackers!" </H5>
  On 7 April 1993, shortly after the first plane hijacking 
last 
year, "legislators" Yu Zhengxian and Zeng Zhennong of Taiwan's 
"Legislative Yuan" publicly said: Huang and Liu should be 
repatriated to the mainland to avoid covert encouragement of 
plane hijacking and letting people think that Taiwan is a 
paradise for hijackers. 
  On 11 August last year, Taiwan's FREEDOM TIMES [TZU YOU SHIH 
PAO] carried an editorial, entitled: "Say `No' to Plane 
Hijackers!" The editorial pointed out: "Hijacking should not be 
allowed for whatever the reason." The Taiwan authorities 
"should make a solemn statement to oppose the act of hijacking" 
and should "severely punish hijackers so as to clear Taiwan's 
reputation of being a 'paradise' for plane hijackers." 
  Taiwan's police and procuratorates, which have been kept 
constantly on the run by handling those cases, repeately 
expressed that the authorities should "repatriate plane 
hijackers to the mainland after trying them" for "otherwise such 
an evil practice cannot be stopped." 
  Regretfully, owing to the fact that those plane hijackers 
were not sent back to the mainland, several more plane hijacking 
cases happened in April, June, August, and until the end of last 
year. Taiwan's public opinion came to the end of its patience. 
A young teacher sent a letter, entitled: "Hijacking Again, How 
Annoying!" to Taiwan's CHINA TIMES [CHUNG KUO SHIH PAO]. 
  Now we should clearly understand two things. 
  1. Who "started the trouble" and caused the frequent 
happening of such "farce" between the two sides of the Straits? 
  Cultural worker Li Suosi wrote an article for Taiwan's 
UNITED 
DAILY [LIEN HO PAO], pointing out: "Now we are all very angry 
and almost want to immediately dump those hijackers into the 
ocean. But have we realized that these are the results of our 
encouraging mainlanders for 40 years? We broadcasted the news 
and welcomed and gave them rewards. Later, we gave them light 
sentence and tolerated them. Only in the most recent year, have 
we really "said" that we would sentence them to 10 years of 
imprisonment. Those who were not informed still want to come. 
Whom shall we blame?" 
  2. After knowing who started the trouble, we know who shall 
be responsible for ending the trouble. 
  "To fundamentally solve the problem, the most straitforward 
method is to send those hijackers back to the mainland and stop 
their intention to remain here." Businessman Li Lan of Taiwan's 
Yilan [Ilan] City wrote an article in Taiwan's newspaper, 
entitled: "Only by Repatriating Hijackers Can the Sky Be Safe." 
He pointed out in his article: "We firmly believe that only 
when those desperadoes know that hijackers will also face the 
destiny of being sent back can civil aviation be safe on both 
sides of the Straits!" 
  Taiwan's MIN SHENG PAO reminded the Taiwan authorities: 
Conniving at plane hijacking and treating hijackers kindly "will 
be a big obstacle to establishing mutual trust between the two 
sides of the Straits and will be unfavorable to effective and 
positive exchanges between the two sides." The consequences 
would be very worrisome. 
  According to reports by Taiwan's newspapers, once those 
hijackers saw Taiwan's newspapers, most of them were "upset" and 
"scared stiff." Some of Taiwan's police forces suggested that 
those plane hijackers should not be allowed to see newspapers. 
<H5>  Civil Aviation on the Mainland Are Adopting Emergent Measures </H5>
  The Civil Aviation General Administration of China (CAAC) 
has 
been making great development for more than 10 years since the 
beginning of reform and opening up. It has made particularly 
rapid progress in recent years at a rate of expanding by over 30 
percent annually. It has bought many planes, opened many flight 
routes, and employed many new workers. People can see the 
contributions made by CAAC to economic development on the 
mainland and to exchanges between the two sides of the Straits. 
However, both hardware and software somehow cannot keep up with 
the rapid development. 
  However, one thing is quite certain: CAAC has always 
attached great importance to the question of flying safety to 
protect civil air transportation and insure the safety of 
passengers and airplanes. In particular, since the beginning of 
this year, in view of the frequent hijacking of planes to 
Taiwan, CAAC appropriated 100 million yuan for the procurement 
of additional security instruments and facilities (including 
relatively advanced X-ray machines and security inspection doors 
generally used by civil airports of various countries) for 
various airports despite the tight budget. CAAC has also 
strengthened professional training for ground and air security 
personnel in light of the situation. 
  It was learned that CAAC has provided special equipment, 
which can be used to restrain hijackers without endangering 
flying safety, for airplane security personnel. CAAC has 
warned, transferred, or dismissed a number of staff members and 
workers who were held responsible for the hijacking incidents 
last year. 
  It was also learned that due to resolute measures adopted by 
the CAAC, several plane hijacking attempts were foiled on the 
mainland last year. On 26 November 1993, hijacker Gao 
Guangkai's hijacking scheme was foiled. 
  A responsible CAAC person hoped to make an apology to the 
broad masses of passengers through news media. He said: To 
effectively insure flying safety for Chinese and foreign 
passengers, passengers of various flights to or passing 
southeast coastal areas will be subject to special inspection. 
He hoped that passengers would understand the situation and 
cooperate with the action taken by CAAC. He especially stressed 
that simply relying on strengthening safety inspection cannot 
totally prevent the scheme of hijackers and that the most 
fundamental and effective way is to repatriate all plane 
hijackers from Taiwan and stop making Taiwan a paradise for 
hijackers. 
  Are not the words of this official right? Business Liu 
Changyuan of Taiwan's Jilong [Keelung] City said in a newspaper 
article: If we blame the mainland for all the reasons of plane 
hijacking, then we should ask why those hijackers only choose to 
fly to Taiwan and not to other places? Besides, the items used 
by several hijackers could not be detected by general safety 
inspection prodecures. How can we blame the mainland for not 
being thorough in flying safety inspections? Must they take 
measures to the point of annoying all passengers? 
  It is hoped that Chinese and foreign tourists would, like 
Mr. 
Liu, understand why CAAC cannot but adopt temporary safety 
inspection measures to the point of "annoying passengers." 
<H5>  Plane Hijackers "Met with Misfortune" in Taibei </H5>
  News from Taiwan at end of 1993 reported that hijacker Gao 
Jun tried to commit suicide at a detention house. After racking 
his brains in scheming the plane hijacking, why did he want to 
commit suicide shortly after arriving in Taibei? Gao Jun's 
"performance" merits attention and thinking by a small number of 
lawless people on the mainland who assume that hijacking a plane 
can bring them benefits. 
  At 0200 in the wee hours of the morning of 23 December, five 
other prisoners living in the same room with Gao Jun at the 
Taibei [Taipei] Taoyuan Detention House had already fallen 
asleep. Only Gao Jun sat there and could not sleep. A watcher 
asked him why he could not sleep, Gao Jun said with staring eyes 
that he could not sleep because he had swallowed batteries and 
his stomach ached. The watcher was frightened and rushed him to 
a hospital. An X-ray examination showed he indeed had hard 
stuffs in his stomach. It was learned that Gao Jun swallowed 
two No. 4 batteries and the handle of a toothbrush. Gao Jun was 
kept in the hospital for observation and then sent back to a 
prison after doctors confirmed he would be all right. According 
to the analysis of Taiwan police, the reasons why Gao Jun 
committed suicide were: 1) His girl friend did not know about 
his hijacking scheme and was forced to return to the mainland on 
the same plane by Taiwan's police following his hijacking of the 
plane. Gao Jun was "hurt" and had high blood pressure. 2) He 
did not think that, after "flying" to Taibei, he would be put 
into a jail. When he was sent to the Taiyuan Detention House 
for "routine health examination," it was found that he had high 
blood pressure and was emotionally very unstable. It was 
learned that Taibei police are conducting "psychological 
guidance" for him. 
  Is it difficult or not difficult to solve the problem of 
frequent cross-strait plane hijackings? 
  The answer is: not difficult. Now, the measures that should 
be taken by the Taiwan side are simple and convenient. All they 
have to do is to send back all criminals involved in previous 
aircraft hijackings. Naturally, if the Taiwan side announces 
publicly after repatriating all hijackers that from now on all 
people who hijack airplanes to Taiwan will be repatriated, and 
if the mainland side also makes great efforts to coordinate and 
publicize Taiwan's announcement through the mainland's mass 
media, then all vicious and stupid people on the mainland cannot 
but think twice before carrying out such heinous crimes as 
aircraft hijackings. 
  At the end of 1993, the Taiwan authorities held several days 
of a "cross-ministerial" conference. Wu Boxiong [Wo Po-hsiung], 
the convener of the Executive Yuan's "policy group for 
countering aircraft hijackings," finally announced that Taiwan's 
"Executive Yuan" has decided to repatriate plane hijackers so as 
to eliminate the possibility of aircraft hijackers' remaining in 
Taiwan. Bu Boxiong told Taiwan's reporters: "At present, plane 
hijackers can remain in Taiwan after serving their prison 
sentences. We must stop this kind of practice, which is an 
incentive." 
  In early 1994, news from Taibei said: Following the 
sentencing of Huang Shugang and Liu Baocai to 10 years in 
prison, the hijacker Zhang Wenlong was sentenced to nine years 
in prison, Yang Mingde was sentenced to nine years in prison, 
and Yang's wife Han Fengying was sentenced to six years in 
prison. Taiwan's procurators demanded that Zhang Hai, Li 
Xiangyu, Han Shuxue, and others be sentenced to more than 12 
years. The Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits 
and Taiwan's Straits Exchange Foundation reached a common 
understanding in their routine discussion: that in principle, 
all aircraft hijackers of the two sides must be repatriated. 
  Even though the Taiwan authorities have made a decision on 
repatriating plane hijackers because of the strong demand of the 
people of the island, people believe what is more important is 
that the Taiwan authorities must implement the decision as 
quickly as possible. 

