BFN 

  [Text] Joe Clark, the UN secretary general's special 
representative in Cyprus, stressed that there must be safe 
access to and from Famagusta. Clark was speaking to Cyprus 
Broadcasting Corporation [CyBC] correspondent Apostolis 
Zoumbaniotis before meeting Greek Foreign Minister Karolos 
Papoulias in New York last night. 
  The UN official said the two sides are very close to an 
agreement but noted that there are still some pending issues. 
He said access to Famagusta is the most crucial one. Clark 
added that there must be real security on access to and from 
Famagusta both for residents and businessmen who will return to 
the area. 
  With his meeting with Papoulias, Clark opened a new round of 
meetings to reach an agreement on the confidence-building 
measures. He also met U.S. Assistant Secretary of State Stephen 
Oxman and Robert Lamb, the U.S. State Department's special 
coordinator on the Cyprus issue. Clark is expected to leave 
from Washington today to go to Ankara for talks with Turkish 
Foreign Minister Hikmet Cetin. He and Gustave Feissel, the UN 
secretary general's alternate special representative in Cyprus, 
are expected in Cyprus next Wednesday [27 April]. 
  Accompanied by UNFICYP [UN Forces in Cyprus] Political 
Adviser John Paul Kavanagh, Feissel left for Ankara this 
morning. In a statement to CyBC, Feissel said he and Clark will 
hold two-day talks with Turkish officials in Ankara. He said: 
It is a new effort for a positive conclusion on the 
confidence-building measures in view of the new report that the 
UN secretary general will have to submit to the Security Council 
by the end of April. 
  Answering a question by CyBC correspondent Takis Andoniadhis 
in Nicosia on U.S. President Bill Clinton's position that 
Turkish Cypriot leader Rauf Denktas will accept the 
confidence-building measures, Feissel said he is not aware of 
the U.S. President's statement, adding: We must wait for the 
outcome of the new effort by the end of this week. 

