Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Arab delegations to the peace talks in 
Washington today decided to suspend [qat'] bilateral talks with 
Israel to protest the massacre at the holy Ibrahimi Mosque in 
Hebron. A spokesman for the Syrian Foreign Ministry confirmed 
statements by U.S. officials that this step does not mean an end 
to the whole peace process, which began two years ago. The 
spokesman added: No progress has been achieved in the talks 
that resumed in Washington on 24 January after a four-month 
hiatus. The spokesman said that Israel is responsible for this. 
  The Foreign Ministry spokesman added that Israeli 
intransigence during the talks, and its failure to make any 
positive initiatives, encouraged Israeli extremists to 
perpetrate the Hebron massacre. The spokesman said: Israel has 
made no positive initiatives in response to the constructive and 
flexible stands adopted by Syria in the Geneva summit held 
between President Hafiz al-Asad and U.S. President Bill Clinton. 
  In Amman, Talal al-Hasan, Jordanian minister of state for 
foreign affairs, announced that Jordan today was stopping 
bilateral talks with Israel in Washington to protest the 
massacre of the holy Ibrahimi Mosque. REUTER cited al-Hasan as 
saying that the heads of the Arab delegations participating in 
the peace talks in Washington held intensive contacts and 
decided to stop the ongoing talks to protest the criminal 
massacre. 
  Chief Syrian delegate Muwaffaq al-'Allaf today said: It is 
not logical or suitable to pursue the talks in Washington 
following the massacre perpetrated by the settlers in the holy 
Ibrahimi Mosque. Al-'Allaf added in an interview with Radio 
Monte Carlo: Through our suspension of bilateral talks, we want 
to express our solidarity with the Palestinian Arab people 
following this vicious aggression. 
  The heads of the Arab delegations charged al-'Allaf with the 
job of holding contacts with the U.S. Department of State to 
inform it of the stands of the Arab delegations involved in the 
talks. 

