BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial by Muhammad al-Mashmushi: "The Naked U.S. Truth"] </F>
  [Text] No one would object, particularly in the Arab world, 
if U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher makes his planned 
new tour of the region that the Americans call "the Middle 
East." However, this tour will not be useful if he visits under 
the conditions he himself specified, primarily that he will 
pressure no one--he naturally means Israel--to achieve progress 
on the road to a settlement. 
  Following the al-Ibrahimi Mosque massacre and Washington's 
stance on a Security Council resolution on it, let alone the 
constant Arab complaints about Israeli intransigence at the 
negotiating table, Christopher's statement on the tour seems to 
be asking the Arabs whether they want him to come and, 
consequently, if they are ready to make his tour useful. 
  The U.S. secretary is revealing here what no one needs to 
know any longer, although certain Americans and even some Arabs 
are trying to cover it up, as PLO chairman Yasir 'Arafat did by 
accusing a "secret organization" of assassinating six 
Palestinians on the day before yesterday. The Yitzhaq Rabin 
government responded by awarding medals to its personnel 
yesterday. The United States as much as Israel is trying to 
make political gains from the daily repression, massacres, and 
individual and collective assassinations taking place in the 
occupied territories as well as even disavowals of the 
Gaza-Jericho agreement. 
  The Israelis and Americans constantly have their eyes on the 
negotiating table in Washington and what the Arabs can offer 
voluntarily or forcibly in favor of Israel and its strategy in 
the region, once on the pretext of security requirements, fear 
of another holocaust, or the new world order and the need for 
the Arab world to adjust itself with its requirements. 
  The United States does not deny any of these accusations. At 
times, it even boasts about them publicly. An extremely 
significant example, although not directly related to the U.S. 
Administration's stance on a settlement in the region and the 
fluctuations in the talks to confront the Arab stance on the 
Israeli intransigence about the Arab call for land for peace, is 
manifest in the U.S.-Zionist campaign to circulate the Jewish 
theory on which Israel was established--international 
persecution and the Nazi holocaust. The U.S. State Department 
released an official statement in the past few days denouncing a 
decision by the Indonesian and Malaysian Governments banning the 
movie Schindler's List made by a Jewish director who was awarded 
seven Oscars. Washington was not content with an indignant 
official denunciation. It adopted more than the hostile stance 
of releasing a statement that is rare in the history of 
relations among countries. The proof of this is that both 
countries backed down and permitted the film, but only after 
censoring certain sexual and nude scenes. Why? What is the 
reason for this stance? It is easy to say that it is because of 
the Zionist influence and media controlled by Jewish funds. 
However, the truth goes beyond that. The fact is declared 
brazenly that the current U.S. Administration is not American 
as much as it is Zionist regarding the issue of an Arab-Israeli 
settlement. Perhaps Christopher was admitting this naked truth 
when he spoke of his forthcoming tour. It makes no difference 
whether the tour takes place or not. He is telling the Arab 
world that this is the truth of the U.S. policy on a settlement, 
whether it is under the name of "full partner" or "honest 
broker," or any other. 

