Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By RENMIN RIBAO reporter Yu Ning (0060 1337) and XINHUA </F>
reporters Zheng Qingdong (6774 1987 2639) and Zhang Yijun (1728 
4135 0193)] 
  [Text] Beijing, 15 Mar (XINHUA) -- Zhu Rongji, a member of 
the Standing Committee of the CPC Central Committee Political 
Bureau and vice-premier of the State Council, joined deputies 
from Shaanxi in examining the "government work report" in the 
Shaanxi Room today and conscientiously heard their views and 
suggestions. He said: The vast territory of China's central and 
western regions have great potential for development. How to 
develop these regions' economy, improve work of helping the poor 
areas with development, solve the food and clothing problem of 
the poor population, and accomplish common prosperity is an 
important question that draws both the concern of the people and 
the focus of world attention. The economic takeoff in China's 
central and western regions symbolizes China's hope in the 21st 
century. 
  Deputies Liu Ronghui, Wang Shuangxi, Wang Dazhong, Lei 
Renyi, 
and others, who are provincial, prefectural, and city leaders as 
well as factory and rural representatives, spoke one after 
another. Responding to various policy matters raised by the 
deputies, including finance and taxation, Zhu Rongji replied in 
simple terms and spoke on the development of the central and 
western regions. 
  Zhu Rongji said: Both thinking on achieving common 
prosperity and strategies in developing the central and western 
regions are important components of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
theory of building socialism with Chinese characteristics. 
General Secretary Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng have 
seriously discussed and given concrete instructions on the 
question of developing the central and western regions, 
particularly during the recent national work conference on 
helping poor areas when a package of principles and policies on 
promoting development in these regions was presented. The 
party's Central Committee and the State Council have all along 
attached great importance to the economic development in the 
central and western regions. With enhancement of its financial 
strength, the central government will invest more to quicken the 
pace of development in these regions. 
  Zhu Rongji emphasized economic development in the central 
and 
western regions must continue to be based on agriculture. He 
stated: The central and western regions, with a certain 
industrial foundation, should not abandon their agricultural 
superiority. As comparative agricultural efficiency has been 
declining in recent years, the central government is taking 
measures to constantly narrow the scissor-shaped price gap 
between industrial and agricultural products to enhance both 
comparative agricultural efficiency and the peasants' incomes. 
We should not have the notion that agricultural development is 
doomed to suffer losses. Developing industry in a region with an 
extremely backward agricultural foundation is unimaginable. The 
central and western regions will become prosperous as prices of 
farm products gradually improve. In developing agriculture in 
these regions, special attention should be paid to the 
construction and maintenance of water conservancy projects. 
Peasants should be mobilized to build small-scale but effective 
irrigation projects, while the larger ones should be carried out 
according to capability. 
  Zhu Rongji pointed out: The central and western regions 
should vigorously develop infrastructure facilities and basic 
industries with emphasis on communications and transportation. 
Restrained by communications and transportation conditions, the 
regions' rich natural resources have not been fully utilized, 
however. Similarly, in the absence of a convenient 
transportation system and posts and communications networks, 
industrial development will be impossible. Hence, as far as the 
central and western regions are concerned, developing 
communications and transportation is not only an important means 
for quick prosperity, but also will help build a solid 
foundation for future industrial development and economic 
takeoff. 
  Zhu Rongji said: Developing the central and western regions 
will involve other questions, such as personnel training, 
changes in concept, transformation of mechanisms, and system 
innovation. The nationwide efforts in streamlining government 
organs and downsizing cadres are particularly important to the 
central and western regions. Currently, revenues collected by 
some poor areas nearly all go to the maintenance of cadres as 
state subsidies for helping poor areas through development; as 
such, what financial strength do we have to develop the economy? 
  Over the past few days, Zhu Rongji has been talking with 
deputies from Hunan, Guizhou, Jiangxi, and Henan, and 
conscientiously heard views reflected by deputies from the 
central and western regions. Deputy Ding Guangen, a member of 
the CPC Central Committee Political Bureau and secretary of the 
Central Committee Secretariat, also took part in today's 
discussions with the Shaanxi delegation. 

