BFN 

  [Text] Mikhail Poltoranin, democratic reformist member of 
the lower house of the Russian Federal Assembly and former vice 
premier of Russia, who came to Japan at the invitation of the 
Japan-Russia Parliamentary Union on 29 March, gave an exclusive 
interview to MAINICHI SHIMBUN at a hotel in Tokyo on 30 March. 
  Poltoranin stressed the significant influence that the draft 
"National Reconciliation Agreement" proposed by President Boris 
Yeltsin, which he and other parliamentarians drew up on 28 
March, will have on the stability of the Russian political 
situation. He indicated that in case the conservatives refuse 
to support the agreement, there is a possibility the 
presidential election may be advanced to late 1994 or early 1995. 
  The "National Reconciliation Agreement" was drawn up by 
Poltoranin and other representatives of the Parliament and the 
government. It is a document that designates the order of 
priority of current issues to be resolved by Russia in social, 
economic, and international affairs. According to Poltoranin, 
the agreement states that "Russian society will aim at achieving 
stability gradually." It also provides for a temporary freeze 
on the proposed advance presidential and parliamentary 
elections. While the document is not legally binding, the 
concurrence and signatures of the president, the speakers of 
both houses of parliament, the federal government [as 
published], the chairman of the Supreme Court, and 
representatives of all political blocs in the Federal Assembly 
are being sought. The president wants to stabilize the 
political situation with this document. 
  After the draft of the "Agreement" has been completed, 
supporters of the president are working on persuading all 
parties and factions, including the conservative forces 
advocating the overthrow of the president, to sign the document. 
Poltoranin said, "If we are unable to obtain the signatures of 
all parties and factions, there is a possibility that the 
presidential election may be advanced to late this year, or 
early next year." 
  Poltoranin is a close aide to Yeltsin. He was concurrently 
vice premier from February 1992. He ran for a seat in the lower 
house in the December 1993 elections and was elected. 

