Language: <F P=105> Lao </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] His Excellency [H.E.] Chaleun Yiapaoheu, head of 
the Secretariat Commission of the Lao People's Democratic 
Republic [LPDR] National Assembly, has told national radio 
reporters that the talks between the high-level Lao National 
Assembly delegation and the high-level parliamentary delegation 
from the Kingdom of Thailand proceeded in an atmosphere of 
good-neighborly and fraternal friendship. As a result of the 
talks, agreements have been reached on many issues. 
  The talks were held this afternoon at the National Assembly 
Hall in the capital, Vientiane. Attending the talks on the Lao 
side were H.E. National Assembly Chairman Saman Vi-gnaket; H.E. 
Chaleun Yiapaoheu, member of the National Assembly from Oudomsai 
Province and head of the National Assembly Secretariat 
Commission; H.E. Dr. Khamliang Phonsena, member of the National 
Assembly from Champassak Province and head of the National 
Assembly Foreign Affairs Commission; H.E. Souphanthaheuangsi 
Sisaleumsak, member of the National Assembly from Luang Prabang 
Province; H.E. Dr. Siho Bannavong, member of the National 
Assembly from Vientiane Municipality, deputy head of the 
National Assembly Cultural and Social Commission, and vice 
chairman of the Lao-Thai Friendship Association; H.E. Somphon 
Kha-gnong-ek, member of the National Assembly from Champassak 
Province; H.E. Brigadier General Saisompheng Souli-gnavong, 
member of the National Assembly from Xieng Khouang Province; 
H.E. Khamsen Meuangmani, member of the National Assembly from 
Saravane Province; and H.E. Khampong Soulinphoumi, member of the 
National Assembly from Vientiane Municipality. [passage omitted] 
  [Begin Yiapaoheu recording] The Lao National Assembly 
delegation and the Thai parliamentary delegation held a meeting 
at 1450 in the National Assembly auditorium. During the 
meeting, Chairman Saman Vi-gnaket welcomed the Thai delegation's 
official visit. He highly assessed the visit and noted that it 
will contribute to promoting and expanding the long-standing and 
traditional relations of friendship and cooperation between the 
two peoples of Laos and Thailand. Chairman Saman Vi-gnaket also 
briefed the Thai side on the general situation in the LPDR. He 
emphasized the National Assembly's organizational work and 
activities, especially the establishment and enforcement of the 
Constitution and various laws aimed at guaranteeing Lao citizens 
from all tribes their democratic rights, freedoms, and rights as 
masters. In addition, Chairman Saman Vi-gnaket briefed the Thai 
side on the National Assembly's functions, structure, and 
activities. He also gave his views on the LPDR's determination 
to implement the policy of peace, friendship, and cooperation. 
In this regard, he said the LPDR and the multiethnic Lao people 
always seek friendship with all neighboring countries as well as 
various friendly countries throughout the world, both near and 
far. In addition, Chairman Saman Vi-gnaket expressed his 
satisfaction with the friendly relations between the LPDR 
National Assembly and the Parliament of the Kingdom of Thailand. 
  For his part, Prof. Marut Bunnak expressed his pleasure with 
the welcome accorded to the Thai delegation by the Lao side. He 
then reiterated the time-honored and traditional relations of 
friendship and cooperation between the peoples of the two 
countries. He noted that Laos and Thailand are two neighboring 
and fraternal countries that maintain similar customs and 
languages. He continued, saying that as representatives that 
have worked for the interests of the people and the nation, the 
delegation will contribute positively and more effectively to 
boosting the activities of the two countries' assemblies. In 
conclusion, the two sides agreed to strengthen mutual relations 
between the two countries' assemblies through various forms and 
means, such as exchanging visits between delegations at various 
levels. In this regard, the two sides agreed to set up a 
friendship association between the LPDR National Assembly and 
the Parliament of the Kingdom of Thailand to enhance friendly 
relations between the Lao and Thai peoples. 
  In addition, the Lao side reiterated the settlement of 
border 
problems and the problem of those ill-intentioned elements that 
have hidden in Thailand and created obstacles to friendly 
relations between the peoples of the two countries. The two 
sides agreed to make efforts to promote and improve friendly 
relations and expand the roles of the legislative institutions 
in order to contribute to strengthening Lao-Thai relations and 
cooperation during the next stage. [end recording] [passage 
omitted] 

