Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lyubov Latypova: "In the Corridors of Power: </F>
Democracy Without Force, or Force Without Democracy"] 
  [Text] It is useful on the threshold of another special 
election to give some thought to what it will lead to regardless 
of established and declared objectives. As the previous one 
showed, the result of recurrent rearrangements in the Federal 
Assembly can diverge far from the intentions of the ideologues. 
In this regard, life supplied our neighbors in Vladivostok with 
an amazing experiment a year ago. The first results are already 
also visible... 
  As we recall, the heads of the kray and the city 
administrations were replaced practically at one and the same 
time within about a month of each other. Yevgeniy Nazdratenko, 
manager of the Vostok mining company, became governor, and 
Viktor Cherepkov, a military prosecutor, became mayor. Almost 
all the deputies of the kray board, with an assist from the 
president, voted for Nazdratenko, while a majority of the 33 
percent of the voters who came, as is customary to say, to the 
ballot boxes, voted for Cherepkov. The first "bought" the kray 
parliament with the fact that he had created a bright future 
within the scope of his own enterprise, which had grown from a 
small artel; the second made a name for himself in exposing 
improper dealings in the army, and was almost the only one of 
all of the candidates during the election campaign who promised 
with army resoluteness unconditional protection for all those 
who are orphaned or impoverished. 
  As a result, both aspirants proceeded from different poles; 
however, their new life started, and is continuing, in the same 
vein--with scandals. Cherepkov introduced free travel on public 
transport (after which it began to operate significantly worse), 
and hampered city preparations for winter, understanding nothing 
about city administration but continuously and personally 
issuing instructions. As may be realized, because of this things 
only became worse for the orphaned and impoverished. 
  Somewhat bigger scandals are tied to Nazdratenko's name. 
Quite recently Valeriy Butov, the president's representative 
(now already a former representative), accused him and the 
administration team of corruption, after which he was dismissed 
from his position without any explanation of the reason. This 
opinion, incidentally, is also shared by almost the entire 
press, which this team tried to take in hand almost immediately 
after coming to power. Almost all, with the exception of the 
KRASNOYE ZNAMYA newspaper, whose editor, Vladimir Shkrabov, 
began to manage the press committee in the executive branch. 
  The press defended its independence, continuing with a 
passion to keep an eye on the actions of an almost completely 
renewed administration. There was indeed something to keep an 
eye on: Almost all the those who came to the highest building in 
Vladivostok were people of the same team, called PAKT--Maritime 
Joint-Stock Corporation of Commodity Producers. And herein is 
the main plot. 
  Despite the fact that the representative authority was "for" 
Nazdratenko, the managers of the executive authority did not 
stand too much on ceremony with colleagues from the very 
beginning, forgetting to coordinate the candidacies being 
appointed to responsible positions with the approval of the 
council of people's deputies. At one press conference Dmitriy 
Grigorovich, chairman of the council of people's deputies, 
reported that the deputy head of administration, Igor 
Lebedinets, "told him point blank in the presence of several 
people that PAKT--new, rich people--had come to power. The 
placement of personnel was calculated a long time ago, and it is 
not necessary to impede this association." Actually, key 
positions in the "governorship" were occupied by members of this 
organization. 
  A clamor was raised about this just before the confirmation 
of Nazdratenko as the head of the administration, although the 
association itself, of which he was a founder, was formed a year 
earlier. Well, it was organized and organized--colleagues right 
away named six such organizations, and this, I think, is not 
all. The directors of the largest enterprises gathered, along 
with some of the main specialists and "necessary" people, about 
200 of them, and established a joint-stock company of the closed 
type, with a charter capital of more than R400 million, which 
even in the yardstick of the year before last was not too much. 
But this is not prohibited by law. The shares of stock were 
divided up--50 for the directors and those most "necessary" 
(including Shkrabov), and further, according to one's place in 
the hierarchy. This is also legal. Although there is a question: 
If the director of a large enterprise that is still a state 
enterprise has a maximum number of shares of stock in another, 
private structure, which one will he be more interested in? Or 
will he try to combine both interests, using the state capital 
(or former state capital) for personal aims? 
  THE QUESTION IS FAR FROM AN IDLE ONE, for--I especially 
emphasize this fact--PAKT is an association of physical and not 
juridical persons, which the enterprises headed by these 
physical persons are. That is, friendship is one thing, money 
quite another. And from this standpoint the charter capital of 
PAKT would be insufficient for the organization of the slightest 
serious business that some have proclaimed: the production and 
sale of consumer goods, the construction of industrial 
enterprises, stores, and housing, and furthermore, like 
everyone, mediation and commerce. 
  Perhaps what is most intriguing in this situation is the 
fact 
that the founders themselves, it seems, forgot about the status 
of their association and in numerous interviews enthusiastically 
drew a picture of how remarkably shareholders will begin to live 
in the very near future, while at the same time naming 
collectives that did not have a single share. As could have been 
expected, not one of these promises came to fruition, and 
enterprises, among which there were a lot of defense 
enterprises, felt the full effects--many had come to a 
standstill by winter. 
  Lawyers and economists with whom I have had occasion to 
consult regarding the promises and the deliberate silence assert 
with one voice that no law was broken here either, because 
silence is not a crime, and numerous methods for getting hold of 
a large piece of state property can be implemented in a quite 
civilized way: For example, transfer in trust to PAKT shares of 
enterprises that belong to the founders, or sell them to it 
(that is, to itself), or convert them to PAKT shares. But if it 
also takes the share that belongs to the state into trust 
control, this will be quite enough for possessing a controlling 
block of shares of the "dependent" enterprises. That is, they 
will first and foremost feed the founder-directors of the 
private structure. 
  It was assumed that the directors, tied by a single 
corporate 
string, would be able to help each other to be strong and rich 
and work out a single policy that would be profitable for 
everyone. That is, they would not beat their heads against a 
wall, bruise each other, and go to Moscow with outstretched 
hand. However, Nazdratenko's first visit was exactly with such 
an "outstretched hand" for privileges in the power industry. One 
of PAKT's founders, Vladimir Kolesnichenko, declared in this 
regard that this was the will of the industrialists of the kray. 
But in the project of the "functionally organizationally 
integrated structure to which it is planned to transfer PAKT 
smoothly, it is envisioned bringing onto the board of directors 
a special representative of the government who is to be assigned 
special rights. Although this is prohibited by law. But this is 
today's law. However, inasmuch as legislation in our country is 
extremely unstable and does not depend as much on objectives 
that generally no one sees as on the political prejudices of a 
majority of parliamentarians, it is not ruled out that the 
current majority (especially in the Federation Council, which 
consists of more than half of the governors) will change this 
situation. PAKT plans to press both the legislative and 
executive and the coordination structures, proposing "the 
inclusion of the corporation as an official structure in the 
resolution of federal programs of the government within the 
scope of implementation of programs of structural 
reorganizations in the economy of Maritime Kray and the Far 
East." That is, as long as you, local authorities, are sorting 
things out between yourselves and are dividing the chairs in the 
association of economic cooperation, we, the private structure, 
will seize the initiative and the finances. If it is also 
considered that the federal program in all variants envisions an 
exclusively colonizing policy with respect to the region, then 
it becomes somewhat awful. 
  Is it bad? Well, it depends on how you look at it... It is 
quite clear that the current authority in the region is not an 
authority in the full sense of this word, because it does not 
have the resources, does not have new levers of control at a 
time when the old ones are stuck, and does not have 
organizational support in the active strata of the population. 
The attempts by Viktor Ishayev, administration head of our kray, 
to gather intellects around himself are rather fruitless. All 
kinds of public consultative councils that clustered around him 
two years ago in the hope of dictating conditions have collapsed 
and cracked; the board of directors, enjoying his support, 
regularly composes petitions with ultimatums for the center, to 
which the center does not pay much attention; the monthly 
collegiums, like two peas in a pod, began to resemble the former 
party administrative aktivs with efforts by subordinates to 
render account successfully and by the "bosses" to lead everyone 
to clear water. Given this layout, a managerial construct is 
sooner possible as an exception than as a system. 
  But the director corps in Primorye, which is already 
reinforced with its own powerful productive forces and material 
valuables, declared unequivocally that it is tired of playing 
politics and that it is taking authority into its own hands. 
Which it is doing rather persistently, without reflecting on the 
losses of socialist morality and ethics. Perhaps this is a kind 
of revenge for the years of humiliation since the beginning of 
perestroyka, when the entire director corps was considered 
stupid and reactionary and when the idols of the public were 
speakers who called for "rejection of the old world." Is the new 
morality of society that is growing on the ruins of the old 
maturing, or is this really a degradation of ethics? I will not 
try to answer this question unequivocally, because it is in an 
equal degree unethical to muddle heads with promises of 
prosperity at the expense of the state and to build personal 
welfare on the bones of others. But we should not flatter 
ourselves regarding the independence of the Primorye governor 
from the people who make up his circle, which it would seem is 
indicated by his formal withdrawal from PAKT. Indeed, on this 
score, he also did not leave any illusions, unambiguously 
declaring after his confirmation: "I am in no measure against 
anyone from the former people, but I listen to the opinion of 
those people who are around me." 
  One can ride for a long time on the seesaw of doubts between 
two assessments of what happened--its nontriviality prompts one 
to reflect. However, there should be no doubt that this is the 
obvious beginning of the crystallization of new structures for 
which, in contrast to our numerous and weak parties, authority 
is necessary to protect their own property interests. 
Incidentally, it is said that similar structures, but with a 
clearly expressed criminal nature, also supported one of 
Cherepkov's rivals. But the new entrepreneurs of various shades, 
who also have something to gain and lose, have not yet had their 
say. Without a doubt all of them will try to establish their own 
lobbies in the representative organs of authority at the kray 
and city level. 
  In addition, two things are clearly coming into focus: 
First, 
the personal qualities of the workers who have been promoted to 
administrative posts in these structures will have secondary 
significance, inasmuch as the pyramid here has been inverted: It 
is not the leader who directs the people, but the corporation 
that directs its protege. On the one hand, this means that we 
will never again be ruled by either tyrants or musical comedy 
personalities. On the other hand, are the corporate interests of 
a rather narrow circle of persons that much better? 
  It is a short step from here to another circumstance If 
anyone still has any illusions that authority serves everyone, 
let them be finally dispelled, because this never happened, 
either in capitalist or in socialist times. It is another matter 
that perhaps tall weeds grow out of nothing and that it is 
impossible to make everyone happy at the expense of the poor, 
but owing to an increase in wealth it is possible to make many 
happy. Depending on the kind of goal one sets and how to reach 
it. But I will not throw myself now into a slough of doubts 
regarding the goals and methods of achieving them. I will stand 
aside and think about something else. 
  I will think about Viktor Ivanovich Cherepkov who, without a 
doubt, evokes deep respect for his tireless courage in exposing 
vices and, at best, pity--for incompetence in creative matters 
behind which there are no real productive forces. He promised 
help to many. The war is over. It is necessary to build. Who 
will come to help, and is the foundation not too weak? 
  And furthermore. What do we want from our new representative 
authority, which the executive authority has so successfully 
learned to ignore and the possibility of doing without which was 
cultivated for so long in society? Will it now be a 
counterweight to the managers, or will it begin to obediently 
follow in the direction indicated by the governor's finger? 

