Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev in the "Concept" </F>
column: "Following an `Asiatic' Path Toward a Security System 
in Asia. Russia Has No Irreconcilable Contradictions With the 
Asian Pacific Rim Countries" -- "abridged version of Andrey 
Kozyrev's statement on 27 January to the Chinese People's 
Diplomacy Association"] 
  [Text] The realization of Russia's interests not through 
confrontation but cooperation with the outside world has allowed 
us to a very large extent to reopen for ourselves a whole number 
of Asian states. This refers to China, our great eastern 
neighbor. After agonizing vacillations from ideologized 
indiscriminate friendship to just as unwarranted and 
unrestrained hostility, the two "mainlands" of civilization -- 
Russia and China -- have confidently embarked down the path of 
good-neighborliness and cooperation. 
  In formulating Russia's foreign policy, we proceed from the 
strategic character of good-neighborly relations with the 
Chinese People's Republic. Its main points of departure along 
the Asian Pacific direction are as follows: 
  First. The region's importance for the future of Russia is 
increasing. Primarily because the economic role of the Asian 
part of our country is growing. Here, some major tasks are to 
be resolved in building up the production of energy resources, 
converting military industry enterprises, developing 
communications, and providing amenities for the cities. The 
significance of our ties with our Asian neighbors is also 
increasing. They account for a third of our foreign trade. 
  Second. The system of interstate relations in the region, 
just as, incidentally, in the world at large, is and will be not 
mono- polar, not bipolar, but multipolar. The ideology of 
regional or global alliances of some countries in the 
Asia-Pacific Rim against others is becoming history now. The 
future of the region lies not in power rivalry but in 
cooperation and interaction between the leading powers. 
  Russia proceeds from the importance of maintaining stable 
and 
balanced relations with all of the Asian Pacific states. This 
principle underlies our treaty with China, India, the United 
States of America, and the Republic of Korea and also our links 
with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We are seeking 
to apply the same principles in building our relations with 
Japan and the ASEAN member states. In so doing, we believe that 
in the Asia-Pacific Rim there are no powers or groupings with 
which we have irreconcilable contradictions. We are striving to 
make the Commonwealth of Independent States, created jointly 
with our partners, a major factor of stability in the Eurasian 
space. 
  Third. The danger of large military conflicts arising in the 
region today is the lowest since the times of World War II. The 
importance of the military factor has diminished noticeably. At 
the same time there is a considerable potential of tension, not 
only inherited from the "cold war" but also caused by new 
problems. This involves the issue of access to the resources of 
the Pacific Ocean, including its sea bed, and a number of border 
disputes. The rise of religious and nationalist extremism has 
dramatically manifested itself in Afghanistan and is threatening 
Tajikistan. Unless we jointly attend to these problems in Asia, 
we will run the risk of ending up with a fairly "explosive 
substance." 
  Fourth. The economic role of the Asian Pacific Region, which 
accounts for 60 percent of the world's industrial output, will 
continue to grow dynamically in the future. In this respect the 
21st century will undoubtedly be a "century of the Pacific." 
The international positions of the Asian states will be 
primarily conditioned by the extent of their involvement in 
business relations in this region and their participation in the 
associations emerging here. We proceed from the assumption that 
such a buildup of national might does not threaten neighbors, 
but quite the contrary creates in the Asian Pacific Region 
conditions for dynamic economic growth necessary to all of us. 
We have welcomed China's participation in the recent meeting of 
the Asian Pacific Economic Union member states in Seattle as a 
major event for the whole of this region. For our part we hope 
that friendly China will render us assistance in integrating 
into the main economic associations in our region. 
  Fifth. In Asia, just as in other regions of the world, 
economic progress contributes to progress in ensuring 
fundamental human rights and freedoms. "To respect others like 
yourself and to treat them as we wish to be treated." This 
universal law of morality, formulated by Confucius, has become a 
prototype of universal contemporary human rights. The World 
Human Rights Conference in October 1993 called for their 
comprehensive observance. 
  On the whole, we favor a phased formation of a joint 
security system, a kind of "security community" open to all. We 
should move toward such a system taking into account the 
experience of other regions, for example, Europe, but in our own 
"Asiatic" way. Here, the following criteria are applicable in 
particular: 
  -- a phased, possibly multi-speed and multi-optional, 
approach based on the real readiness of particular states for 
participation in concrete security structures; 
  -- consideration for the specifics of bilateral ties and the 
situation inside the sub-regions, and movement from local 
accords to a diversified regional structure; 
  -- ascent from simple forms of cooperation (exchange of 
military information, confidence measures, and so forth) to more 
complex forms (joint situation management measures). 
  To this end Russia proposes to start creating a regional 
conflict prevention center and to establish a regional institute 
for security studies. We also propose to work out principles of 
the arms trade in the Asian Pacific region. They must be based 
on the Basic Guidelines worked out by the five permanent UN 
Security Council members. The application of such principles 
would impede outside "arms feeding" of current and future 
conflict situations in the region. On the other hand, it is 
important to preclude attempts to hamper normal commercial 
transactions on the arms market under far- fetched pretexts. 
"Double standards" are inadmissible here. 
  Russia and China can make a major joint contribution to 
security and cooperation in the Asian Pacific region. I think 
that all the prerequisites are there for us to enter a new stage 
of interrelations -- the stage of constructive partnership. 
  The geographical center of Asia is in the town of Kyzyl, on 
Russian territory. This shows just how absurd it is for Russia 
to oppose the "western" European to the "eastern" Asian 
direction in its foreign policy. 

