Language: <F P=105> Swedish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Katarina Koivisto: "Finland Should Take Care of </F>
Its Own Nuclear Waste"] 
  [Text] 

  -  In the future, Finland should take care of the 
nuclear waste that is produced in this country. The Ministry of 
Trade and Industry will look into what changes are needed in 
legislation and prior administrative decisions to guarantee 
this. 
  -  As large a part of basic energy needs as possible should 
be supplied by natural gas plus solutions involving new 
technology based on peat, wood, and other domestic energy 
sources. It may be necessary for the state to participate in 
finding another supply source for gas. 
  -  The permit procedure in 
connection with importing electricity will be retained to enable 
the state to supervise the safety and environmental 
acceptability of the imported energy. 
  These three points are new features in the energy policy 
statement the government sent to the parliament on Wednesday [24 
November]. The statement clearly reveals a more positive view of 
natural gas, but it points out that it will not be possible to 
import Norwegian gas to Finland before the beginning of the next 
decade at the earliest. 
  "Nothing new has happened," said Marketing Director Harry 
Anton of Neste. "We are in constant contact with both the Swedes 
and the Norwegians, but there is still no one in Sweden who 
plans to start importing Norwegian gas. A pipeline through 
Sweden is needed to get the Norwegian gas to Finland." 
  Nevertheless, Anton sees the statement as a positive signal 
from the government and hopes it will also be regarded in this 
light in Sweden. The negotiations with Norway are becoming more 
urgent in view of the fact that the Norwegians must eventually 
decide where they are going to build supply pipelines for their 
gas. On the other hand, the Meripori coal power plant and the 
combined power plant that will probably be built in Skoldvik 
will provide new electricity production capacity, giving Finland 
a little more time in the natural gas negotiations, Anton 
pointed out. 
<H5>  Electricity Needs Increase </H5>
  The government's energy policy statement assumes that 
electricity consumption will increase at an annual rate of 2 
percent during the next 10 years. This means Finland will need 
2,000 MW in new production capacity by 2005 and 3,500 MW by 
2010. The need is based on the fact that, in addition to 
increased consumption, old capacity will be phased out. 
  Imported electricity is one alternative in the energy policy 
statement, but the government assumes that it will be imported 
only from countries that observe international environmental 
agreements and safety regulations. 
  In practice, such a decision could eliminate the importation 
of electricity from Russia and the Sosnoviy Bor nuclear power 
plant outside St. Petersburg. However, Finland has an import 
agreement with Russia that will be in effect until 1999, and 
production director Anders Palmgren of Imatran Voima [Finnish 
power-generating company] says it would not be easy to break the 
agreement. Determining who is complying with international 
safety regulations can be difficult, he indicated. 
<H5>  Nuclear Waste Alternative </H5>
  Finland also has an agreement in effect with the Russian 
authorities with regard to nuclear waste from Lovisa, and 
Palmgren sees no reason to break the agreement. Theoretically, 
nuclear waste from Lovisa can be shipped back to Russia as long 
as the power plant is in operation, Palmgren said, but the 
commercial terms are renegotiated every five years. The current 
commercial agreement will be in force for another four years, 
and Palmgren did not think it should be broken. 
  "It is true that we have the alternative of taking care of 
our waste ourselves, we have had that all along," said Palmgren. 
"But the money we now pay to have our waste taken care of and 
processed in Tchelyabinsk also helps the Russians finance the 
cleanup of the area, which suffered heavy radioactive 
contamination in the 1950's." 
  Palmgren thought the government had yielded to outside 
political pressure in formulating its statement. He pointed out 
that it would certainly be possible to provide final underground 
storage for the waste from Lovisa in Finland, but that it would 
be a barbaric way to dispose of it. In this case, usable fuel 
would also be buried while long, medium, and short-lived waste 
would all be mixed together. 
  Therefore, Palmgren feels it is better to send it to Russia 
now that it is also possible for both Imatran Voima and 
Finland's Radiation Safety Center to check that the waste is 
handled properly. 
<H5>  Old Formula </H5>
  In other respects Wednesday's statement repeats the 
government's old formula for the economic management of 
Finland's energy. One element is energy taxes to make energy use 
efficient and achieve the environmental goals that have been 
set, another is a revised program to cut energy use and sector 
agreements on energy-saving measures in industry. 
  The government also wants to increase the use of bioenergy 
and other domestic energy. To promote this goal, increased 
support will be given to research in new technologies applicable 
to gasification plants, among other things. It will become 
easier for small-scale power plants to enter the electricity 
network and the possibility of increased electricity production 
in connection with the cellulose industry will be studied. 
  The government is also stressing the development of energy 
technology and will subsidize export efforts in this area. In 
addition, the electricity market will be deregulated and there 
will be increased competition. Previous emission goals will 
remain in effect in the energy sector, sulfur dioxide emission 
must be cut 80 percent in relation to the 1980 level, nitrogen 
dioxide emission 30 percent, and carbon dioxide emission will be 
checked at the end of the 1990's. 
<H5>  Industry Dissatisfied </H5>
  Industry's Energy Association feels the government's energy 
policy line is still based on empty phrases just as it was after 
the negative decision on nuclear power. Pentti Sierila, the 
association's president, says the government energy statement is 
not in line with the good goals that are presented at the 
beginning of the statement. 
  "The energy policy line that has now been presented is based 
on hopes and comprehensive state subsidies in the belief that 
energy needs can be satisfied through the increased production 
of bioenergy and by implementing the purchase of natural gas 
from Norway," Sierila said in commenting on the statement. 
  He is surprised the government does not say anything about 
the price of energy. He feels the structure and level of energy 
taxes should be reconsidered. 
  "The line that has now been presented will inevitably 
increase the use of fossil fuel and thus make it impossible to 
achieve the environmental emission goals Finland has committed 
itself to internationally," Sierila said. 
<H5>  Greenpeace Approves </H5>
  The environmental organization Greenpeace is pleased with 
Finland's decision to stop exporting nuclear waste to Russia. 
Imatran Voima has shipped highly radioactive nuclear waste from 
Lovisa east of the Urals 11 times. 
  Greenpeace has launched highly visible campaigns against the 
shipment and processing of nuclear waste in various parts of the 
world. Protests have been organized in such countries as 
Finland, Sweden, Russia, Germany, and England. 

