BFN 

<F P=106> [Viktor Litovkin report: "Reserve Officers Called Up Again"] </F>
  [Text] Some 13,000 reserve officers and graduates of 
higher educational establishments [VUZ] with military faculties 
will this year receive a notice from their military commissariat 
inviting them to join up for the next two years. The edict on 
their drafting has been signed by the Russian president. This 
was announced to journalists by Colonel General Vladimir 
Semenov, commander in chief of the Ground Forces. 
  More accurately, the notification from the military 
commissariat will be received, of course, by far more than 
13,000 officers -- the Defense Ministry will be choosing who 
will and will not be selected, and not all of those "invited" 
will want to swap their apartments and jobs for a barracks and a 
test range. But, nontheless, the Army is firmly convinced that 
it will get the required number of "reservists" without too much 
difficulty. The situation in the labor market today is such 
that many VUZ graduates cannot put their knowledge to good use. 
They will be more comfortable in the forces. 
  Admittedly, after several years of "vetoing" the drafting of 
"reservists," the Army has been forced into this action. Last 
year 6,623 lieutenants were dismissed from the most widely held 
officers' positions -- platoon and detail commanders -- in the 
Ground Forces alone. This accounted for 45 percent of the total 
number of those discharged, including pensioners. The figure 
for the first quarter of this year is already 1,674. This is 37 
percent. And, despite the fact that 3,000 of the 3,512 
graduates of military colleges will be joining motorized rifle 
units and combined units, there is virtually nobody to educate 
and train the men. The staff shortage in primary officers' 
posts is 17,931. 
  But there is also a shortage of soldiers and NCO's. Subunits 
are almost 50 percent undermanned. This spring the Ground 
Forces should be drafting just 27,000 men, but they need 
260,000. The one hope, say regulars, is for "contract 
servicemen." There are now 82,000 of them in service, and there 
will be another 90,000 this year. And the "professionalization" 
of motorized rifle units will reach 30 percent. 
  The Army is being helped out for the time being by women. 
There are 56,000 of them serving as soldiers and NCO's. This, 
in Gen. Semenov's opinion, will not solve the Ground Forces' 
staffing problems, but it all creates at least some basis for 
maintaining a definite level of military readiness on the part 
of subunits. 
  The Ground Forces' problems are the same as those facing all 
of the Armed Forces. There is no money -- there is a two-three 
month backlog of officers' salaries and a chronic housing 
shortage. There are 51,000 people in motorized rifle and tank 
units without housing, and by the end of this year the figure 
will be 55,000, despite the fact that foreign firms will hand 
over 33,356 apartments by January. The withdrawal of troops 
from abroad, the lack of funds for capital construction, and the 
sharp increase in construction costs will continue to exceed the 
rate at which apartments are obtained. 
  Nonetheless, despite the reduction in its numbers over the 
past few years (the Ground Forces have been reduced by 154,000 
men to currently stand at around 600,000, and generals' 
positions have been halved -- there are now 474 of them), 
Colonel General Semenov is still optimistic. He believes that 
the reforms in his troops, despite everything, are under way, 
and by the time the reforms are complete his units will be 
stronger, more mobile than at present, and prepared to carry out 
any tasks that they are set. 

