Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by "(mad)": "Burglars Are in First Place"] </F>
  [Text] Bratislava--Thirteen murders, 10 of which have been 
resolved--that is, a 77-percent success rate--200 robberies, of 
which the police have clarified almost 39 percent, and 20 rapes, 
15 of which have been cleared up, are a sample of the crime 
figures for Slovakia since the beginning of this year. This 
information was made available yesterday by Jaroslav Ivor, 
director of the Slovak Police Force Office of Investigations, 
and his colleagues. 
  It is apparent from the overall crime rate that theft by 
burglary is the crime committed most in Slovakia. The 7,778 
incidents during the first two months of this year, just under 
19 percent of which have been cleared up by the police, testify 
to the growing audacity of the burglars and to the impotence of 
the police, who, despite considerable effort, are unable at the 
moment to confront this menace. The overall damage inflicted 
has increased by more than 30 percent, compared with the first 
two months of last year, and it can definitely be said that the 
victims themselves are partly to blame for the burglars' 
success, because, from the point of view of the police 
investigator, they obviously sometimes invite the criminal 
directly into their homes. 
<H5>  Embezzlers of the State </H5>
  So-called economic crime, or criminal activity against state 
property, holds a steady place in the shocking statistics on the 
crime rate. To date, the "mere" 13 instances of crime committed 
against privatization could testify to a relative lack of 
interest by pseudobusinessmen in this sphere. The opposite is 
true, however. The almost 25 million korunas [Sk] worth of 
damage resulting from crime against state property and the 43 
cases of tax evasion, which amounts to almost Sk283 million, 
again reveal major flaws in legislation, which is a problem for 
National Council of the Slovak Republic deputies. Fraudulent 
purchases of goods on a noncash basis have inflicted damage on 
our economy of more than Sk20 million, and we could continue in 
this vein ad infinitum because the embezzlers' resourcefulness 
is limitless. The overall damage from property and economic 
crime during the first two months of this year alone amounts to 
more than Sk300 million! 
<H5>  Money Forgers </H5>
  Those who forge money and bonds are also among the criminals 
with good prospects. Some 531 instances of forged domestic and 
foreign currencies, 162 instances of franked Slovak bank notes 
(including five cases where the new Slovak currency has been 
forged), and forged U.S. dollars, British pounds, Austrian 
schillings, and other currencies bear witness to the lucrative 
development of the crime rate under our conditions. The fact 
that children are among the delinquents is particularly 
cautionary. The more than 4,600 instances of crime committed by 
children reveal that the most basic element of society, the 
family, is also breaking down! 
  It is interesting to note that criminal activity by Romanies 
has shown a relative decline. This, however, really only is in 
relative terms because Romanies are involved in almost 22 
percent of crimes committed. Repeat offenders have also shown a 
relative decline in the Slovak Republic; "only" 13,907 have been 
prosecuted, which is the same as in the past three years. 
<H5>  Something Slovakia Still Does Not Need </H5>
  We cite, as a gem, a report issued by the Czech Press 
Agency, 
according to which special units have even been established 
there to deal with extremist groups, skinheads, neofascists, and 
so on. This is something that so far we do not need in 
Slovakia.... 

