BFN 

  [Text] Islamabad, June 6 -- The Ambassador of the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea (North Korea) in Pakistan 
Choe Su-il today accused the United States of persisting with 
its hostile posture against his country despite the flexibility 
the DPRK had shown in allowing international inspectors to visit 
its sole nuclear power reactor. 
  A team of experts of the Vienna-based International Atomic 
Energy Agency (IAEA) are currently positioned at the Yongbyong 
Nuclear Reactor along with cameras watching the change of fuel 
at the facility but still "the US was finding excuses" for 
carrying on its hostile posture and propaganda against North 
Korea, he said while addressing a Press conference at his 
residence here on Monday. 
  According to operational rules when the fuel at a nuclear 
plant was spent up at after [as published] about 10 years, it 
has to be replaced with fresh fuel because its dust becomes 
weapon-oriented. Since North Korea did not want to retain the 
dangerous spent-up fuel it had invited the IAEA inspectors to 
watch the changing process themselves. 
  Talking about the Yongbyong nuclear power facility Mr Choe 
said it was a harmless nuclear plant with a small capacity of 
only 5 megawatt. Moreover, it was an experimental reactor of 
'graphite and moderated type'. The North Korean government had 
undertaken to change it into a light water reactor so that it 
did not release the weapon-making dust and as such remove 
doubts, if any, of the reactor being used for making nuclear 
weapons. 
  He said the flimsy pretexts being advanced by the United 
States on North Korea's nuclear programme were not actually 
meant to denuclearise the Korean peninsula. In reality and as a 
matter of fact the Americans wanted to destroy and put an end to 
the socialist system practised in North Korea under its global 
policy of decimating socialist system wherever it existed, said 
the DPRK envoy. 
  One of the most dangerous postures of the United States in 
his view was the stationing of 38,000 American troops on the 
South Korean soil plus deployments of 1,000 nuclear war-heads 
and setting up of several 'Patriot' missiles, which were used 
with devastating effect against Iraq in 1991. 
  Additionally, the DPRK Ambassador went on, the American 
troops and the South Korean army would conduct on the South 
Korean soil army exercises called 'Team Spirit 94.' 
  Mr. Choe accused the United States of abandoning direct 
talks 
with North Korea on 'artificial excuses' which was against the 
clear-cut commitment it had made in an agreement with North 
Korea more than a year ago. Not only that the Americans had 
also adopted threatening attitude towards his country and one of 
the threats being mentioned was the applying of sanctions 
against it. 
  If the United States chose to shut the door for direct talks 
with the DPRK the next step of his government would be to 
proceed to the next step in its peaceful nuclear programme which 
also included expansion of independent nuclear power industry. 
If the pressurisation and threatening stance of the United 
States did not end, North Korea would have no choice but to come 
out permanently from its promise to sign the nuclear 
non-proliferation treaty [NPT], warned Choe Su-il, but explained 
that the withdrawal from NPT did not mean that North Korea would 
start making nuclear weapons. 

