Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Nell Darbyshire, Sean O'Neill, and Dan Conaghan: </F>
"Crude Weapons on Front Line of Propaganda War"] 
  [Text] Although the Heathrow attack will bring comparisons 
with the 1991 Downing Street mortar bombing, it appears to have 
been less sophisticated, designed more to disrupt than injure. 
  The home-made rockets were crude and, unlike the Downing 
Street incident which had to circumvent tight security, 
yesterday's attack was indiscriminate. 
  However, the target was sufficiently important to cause 
immense disruption, achieve maximum publicity and carry little 
risk of arrest -- all factors behind mainland IRA attacks. 
  Since the Downing Street declaration, Scotland Yard has 
feared an IRA "spectacular" to give notice that there are still 
active terrorist cells capable of continuing the mainland 
campaign. 
  Recent Royal Ulster Constabulary intelligence reports are 
understood to have mentioned rumours from within the Northern 
Irish Republican community of another mortar attack, and the 
Yard has been on alert. 
  At least two IRA cells are believed to be in London and they 
may be less enthusiastic about the prospect of peace than Sinn 
Fein. 
  While Mr Gerry Adams and other Sinn Fein leaders vacillate 
about the clarity of the Downing Street declaration terms, there 
are other IRA factions who wish to send a message to all parties 
that they are not prepared to lay down their arms. 
  Peace could bring a rapid end to the enormous profits being 
made from IRA racketeering activities and would remove the 
status attached to the terrorist "volunteer." The alternative 
for many would be unemployment or a life of crime without the 
semblance of political justification. 
  Mortar bombs of the type used in the Heathrow attack are one 
of the IRA's favoured weapons since their development in the 
early 1970s. 
  Typically they contain between 40 pounds and 60 pounds of 
home- made explosives, packed into a gas cylinder and with a 
range of 200- 300 yards. 
  Clusters of two or four mortars are fired from tubes 
attached 
to a frame and placed inside a car or van. They can be fired 
through a hole cut in the roof of the vehicle, or through a 
conventional sunroof. 
  The first such device was used against an Army base in 
Londonderry in 1972 and became known as the Mark One. It 
comprised an 8-inch piece of steel pipe packed with home-made 
explosive. 
  Successors to the Mark One were developed throughout the 
1970s and 1980s. Modifications included a firing pin and gas 
bottle of the type used to pump draught beer in pubs. 
  Fins to stabilise the bombs in flight were added and a 
propeller was fixed to the canister's nose. The device would 
tighten in flight and detonate the explosive on impact, causing 
the canister to shatter showering the target with shrapnel. 
  By February 1985, the most devastating IRA mortar attack 
killed nine police officers -- two of them women -- at Newry RUC 
[Royal Ulster Constabulary] station. The terrorists fired nine 
home-made mortars, each containing about 50 pounds of explosive, 
from tubes fastened to a steel frame and welded to the back of a 
lorry. 
  The crudely-made weapons, known as Mark 10s, were wildly 
inaccurate -- in Newry only one bomb struck its target. Several 
others overshot their target or failed to explode. 
  The lorry bearing the weapon had been parked in a disused 
works yard and aimed by pointing the weapon towards the 
station's radio mast. 
  In other IRA mortar attacks, including that on Downing 
Street, the shells have been launched from the rear of transit 
vans. 
  The only person the IRA has murdered in Northern Ireland 
this 
year was a police officer killed when a mortar struck the side 
of his armoured Land Rover in Belfast last month. 
  Constable Jonathan Beacom was killed in the Markets area 
close to Belfast city centre by a horizontally-fired mortar. 
  Partly as a result of the need to protect against mortar 
attack, the city's main Aldergrove airport is surrounded by a 
three-mile security cordon through which all traffic must pass. 
  The IRA currently favours two types of mortar -- the Mark 16 
which fires a 200 pound charge packed into a gas cylinder up to 
300 yards and the Mark 10, a horizontally-fired mortar with a 50 
pound charge and a range of around 80 yards. 

