Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] President Fidel Ramos today said that his meeting 
with top Vietnamese leaders have greatly enhanced 
Philippine-Vietnamese relations, which he describes as a 
critical factor for the solidarity of Southeast Asia and the 
peace and progress of the region. The president said he had 
friendly and powerful meetings with President Le Duc Anh, 
General Secretary Do Muoi of the Communist Party of Vietnam, and 
Vice President Nguyen Thi Binh. The chief executive said he was 
looking forward for his luncheon meeting with the prime 
minister, Vo Van Kiet. 
  President Ramos said Vietnam's leaders are all acutely aware 
of their country's need for regional stability so that they can 
have a breathing spell after two generations of almost 
continuous conflict to set their economy on the road to 
self-sustaining growth. 
  The president said that during his meetings with the 
Vietnamese leaders, he was able to explore new avenues of 
possible cooperation in the South China sea in order to reduce 
tension in the area and promote its joint development as called 
for in the 1992 Manila Declaration on South China Sea. The two 
countries also agreed on the needs to devise confidence-building 
mechanisms or cooperative ventures that will begin to assure 
countries with claims over the area in the rest of the region 
that the South China Sea can transform from waters of contention 
to an area of cooperation. 
  On the repatriation of Vietnamese refugees still in the 
Philippines, the president said, and I [newscaster] quote, We 
agreed that the increasingly favorable economic situation in 
Vietnam should make it easier for our two countries to work out 
the repatriation of the Vietnamese asylum seekers in the 
Philippines, unquote. 
  President Ramos paid tribute to Vietnam's revolutionary 
leader Ho Chi Minh by laying a wreath at his mausoleum at the Ba 
Dinh Square. The president and his official delegation arrived 
at 8:00 A.M. yesterday and briskly walked towards the mausoleum 
escorted by the curator and a guard. After laying the wreath, 
the president proceeded to the Ho Chi Minh residence, located 
inside the compound of the Presidential Palace. The two-room 
house is made of wooden materials. The president accompanied by 
the caretakers stopped by the pond and attempted to fish out but 
failed to catch any. After this, Representative Antonio Cuenco 
told reporters that the ASEAN Inter-Parliamentary Organization 
[AIPO] will invite Vietnam to attend the forthcoming AIPO 
meeting in Manila in September. The invitation will be relayed 
today by the Philippine legislators accompanying President Ramos 
during his official visit in Hanoi. Representative Cuenco said 
that during the AIPO meeting in Manila Vietnam will be offered 
an associate member status, which will make it a dialogue 
partner. Vietnam currently has an observer status in the AIPO. 
  President Ramos visited the assembly plant of Vietnam Motors 
Corp., a joint venture of Filipino and Vietnamese businessmen. 
In extemporaneous remarks during his visit to the plant site, 
the president said the linking up of the two countries in the 
joint economic endeavor is a breakthrough in business 
partnership. He said this partnership is a new arithmetic in 
business in the global economy. The president said that so far 
$7 billion worth of spare parts have been imported from the 
Philippines for the plant, which assembles 9,200 Mazda and [word 
indistinct] vehicles a year. The plant employs a number of 
Filipino managers and technicians. Vietnam Motors Corp. is a 
joint venture between Colombia Motors Group of the Philippines 
and Hoa Binh Automotive factory of Vietnam. Colombia has 70 
percent equity in the firm. The plant started operations in 
1992. 
  President Ramos, recalling that the Philippines and Vietnam 
made solemn commitments to respect each other's territorial and 
sovereign integrity in 1978 and in 1992, last night proposed the 
holding of regular consultations among all states with claims on 
the Spratlys. According to the president, in the South China 
Sea, where both the countries are involved, attention needs to 
be focused not on mutual suspicions but on cooperative ventures 
that build mutual confidence and trust among the claimant 
states. The president said regular consultations on the 
Spratlys can result in greater cooperation in local confidence 
building, marine research, environmental protection and joint 
exploratory activities. 
  According to President Ramos the foundation for the 
friendship between the two countries were laid when they 
established diplomatic relations soon after the reunification of 
Vietnam. The commitments that they made to each other were 
given substance and strength by a joint communique issued in 
1978 by then President Marcos and then Premier Pham Van Dong, 
and they were reaffirmed by Prime minister Vo Van Kiet and 
President Aquino in Manila in 1992. 
  According to President Ramos, and I quote, By this solemn 
undertaking, we pledge peace between us, resolving to settle 
peacefully any disputes and to cooperate for the common good for 
our people. This pledge I reaffirm, Mr. President, on behalf of 
my government and the Filipino people, unquote. 
  The chief executive said Manila was privileged to be the 
host 
two years ago of Vietnam's accession to the Treaty of Amity and 
Cooperation in Southeast Asia and Vietnam's acceptance as 
observer in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. It was 
during the same occasion in Manila that ASEAN issued the Manila 
Declaration of the South China Sea, which Vietnam immediately 
endorsed. President Ramos noted that his delegation also looked 
intensively into the opportunities for counter trade and 
investments and joint ventures in each other's economy. The 
chief executive also offered the help of the Philippine 
industrialists, academics, managers and technologist in 
rebuilding Vietnam's infrastructure and financial management and 
legislative policy formulation, and in running their tourist 
facilities. 
  According to the president, they also agreed during their 
meeting to collaborate in science and technology, education, and 
public health. The two countries also agreed to exert every 
effort to raise the level of trade and to take every advantage 
of complimentarity, adding that the trade protocol signed 
yesterday identified a long list of products that could 
profitably be exchanged between the two countries. According to 
President Ramos and I quote, We proposed and they agreed that we 
establish a joint commission to deal comprehensively with the 
whole range of our relationship and nurture its steady 
expansion, unquote. To promote tourism in both countries, 
President Ramos cited the just concluded tourism and cultural 
agreement between the Philippines and the Vietnamese officials. 

