Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tripoli, 4 Mar (MENA)--Colonel Mu'ammmar 
al-Qadhdhafi has praised Egypt's and President Husni Mubarak's 
role in seeking to solve the Libyan-Western dispute, noting that 
President Mubarak is currently making further efforts to achieve 
this result. He said Libya appreciates these efforts. 
  Col. al-Qadhdhafi also praised Egypt's role in confronting 
the challenges to the Arab world in a serious and responsible 
manner. He cited Egypt's efforts on behalf of the Palestinian 
cause as an example. 
  During a meeting with a delegation of Egyptian journalists 
who were attending the ceremonies marking the anniversary of the 
Libyan Jamahiriyah's establishment, al-Qadhdhafi said he 
maintains constant contact with President Mubarak. 
  Asked what Libya can offer to solve the Libyan-Western 
crisis, Col. al-Qadhdhafi said that Libya has nothing new to 
offer. 
  Regarding the disappearance of former Libyan Foreign 
Minister 
Mansur al-Kikhya, he said that Egypt and Libya are cooperating 
in an investigation to uncover the facts. 
  He declared: We are concerned about this issue. 
  Al-Qadhdhafi described al-Kikhya as "a Libyan citizen 
concerned with human rights, not an opposition figure." 
  Al-Qadhdhafi declared that no official Libyan decision has 
been made to withdraw from the Arab League, explaining that the 
union secretariat in Libya informed the Arab League of Libya's 
wish to withdraw in an informal manner. He explained that a 
draft resolution to withdraw from the League will be submitted 
to the Libyan basic people's congresses for discussion. He said 
Libya sees no benefit in staying in the league. 
  Al-Qadhdhafi called for amending the Arab League Charter to 
take into account world changes and their implications for the 
Arabs. He urged the league to develop itself. 
  Asked why he is not adopting inter-Arab reconciliation as a 
cause to defend and why he is not backing Arab League Secretary 
General Dr. 'Ismat 'Abd-al-Majid's initiative on this issue, 
al-Qadhdhafi said he agrees with Dr. 'Abd-al-Majid's views and 
supports his efforts on this matter. He called for an Arab 
summit to revive inter-Arab solidarity. 
  Regarding his country's conflict with Chad, Col. 
al-Qadhdhafi 
said Libya is committed to the decision made by the 
International Court of Justice [ICJ] on this issue and that this 
dossier is now decisively closed. He noted, however, that some 
things needs to be arranged between the two countries so that 
the ICJ's ruling can be implemented. 
  Al-Qadhdhafi denounced the Arab world's terrorist movements, 
saying that they have no connection whatever with Islam and are 
financed and commanded by people abroad. He said Islam is 
innocent of these terrorist movements. 
  Col. al-Qadhdhafi denounced the massacre perpetrated by 
Israeli settlers in the Ibrahimi Mosque and said that the 
incident has moved all nations, including the United States. 
  He accused the Israeli Mosad of the recent bombing of a 
Coptic [as received] Church in Beirut, which he said was done to 
cover up the Ibrahimi Mosque's massacre. 

