Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Joseph Samahah: "Summit Scenario"] </F>
  [Text] The summit meeting between Presidents Bill Clinton 
and Hafiz al-Asad is important, but perhaps less important than 
the Syrian media services are saying. However, these 
exaggerations are not supposed to lead to the opposite of what 
they are intended for. The Syrian president can put numerous 
cards on the negotiating table: the hitch in the implementation 
of the Palestinian-Israeli agreement, commitment to Lebanon 
seriously and the resistance card tacitly, preservation of a 
form of Arab boycott [of Israel], the relationship with Iran and 
Iraqi opposition parties, support for the 10 [Palestinian] 
factions [opposed to the peace process], the U.S. need for 
stability in the region, Israel's willingness to accept a kind 
of regional settlement, "tolerance" toward Syrian Jews and 
efforts to facilitate the Congress committee's work, the absence 
of any serious challenge to the existing [Syrian] authority 
which declares its willingess to accept a comprehensive solution 
that returns the occupied territory, and so on... 
  On the other hand, the U.S. President will not forget that 
he 
is in possession of precious negotiation cards: the absence of 
the Soviet Union, the general Arab weakness which has worsened 
since the Gulf war, the lack of credibility of the Syrian 
military power -- which means there is no nonpolitical option, 
Israel's breakthroughs in recent months under the U.S. plan to 
seize the region by the "collar," possible Turkish pressures, 
the Syrian economic situation, and so on... 
  These equations give rise to expectations, given that this 
kind of meeting usually ends up with a tacit, not detailed, 
agreement. On that basis, and in accordance with what is 
generally accepted and common, the following scenario can be 
proposed: 
  A. President al-Asad explains the peace concept he would 
accept as a beginning for discussing the other issues. He hands 
this card to Clinton in response to successive Israeli 
statements, the most recent of which is Rabin's statement 
linking the concept of peace with the scale of the withdrawal. 
This leads to opening the door to the negotiations in 
Washington so that the new round will lead to a declaration of 
principles linking Syrian sovereignty over the Golan and the 
peace -- that is in accordance with a timetable that could take 
years to implement. An integrated solution, but phased 
implementation. 
  B. The Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon coincides with a 
cosmetic Syrian redeployment under which Damascus would continue 
to have the upper hand at the security and political level. 
Here the logic of the the Lebanese-Syrian treaty would dominate 
and none of the agreements signed between the two countries or 
those to be signed in the future would be affected. In this 
way, Washington will have recognized Syria's regional influence 
in return for the "share" Israel has won through the accord with 
the PLO and which it will obtain if a Middle Eastern market is 
established. 
  C. U.S.-Syrian relations enter a new phase whose theme is 
the removal of Syria's name from the list of the states 
supporting terrorism in return for steps that reshape Damascus' 
relations with the Lebanese and Palestinian forces opposed to 
the peace process. In this connection Washington can be content 
with encouraging the features of the Syrian economic opening-up, 
without pausing much at the continuation of political control. 
  These are general ideas trying to precede the almost certain 
positive results of this summit. It seems that the Palestinian 
issue now belongs to Yitzhaq Rabin's "jurisdiction" and that 
Lebanon is a topic on the U.S.-Syrian agenda, and that the 
margin of choice is now narrowing with regard to Jordan. All 
these parties attended the al-Asad-Carter summit in 1977 and the 
al-Asad-Bush summit in 1990. True, the equations have changed 
and Syria's regional influence has declined to some extent, but 
the matter did not reach the point of confining discussions to 
the Golan only. 

