Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>Language: &lt;f 105&gt; Hebrew 
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Gad Shimron: "They Are Selling Death"] </F>
  [Text] The large antenna on the roof of the building of the 
Iranian Embassy in Bonn, at Godesberger-Alley 133, moved in the 
wind, from side to side. Someone in the embassy's communications 
department, a six-story building with a facade covered with 
white and blue ceramic tiles, forgot to check the antenna 
supports before the winter. But it seems that this does not 
interfere with the functioning of the embassy. The cables on the 
Bonn-Tehran line are passing well in both directions. Western 
intelligence agencies estimate that many of these communications 
deal with a project for obtaining equipment, materials, and 
plans for the production of weaponry of mass destruction: 
nuclear, biological, and chemical. 
  The German Government knows that this complex, secret 
operation is being conducted from here, in Bonn. The Germans 
also are trying to monitor the process, and to halt the leakage 
of the material in the direction of Tehran. The argument is over 
the degree of success of the spoiling operation. "The situation 
is under control," asserts Bernard Schmidbauer, the coordinator 
of the intelligence activities in the office of Chancellor Kohl. 
"We are striding with open eyes to the next scandal," argue in 
contrast persons in the German agency, the BND. 
  The captain of the German freighter German Senator was ready 
to continue the voyage from the port of Larnaca in Cyprus, when 
he received a strange cable from the company's headquarters in 
Germany: "Reload the three containers that you unloaded at 
Larnaca, and continue to Singapore." According to the bill of 
lading, the containers held 225 barrels, with a total weight of 
45 tons, of the material trimethylphosphit, which serves as the 
basis for manufacturing insecticides. The goods were purchased 
by a Syrian company called SETEMA. Western intelligence agencies 
arrived at the conclusion that this material was not intended 
for eradicating pests, but for a factory for the manufacture of 
gases in Syria, and, perhaps, in Iran -- Damascus' ally. 
Therefore, the captain received the order to reload the 
containers. 
  Intelligence officials in Germany relate the story of the 
225 
barrels that were on board the German Senator as an example of a 
successful intelligence operation against the armament plans of 
dangerous states. This occurred in August 1992. But the number 
of examples of successful operations is too small to afford the 
West in general, and Israel in particular, the confidence that 
these armament plans were indeed halted. 
  Iran learned from the experience of its big enemy, Saddam 
Husayn. In Tehran, they saw how in secret, far from the 
knowledge of the public, the world media, and the various 
intelligence entities, Saddam established an impressive 
infrastructure for the manufacture of atomic, biological, and 
chemical weapons. Only the defeat that he suffered in the Gulf 
War, and the UN inspectors that it brought to the heart of Iraq, 
halted the ambitious plan of the dictator from Baghdad. 
  Despite considerable economic difficulties -- Iran stands on 
the verge of bankruptcy, owes billions of dollars to foreign 
suppliers, and does not even meet the interest payments -- the 
Iranian leadership is devoting wide-ranging efforts and 
resources to its armaments plans. Western intelligence experts 
assert that there are two reasons for the decision of Rafsanjani 
and his comrades to obtain a nonconventional capability: the 
trauma of the Iraqi gas attack on Iran during the Iran-Iraq war, 
and the feeling that Iran is isolated in the world, and that in 
its vicinity there are already states with nuclear capability 
(Pakistan, the Commonwealth of Independent States, Israel). 
  The Iranians have plenty of experience in secret procurement 
operations. For example, the SASAD organization, which was 
established in 1979 by the Khomeyni regime, following the curbs 
that Washington imposed on shipments of military equipment to 
Iran. It should be remembered that all of the equipment of the 
Iranian army at that time had been purchased by the shah in the 
West, and the blockage from the sources of supply was supposed 
to bring the Iranians to their knees. 
  That did not happen. From the headquarters of the 
organization, which, according to Western intelligence sources, 
is located on Pasadaran Street in Tehran, instructions, money, 
and agents went out. Mysterious procurement operations, through 
dummy corporations, bank managers who do not ask too many 
questions, and corrupt customs officials succeeded in filling 
the Iranian warehouses. The ayatollahs owe the fact that Iran 
did not suffer a defeat in the war against Iraq more than a 
little to the performance of the agents and managers of SASAD. 
  The organization's tasks were changed at the end of the war. 
The new goal was weapons of mass destruction -- equipment, 
machinery, installations, and plans related to atomic, 
biological, and chemical weapons. 
  The system of relations between Iran and Germany is twisted 
and complicated, and its roots are planted back in the special 
relations that existed between Germany and the shah. Bonn also 
got along with the extreme Muslim regime in Tehran. After 
Khomeyni's rise to power and the outbreak of the war against 
Iraq, the German Embassy in Tehran was one of the few 
representatives of the Western countries that continued to 
function. And the Iranians remember that gratefully. 
<H5>  `Tehran Must Not Be Isolated' </H5>
  Washington's policy of sanctions against Iran is not 
accepted 
by the Bonn government. "The U.S.A. is pursuing a hypocritical 
policy in everything related to Iran," they say in Bonn, "and 
the proof is that the U.S.A. holds fourth place among the states 
that trade with Iran. Moreover, a large portion of Iranian oil 
is marketed through American firms," German spokesmen stress. 
<H5>  [Box p 11] </H5>
<H3>  `They Are Getting Stronger and We Are Talking' by Ya'aqov 
Erez </H3>
  Very quietly, out of the range of immediate attention, the 
existential threat to Israel is gaining strength and impetus, 
without anything happening in Israel that would push the 
barometer of danger higher. Meanwhile, the fear is not 
perceptible and there are no headaches or distress, as if we 
were outside of the range of the missiles. The news about the 
Iranian procurement appears in the media almost without any 
reactions, and for some reason the feeling is strengthened that 
a new syndrome is coming into being, which is related to the 
existential threat to Israel: everyone is talking about it and 
no one is doing anything to change it. 
  Interest and response focus, naturally, on the diplomatic 
process, on attacks in the territories, and on daily events. The 
instinctive desire is to repress the thinking and attention to 
that terminal factor, which is liable to appear one day and 
affect the very existence of the state. Even mention of the 
threat of the Scuds from Iraq, which developed faster than the 
experts had estimated at first, does not spur handling of the 
threat. We are talking and the Iranians are getting stronger. 
  The terror, according to all the Israeli theories of 
security, was never considered as a threat that was liable to 
undermine the basis of the existence of the state. But the 
terror and the diplomatic process, which was born in order to 
neutralize it, take up most of the energies of thinking and 
doing, while Iran, which is arming itself with efficient weapons 
against Israel, therefore enjoys the cover of the smoke cloud 
that hides its activity and its ability to influence our lives. 
  The words of the chief of the intelligence branch of the air 
force, Brigadier General 'A, which were published in the latest 
issue of the force's organ, barely reached the front pages of 
the Israeli press, and it is not necessary to note that they 
were not followed by any response from the helmsmen of the 
state. The response to the words of the intelligence man were 
very low-key, as if the subject were Japan or the Gulf states, 
and not a real threat to Israel. 
  "In another year, Iran will be capable of launching 
long-range missiles of the Nodong-type of North Korean 
manufacture, which could reach Israeli territory from west Iran. 
The procurement agreement has already been signed, and it may be 
assumed that during the process of absorbing the missile, Iran 
will conduct tests on it," stated the chief of the 
intelligence branch of the air force. 
  The procurement of the missile, which can be equipped either 
with a conventional warhead or with a nuclear warhead, is 
intended first and foremost to threaten Israel. The range of the 
North Korean Nudong is 1,100 km, and in contrast to Iran's 
missile arsenal, the ayatollahs of Tehran can threaten Israel 
significantly only with it. 
  Iran is not restricting its activity to the acquisition of 
missiles from North Korea, which does not shrink meanwhile from 
the American threats regarding everything connected with the 
production of nuclear weapons. All of Washington's efforts to 
hinder the source of the threatening war materiel -- have not 
succeeded, and their actual contribution in the field is 
negligible. 
  It is clear from the statement of the chief of the air force 
intelligence branch that what was thought a few months ago not 
to be a practical threat has now become a perceptible threat. At 
the beginning of the year, experts spoke of the Iranian 
intentions to acquire the Nudong and North Korea's attempts to 
manufacture the long-range missile. Now it is clear that the 
missile exists already, and that the negotiations for its 
purchase have already been completed. In about another year, 
they are liable to test it operationally there. 
  The IDF [Israel Defense Forces] has means of deterrence. The 
United States is a faithful ally in everything related to this 
threat. Israel is not alone in the battle, and experts estimate 
that the first threat will be on the Gulf States. But in this 
case, trouble for everyone is not half, or even one-quarter 
consolation, and it is impossible to foresee diplomatic 
developments, especially not in Tehran and in the Middle East. 
  And, meanwhile, European states continue to supply Iran with 
components for producing nuclear weapons. The Swiss Government 
continues to ignore the private firms that are exporting means 
of death to Iran. In Germany, the administration is cooperating 
with the Tehran government. And we are on the order of dogs that 
bark at the passing caravan. [End box] 
  "We believe that Tehran must not be isolated completely," a 
senior German source told MA'ARIV, "look at what is happening to 
a leper and isolated state like North Korea. Open channels of 
communication must be maintained." And that was also the 
position that Germany presented in discussions on the subject of 
the sanctions against Tehran that were held at the economic 
summit conference that convened in Tokyo. 
  In order to maintain the communications channels with Bonn, 
Iran maintains a diplomatic staff of respectable size in 
Germany. "Thirty-four Iranian diplomats serve in Germany, in the 
embassy in Bonn, likewise in the consulates in Berlin, Hamburg, 
Frankfurt, and Munich," a spokeswoman of the German Foreign 
Ministry told me. 
  No one doubts that some of them are employees of the various 
intelligence agencies of Iran, who are engaged in secret 
procurement operations. At least one of them is a permanent 
liaison officer of the Iranian Ministry of Information with his 
German colleagues. This fact was revealed by German 
Undersecretary Bernd Schmidbauer, who is responsible for 
coordinating intelligence activities in the German Government, 
at a special session of the services committee of the Bundestag. 
  And there are more. 'Abbas Tafarshi-Mutal'ag, for example, 
an 
Iranian diplomat who was returned home a year ago, because his 
secret activity was too blatant. Or Mortaza Gul'ami, who, 
according to the German prosecutor general's office, is an 
intelligence agent who is linked to the murder of opponents of 
the regime. 
  In addition to tens of holders of diplomatic status, a large 
Iranian procurement office operates in Dusseldorf, on 
Kaiservertestrasse. Likewise, hundreds of Iranian businessmen 
spin connections and deals all over Germany. 
  The network of Iranian-German relations also includes 
activity that they do not like to talk about in Bonn. "We have 
already been cooperating for two years in the war against drugs 
and terror," crowed Iranian Minister of Information 'Ali 
Fallahian, in Bonn, who visited here secretly two months ago. 
His host, Undersecretary Schmidbauer, at first tried to say that 
Fallahian was invited to Bonn to discuss humanitarian problems: 
the fate of German businessmen who are imprisoned in Iran, and 
also the fate of Ron Arad and the IDF personnel missing in 
Lebanon. But it became clear quickly that the cooperation 
between the intelligence entities does indeed exist, and it 
includes the provision of sophisticated surveillance equipment 
and computers to the Iranians, training, and exchanges of 
information. 
  By the way, while Fallahian was enjoying a tour of the 
German 
SHABAK and Mosad installations, and a guided tour of the 
magnificent cathedral of Cologne, his agents shot the Norwegian 
publisher of Salman Rushdie. The day after Fallahian's return to 
Tehran, his agents knocked on the door of a luxurious villa on 
Pasadaran Street, not far from the SASAD headquarters, and 
arrested the owner, Gerhard Bachman, aged 56, a representative 
of the MAN company in Iran for seven years. Bachman, who was 
accused of bribery and collecting information on Iran, was 
released a few days later following diplomatic efforts. 
  But the primary basis of Iran-German relations is the lively 
trade between the two countries. "In the past year, German-made 
equipment and materials with a total value of 7.96 billion marks 
were sold to Iran," I was told by an official spokesman of the 
German-Iran Chamber of Commerce. Iranian exports to Germany came 
to barely 1.34 billion marks. 
  The spokesman of the Chamber of Commerce was glad to supply 
details of the export items. "1.67 billion marks -- equipment 
for power generating stations and generators; 272 million -- 
pumps and similar equipment; 112 million -- semifinished 
chemical products; 238 million -- precision instruments and 
optical equipment," and on and on. Nearly 8 billion marks ($5 
billion). And with such a volume of trade, it is very easy to 
slip in secretly several barrels of chemical materials for 
manufacturing gases, centrifuges for atomic laboratories, or 
precision lathes for machining missile parts. Following the 
revelations about the share of German companies in shipping 
equipment and materials for Saddam Husayn's plan for weapons of 
mass destruction, the German Government, in 1991, adopted a 
series of laws, the strictest in Europe, concerning exports to 
dangerous countries. Iran, Iraq, Libya, Algeria, and North 
Korea, for example, appear on this list. 
  "Any equipment that is sent to these countries must receive 
approval from the Economics Ministry in Ashborn," the Germans 
stress. "The moment that suspicion arises that dangerous 
equipment is involved, or equipment that could also serve 
military purposes, we do not give approval. When doubt arises 
concerning a lathe, or a systems of pipes, or any other 
equipment, we forbid the manufacturer to transfer the product to 
the destination." 
  Israel, for balance, also appears on the list of dangerous 
states. "The apple harvest in Israel was in danger because some 
official in the ministry in Ashborn decided that 300 kg of 
insecticide could be used for the manufacture of poison gases. 
The subject was material that is manufactured in Israel in large 
quantities. The shipment went to Israel only after a series of 
telephone calls, and the Delicious, the Jonathans, and the rest 
of the apples were saved," an Israeli diplomat relates. 
  These laws and regulations include hundreds of pages, and 
the 
large concerns in Germany have established special sections 
whose task is to ensure that they do not violate the law. "The 
self-supervision and the checks of the transactions with 
"dangerous" states cost Siemens between 35 and 40 million marks 
per year," MA'ARIV was told by Mr. Bassler, one of the managers 
of the export audit branch of the giant corporation. More than 
400,000 employees worldwide work for Siemens, about 240,000 of 
them in Germany. 
  "Every transaction related to Iran undergoes examination by 
us," Bassler says. "In everything related to machinery, it is 
easier to supervise. For example, if equipment is ordered from 
us for a sugar factory, but an installation surrounded by a 
barbed wire fence, guarded by tanks and soldiers, is involved, 
then it is clear that we will not sell. If for an ordinary 
housing project an order creeps in for sophisticated automation 
equipment, there is no doubt that it is not connected with the 
construction of housing. The big problem is with products that 
do not go to specific installations, for then the distinction is 
harder." 
  It may be that because of the self-supervision, the 
officials 
of the Economics Ministry do not generally have anything to say 
to the exporters. "Eighty percent of the requests for exports to 
Iran receive immediate approval," stress Bernard Kubi and Harold 
Muller, scientists of a research institute in Frankfurt, who 
examined the German export policy to Iran. The remaining 20 
percent generally go on their way after a series of 
clarifications that satisfy the officials. 
  "Due to the system of self-filtering, we have almost no 
problems with approvals," confirms Bassler of Siemens. 
  "What is the proportion of transactions that are halted due 
to a government order?" I asked. 
  "One or 2 percent, no more." 
  For example, an Iranian order for a very sophisticated 
automated production line. Truly the latest word in the field. 
Officials of the Economics Ministry reached the conclusion that 
the Iranian client, a civilian plant according to the documents, 
was not capable at all of absorbing such a system, and that it 
was not suited for the declared purpose of the plant's 
operations. The German supplier explained the problem to the 
Iranians, and suggested to them an alternative installation, 
less efficient, with relatively outmoded technology. The 
Iranians shrugged and purchased the substitute. 
<H5>  The Unemployment -- An Incentive for the Iranian Transactions </H5>
  The severe system of laws hinders the business with Iran, 
but 
also provides a convenient and handy alibi for all of the 
companies that trade with it. "The shipments to dangerous 
countries go through an examination in the official channels," 
says Uwe Klassen, the manager of the [?Magnet] factory. The name 
of the factory, which is located in northern Bonn, and that 
manufactures magnets and sophisticated centrifuge equipment, was 
linked about a year ago to a series of shady deals with Iran. It 
was stated in an investigative program on German television that 
Iran had attempted to purchase sophisticated equipment for 
nuclear laboratories from the Thyssen company, but it had 
refused to sell the requested item. The television investigators 
asserted that in the end, the Iranians found what they wanted at 
Magnet. 
  "We never sent to Iran the equipment that was discussed on 
television. We work only according to the law," Klassen 
emphasized to me. 
  But despite the strict laws, the network has enough holes, 
both legal and on the borderline, which allow the Iranians to 
procure in Germany products for the nonconventional weapons and 
armaments industry. 
  Germany is now in the throes of an economic crisis. 
Thousands 
of small- and medium-sized machine-tool firms are fighting for 
their survival. In the month of October, more than 3.5 million 
unemployed persons were registered in Germany. The forecast 
speaks of nearly 4 million. Hundreds of thousands of Volkswagen 
employees have no choice but to shift to a four-day work week. 
In Opel, they have announced a wage cut. A sophisticated firm 
like DASA (Deutsche Aerospace), a subsidiary of Daimler-Benz, is 
going to dismiss 16,000 employees. Siemens has announced the 
dismissal of 3,000 employees. "Once 300 persons worked for us, 
now many fewer," Uwe Klassen of the Magnet firm told me. 
  In such conditions, every position is important. That also 
explains why a serious newspaper such as DIE WELT came out with 
a headline about Chancellor Kohl's visit to China that announced 
"contracts worth 2.1 billion marks." The headline in the 
newspaper the following day was: "Contracts for 7 Million Marks." 
  "Doubtless, most of the commerce with Iran is legitimate 
commerce, without any connection to this or that armaments," 
says a Western diplomat in Bonn, "and I do not envy an official 
who must decide that a certain machine for manufacturing pipes 
under high pressure is destined for a pharmaceutical plant and, 
therefore, legitimate for export to Iran, or that we are talking 
about equipment for a laboratory that manufactures poisonous 
gases. And it is even more difficult if the official knows that 
the fate of an entire plant, which is also the main employer in 
some town in Thuringia or Bavaria, depends on his decision." 
  German companies continue to supply Iran with equipment and 
systems that can be converted to the manufacture of chemical, 
biological, and atomic weapons, with the knowledge of German 
intelligence, which for legal reasons is prevented from acting 
against these firms. "We are striding with open eyes towards the 
next political scandal," argue sources in the German 
intelligence institution. They emphasize that despite the 
supervision over the activity of German companies in Iran, and 
over Iranians in Germany, in the area of the development of 
chemical, atomic, and biological weapons, they are prohibited 
for legal reasons from passing this information to the police 
and to the legal authorities. All that is left for the chiefs of 
the German intelligence community is to share this information 
with their colleagues in Western intelligence services. 
  Sources in the German intelligence service assert that as of 
the autumn of 1993, most of the trade with Iran is conducted by 
small companies, as the large concerns fear getting in trouble 
with the legal authorities. Most of these small companies are 
managed by former officers of the East German intelligence 
service, who were unemployed, but have appropriate contacts and 
know-how for secret transactions. 
  "The problem is that what we do not sell to the Iranians, 
due 
to our strict laws, the representatives of Tehran find in nearby 
countries," a senior source in German industry told MA'ARIV. 
"Strict laws against exporting to `dangerous states' exist only 
in Britain and Germany. Until there is a uniform law throughout 
the community, the Iranians will find what they want in 
Switzerland, in France, or in Italy. Perhaps not the same 
quality as the products MADE IN GERMANY, but of a quality that 
satisfies the Iranian requirements." 
  "The truth is that the Germans are the most decent in 
Europe. 
They are at least trying and struggling with the Iranian 
procurement campaign," a senior Western source sums up. "In 
world trade, and especially in a period of economic crisis, 
there is no vacuum. There will always be the supplier who will 
be ready to shut his eyes, to put aside the ethical issue, and 
to sell to whomever can pay. It is impossible to halt with legal 
action the Iranian process of arming with weapons of 
destruction. It is possible only to slow the pace. The only ones 
who understand the seriousness of the situation are the Israelis 
and the American administration. Immediately after them the 
Germans and the British. All the other European states are 
rather indifferent. While in Asia, everything is wide open, a 
real catastrophe." 
  This is affirmed by the fate of the 225 barrels of 
"insecticide" that were on the ship German Senator. This cargo 
covered half the globe, and instead of arriving at the orderer 
from Syria, landed finally in Taiwan. And Taiwan is known as a 
country that does not scrutinize the documentation of exporters. 
The main thing is that the goods will be sold. 
  As of November 1993, no one in the West knows what happened 
to the shipment, and if it did not nevertheless arrive in the 
end in a dangerous country. Iran, for example. 

