BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chen Ming: "Iraq Postpones Visit by Iranian Delegation"] </F>
  [Text] Tehran, June 18 (XINHUA) -- Iraq, the former foe of 
Iran during the eight-year Iran-Iraq war, has postponed the 
visit by an Iranian delegation to Baghdad for two weeks or maybe 
longer, a high-ranking Iranian official disclosed here today. 
  "As our delegation is leaving for Baghdad, the Iraqi side 
sent a telex message, asking for a 2-week postponement of the 
visit," Iran's Deputy Foreign Minister 'Abbas Maleki told XINHUA: 
  Therefore, the Iranian delegation has been still in the 
country and the planned trip by foreign minister 'Ali Akbar 
Velayati has also been postponed, he added. 
  Nevertheless, he did not give any detail about the cause of 
the postponement by the Iraqi side, adding that he was still 
optimistic over the relations between Iran and Iraq. 
  However, observers here noted that the postponement would 
cast a shadow on the improving relations of the two former foes. 
It also indicated that the two sides have had big differences 
on some major issues. 
  They also doubted the prospect of the bilateral relations 
because many problems still remain unsolved, such as the fate of 
prisoners of the eight-year war between the two countries, war 
compensation, Iraqi aircraft in Iran and support of each side's 
opposition forces. 
  The future talks will no doubt be focused on removing the 
obstacles of the improving relations, rather than rapid 
normalization of ties, which cannot be foreseen in the immediate 
future. 
  The two sides will have a lot of important issues to 
discuss, 
including the trade. Once the UN sanctions against Iraq lifted, 
Iran can be a major supplier of goods to Iraq. 
  However, Iranian dailies acknowledged that Tehran's mistrust 
and lack of faith in the Baghdad regime is not without reason. 
Baghdad has been supporting the outlawed Mujahideen Khalq 
Organization (MKO) to launch cross border attacks from inside 
Iraq. 
  The Iranian delegation was formerly scheduled for Iraq on 
June 11 to make preparation for Velayati's visit to Iraq. 
  According to official report, Velayati was preparing the 
trip 
to Iraq to discuss bilateral ties and other issues, including 
the fate of thousands of prisoners of war from both countries. 
  If the Iranian foreign minister makes the trip, it would be 
the first visit by Velayati to Iraq since the 1991 Persian Gulf 
war, when U.S.-led forces drove Iraqi troops out of Kuwait. 
  The POW issue is the main obstacle for an improvement of 
ties 
between the two countries. 
  According to an official report, Iraq is still holding 8,000 
Iranian military personnel and civilians, including soldiers 
captured almost 20 years ago in border skirmishes. 
  But Iraq has denied holding any Iranian citizens and claims 
20,000 of its own troops are being held in Iran. 

