Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Taba, 15 Feb (MENA)--The head of the Palestinian 
negotiating delegation, Dr. Nabil Sha'th, said the Palestinian 
and Israeli delegations are working continuously, positively, 
and successfully but are not ready to announce agreement on the 
Palestinian police force. He added that the delegation reached 
agreement on joint security coordination and cooperation. 
  In statements to journalists at the conclusion of the second 
day of negotiations in the current round of talks in Taba, he 
announced that the two sides revised a draft joint agreement 
based on Palestinian and Israeli draft papers and that the joint 
draft had been sent to the leadership in Jerusalem and Tunis. 
  Sha'th affirmed that genuine progress was made in the past 
two days of talks but denied that the two sides would sign an 
agreement tomorrow or in the next hours. He noted that they 
achieved great progress. 
  He said: The talks are progressing continuously but nothing 
more; in other words, there are no problems blocking agreement. 
He added: At the same time, we have not reached the stage of 
making the pleasant announcement that all our difficulties are 
now behind us. 
  He explained that the two sides are awaiting answers from 
their leadership and that a spirit of optimism prevails over the 
negotiations on the Palestinian and the Israeli side. 
  He noted that work has been completed on security 
cooperation 
and coordination between the Palestinian and Israeli sides. He 
remarked that numerous issues remain unresolved, such as 
security measures on land, at sea, and on coasts as well as a 
timetable for a phased Israeli withdrawal on specific dates. He 
said that these issues include the transfer of civilian 
authority that must be concluded and a (?general amnesty) for 
the Palestinian detainees. He affirmed that if things proceed 
the way they did today, these issues will not take much time. 
  He said the Palestinian and Israeli delegations, through the 
Security Affairs Committee, held a preliminary discussion of the 
Palestinian detainees issue and that a meeting will be held 
tomorrow morning between General (Admon Ahjon) and Muhammad 
Ramlan to continue the discussion. He affirmed the importance 
of a timetable to release the detainees, which should include in 
principle all those who contributed to the struggle against 
occupation. 
  He said: We reached agreement to halt violence between the 
two sides. A general amnesty should cover both the Palestinians 
and Israelis. He noted that there are also Israeli soldiers who 
have been punished for acts of murder they committed without 
permission from the Israeli authorities and who were imprisoned. 
They too must be freed, he remarked. He explained that the 
general amnesty must cover all those who participated in 
violence. 
  He said that most Palestinian detainees are those who took 
part in the intifadah and stressed that the timetable for their 
release should not go beyond 13 July. 
  Sha'th denied that cooperation and coordination between the 
Palestinian and Israeli sides will be at the expense of the 
Hamas Movement. He said this kind of talk destroys confidence 
and that we need a country where we can spread peace among the 
people of the same homeland and the enemies of yesterday. He 
added that you cannot make peace with the enemies of yesterday 
only to establish animosity with the brothers of today and 
tomorrow. 
  Negotiations between the two sides are scheduled to resume 
tomorrow, Wednesday. 

