Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by News Research and Commentary Group] </F>
  [Text] After three days of talks, the OPEC petroleum 
ministers could not reach a consensus on the reduction of 
production ceilings for member countries and approved the 
current ceiling of 4.5 million barrels per day [as heard] to 
remain in effect till the end of the current year. 
  Aqazadeh, our petroleum minister, expressed his displeasure 
at the final outcome of the three-day OPEC ministers' session 
and said that the responsibility for this decision rests solely 
on those who are not supporters of OPEC and the oil-exporting 
countries. 
  The Saudi petroleum minister on the other hand, expressed 
his 
satisfaction at the OPEC decision to maintain the current 
production ceilings; however, he refrained from commenting on 
the effects of this decision and the possibility of a further 
slump in oil prices. 
  It was expected that in its latest session OPEC would reach 
a 
consensus. In the past few months, the GCC [Gulf Cooperation 
Council] member countries had been in the forefront in proposing 
the reduction of oil production of OPEC and non-OPEC countries. 
These countries are also sustaining losses and had been 
adversely affected as a result of the oil prices on the 
international market. 
  The budgets for the current year of most of the GCC member 
countries have faced considerable deficits. The Omani oil 
minister had initiated extensive activity within the framework 
of the GCC recommendations for reducing production. He had 
contacted most of the non-OPEC oil-producing countries and had 
enlisted their concurrence for reduction of their oil levels. 
Therefore, it was anticipated that the pioneers of this 
proposal for reduced production would take the initiative in 
this regard. However, Saudi Arabia's opposition to reduction of 
its quota resulted in the failure of the session. 
  The Saudi petroleum minister expressed doubts on the 
effectiveness of reducing of OPEC production ceilings and the 
adherence of the non-OPEC countries to their commitments based 
on reducing their production and questioned the basic plan for 
reducing OPEC production. In general, Saudi Arabia's efforts 
were geared to retaining its quota of 8 million barrels. 
  The Saudi quota prior to the oil war was about 5 million 
barrels. The exclusion of the oil production of Iraq and Kuwait 
at that time paved the way for the increase in Saudi Arabia's 
production quota. However, after the return of Kuwait to the oil 
market and despite the possibility of the reentry of Iraq in the 
oil market, Saudi Arabia continues to insist on its quota and 
has now had it endorsed, in practice. 
  This tendency on the part of Saudi Arabia to preserve the 
high level of its production quota has prevented the OPEC 
ministerial session from reaching any consensus on production 
ceilings and it was forced to agree to maintaining the current 
production ceiling. Iran had proposed that with the advent of 
spring, which results in diminished demand, the ceiling should 
be reduced by 1.2 million barrels so that the price would be 
adjusted and strengthened accordingly. 

