Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] 
<H6>  THE CITIZEN </H6>
  TEC Takes Effective Control of Government Functions--"It is 
clear that the Transitional Executive Council [TEC] is taking 
over effective control of some government functions," notes the 
page-6 editorial in Johannesburg THE CITIZEN in English on 27 
January. The TEC has "demanded the government suspend its 
planned salary increases for senior civil servants," despite the 
"objections of government members." THE CITIZEN fears the TEC 
"is going to act increasingly as if it is the government, and 
the government is going to be outvoted on major issues." 
President de Klerk is advised to tell his TEC members to "take 
a stronger line." "There is, after all, an election ahead of 
us, and the government, which is going to campaign to win, must 
be able to show that it is governing in the transition period -- 
and is strong enough to make its voice heard in a government of 
national unity. Chumminess or weakness is totally out of place 
in the run up to the election." 
<H6>  THE STAR </H6>
  South Africa-Frontline States Reconciliation--"This week 
Mugabe was gracious and warm in receiving President de Klerk and 
Nelson Mandela at the Gaborone mini-summit," points out a 
page-10 editorial in Johannesburg THE STAR in English on 28 
January. The significance of the encounter "extends well beyond 
the formal reason for the calling of the meeting--the crisis in 
Lesotho. In effect it amounted to a historic act of 
reconciliation between South Africa and the Frontline states, of 
which Mugabe is the chairman. It also signaled South Africa's 
return to the regional fold, where it is bound to become a major 
power. Mugabe's generous acknowledgement of De Klerk's role in 
breaking the Republic's isolation was also revealing and might 
give some of the South African president's critics back at home 
food for thought." 
  Peacekeeping Force Commander Appointment `Mistake'--A second 
editorial on the same page finds the appointment of Brigadier 
Gabriel Ramushwana as commander of the National Peacekeeping 
Force to be "a mistake." Although Ramushwana is a "good 
soldier" he "fails" as a "man of unquestioned integrity." "He 
is alleged to have enriched himself at the expense of the Venda 
Pension Fund. The alleged self-enrichment took place while he 
was chairman of the Venda Military Council, meaning that he is 
suspected of abusing power for self-gain. Ramushwana may be 
innocent. He must not, however, be considered for high office 
until his name is cleared, the more so as his accusers are 
ordinary men and women in Venda, not rival politicians with 
suspect motives." 
<H6>  BUSINESS DAY </H6>
  S. Africa To Play New Regional Role--Johannesburg BUSINESS 
DAY in English on 28 January in a page-8 editorial believes 
South Africa is "taking its place in Africa and the world." The 
paper comments on President de Klerk's meeting with Nelson 
Mandela in Botswana in an effort to "end the military problem in 
Lesotho." "It was a brief meeting between the two South 
Africans, the presidents of Zimbabwe and Botswana and the deputy 
prime minister of Lesotho, but it was loaded with symbolism and 
promise. Zimbabwe President Robert Mugabe is current chairman 
of the Frontline States. He and Botswana President Quett Masire 
are prominent members of the Southern African Development 
Community (SADC), while both countries and Lesotho are members 
of the Commonwealth, whose secretariat was consulted. The 
regional linkages were clear, deliberate and relevant: South 
Africa was being asked by other African states to help resolve a 
regional problem." This first meeting between Mugabe and De 
Klerk "should presage more amicable relations, both now and 
after the April election. Doors are opening further afield, 
too: the next government will be invited to rejoin the 
Commonwealth and this week's events may help influence opinions 
on both sides." 
<H6>  SOWETAN </H6>
  Botswana Meeting Platform for De Klerk To Meet 
Mugabe--Johannesburg SOWETAN in English on 28 January in a 
page-10 editorial says many people must be "disappointed at the 
outcome of the meeting" in Botswana between President Masire, 
President Mugabe and President de Klerk concerning Lesotho's 
military crisis. "Here were three presidents who listened to a 
presentation by Lesotho's Deputy Prime Minister, Mr Selometse 
Baholo, and then appointed a task force to investigate the issue 
further. Why not act on the information provided by Baholo?" 
This "vacillation must stop if the Lesotho crisis is not to 
develop into a major regional crisis. Unless the purpose of the 
meeting was not to discuss Lesotho, but to provide a platform 
for F.W. de Klerk to meet Mugabe before his term expires. Which 
would be a pity, for people may have died in Lesotho and many 
more may die unless effective steps are taken now, which we urge 
the leaders of southern Africa to do without any more 
commissions and committees." 
<H6>  WEEKLY MAIL &amp; GUARDIAN </H6>
  SACP Lacks Separate Identity--Johannesburg WEEKLY MAIL &amp; 
GUARDIAN in English for 28 Jan-3 February in a page 14 editorial 
points out that the South African Communist Party (SACP) has 
named its members on the African National Congress (ANC) 
election list. "Ironically, this may be the end of the road for 
the SACP as a significant political force. Will it still have 
an identity separate and clear enough to make it a political 
force?" Its MPs "will be subject to ANC discipline and the 
orders of ANC parliamentary whips. If they vote against ANC 
orders, they will lose their seats. So, either the SACP goes 
along with the ANC on everything, or it will have to choose to 
go out in the wilderness -- a penniless, MP-less prospect for a 
party with only 60,000 members." 

