Language: <F P=105> Slovene </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "No Chance of Survival"] </F>
  [Text] A reporter for the Austrian economics journal 
INTERNATIONALE WIRTSCHAFT wrote in an article titled "Heroes Are 
Tired": Yugoslavia is committing slow suicide and Montenegro is 
dying with it. She describes the hopeless state of the 
Montenegrin economy. The author claims that, objectively 
speaking, the industry of the most loyal Serbian ally has no 
chance of survival following the dissolution of Yugoslavia. It 
not only lacks raw materials, it has been left without a market. 
The Montenegrin economy used to rest on three pillars -- its 
main sources of foreign currency: production of aluminum, 
maritime transport, and tourism. Before the war in Bosnia, 
Montenegro's merchant marine earned $150 million, as much as 
tourism. Sales of aluminum accounted for $155 million. All three 
economic sectors are virtually in ruins today. 
  The Montenegrin economy did not fare badly at the end of the 
1980's. The former Yugoslav republic produced 25 percent of 
Yugoslavia's quality steel and 50 percent of its aluminum. Of 
course, the aluminum combine in Podgorica as well as the iron 
works in Niksic have been operating at a loss in recent years. 
According to an assessment by an independent economist, Branko 
Vujosevic, they may be operating at only 20-percent capacity 
but, fearing labor unrest, the political leadership is afraid to 
close them. 
  The second pillar of the Montenegrin economy was the 
maritime 
industry. Montenegro had the largest concentration of ships per 
capita in Europe. Following the imposition of sanctions, most of 
them are now anchored. Tourism, which had the best chance of 
developing in Montenegro, has also been damaged by sanctions. 
Since 1991 there have been no foreign tourists, while before the 
war they accounted for 35 to 45 percents of all overnight 
guests. Montenegrins must now be content with Serbian and 
domestic guests. Macedonian tourists are counted as foreign 
guests although they do not bring foreign currency. 
  Since the introduction of UN sanctions against rump 
Yugoslavia, the Montenegrin food supply has depended entirely on 
Serbian good will. This was apparent last fall when trucks 
loaded with needed foodstuffs were not allowed to cross the 
Serbian-Montenegrin border at Prijepolje. The Serbian 
authorities suddenly demanded special permits. This internal 
trade embargo against the small Serbian partner was meant to be 
a disciplinary measure to preclude any thought of independence. 
  Montenegro -- like Serbia -- has horribly high inflation, 
and 
humble protests [against sanctions] by the leadership that 
Montenegro is an innocent victim are to no avail. The only thing 
that is still adequate in Montenegro is the supply of 
electricity, but this is also supposed to change thanks to the 
rapprochement between Croats and Serbs. It is supposed to be 
exported to Croatia for foreign currency. 

