Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Vladimir Zhirinovskiy, leader of the Liberal </F>
Democratic Party of Russia, in Moscow, by Heiner Bremer in 
Cologne on 3 January--recorded; Zhirinovskiy speaks in Russian 
with superimposed German translation] 
  [Text] [Bremer] Mr. Zhirinovskiy, a few days ago, you 
threatened Germany with World War III. Shortly before that, 
however, you celebrated the natural alliance between the 
Russians and the Germans. How are we Germans supposed to 
understand this contradiction? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] I think there should be the best possible 
relations between Russia and Germany. Germany should finally 
become a free country. The problem was that the German consul 
in Sofia canceled my entry visa. I have visited Germany four 
times already. I am a friend of the Germans. The consul made a 
political mistake and so has the German foreign minister. 
However, I differentiate between the German people and its 
officials. After all, they are around only for a limited period 
of time. 
  [Bremer] You not only threatened World War III, but you also 
announced that you would break off diplomatic relations and stop 
the withdrawal of Russian troops. You even want compensation 
for World War II. Mr. Zhirinovskiy, are you surprised that you 
are not very highly regarded in Germany, that Germany does not 
really want to have any dealings with you? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] I have a number of friends in Germany. These 
are mainly parties like the German People's Union and others. 
Millions of Germans support our policy of friendship and equal 
relations with Germany. As for reparation payments, this is not 
supposed to be an attack against Germany; but why did Germany 
pay compensation to the Jews after World War II and not anything 
to the Russians? It was not the Jews but the Russians who were 
victorious over the German troops and marched into Berlin. 
  [Bremer] But, Mr. Zhirinovskiy, there is a difference 
between two nations fighting each other in a world war and one 
nation, namely the German one, doing severe injustice to another 
nation, namely the Jewish one. 
  [Zhirinovskiy] Well, let us not compare these two things 
then. We are not demanding anything; we do not insist on 
anything. But I ask myself: If the Russian troops withdraw from 
Germany, then why do the French, Americans, and British stay? 
All occupation forces have to leave Germany. The Germans want 
to be free. This includes the Germans' right to live free of 
foreigners. Why do the Germans constantly have to live with 
occupation forces? We want to help Germany. Let me put it this 
way: I declare my affection for Germany, I declare my 
friendship. But I see with concern that there are a number of 
problems in Germany. The Gypsies and Turks have a firm grip of 
the country. Millions of foreigners are disturbing the Germans' 
lives. It is they who disturb the Germans, not us. The Germans 
and the Russians are friends forever. And yet, I am refused an 
entry visa. This is absurd. 
  [Bremer] Mr. Zhirinovskiy, your answer shows that you should 
travel through Germany at your leisure, and maybe not only 
accompanied by your friend [German People's Union Chairman] 
Frey. It is, of course, nonsense to say that Germany is 
controlled by Turks and other foreigners. The Turks who have 
been living in Germany for a long time did a great deal of 
reconstruction work here. We are perfectly capable of tackling 
our country's problems by ourselves. Do you think that we 
should not look ahead, that we should continue the peace 
process, begun under your President Yeltsin, together, instead 
of bringing uncertainty into the relations by your radical 
demands? 
  [Zhirinovskiy] I do not think so. I do not want to 
interfere with German affairs. It is simply a matter of good 
relations between Russia and Germany. We also have our own 
problems, which we will be able to solve without external 
interference. By no means are we planning any aggression toward 
the West. 

