CSO 

  [Text] THAN SETTHAKIT went to Khun Sa's area in the north 
and discussed many issues with him, including the future of both 
he and his followers in the Shan State. 
  "If the economy is weak, our brave soldiers probably won't 
be 
able to fight well. On the other hand, our poor-quality soldiers 
can become good fighters if the economy is strong." 
  This well-built man, who is more than 175 cm tall and who 
appears to be a very kindhearted person, talked confidently 
about his economic views. He was wearing a white, short-sleeved 
shirt and a pair of comfortable-looking long, dark trousers. 
Looking at him, it was difficult to believe that this was the 
internationally-known "heroin kingpin." In 1981, the Thai 
government offered a reward of 500,000 baht for his arrest. But 
people have said that that is a very small amount as compared 
with the value of the huge amounts of heroin that flow from the 
Golden Triangle to world markets. 
  The economic views of Khun Sa, who presently holds the 
position of president of the Shan Sate Restoration Council 
(SSRC) and head of the Mong Tai Army, are similar to the 
well-known strategy of Napoleon, who attached great importance 
to the economic well-being of the people, saying that "an army 
marches on its stomach." During the past 40 years, Khun Sa's 
forces and the other minority group national liberation 
movements in Burma have "put food in their bellies" in order to 
survive and continue the struggle against the Rangoon government 
by trafficking in opium. In particular, the Shan's struggle for 
independence has been closely tied to international narcotics 
trafficking activities, and so it has been ignored by the 
international community. This is in contrast to the struggle for 
independence that is being waged by minority groups in many 
other regions of the world, which people have monitored closely. 
This includes the struggle by the Palestinians against Israel, 
the conflict between the Serbs and the Moslems in Bosnia, the 
slaughter of the Kurds in Iraq, and the conflict between the 
whites and the blacks in South Africa. 
  As for the world in the information age, the Cold War has 
ended with the collapse of the communist states, and many 
different viewpoints have arisen. This rapidly spreading 
international trend has caused many countries to put economics 
before politics. Khun Sa cannot escape this trend. People's 
views on the Shan national liberation movement have begun to 
move to a new dimension. 
  Khun Sa has begun making preparations to deal with these 
changes. He has talked with reporters from around the world, who 
are becoming interested in the international narcotics problem 
and who are viewing Khun Sa's role in a new light, and explained 
to them why the people in the Shan State have to produce opium. 
"My people produce opium because they have to buy food and 
clothes for themselves and their families. I have never heard 
anyone say that they are growing opium poppies in order to 
destroy another nation. If we are to grow substitute crops, we 
will need roads so that we can transport our produce to market. 
But Burma has never shown any interest in building roads. The 
oranges and other fruits that we produce would rot before we 
could transport them to the markets. But in producing opium, we 
don't need any roads. The merchants come to us." 
  However, the Shan State's policy is that the "strong 
economy" 
of our independent state must not be based on "growing opium 
poppies." "Even though we cannot expect the governments of 
various countries to cooperate with us at this time, we can 
obtain cooperation from people in the private sector," said Khun 
Sa. As an example, he said that "poppy cultivation declined in 
China because China had its own government. Similarly, the 
eradication of poppy cultivation in the Shan State cannot be 
separated from the establishment of an independent Shan 
government. China's independent government (put an end to poppy 
cultivation by itself). It wasn't necessary for other 
governments to tell them that it was urgent to end poppy 
cultivation. The same is true for us." Today, Khun Sa has 
established a foundation for changing the economic structure of 
a free Shan State. 
  Traveling in this "economic base" area, we saw several 
economic projects that Khun Sa is carrying out in order to 
establish a foundation for changing the economic structure of 
the Shan State. One of the tangible projects that is quite 
interesting is the construction of a medium-sized earthen dam in 
order to store water for agricultural use. And this will be 
developed to produce electricity in the future. As for the plans 
to create new occupations for the Tai people in the Shan State, 
some very interesting steps have been taken. This includes 
planting other crops in place of opium poppies. Today, people 
are growing mushrooms using technology from Taiwan. There are 
presently seven-eight 15 X 30 meter buildings for growing 
mushrooms. An average of 100-200 kg of mushrooms are harvested 
every day. Most are sold at nearby markets at a wholesale price 
of about 50 baht per kg. Other cold-weather vegetables and 
flowers will probably be cultivated in the future, because the 
Shan State is comprised mainly of high mountains where the 
temperature is cool year round. If there is enough water, 
agriculture will probably develop rapidly. 
  Gem cutting is another occupation that Khun Sa thinks is a 
viable option for Shans. Much of the land in the Shan State is 
rich in valuable natural resources such as sapphires, rubies, 
jade, gold, amber, and so on. The Mong Tai Gem Cutting Factory 
is located near Khun Sa's beautiful house. Suradet Phandi, a 
Thai from Lopburi Province, works there as an instructor. He is 
teaching gem cutting to about 20 Shan women. For this, Khun Sa 
pays about 10,000 baht a month, which is a large sum for people 
in Ho Mong. State officials of the free Shan State are paid a 
salary of only 150 baht a month. But everyone, including 
Suradet, receives an allowance from the state for food and 
housing. Suradet is very impressed by Khun Sa and the 
friendliness of the Shan people in Ho Mong and plans to continue 
working there. 
  The textile plant, which uses technology and instructors 
from 
Sankamphaeng District, Chiang Mai Province, is diligently 
developing the skills of its workers. Even though the looms, 
which are operated by human power, are similar to those used 40 
years ago in Sankamphaeng, the people there firmly believe that 
they will achieve national independence and have a better life. 
Thus, there is no hint of discouragement or tiredness in the 
eyes of the several dozen women who work the shuttles there to 
produce beautiful cloth. 
  Peter G. Bourne, a special adviser to the president of the 
United States and the head of the Drug Abuse Policy Office in 
the Carter White House, was a senior official who played an 
important role in formulating and implementing the narcotics 
policy of the United States. Several weeks after meeting with 
Khun Sa at Ho Mong, on 6 May in a letter sent to the BANGKOK 
POST, Bourne openly admitted that "Khun Sa is a man of great 
charisma and a person worthy of respect. I and many others used 
to refer to him as a drug warlord, but that was careless of us. 
We viewed things too superficially and were unfair (to Khun Sa). 
This is evident from that fact that he has adhered to the 
agreements. He has looked for ways to win independence for the 
Shan State. He is making rapid progress in that direction by 
developing a vigorous economy in his zone of influence. I think 
that he is one of the most charismatic national leaders that I 
have ever met." 
  Besides this, Bourne feels that the time has come to begin 
negotiating openly with Khun Sa. This means admitting that the 
"struggle for Shan independence" is an important political 
problem that is at the root of survival of the minority groups 
in Burma who rely on poppy cultivation. 
  An important new turning point in the life of Khun Sa is 
becoming apparent to the people of the world. But the path ahead 
is not strewn with rose petals, because the profits to be made 
from opium, particular after it has been processed into heroin, 
are huge. The network of those who are involved and who have 
financial and political power extends around the world. It 
certainly won't be easy to put an end to this. 

