BFN 

  [Text] New York, April 27, IRNA -- Iran's Foreign Minister 
'Ali Akbar Velayati here Wednesday called on Security Council to 
untie the hands of the Bosnian Muslim and let them exercise 
their right to defend themselves. 
  Addressing the meeting of Organization of Islamic Conference 
(ICO) contact group here, Velayati said that the latest 
cold-blooded massacre in Gorazde which has resulted in death of 
700 and injury of more than 2,000 civilians is a vivid example 
of Serbian atrocities in Bosnia and the inaction and 
indifference of the international community towards these crimes 
against humanity. 
  "What is more disturbing is the fact that the Serbs continue 
to commit these crimes and violate Security Council resolutions 
particularly those related to the safe areas, with impunity, 
while the UN system is watching a gradual annihilation of one of 
its member states," said Velayati. 
  He underlined that the Islamic countries, from the 
beginning, 
have called for the lifting of the unjust arms embargo against 
the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  The Iranian foreign minister, elsewhere in his speeches 
argued that the Security Council is unable or unwilling to 
implement its own resolutions, and thus destroying its 
credibility and legitimacy. "Now the question is what is the 
justification for the continuation of arms embargo? Why do some 
permanent members of the Council look after their short-sighted 
political interests at the expense of a nation?" he asked. 
  Velayati emphasized that the contact group should continue 
its hard work to press the UN particularly the Security Council 
for lifting the arms embargo and in case the Security Council 
fails due to veto, we should intensify our efforts to invoke the 
a "uniting for peace" resolution and convene an urgent session 
of the United Nations General Assembly. 
  We should continue to intensify humanitarian relief efforts 
in Bosnia-Herzegovina by establishing an air fleet to various 
parts of it, Velayati said, adding that the government of the 
Islamic Republic of Iran strongly endorses the convening of an 
emergency ministerial meeting of the full membership of the ICO 
as soon as possible. 

