Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Robert MacPherson] </F>
  [Text] Hong Kong, Feb 9 (AFP) -- China's controversial 
Three Gorges hydroelectric dam on the Chang Jiang River could be 
scaled down or shelved if its number-one advocate, Premier Li 
Peng, falls from political grace, a British expert on the 
project said Wednesday. "If there was a significant change in 
political leadership, I don't think anybody would really want to 
develop the Three Gorges dam in the same way Li Peng has said," 
Patrick O'Reilly of London's School of Oriental and African 
Studies said. "I think it could get scaled down. I think it 
could even be sidelined," he told a Foreign Correspondents Club 
luncheon. 
  Li, a Soviet-trained electrical engineer who belongs to 
Beijing's conservative faction, is widely seen as the driving 
force behind the 20-year, 10 billion US dollar attempt to 
harness China's longest and mightiest river. Last weekend Li 
presided over the inauguration of another of his pet projects, 
the Daya Bay nuclear power plant, northeast of Hong Kong, built 
with French technology for four billion US dollars. Political 
analysts say his future will be cast in doubt in the power 
struggle that is certain to emerge in Beijing after the death of 
China's present senior leader Deng Xiaoping, who is 89. 
  Once mooted by Mao Zedong, the Three Gorges project was 
approved by China's parliament, the National People's Congress, 
in 1992, a year after devastating floods swept the fertile lower 
half of the Chang Jiang. So big is its size -- 185 meters 
(yards) high by nearly two kilometers (1-1/4 miles) wide -- that 
O'Reilly called it "the last Stalinist infrastructure project" 
in the world. In political terms, Beijing is looking upon the 
18,200-megawatt dam as a way to break provincial-level control 
of China's power generating capacity, said O'Reilly, who is 
preparing a doctoral thesis on the venture. It also hopes to use 
it to create a new, east-west "axis" of development along the 
Chang Jiang -- stretching from coastal Shanghai to inland 
Chongqing city -- to counter-balance the fast-growing South 
China coast, he said. Most of its electricity output is to go 
downriver, mainly to Shanghai. 
  But resistance to the project remains strong inside China, 
O'Reilly noted. Sichuan province, on the west side of the dam, 
is unhappy that it will get only 10 percent of its electricity 
output, but 80 percent of the 1.13 million river-dwellers to be 
displaced by its construction. 
  There are also strong doubts among China's own 
professionals, 
even though O'Reilly said the country has the expertise to get 
the job done. "When we talk to engineers off the record, 
they're all saying, `Look, it shouldn't be built, but if we're 
told it's got to happen, it's got to happen'," the scholar said. 
  Impoverished peasants now trying to eke a living from the 
barren slopes upriver from the dam could also emerge as a 
political force to be reckoned with if their relocation to new 
plots of land is badly handled. If the peasants refused to move 
in protest, they could gain political support from other 
disgruntled groups in Chinese society, such as students, 
O'Reilly said. Other outspoken Three Gorges opponents include 
dissident intellectuals who were forced underground after the 
ill-fated Tiananmen Square democracy movement in 1989. 
  Many critics say China's pressing energy needs could be 
dealt 
with more effectively, and with less cost and damage to the 
environment, with smaller dams along the Chang Jiang's many 
tributaries. 

