Language: <F P=105> Tamil </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "An Agreement Favoring the United States"] </F>
  [Text] America and Europe have reached an accord regarding 
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade [GATT]. Hereafter the 
GATT organization will be used as a tool to promote the 
interests of America and to trumpet America's influence. On the 
pretext of building up a flourishing international trade on the 
basis of the Dunkel draft, arrangements to strangle the 
international trade has now been completed. Developing countries 
like India will be in a miserable plight as they cannot stop the 
tide of imports from developed countries and they can not give 
adequate protection to their own indigenous industries. 
  The GATT came into being in 1948 with the object of 
rendering 
help to every country to achieve self-sufficiency in agriculture 
and industry, to regulate imports and exports and to levy 
tariffs as dictated by its national interests. But the latest 
accord makes it clear that Europe and Japan found out that they 
have no other option but to bow to mighty America's political 
and economic power and influence. Developing countries like 
India have been struggling to find a way to divert surplus 
manpower in agriculture to industrial sectors. The developed 
nations are not going to close down their industries, just to 
help the developing countries. In the United States there are 
many industrial organizations involved in metallurgy production 
and they have been operating under heavy losses for years, but 
have managed to survive thanks to the heavy subsidies from the 
U.S. Government. 
  Under the garb of protecting patents and coyprights, the 
present accord will prevent developing countries' industrial 
organizations from making any technological advances or 
discovering any new devices. Even when a couple of nations 
attempt such advances, the World Bank or the International 
Monetary Fund [IMF] will advise those nations that imports are 
better than their own production. 
  The latest GATT accord is indeed a mighty big victory for 
the 
United States of America. America successfully prevented the 
developing countries from joining hands to put up a joint united 
front, effectively forced Japan to agree to the accord and 
subdued Europe to yield to the accord. India will have to give 
up its plan of modernizing its textile and clothing industries 
with foreign technology. GATT will hereafter be a new device in 
the hands of America to threaten and subdue other nations, 
asking, "Will you do this or will you not do this for the sake 
of America?" 


