BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ciro Ortega; from the "RPC Television News" </F>
newscast; passages within quotation marks recorded] 
  [Excerpts] The 193d Infantry Brigade has completed 32 years 
of defense operations in Panama. It began its redeployment 
today from Panama, where the U.S. Army Southern Command is 
headquartered. The ceremony took place at Fort Clayton. The 
ceremony highlighted the brigade's decisive military action in 
Europe during World War II. The 193d had also participated in 
1989's Operation Just Cause, which ended with the capture of the 
Central Headquarters of the Panama Defense Forces. [passage 
omitted] 
  President Guillermo Endara Galimany outlined the challenge 
that lies ahead, saying the task is to transform the Panama 
Canal area into a magnet that attracts activities that can be 
beneficial to the entire country. He told the press this is a 
very significant event, but the historic encounter of 31 
December 1999 is yet to come. 
  [Endara] "The events of 31 December will be even more 
significant; it will be both sad and happy, because the last 
U.S. soldier will be leaving." 
  President-elect Ernesto Perez Balladares was clear in saying 
the departure of the 193d Infantry Brigade from Panama is 
essential for the fulfillment of the Panama Canal Treaty. 
  [Perez Balladares] "We must ensure there will be no further 
military presence in Panama after 31 December 1999. I believe 
this is a clear demonstration of both countries' positive 
intentions to fulfill our commitment." 
  Carlos Mendoza, a member of the Interoceanic Region 
Authority 
[ARI], reaffirmed that the gradual retreat of U.S. troops from 
Panama is a definitive step established by the Canal Treaty. He 
added the assets that will revert to Panamanian jurisdiction 
will be honestly and properly administrated, thanks to the 
organization created specifically for that task. 
  [Mendoza] "The plans we have include the reversion of Fort. 
Espinar, or what remains of Espinar to revert, Fort. Davis and 
Fort. Amador, the reversion of which will occur next year. In 
addition, as I have outlined in Coco Solo, we will soon have the 
container port for Colon." 
  The number of U.S. troops stationed in Panama will be 
reduced 
over the next 18 months, from 11,000 to 6,000, and many forts 
and other valuable assets will revert to Panamanian 
jurisdiction. The process will conclude on 31 December, 1999. 

