Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Paris, March 3 (AFP) -- Immigration into most of the 
developed countries of North America, Europe and Asia has fallen 
off in what could mark a "turning point" in global migration, 
the OECD reported Thursday [3 March]. 
  But it added that the potential remains for new bursts of 
migration, notably by people seeking to escape the turmoil 
caused by political change in the former Soviet bloc, the 
organization said Thursday. 
  The 24-nation Organisation for Economic Cooperation and 
Development, in its annual report on global migration trends, 
said that with the exception of Germany, Sweden and the United 
States, immigration into OECD countries fell off in 1992 and the 
first part of 1993, the latest period covered by the survey. 
  It said the changes "seem to mark a turning point in 
migration." 
  The report suggested various reasons for the decline, 
including the economic recession and subsequent fall in the need 
for fresh immigrant labour and government measures to combat the 
abuse of political asylum rights. 
  But it added that the changes could mark "merely a cyclical 
downturn unlikely to have a fundamental effect on the 
acceleration of international migration," and said it "would 
seem premature to suggest that the trend has been definitively 
reversed." 
  The report said that while economic and population 
imbalances 
between North and South remained the main cause of migration, 
political change in the former Soviet bloc had become a 
contributing factor. 
  Transition to a market economy in that region was "a 
completely unfamiliar process whose effects, especially 
increased unemployment, may have an impact on migration." 
  While noting that the "great East-West exodus feared by some 
has not so far taken place," the report said the crisis in 
former Yugoslavia "has triggered substantial unforeseen 
population movements." 
  It also said that Central and East Europe and the former 
Soviet Union had "considerable migratory potential, fuelled by 
economic and political change as well as social and ethnic 
tension." 
  The transition to a market economy was having contradictory 
effects, the OECD said. "The political motivations for leaving 
are gradually disappearing but the re-establishment of freedom 
of movement, rising levels of unemployment and persistently high 
income differentials between East and West encourage emigration, 
especially among the most highly qualified," the report said. 
  The report went on to say that over a very short space of 
time, OECD countries had been confronted with "all the different 
forms" of population movement -- migration by ethnic minorities, 
migration for work and family reasons, temporary or seasonal and 
frontier migration, movement of asylum-seekers and the return 
home of former emigrants. 
  The OECD groups West European nations, the United States, 
Canada, Australia and Japan. 
  Migration trends are causing concern in almost all the OECD 
countries, with some continuing to receive high levels of 
applications for asylum, the report said. 
  The number of applications in Germany in 1992, totalling 
440,000, was entirely exceptional, exceeding the number of 
applications in the same year in all the other European OECD 
members, it noted. 
  It said that in their efforts to deal with "the 
ever-increasing scale" of population movements, the migration 
policies of some OECD states were facing "a crisis of 
legitimacy." 
  The report cautioned that widespread illegal migration and 
the growing numbers of asylum seekers were blurring some 
governments' judgement of the differences between various 
categories of migrants -- asylum seekers, refugees, family 
reunification, students, workers and tourists. 
  If the legitimacy of migration policies is to be 
strengthened, the OECD said, there needs to be more effective 
control of flows of all types of migration. 
  Possible measures include tighter border surveillance, more 
checks within countries and extended visa requirements, it said. 
  But several countries have complained about the speed with 
which migrants and employers adapt to whatever restrictions were 
imposed to combat illegal employment. 
  Whenever much tighter controls were introduced, the report 
said, the clandestine crossing of frontiers gave way to entry 
either with forged papers or as tourists. 

