BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by correspondent Dhimitrios Fikas from New York] </F>
  [Text] Political observers consider Greek Prime Minister 
Andreas Papandreou's visit to the United States to be of 
historic significance to Greek-U.S. relations. The official 
visit will begin 19 April and last until 24 April; the prime 
minister will then move on to New York for meetings with Greek 
community officials and other diplomats. 
  The White House looks forward to the meeting between U.S. 
President Bill Clinton and Papandreou, with particular interest 
in bilateral issues and the crisis in the former Yugoslavia. 
The Greek side will mainly raise our national issues: Skopje 
[The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia--FYROM], the Cyprus 
issue, respect for the rights of the Greek minority in North 
Ipiros, and bilateral economic and defense cooperation. 
  Some circles in the U.S. State Department and at the 
Pentagon 
do not view Greece's role positively and are exerting some 
pressure. According to unverified information, last week the 
U.S. secretary of state was ready to issue a statement 
criticizing Greece's handling of Skopje. In any case, such a 
statement was not issued. White House adviser George 
Stefanopoulos personally told Athens Elliniki Radiofonia today 
that the White House considers the prime minister's trip to be 
of substantive significance. 
  Greek-Turkish relations are also on the agenda. President 
Clinton is particularly concerned with the tension in the 
region. It is indicative that although his meeting with Turkish 
Prime Minister Tansu Ciller last week was unofficial, Clinton 
raised the Cyprus issue and Greek-Turkish relations, noting that 
there must be self-restraint, and a worsening of the situation 
in the region must be avoided. 
  Regarding the Skopje issue, the picture is not very positive 
for Greece right now. International mediator Cyrus Vance 
continues the proximity talks in New York. There was a marathon 
two and a half hour meeting tonight, which ended 45 minutes ago, 
between Vance and Ambassador Khristos Zakharakis, our Foreign 
Ministry secretary general. Afterward, Zakharakis confirmed 
that the Greek side had submitted notes on Vance's ideas on how 
to break the deadlock. We have reported that the Vance formula 
provides for negotiations in three phases. In the first phase, 
there is to be a simultaneous lifting of the embargo and a 
statement from Skopje assuring of the border's inviolability and 
giving guarantees about its constitution. The disputed points of 
that constitution--the symbols and the flag--will be discussed 
in the second phase. The name issue will be discussed in the 
third phase. Our information is that neither Skopje nor the 
Greek side accept Vance's ideas in their current form [words 
indistinct]. 
  We have just received a statement--in the form of 
propaganda-- from the permanent Albanian delegation to the 
United Nations. Its title is: Greece Continues Its 
Provocations Against Albania. The statement includes the 
official protest of the Albanian Embassy in Athens made last 
Friday [15 April], about the incident of the seizure of the 
Greek fishing boat Ayios Vasilis. The Albanians claim the 
fishing boat violated their territorial waters and imply that 
the incident was planned. 

