BFN 

  [Text] Laos appears to be hastening its pace to develop a 
large number of power plants with an aim to export the bulk of 
their output to meet Thailand's explosive energy demand. 
  Vientiane has so far signed memorandums of understanding 
with 
international consortia to establish 13 power generation 
projects in Laos with a combined generating capacity of more 
than 4,000 megawatt (MW), a capacity which satisfies nearly half 
of Thailand's current power demand. 
  Khammon Phonkeo, Laos' vice minister of Industry and 
Handicraft told the Business Post in Bangkok that 12 of the 13 
projects are hydroelectric stations and one is an indigenous 
lignite-based station. 
  The Laotian Government's decision to proceed with so many 
projects is largely influenced by indications from Thai energy 
planners that the Kingdom would be able to increase power 
purchases beyond the 1,500 MW contained in the memorandum of 
understanding the two governments signed last June. 
  Due to the explosive growth in Thai power demand, now 
increasing at roughly 10 percent a year, there is a strong 
possibility that the Kingdom could buy up 4.000 MW of 
electricity in the period between 2000-2010, according to the 
Laotian minister. 
  Thailand's power demand in the current 7th Plan was 
anticipated to grow from 9,000 MW in 1992 to 13,009 MW in the 
year 2000, representing an average annual growth of 10.9 percent 
or 992.8 MW. 
  However, Laos is expected to be able to supply only 1,600 MW 
to Thailand in the year 2000 because some projects would not be 
on line by that time, Mr Khammon said. 
  Four out of 13 projects are in the preparation stage of 
construction. They are the Nam Theun Hin Boun, Nam Theun II, 
Houai Ho and Hongsa, which is lignite-fired. 
  The four projects are more committed in the advanced stage 
than other projects whose feasibility studies still need to be 
conducted. Most of them involve Thai investors. 
  The majority of output from all the power projects in Laos, 
in which the Laotian Government has certain stakes, will be 
exported to Thailand. 
  However, Mr Khammon said it is possible to export some of 
the 
power to neighbouring countries like China, Burma, Vietnam, 
Cambodia and Vietnam. 
  But agreement on the power price with the Thai authorities 
will be crucial in determining whether all these Laotian power 
plants will get off the ground. 
  Mr Khammon is now leading the Laotian effort to negotiate a 
power sale agreement with the Electricity Generating Authority 
of Thailand (EGAT). 
  Current negotiations center on the power sale pacts for the 
210- MW Nam Theun Hin Boon scheme and the 600-MW Nam Theun II 
plan. The minister said talks on the Nam Theun Hin Boun is now 
at a much more advanced stage. 
  He is optimistic that an agreement for Nam Theun Hin Boun 
could be struck shortly, noting that the difference in prices 
both sides have asked were substantially narrowed. 
  In another development, EGAT yesterday won Cabinet approval 
to proceed with the 14.73-billion-baht investment plan to set up 
two large-scale power stations to be fuelled by indigenous 
natural gas. 
  One of the two projects is the 400-MW combined cycle power 
plant to be located in Nong Chok. Investment for this project 
is estimated at 6.52 billion baht. 
  The other, estimated to cost 3.52, billion baht, calls for 
the installation of a 200-MW power house in Sai Noi district of 
Nonthaburi. 

