Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial entitled: "The Colombian Note"] </F>
  [Text] We should not be surprised at the diplomatic note 
sent by the Colombian Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Casa 
Amarilla [seat of the Venezuelan Ministry of Foreign Affairs], 
in which Colombia confirms that it has returned to its most 
extreme position regarding the demarcation of the maritime and 
underwater borders between the two countries in the Gulf of 
Venezuela. 
  The Colombian note, in which Colombia reminds us that it has 
available to it means for a solution to the controversy other 
than direct negotiations and which denies legitimate, Venezuelan 
rights to the Los Monjes Archipelago, confirms everything that 
we have warned people about in terms of Colombian behavior and 
which was referred to some two years ago in the "Informe 
Bacalao" [Bacalao Report], presented by Isabel Carlota Bacalao 
Romer, an international lawyer, to the Venezuelan Negotiating 
Commission before she submitted her resignation as an adviser to 
the commission. 
  The note which Colombian Foreign Minister Noemi Sanin sent 
to 
Fernando Ochoa Antich, our foreign minister, should be rejected 
by Venezuela and by all Venezuelans because: 
  In the first place, Venezuela cannot accept, as the 
Colombian 
note suggests, arbitration or the International Court of Justice 
as channels for reaching a peaceful solution of the dispute; and 
in the second place, the Los Monjes Islands certainly generate 
rights to a territorial sea, a contiguous zone, a continental 
shelf, and an Exclusive Economic Zone, just as Colombia demanded 
in its border demarcation dispute with Nicaragua over 
Quintanilla, Roncador, and Quita Sueno Islands, which make up 
the San Andres Archipelago. 
  We must refuse to allow Colombia to return to that extreme 
position when direct negotiations--according to the many 
statements which have been made--are going well. At the same 
time we must refuse to allow Colombia to place itself in open 
contradiction to the position which it took in its territorial 
dispute with Nicaragua. 
  Nevertheless, we say that the Colombian position should not 
surprise us, because it reveals a stark reality: that Colombia 
has always wanted to go to arbitration and to the International 
Court of Justice and that it certainly has those possibilities 
open to it, thanks to the Declaration of Caracas, the 
Declaration of Urena, and the Agreement of San Pedro 
Alejandrino, documents which were signed by [former] Venezuelan 
President Carlos Andres Perez. These three documents, as Bacalao 
stated in her report, were part of a premeditated scenario to 
have this dispute resolved by third parties. In this way 
President Perez made the Treaty of 1939 applicable and even 
appointed the members of the arbitration commission. 
  Regarding the fact that Colombia has decided to return to 
its 
most extreme position, this should not be surprising, either. 
  For many years Colombia has presented, on the one hand, the 
appearance of good faith to the world regarding the demarcation 
of the maritime and underwater boundaries in the Gulf of 
Venezuela. On the other hand, Colombia has applied pressure on 
our country with everything it has available to it: matters 
related to the narcotics traffic, guerrilla activity, illegal 
immigration, and the theft of vehicles, to mention only some of 
the problems which it has raised. 
  How long will this go on, Colombia? Venezuela wants 
fraternal 
relations and integration with Colombia. Successive Venezuelan 
Governments have made every effort and gone even further to 
achieve that dream. Meanwhile, successive Colombian Governments 
persist in ignoring what is of vital interest to us: our 
unquestionable sovereignty in the waters of the Gulf of 
Venezuela. 

