Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Victor Barillas and Oscar Camacho, including the </F>
"text" of a statement by Manuel Camacho Solis, commissioner for 
peace and reconciliation in Chiapas, on 11 March; place not 
given] 
  [Text] Yesterday, Manuel Camacho Solis defined himself as a 
"factor of reconciliation and stability and a useful element in 
the transition to democracy." In view of the "pressure" he is 
under to get him to exit the nation's political scene, the 
commissioner for peace and reconciliation in Chiapas warned he 
is not ready to let anyone infringe on his civil rights and that 
he "will not act in a hasty manner." He added: "I cannot, 
simply because of pressure, invalidate my political life and 
what I represent in politics." 
  In response to criticism leveled against the programs he 
headed as Mexico City mayor, Camacho said he is not going to 
allow himself to be turned into a force "that simply explains 
the flaws of others." He added that if there is no endorsement 
for amending the IFE [Federal Electoral Institute], Cofipe 
[Federal Code of Institutions and Electoral Procedures], and 
the agreements on peace, justice, and democracy, he will make 
the necessary political decision to help democracy advance and 
to foster the country's unity. 
  Speaking to some 300 reporters, Camacho outlined his 
political position in light of criticism leveled against the 
programs he implemented when he headed the Federal District 
Department [DDF], and he discussed the pressure exerted to get 
him to leave politics. He affirmed he will not submit to 
pressure nor will he act in a hasty manner. He stressed: "My 
duty is to contribute to unity and to participate in Mexico's 
democratic transition. Camacho Solis will be a factor of 
reconciliation and stability and a useful element in the 
transition to democracy." 
  Responding to criticism regarding his performance as mayor, 
Camacho Solis warned: "The future of the country will not be 
built by a single force. An alliance of national forces will be 
built to give the government the necessary foundations, and one 
must be up to the task demanded by the times ahead." 
  He then defended his former assistants at the DDF -- some of 
whom served as assistants in the peace process -- from "attacks" 
by some political columnists. "False information" has been 
leaked about these people, but those making these comments "are 
the ones who are connected to corruption and support it. I now 
hear that if Camacho makes a unfavorable decision, he will harm 
the interests of the PRI [Institutional Revolutionary Party], 
but these people do not realize that some of the programs he 
headed in the city continue to have the support of the majority 
of Mexico City's residents." 
  In this way he was responding to PRI presidential candidate 
Luis Donaldo Colosio's criticism of his "Does Not Circulate 
Today" program [a program to keep cars off the streets on 
certain days]. Camacho Solis added: "I do not accept the fact 
that some people want to turn me into a force that simply 
explains the flaws of others. Camacho has proven his loyalty to 
the president and has been efficient in carrying out the task 
entrusted to him." 
  Regarding the transition to democracy, he said there are two 
paths: "The path I consider most advisable would be the approval 
of the amendments to the IFE and Cofipe, which will enable us to 
stick to the agreements on peace, justice, and democracy signed 
by the parties and the presidential candidates. After I fulfill 
my mission in Chiapas, and if the conditions exist to allow me 
to contribute to guaranteeing the transition to democracy, I 
will support the transition and defend its results." 
  As for the other path, Comacho said: "If we fail to make 
advances in democracy, if instead of a peace agreement we have 
polarization, or if some want to infringe on my political rights 
as a citizen after I fulfill my mission in Chiapas, I will make 
the necessary political decision to help Mexico advance in 
democracy and unity." 
  He noted: "There is nothing more important to me than 
maintaining and strengthening Mexico's unity -- not unity for 
the sake of a mere conglomerate, but a unity that stems from 
feeling one's legitimate interests are assured and from opening 
the doors of institutions to the demands for justice of the 
Mexican society and people. In other words, we must create a 
nonexclusive unity -- a unity that is founded on peace, justice, 
and democracy. This is my position, and this is where I will 
be." 
  In terms of the pressure to get him to leave politics, he 
said: "I am hearing now that Camacho can create problems, even 
though the work by this commissioner has always served and will 
continue to contribute to the country's economic, political, and 
financial stability. Some want to pressure me by fabricating 
administrative problems linked to those who are my assistants in 
Chiapas, when everyone knows the decisions at the highest levels 
of the Mexico City government were handled with honesty." 
  At this point, some reporters applauded his much-awaited 
statement. This was the first ovation. He said: "I do not 
accept the fact that some people want to turn me into a force 
that simply explains the flaws of others. Camacho has proven 
his loyalty to the president and has been efficient in carrying 
out the task entrusted to him." 
  He said: "Camacho will not present a problem for the other 
candidates who intend to carry out their duty to consolidate 
their political campaigns and demonstrate their effectiveness to 
the people. This opportunity has always been open." 
  Following is the full text of his statement: 
  "Today, I would like to comment on two issues. The first is 
related to a meeting I just had with the Coleto Civic Front. 
This is a very important issue for Chiapas. Later, I plan to 
refer to another unrelated issue. 
  Today I met with a delegation representing the Coleto Civic 
Front headed by Mr. Ricardo Diaz Martinez. The delegates 
stressed that the population of San Cristobal de las Casas 
favors peace and is working toward creating a favorable climate 
for negotiations. They are proud of the fact that San Cristobal 
de las Casas, their city, is hosting the peace talks. They have 
indicated their intention to be present as witnesses during the 
signing of any peace agreements that may be reached should the 
EZLN grass roots decide to accept any proposals. 
  With this symbolic act, reconciliation in San Cristobal de 
las Casas has already begun. During my next visit I will meet 
with the San Cristobal Civic Front in a 
friendship-and-reconciliation ceremony. 
  Now I am going to refer to the other issue -- the issue of 
politics. 
  Ever since I was sent to Chiapas, I have done nothing but 
work for peace, often taking risks I had to take. I have spent 
the entire time honestly involved in this endeavor, and I have 
also taken advantage of all my experience with this single end 
in mind. 
  I will continue to do this until my mission is complete. It 
is because I concentrated on this goal and did not distract 
myself with other political issues that I have been able to show 
positive results to all those who trusted in my efforts, 
starting with the president of the republic. 
  Once again I would like to acknowledge the categorical 
support received from the Mexican Army in favor of a political 
solution. 
  Of course, to me it would have been preferable to continue 
moving forward with the Chiapas peace process before outlining 
my political position. Nevertheless, the circumstances and 
pressure involved are of such magnitude and force that, if I do 
not clarify my position now, I will end up damaging the search 
for peace in Chiapas, further complicating the process. 
  Currently, pressure is being exerted for this commissioner 
to 
withdraw from the country's political scene. I am hearing now 
that Camacho can create problems, even though the work by this 
commissioner has always served and will continue to contribute 
to the country's economic, political, and financial stability. 
  Some want to pressure me by fabricating administrative 
problems linked to those who are my assistants in Chiapas, when 
everyone knows the decisions at the highest levels of the Mexico 
City government were handled with honesty. 
  Those people leaking this type of false information are the 
ones who are connected to corruption and support it. 
  I now hear that if Camacho makes an unfavorable decision he 
will harm the interests of the PRI, but these people do not 
realize that some of the programs he headed in the city continue 
to have the support of the majority of Mexico City's residents. 
  No, I do not accept the fact that some people want to turn 
me 
into a force that simply explains the flaws of others. Camacho 
has proven his loyalty to the president and has been efficient 
in carrying out the task entrusted to him. I have made 
decisions in accordance with what is best for Mexico. Camacho 
will not present a problem for the other candidates who intend 
to carry out their duty to consolidate their political campaigns 
and demonstrate their effectiveness to the people. This 
opportunity has always been open. What I am not willing to do is 
to stop exercising my rights as a citizen. Mexico needs to 
bolster its opportunities, its road toward reconciliation, its 
democratic opening, its responses to the middle class, its 
resolve to be part of the new global economy, the vitality of 
its history, and its determination to open its door to justice. 
  I cannot, simply because of pressure, invalidate my 
political life and what I represent in politics. The future of 
the country will not be built by a single force. An alliance of 
national forces will be built to give the government the 
necessary foundations, and one must be up to the task demanded 
by the times ahead. 
  The best guarantee for economic and political stability 
today 
is the definite and orderly transit toward democracy. This 
should be done without violence and with guarantees for all -- 
for the private sector, the workers, and for every political and 
civil organization without exception. A key guarantee of this 
entire process is to firmly uphold those agreements responsible 
for the country's macroeconomic balance and to ensure foreign 
investment confidence in the Mexican economy. 
  What Chiapas has proven is that if the forces of moderation, 
democracy, and peaceful change fail to strengthen themselves, 
the measures adopted by interest groups will make the task of 
government more difficult by creating deep divisions. 
  Let us see now, my friends. Let us now take a brief recess 
and exercise some reconciliation. I am about to reach the best 
part of all, but it would seem that I will have to leave without 
saying it. 
  As result of all I said before, ladies and gentlemen, I am 
not going to make decisions as a result of pressures, and I will 
not act in a hasty manner. My duty is to contribute to unity 
and to participate in Mexico's democratic transition. Camacho 
Solis will be a factor of reconciliation and stability and a 
useful element in the transition to democracy. Therefore, the 
question is this: What is the best way to do this effectively 
while remaining loyal to the nation? 
  The path I consider most advisable would be the approval of 
the amendments to the IFE and Cofipe, which will enable us to 
stick to the agreements on peace, justice, and democracy signed 
by the parties and the presidential candidates. After I fulfill 
my mission in Chiapas, and if the conditions exist to allow me 
to contribute to guaranteeing the transition to democracy, I 
will support the transition and defend its results. 
  Another possibility is this: If we fail to make advances in 
democracy, if instead of a peace agreement we have polarization, 
or if some want to infringe on my political rights as a citizen 
after I fulfill my mission in Chiapas, I will make the necessary 
political decision to help Mexico advance in democracy and unity. 
  There is nothing more important to me than maintaining and 
strengthening Mexico's unity -- not unity for the sake of a mere 
conglomerate, but a unity that stems from feeling one's 
legitimate interests are assured and from opening the doors of 
institutions to the demands for justice of the Mexican society 
and people. In other words, we must create a nonexclusive unity 
-- a unity that is founded on peace, justice, and democracy. 
This is my position, and this is where I will be. 
  Camacho will be a factor for reconciliation and stability 
and 
a useful instrument for democratic transition. Just as I have 
done since 10 January, at this moment I am wholly concentrating 
in the task of searching for peace in Chiapas. 
  Thank you very much, and thank you for being here." 

