Language: <F P=105> Cambodian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Reply from His Excellency Khieu Samphan, chairman of the </F>
Party of Democratic Kampuchea, to Prince Krompreah Norodom 
Ranariddh, chairman of FUNCINPEC, concerning the king's 
five-point initiative and the establishment of the technical 
group" -- read by announcer] 
  [Text] After receiving a telegram from His Excellency 
[H.E.] Khieu Samphan, chairman of the Party of Democratic 
Kampuchea [PDK], dated 15 January 1994, Prince Krompreah Norodom 
Ranariddh sent his representative to verbally inform H.E. Khieu 
Samphan of his answer. In this answer Prince Krompreah Norodom 
Ranariddh specified that the king's five-point initiative is 
fully accepted and that this will be used as the basis for talks 
within the technical group and that all points will be 
implemented at the same time. Furthermore, Prince Krompreah 
Norodom Ranariddh also agreed that the technical group does not 
have to have a name and he asked that the technical group start 
its work immediately. 
  It must be made clear that the representative of the Phnom 
Penh side has also demanded to be included in this technical 
group without yet accepting the king's five-point initiative. 
  On the morning of 21 January 1994, directed by PDK Chairman 
H.E. Khieu Samphan, the PDK representative in Phnom Penh met 
with the representative of FUNCINPEC [National United Front for 
an Independent, Neutral, Peaceful, and Cooperative Cambodia], 
Chairman Prince Krompreah Norodom Ranariddh, and verbally 
informed Prince Krompreah Norodom Ranariddh of H.E. Khieu 
Samphan's answer, the essence of which is as follows: 
  1. After thanking Prince Krompreah Norodom Ranariddh for 
sending his representative to verbally convey the message on 17 
January, H.E. Khieu Samphan noted that in the message Prince 
Krompreah Norodom Ranariddh stated that the king's five-point 
initiative has been fully accepted; that this will be used as 
the basis of talks within the technical group; and that all 
points will be implemented at the same time. 
  2. As for the Phnom Penh side, it has categorically opposed 
the king's five-point initiative in successive open statements 
and in concrete actions. 
  Recently, the representative of the Phnom Penh side on 7 
January 1994, and subsequently, openly stated that the PDK 
should first implement the first three points before discussing 
other issues. This is in fact opposing the king's five-point 
policy. Furthermore, national resources have been used to buy 
ammunition, weapons, and military materiel, in an attempt to 
smash Democratic Kampuchean forces to prevent national 
reconciliation. 
  3. In brief, it can be seen that Prince Krompreah Norodom 
Ranariddh and H.E. Khieu Samphan, namely, FUNCINPEC and the PDK, 
have agreed to and accepted the king's five-point initiative. 
Therefore, the technical group should start working straightaway 
with FUNCINPEC and PDK representatives. 
  4. The Phnom Penh side -- which talks about a three point 
scheme in opposition to the king's five-point initiative -- 
cannot take part in the talks on the five-point political 
guideline. When the Cambodian People's Party accepts the 
five-point advice, its representative will be added to the 
technical group. 
  It should be this way so as to clearly indicate that we 
accept King Sihanouk's five-point initiative as the basis for 
talks within the technical group, because the technical group's 
task is to discuss and talk about political issues with a 
specific agenda. 
  It should be stressed that the Buddhist Liberal Democratic 
Party has also supported the king's five-point initiative. 

