BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial by Ilnur Cevik: "So at Last the Mouse Decided To </F>
Roar"] 
  [Text] Prime Minister Tansu Ciller has once again proved 
her courage by allegedly standing up to U.S. President Bill 
Clinton and telling him what he can do with his assistance to 
Turkey.... The prime minister, who is currently on a "private" 
visit to the United States to attend her son's graduation 
ceremony, told reporters she had a telephone call from Clinton 
in Boston and that during the conversation she told the American 
head of state that Turkey "may" reject U.S. military aid after a 
U.S. congressional decision to withhold part of it pending 
reports on human rights in Turkey and the Cyprus question. 
  "I told U.S. President (Bill) Clinton that I will reject 
foreign aid if necessary," the gallant prime minister declared. 
She said that she told the President she could not explain the 
aid cut to the Turkish public and that Clinton in return 
promised to do all he can to restore full aid. 
  In Sunday's [29 May] Turkish national dailies the news was 
billed as an act of courage on the part of the prime minister. 
  We too oppose the American congressional move to attach 
strings to aid to Turkey. We do not feel such aid should be 
used as a leverage on Turkey because above all this makes us 
suspect the motives of those who suspended the aid. As we 
mentioned in our earlier commentaries, the fact that the Greek 
lobby once again introduced the Cyprus card into the aid package 
shows the lack of sincerity and goodwill in the aid-cutting 
decision. The fact is that, while the congressional move 
mentions human rights in Turkey, it actually plays upon the 
"Kurdish card" rather than showing a genuine concern for the 
plight of freedoms and rights in Turkey-- which we too feel are 
in a shambles. 
  Yet, we feel this issue should not have been blown up out of 
proportion. The prime minister, while using the issue for 
domestic consumption, is doing great harm to Turco-American 
relations. Certain people seem to be completing in 
anti-Americanism and will only capitalize on Ciller's remarks. 
We should not forget that similar American Congressional 
committees also lambasted Greece for its pro-Serbian stance and 
withheld aid. We should also remember that the American 
Administration and the State Department share our views on the 
importance of maintaining warm ties between Ankara and 
Washington, and realize such congressional actions harm these 
relations. 
  Can Ciller openly say we do not need any Western assistance? 
All the leading Western countries who maintain close links with 
Turkey have been rather forceful on our human rights record, as 
well as on Cyprus. Can anyone say we do not need their aid at a 
time when Ciller is on a "fund raising" tour? Will people 
believe her when she says we "might" turn down U.S. assistance 
when Turkey is in serious need of foreign cash? Can Ciller fly 
her choppers in southeastern Turkey without American aid? Can 
she and her military friends effectively fight Kurdish 
separatist terrorism without American and German military aid? 
Does Turkey have the hard cash to do all this without outside 
assistance? Doesn't Ciller know that it is the Americans who 
are the leading contributors to the IMF which will provide the 
vital loans for Turkey to keep our economy afloat? 
  Turkey and the U.S. share common and vital interests and 
thus 
need to be good allies. They will need each other for a very 
long time to come and it is time certain U.S. congressmen, 
Ciller herself, and many other people who try to drum up 
anti-American sentiment in Turkey, realize this. 

