Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, January 30 (XINHUA) -- Vice-Premier Qian 
Qichen, on behalf of the Chinese Communist Party Central 
Committee and the State Council, today extended Spring Festival 
greetings to returned Overseas Chinese, relatives of these 
Chinese and Chinese nationals residing abroad. 
  Speaking at a reception held by the All-China Federation of 
Returned Overseas Chinese, Qian said that "at present, with an 
ever-growing economy, China enjoys political stability and good 
unity among the people of various nationalities and is making 
social progress." 
  China has also made new progress in its friendly relations 
with other countries, while the Chinese people have enhanced 
their friendship with the people in the rest of the world, said 
Qian, who is also a member of the Political Bureau of the party 
Central Committee. 
  He praised returned Overseas Chinese and their relatives for 
plunging themselves into China's reform, opening up and 
modernization drive, and making great contributions to the 
country's social development and progress. 
  He described Chinese nationals residing abroad as the most 
"active and zealous force" for promoting opening up and economic 
and trade cooperation and cultural exchanges between China and 
other countries. 
  "They have made great contributions to the expansion of 
friendly ties between China and the countries they reside in and 
to the prosperity of their motherland," Qian told the gathering 
of 1,200 people. 
  He quoted Deng Xiaoping as saying that bringing into full 
play the role of Overseas Chinese and foreigners of Chinese 
origin serves as a "unique opportunity" for China to achieve 
tremendous development. 
  The present international and domestic situations have 
provided a rare favorable opportunity for China to develop, he 
said, noting "it is possible that the world will usher in a 
relatively long period of peace. 
  "The economic vitality of the Asia-Pacific region has 
continued to rise, providing favorable conditions for China's 
economic expansion," he said. 
  "Achieving the sacred cause of China's reunification is a 
common aspiration of the entire Chinese people, including our 
compatriots in Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macao, as well as Overseas 
Chinese," he said. 
  The vice-premier said that the Chinese Government and people 
are committed to and can certainly promote the country's 
peaceful reunification in line with the principle of "one 
country, two systems." 
  He described China as a major force for maintaining peace 
and 
stability throughout the world. "We will, as always, pursue an 
independent policy for peace and persist in expanding friendly 
and cooperative relations with other countries on the five 
principles of peaceful coexistence," he said. 
  "We will also continue to make positive efforts to establish 
a peaceful, stable, fair and rational new international order," 
Qian added. 

