Language: <F P=105>Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yu. G. Goltsov, V. V. Zhilinskaya, V. B. </F>
Nechitaylo, V. I. Stepkin, Z. A. Tkachenko, and V. P. Sherstyuk, 
Physical Chemistry Institute imeni L. V. Pirsarzhevskiy, Kiev; 
Physics Institute, Kiev; UDC546.722'267:546.723'267] 
  [Abstract] The development of new electrode materials from 
polymeric cyanoferrates is sustaining a steady interest. It has 
been demonstrated that hexacyanoferrate of iron (III), HCFI or 
Prussian Blue, is a promising substance for use in 
electro-optical devices using the electro-chromic effect and in 
electrical storage devices. HCFI is one of the most efficient 
converters of electrical charges in optical absorption and it 
has a high and stable coloration-discoloration rate. 
Modifications in composition and properties of polymeric 
cyanoferrates for the purpose of broadening their range of 
applications in electronic devices operating in conjunction with 
other known electro-chromic materials, such as tungsten 
trioxide, remains a pressing problem. Recently, HCFI analogs 
having various extra-spherical cations have been prepared. An 
alternate method for modifying HCFI properties lies in 
substituting the ligands in the coordination sphere (cyanide 
ions), i.e. preparing a variety of pentacyanoferrates of iron 
(III). The significant differences between the physical chemical 
properties of the pentacyanide complexes and that of the highly 
symmetrical hexacyanides makes it possible to propose that a 
change in the symmetry of the ligand make-up of the iron atoms 
in the polymeric pentacyanoferrates must also have a significant 
effect on the physical chemical properties of the materials, 
including optical and electrochemical. In the present work an 
analog of Prussian Blue, aquapentacyanoferrate of iron (III), 
was prepared and a study was made of the effects of the 
composition of polymeric cyanoferrates on the physical chemical 
properties, structure, and electrochemical behavior of the 
resulting materials. Figures 2; references 10: 4 Russian, 6 
Western. 

