Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Economic Class" column article by columnist Yukio Okamato: </F>
"Japan-U.S. Summit Meeting -- Stop the Trade War; There Are Many 
Other Important Things To Do; Speed Up Restoration of 
Cooperative Relations"] 
  [Text] Japan-U.S. Framework Talks Making No 
Progress 
  About two weeks ago I was listening at a hotel in Washington 
to a State of the Union address by President Bill Clinton. It 
was a strong plea for the revival of the United States by 
reforming the medical care system and by fighting crime. 
  What was interesting about it was there was no mention of 
either foreign economic issues or of a reference to Japan. One 
of the officials I met the following day told me that although 
the Office of U.S. Trade Representative and the Department of 
Commerce wanted the issue of the trade imbalance with Japan 
included in the speech, the White House wanted to focus on 
domestic issues. 
  This weekend, Hosokawa and Clinton will meet in the White 
House. In the days of U.S.-Soviet confrontation, Japanese-U.S. 
summit meetings had a successful outcome every time one was 
called. That was because the most important theme was 
confirmation of the Japanese-U.S. alliance, and because Japan 
was able to decide on defense policies or on the burdens 
necessary to implement such policies through agreement by only a 
handful of powerful men in the government and ruling party. 
With the Cold War structure gone, however, things do not work 
that way. It is still fresh in our memory that the 
Miyazawa-Bush conference in Tokyo in January 1992 was seen as a 
failure because it did not resolve economic problems. 
  The key topic at the forthcoming summit meeting is progress 
in the Japan-U.S. economic consultations. But the two sides are 
making heavy weather of the consultations, and it is by no means 
clear the summit meeting will be successful. For both Japan and 
the United States, it would be good political news to announce 
the "summit meeting was a success." But the present differences 
will make it difficult for the United States to even issue the 
usual announcement that "measures presented by Japan in the 
economic consultations are a first step in the right direction, 
and we welcome it." 
  Why are the consultations facing such heavy going this time? 
  First, the talks are not needed, economically speaking. The 
Japan-U.S. structural impediments initiative (SII) talks 
concluded in 1990 were aimed at agreeing on the macroeconomic 
measures necessary for both Japan and the United States to 
redress their respective problems of underconsumption and 
undersaving. This was following an agreement that "the 
difference in the volume of savings used for investment is the 
cause of the bilateral imbalance." Agreements made at those SII 
talks are in the process of being implemented step by step. 
  What Japan and the United States should be doing now, first 
of all, are further adjustments of macroeconomic measures within 
the framework of the talks (drastic Japanese deregulation in the 
interests of consumers, for instance). 
  But it was impossible for the Clinton camp, which criticized 
President Bush's trade policy during the presidential election 
campaign, to simply take over and continue the SII talks. They 
had to create new framework talks no matter how absurd the logic 
for them. The upshot is the comprehensive framework talks 
intended to put numerical targets, called "objective criteria," 
on industrial sectors about which the United States has been 
unhappy. The U.S. demands smell strongly of managed trade, 
while many of them are excessive in view of the existing market 
mechanism. 
  A second reason why the consultations are facing a tough 
time 
is that Japan, under the heavy pressure of economic recession, 
has become unable to find a way to accept the U.S. demands. 
Take automobiles, for instance. With the domestic production 
shrinking, there is no way the country can increase imports of 
auto parts from the United States no matter how hard the latter 
may push. 
  A third reason is the difficult schedule according to which 
negotiations on three priority areas -- government procurement, 
insurance and automobiles -- must reach agreement in six months. 
Changing Negotiation Politics 
  The SII talks started in July 1989. Six months later, in 
February 1990, Japanese and U.S. bureaucrats were still 
confronting each other. To find a breakthrough, Prime Minister 
Toshiki Kaifu and President George Bush met at Palm Springs at 
the end of February. Based on agreements at the meeting, 
negotiations resumed in March, and, after repeated pushing and 
pulling in the tough talks, they finally arrived at a conclusion 
in June. 
  Although the 1993 framework talks started in July, the same 
month the SII talks started, they were supposed to have been 
completed by February -- at the same stage the SII talks were 
only at the halfway point on the major points. To make matters 
worse, the Hosokawa government had, until recently, been very 
much occupied with debates on the issue of political reform. 
There is no denying that the talks have been too short. 
  then there is a fourth reason, which is even more 
troublesome. This is the matter of Japan-U.S. negotiation 
politics. Previously in this column I once wrote about the 
Clinton government's mistake of turning Japan-U.S. relations 
from a multilayered relationship involving politics, security, 
the economy, and global cooperation into a single-layered 
relationship involving only the economy. Under Republican 
leaders, those in charge of Japan-U.S. economic negotiations 
were Secretary of State Shultz and Secretary of State Baker. 
But in recent negotiations one cannot find the name of 
Secretary of State Christopher anywhere. The people taking part 
in the negotiations are only sectoral battle commanders like 
U.S. Trade Representative Kantor and Secretary of Commerce Brown. 
  Even during the SII talks there were sharp differences 
between Japan and the United States on individual issues. The 
reason the talks came to a conclusion despite them is that Japan 
promised to make public works investments of 430 trillion yen 
over a 10-year period and Secretary of State Baker, who was 
looking for a good time to conclude the talks, decided to accept 
the offer and ordered all troops to "stop shooting," even though 
not everyone on the U.S. side was satisfied with the deal. 
  In the current talks it is President Clinton himself who 
will 
assess the 15 trillion-yen economic stimulus package, which is 
the result of so much trouble and so many tribulations. The 
summit meeting apparently stands on a very thin layer of ice. 
  On the other hand, Japan has its problems. Prime Minister 
Hosokawa alone is responsible for making political decisions and 
implementing them. When Japan decided on a package of 430 
trillion yen at the time of the SII talks -- despite the strong 
resistance of the Finance Ministry -- it was possible to do so 
because there was support from powerful politicians. In the 
current talks, Hosokawa has no such supporters, and this means 
the bureaucrats can lead the talks. After all, if a country 
wants to prevent an economic issue from turning into a political 
issue in negotiations, it needs cooperation of both parties. 
  As far as the United States is concerned, talks with Japan 
are nothing more than political talks in which Congress, the 
industry, and the administration cooperate as a single force. 
If Japan tried to find a solution within its administration 
only, the talks would not work out well. That is because for 
Japan, which still makes something like $50 billion from the 
United States, it is a political decision on what, if anything, 
it can give back in return. 
  In discussing the politics of negotiation, there is an 
element which, though small, must not be overlooked. This is 
the attitude of the Japanese bureaucrats, who have long 
participated in negotiations with the United States and are 
increasingly displeased by the tough negotiation methods they 
encounter. Their attitude may represent a diminishing of 
respect by the Japanese toward the United States that is a 
result of a new generation of Japanese negotiators taking charge. 
  The framework talks are now at a critical phase. If they are 
not successfully concluded, the United States will take 
unilateral action against Japan, resorting to presidential 
decrees and other means. Throughout the first half of this year 
Japan-U.S. relations will likely remain strained. In Congress 
there is a feeling of resentment that the U.S. Government, which 
devoted so much time to NAFTA and the GATT's Uruguay Round of 
talks, made the mistake of letting Japan and China do as they 
pleased in bilateral trade. 
  But when seen in the long term, the current framework 
talks will probably be the last trade war between Japan and the 
United States. Japanese trade, which hit a peak last year, is 
thought to have decreased gradually since. According to last 
year's economic white paper, the income elasticity of import 
volumes for Japan from 1985 to 1992 was 1.48, which is three 
times as much as the income elasticity of exports. This means 
structurally it has become easier for Japan's economy to 
increase imports and to decrease exports. 
<H5>  Market Logic Should Solve the Problem </H5>
  While it is never desirable, a further drop in export 
elasticity or the export share of world trade is fully possible. 
The situation is more serious if we think about the problem of 
the excess capacity of Japanese industry, the pressure on 
industry to curb its tendency toward excessive competition, and 
the industrial hollowing out as a result of the 
high-yen-prompted removal of production facilities. 
  Rapid industrialization of Asian nations is now causing 
deindustrialization and deflation in Japan. There is now a 
growing view that Japan has no choice but to increase its 
nonmanufacturing service sectors. 
  All this -- as far as relations with the United States are 
concerned -- means things are flowing toward a redress of the 
imbalance. Bluntly put, this means the trade imbalance between 
Japan and the United States, which has lasted for more than a 
decade, is likely to be resolved through the logic of the 
market, not of the government. It will mean a reduction in 
exports of Japanese products to the United States in relative 
terms and not, as is wanted by the United States, an increase in 
its exports to Japan. 
  Japan and the United States have so many issues to discuss. 
These include role-sharing in the post-Cold War world, making 
contributions to stabilization in Asia, the DPRK nuclear issue, 
and the sort of economic and social structures the two countries 
should seek to encourage. Prime Minister Hosokawa and President 
Clinton need to speedily form a Japan-U.S. relationship 
befitting the new era. The chances are getting slimmer that 
Ambassador Mondale's hope for an early finish to the framework 
talks and candid discussions on other important matters will be 
realized. We do hope, however, the two leaders reach agreement. 

