Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by I. Afanasyev under the rubric "Without the </F>
Secret Stamp": "`Halt the Work, Destroy the Materials'"] 
  [Text] The unprecedented aircraft, remotely 
reminiscent of the Space Shuttle, was launched in columns of 
fire and smoke on the broad rectangle of the screen--an aircraft 
with a delta wing, lifted by two powerful rocket boosters--and 
went off into the sky leaving behind a track of many kilometers. 
When the solemn sounds of the music had fallen silent and the 
movie screen lit up, the viewers applauded in concert and 
genuinely. That is how the participants in the 17th Scientific 
Readings on Space Science of 1993, among them the creators of 
the Burya intercontinental cruise missile, welcomed the news 
that the lid of secrecy had finally been removed from the object 
whose fate had been carefully concealed from the domestic and 
world community more than thirty years ago. 
  After 29 August 1949, when the USSR detonated its first 
nuclear device, the United States had to reconsider its views of 
the problem of the "big stick against the Russians." The first 
stage in strategic parity, however, was achieved only when the 
first experimental prototypes of bombers with intercontinental 
flight range appeared at the design bureaus of A. Tupolev and V. 
Myasishchev. They knew about this in the United States. 
  But taking into account the prospects for the development of 
air defenses by a potential enemy, it was necessary to create 
new and less vulnerable means of delivering nuclear weapons. The 
principal flight characteristics and look of systems that had 
the necessary range were determined in the course of research, 
and two basic ways of developing them were noted--the creation 
of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) and supersonic 
winged craft. Both the former and the latter had their 
advantages and disadvantages. While it was difficult even to 
imagine the means of destroying a flying ICBM at the beginning 
of the 1950s, the vulnerability of winged craft seemed to be too 
great. Their principal defense at the time was only altitude and 
speed. The creation of ICBMs, however, required providing a very 
high weight efficiency in the design for the times, as well as 
powerful and economical engines and an accurate, autonomous 
guidance system, also not easy to do. The requirements for the 
structural elements and power plants of supersonic strategic 
bombers and intercontinental cruise missiles (MKRs) were not as 
high; experience accumulated earlier in aircraft construction 
was widely employed in their design engineering. A system of 
celestial navigation on MKRs could ensure high accuracy in 
hitting the target. The decision was made, in order to guarantee 
the safety of the country, to develop MKRs, supersonic bombers 
and ICBMs. 
  M. Keldysh was the inspiration for the idea, and the 
theoretician for the creation, of the ICBMs and MKRs. The NII-1 
[Scientific-Research Institute 1] that he headed was given the 
task of creating a theoretical-design base for the future 
systems. The Experimental Design Bureau (OKB) of S. Korolev was 
to incarnate the missile in metal. 
  A supersonic ramjet engine (SPVRD) was considered to be 
preferable for the power plant (DU) of the MKR; its operating 
efficiency reached a maximum at a constant (cruising) speed 
corresponding to Mach 3--3.5. The work on the SPVRD was advanced 
most broadly at NII-1 and the OKB headed by M. Bondaryuk. Since 
this engine operated steadily and economically only within a 
comparatively narrow range of speeds and altitudes, rocket 
boosters were required to put the MKR onto the flight trajectory 
before the start of the cruising leg. 
  The SPVRD differed from other types of jet engines in the 
simplicity of its design. It had no compressor to compress the 
air before being fed into the combustion chamber; it actually 
consisted of an air intake--diffuser in which the air flow was 
slowed, raising the pressure thereby, a combustion chamber, and 
an exhaust nozzle that transformed the potential energy of the 
hot gas into kinetic energy. 
  The guidance system determined the accuracy of warhead 
delivery. Work on celestial navigation systems apropos of cruise 
missiles was being pursued at the end of the 1940s at the 
initiative of B. Chertok at NII-88, which at that time was a 
part of the OKB of S. Korolev. The design department of I. 
Lisovich, who in 1953 developed an operating celestial 
navigation system with the necessary characteristics, was also 
created there. 
  The heat-resistant structural materials without which the 
manufacture of the MKR was impossible--titanium, high-strength 
stainless steel--as well as the technology for machining and 
welding them, were under development at VIAM [All-Union 
Scientific-Research Institute of Aviation Materials] and MVTU 
[Moscow Higher Technical School] imeni N.E. Bauman. 
  They decided first to build an experimental cruise missile 
(EKR) with a cruising speed of Mach 3 and a range of 1,300 km, 
the design for which was developed at the OKB of S. Korolev in 
1951-53, in order to check out the possibility of realizing 
supersonic cruise missiles. Like a full-scale MKR, it was to 
consist of a booster with ZhRDs [liquid-fueled rocket engines] 
(the R-11 rocket with long-term storable fuel) and a cruising 
stage with an SPVRD developed by the OKB of M. Bondaryuk. It 
should be taken into account that virtually no one, either in 
our country or abroad, had any experience in the creation of 
SPVRDs with the required characteristics. Relying on the 
comparatively modest experimental elaborations of past years and 
quite substantial scientific work in progress at the NII-1, the 
necessary engine was created in the shortest possible time and 
passed through the whole set of ground try-outs, confirming its 
design characteristics. 
  Reporting to the leadership of the USSR the completion of 
working design engineering for the EKR, representatives of the 
expert commission affirmed that the amount of research that had 
been performed was so great, while the data obtained from the 
ground testing satisfied the requirements of the customer so 
well, that the possibility existed of foregoing the completion 
of the experimental missile and its flight testing. An immediate 
move to the physical development of the MKR using the manpower 
of aviation design collectives, rather than "missile" ones, and 
the accumulated design work of the EKR was proposed. The Korolev 
OKB could concentrate all of its efforts after that on the 
creation of ICBMs, which no one had rejected either. 
  A decree came out on 20 May 1954 on the start of development 
of two parallel MKR projects, the Burya and the Buran, the 
creation of which was entrusted respectively to the OKB of S. 
Lavochkin--which at the time had experience in building 
supersonic fighters and had moved on to the new subject 
matter--and the OKB of V. Myasishchev, which was developing 
long-range supersonic bombers. The main executor of the SPVRD 
for both missiles was the OKB of M. Bondaryuk. The celestial 
navigation guidance system was being created under the 
leadership of R. Chachikyan, while the inertial guidance system 
for the operating leg of the launch boosters was under the 
leadership of G. Tolstousov. The scientific research of all 
subdivisions of the NII-1 and the corresponding departments of 
the Institute of Applied Mathematics was directed toward 
supporting the solutions of the tasks of the OKBs of Lavochkin 
and Myasishchev. 
  Soviet MKRs were designed as unmanned supersonic aircraft 
with vertical launch. The launch and reaching of cruising speed 
were expected to be accomplished using powerful boosters with 
liquid-fueled rocket engines. The booster engines of the Burya 
were developed by the OKB of A. Isayev, while those for the 
Buran came from the OKB of V. Glushko. Both, at the 
recommendation of TsAGI [Central Institute of Aerohydrodynamics 
imeni N.Ye. Zhukovskiy], were two-stage craft, with the second 
(cruising) stages fitted with SPVRDs structured according to a 
normal aircraft configuration with a delta wing, a sweep angle 
at the leading edge of 70 and a thin, supersonic profile. 
The forward portion of the cylindrical fuselage of the cruising 
stage held a supersonic diffuser with a central body, in which 
was accommodated the warhead. The air-intake duct led back to 
the tail section of the fuselage where the SPVRD was installed, 
encircled by annular fuel tanks; the fuselage ended in the SPVRD 
nozzle and X-shaped empennage with aerodynamic control surfaces. 
The system of celestial navigation and control was located in a 
cooled instrument compartment in the upper front part of the 
fuselage; its sensors were covered with a unique kind of canopy 
made of heat-resistant quartz sheets. 
  The dimensions and design execution of the individual 
systems 
and units of both MKRs were different. Since the Buran was 
designed for a larger warhead than the Burya, it had a large 
takeoff mass and thrust of both the cruising and the launch 
engines. The work of the Lavochkin OKB outstripped the plans, 
and by 1956, when the Myasishchev OKB was finishing the design 
engineering of the Buran, the first models of the Burya had 
already been created. 
  It is interesting that they were informed abroad about the 
Soviet work on the MKRs. The authors of the "International 
Handbook on Controlled Shells and Spacecraft," published in the 
United States in 1960 by F. Ordway and R. Wakeford, described in 
a great deal of detail the "large winged antipodal T-4A bomber 
under development in the USSR," and even included a drawing. The 
aircraft depicted in it resembled the Burya. They assumed that 
the Soviet projects were based on the research of German 
scientists E. Senger and I. Bredt on a super-long-range rocket 
aircraft during World War II. 
  After comprehensive ground testing of the Burya that was 
successfully completed in full, a new stage in the work started 
in July of 1957--flight testing. The first seven launches were 
to try out the initial leg of the flight of the Burya until the 
moment of booster separation; the aim of the next three flights 
was to run through the dynamics of the separation of stages and 
the ignition of the cruising stage. The second part of the 
program of flight testing envisaged flights with an operating 
cruising engine--first for a short distance, and then for a long 
one--with the actual try-out of all the units. By March of 1960 
the MKR had demonstrated the possibility of stable flight and 
the operability of all systems. The missile was launched before 
dawn in the last launch, made on December 16 of that same year, 
with the cruising flight during the daytime, which proved the 
effectiveness of the operation of the celestial navigation at 
any time of day. The planned program of flight testing had been 
completed. 
  The flights of the Burya took place at the same time as the 
flight testing of the R-7 ICBM developed by the Korolev OKB. The 
leadership of the USSR decided soon afterward to curtail the 
work on the Buran, assuming that the country could not "pull 
off" two MKR projects with similar characteristics at the same 
time. This step made the advocates of the idea of a MKR somewhat 
wary, but it did not particularly upset them--they were 
objectively justified. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-UAC-005-13A>           Graphic </FIG>




  The work on the Burya proceeded with unusual creative 
enthusiasm. Its creators understood that they were making more 
than a weapon--they were getting the last word in aviation and 
missile technology, looking to tomorrow. Against that 
background, the order of the leadership of the sector, the 
essence of which could be reduced to the following phrase, made 
a stunning impression: "Halt the work, destroy all materials..." 
  Yes, everyone could see that Korolev's "seven" had begun to 
fly successfully, but was it then worth it to drop the MKR, 
which had also fulfilled its mission? The decision was made in 
entirely unwarranted fashion, in the opinion of a number of 
specialists taking part in the Burya project. But the higher 
state leadership, after the launch of the R-7, was in a state of 
euphoria, and the Americans had curtailed their work on the 
analogous Navaho MKR by 1958 anyway. Air-defense missiles and 
interceptor fighters able to counter such MKRs effectively were 
also being developed at that time. ICBMs seemed invulnerable at 
the time. 
  Despite the rapid curtailment of the work on the MKRs, their 
results were widely utilized in the future in aviation and 
space, as well as missile, engineering. A domestic school of 
SPVRDs was actually created using the engines from the Burya and 
Buran. The engineering ideas that were verified in them were 
moreover made inherent in the designs of many ramjets installed 
in air-defense and cruise missiles that are in service to this 
day. 
  They returned to MKRs considerably later, in a new stage in 
the development of aircraft and missile technology when mobility 
and operativeness in delivery, along with low detectability and 
high accuracy, had moved to the forefront. And here the 
experience of the Burya, reflected in the mirror of contemporary 
science and technology, proved useful. 


Comparison of Design Characteristics of the Navaho, Burya and Buran MKRs 

Characteristics          Navaho           Burya             Buran 

Launch mass, tonnes      66.2             96                125 

Mass of warhead,         2.25             2.19              3.50 
tonnes 

Total length of          25.1             19.9              24.0 
system, meters 

Boosters: 

Quantity                 1                2                 4 

Length, meters           23.1             18.9              19.1 

Diameter of body,        1.83             1.45              1.20 
meters 

Thrust at launch,        128.45           2 x 68.61         4 x 55 
tonnes of force 

Fuel components: 

oxidizer                 liquid oxygen    nitric acid       liquid oxygen 

combustible              ethyl alcohol    amines            kerosene 

Cruising stage: 

Length, meters           20.7             18.0              23.3 

Diameter of body,        1.83             2.20              2.40 
meters 

Wingspan, meters         8.72             7.75              11.6 

Wing area, m[.sup]2[/]    38.9             60                98 

Number of SPVRDs         2                1                 1 

Diameter of SPVRD,       1.22             1.70              2.00 
meters 

Cruising thrust,         2 x 3.94         7.65              10.6 
tonnes of force 

Maximum range of         5,400            8,500             8,500 
flight, km 

Cruising altitude of     22--24           18--20            18--20 
flight, km 

Cruising speed of        3.25             3.10              3.10 
flight, Mach 

Start of development     1950             1954              1954 

Date of start of         6 Nov 56         1 Jul 57          -- 
flight testing 

Total number of          11               17                -- 
launches 

of which, failed         10               3 

Date of end of flight    18 Oct 58        16 Dec 60         -- 
testing 

Shutdown of project      July 1957        December 1960     -- 


  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1993. 

