CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed interview with Dr. Magda Mrnkova, member of </F>
the Executive Committee of the Democratic Alliance of Slovakia; 
place and date not given: "Why They Come to the Czech Republic"] 
  [Text] On the territory of the Czech Republic [CR], there 
exists the Slovak Activities Forum. Associated in it are the 
Slovak Community in the CR, the Union of Slovaks, the Democratic 
Alliance of Slovaks, and other entities. Because not all of them 
have identical views, any statement issued in the name of the 
forum must be approved unanimously. One vote against means an 
automatic veto. 
  We spoke with a member of the Executive Committee of the 
Democratic Alliance of Slovaks, Dr. Magda Mrnkova. 
  [LIDOVA DEMOKRACIE] How many Slovaks are there in the CR? 
  [Mrnkova] More than 300,000. We do not live in enclaves, but 
more in something like a diaspora. 
  [LIDOVA DEMOKRACIE] It is no secret that the Slovaks in the 
CR hold different views on the Slovak reality. Many times they 
are in direct contradiction.... 
  [Mrnkova] Yes, in some cases that is true. For example, we, 
the Democratic Alliance of Slovaks, have different views from 
those of the Slovak Community in the CR. We are sometimes 
attacked for being "renegades." That is not true. We perceive 
ourselves as Slovaks, and we love Slovakia. We have some basic 
reservations about some of the steps taken by the Slovak 
Government. And one more thing--if I come up against some 
problem, I want to speak up as a citizen who does not like 
something, not as a Slovak whom others have wronged. 
  [LIDOVA DEMOKRACIE] Are people leaving Slovakia to go to the 
CR? 
  [Mrnkova] This is true especially of intellectuals. There is 
a hostility toward them in Slovakia. Recently, for example, came 
Lubomir Feldek, Juraj Jakubisko, Deana Horvathova, Zuzana 
Minacova, Jan Sebechlebsky, and others. 
  [LIDOVE NOVINY] What information do you have about the 
atmosphere that prevails in Slovakia? 
  [Mrnkova] We have very fragmentary information. Observe, if 
you will, the growing distance between us as a result of poor 
information. For example, formerly, every CR citizen understood 
Markovic's jokes 100 percent. Now, the figure is only about 70 
percent. We are losing our familiarity with the facts of 
everyday life. We have to depend on what friends tell us when 
they come here and what we see when we go to Slovakia. Many 
people there find themselves in social isolation. There are a 
few small islands where democratically thinking people meet. You 
see, even that gives a picture of what the atmosphere there is 
like. 
  [LIDOVA DEMOKRACIE] So you do not feel exactly happy.... 
  [Mrnkova] Sad, rather. I am a Slovak and I love Slovakia. I 
never wanted us to split up. I believe that many people in 
Slovakia did not want it, either. In spite of that, they voted 
the way they voted. Even though I did not want the breakup of 
Czechoslovakia, I have to accept it as reality. But the fact 
that I am now a CR citizen does not mean that I am indifferent 
toward Slovakia. I will never be indifferent to it. And I 
believe that none of us who left Slovkia and are now living here 
are indifferent to it. That is why we feel somewhat sad now. 
  [LIDOVA DEMOKRACIE] Those are your personal views. How would 
the Democratic Alliance of Slovaks formulate its current 
position? 
  [Mrnkova] What is happening in Slovakia does, of course, 
touch us, even though we are CR citizens. We have often heard 
from various sides the suggestion that we have forgotten 
Slovakia and that we are sharing in creating a negative picture 
of it abroad. But the truth lies elsewhere. What is now 
happening in Slovakia and where these developments are leading 
could be anticipated already after the 1992 elections. That is 
why many people left Slovakia. We pointed out several times that 
democratic development of the society in Slovakia wass at risk. 
The governing movement was not and is not ready to govern. The 
proof is that, currently, some of its members went to the 
opposition. 
  The only thing we wish for Slovak citizens is that Slovakia 
become visible as a real democracy. But without any more 
experiments. 

