BFN 

  [Text] United Nations, 27 May (EFE) -- Today, Pedro 
Blandino Canto, Dominican ambassador to the United Nations, said 
his government is taking action to comply with the embargo along 
the border with Haiti. He added that embargo violations 
registered were minor and that an effort is being made to 
prevent them. 
  During a news conference, Blandino Canto accused U.S. 
television media of staging a campaign accusing his country of 
violating the embargo; however, up until now they have only 
presented images of civilians "who are taking advantage of the 
situation by transporting jugs of fuel through isolated areas." 
  According to the Dominican ambassador, "no one has been able 
to display photographs of private, military, or petroleum 
company fuel trucks transporting gasoline to Haiti." He added 
that, since the beginning of the Haitian crisis, the Dominican 
Republic's policy has been "coherent, stable, and humanitarian." 
  As he had done previously, before Latin American and 
Caribbean countries, the ambassador mentioned the measures 
adopted by his government to assure the fulfillment of the 
embargo. These measures started with the creation of a 
high-level commission, comprised of the military chiefs. This 
commission requested technical assistance from the United 
Nations. 
  Blandino Canto added that he had met on two occasions with 
Nigerian Ambassador Ibrahim Gambari, president of the UN 
Security Council, to analyze the matters and with UN 
undersecretary Marrack Goulding, to discuss the technical 
mission. 
  The diplomat distributed copies of the 13 April decree 
issued 
by Dominican President Joaquin Balaguer, whereby the commission 
was created. The commission, chaired by Armed Forces State 
Secretary, was authorized, at the request of the United Nations 
and the corresponding organizations, "exclusive logistic and 
technical support, in case it was considered necessary." 
  He also delivered a copy of the letter whereby the 
Commission 
requests UN Secretary General Butrus-Ghali, to send a technical 
mission "to study on site the true situation that prevails," and 
to present recommendations on the case. 
  The Dominican organization promises "the most faithful 
fulfillment of these recommendations "to prevent weapons, 
petroleum, petroleum by-products, and other articles that are 
not strictly humanitarian from being introduced through the land 
border and the adjacent marine areas. 
  The Dominican Republic, in addition to supplying the 
logistical support that may be considered necessary, will 
"gladly" receive the technical advisers that the UN secretary 
general may appoint. This was stated in the Dominican 
commission's letter to Butrus-Ghali. 
  Ambassador Blandino Canto also made reference to the 
elections in his country, which were held on the 16th, signaling 
that they are not directly related to the Haitian problem. The 
exception is the campaign staged against his country, based on 
"the irresponsible allegations by an alleged observer," clearly 
making reference to former U.S. Congressman Stephen Solarz. 
  The Dominican diplomat acknowledged that during the 
elections 
"irregularities could have been registered, as happens in all 
elections, but that this does not constitute fraud, unless the 
results are altered." He also recalled that, according to the 
last Electoral Board bulletin, President Balaguer was reelected 
with more than a 30,000-vote advantage over the candidate who 
came in second. 

