BFN 

  [Text] Although Thailand has succeeded in cutting opium 
production by 99 per cent in three decades, the high output of 
2,000 tons from its neighbours still makes the Golden Triangle 
the world's largest narcotics producing region. 
  The increase in opium production in the region over the past 
20 years is due to rising demand in consumer countries in 
Europe, North America and in Australia, according to Pol Gen 
Chawalit Yotmani, secretary general of the Office of Narcotics 
Control Board (ONCB). 
  He said Thailand's success in reducing opium output to about 
20 tons per year was the result of the introduction of royal 
projects on cash crop substitution and rural development. 
  Chawalit was one of five guests invited to appear on Kho 
Khit 
Duai Khon (Sharing Views) chaired by Dr Choemsak Pinthong, 
associate professor of Thammasat University's Economics Faculty. 
The recorded programme will be telecast next month. 
  The crop substitution programmes have been recognized by UN 
drug agencies which are pushing for a regional effort to combat 
illicit drugs. Thailand, he said, has already signed an 
agreement with Burma and Laos to assist them in crop 
substitution programmes. 
  Chawalit said regional cooperation is also needed in 
suppressing drug trafficking. Traffickers have recently opened 
up new routes through China, but Thailand's good transport 
infrastructure still contributes to the majority of the area's 
heroin production moving through it onto the world market, he 
added. 
  He said the United States had already recognized the need to 
apply a multi-level anti-narcotics strategy including the 
reduction of local demand in its combat against drugs. The 
United States, he said, will concentrate in the next four to 
five years on the suppression of local demand and the 
rehabilitation of drug addicts. 
  Chawalit's views were shared by another panelist, Gary 
Suwannarat, a senior adviser of the UNDCP Projects Coordination 
Office, who said the US narcotics policy was partly wrong in 
concentrating mainly on suppressing the supply side while 
overlooking the reduction of local demand. 
  She said a multi-pronged antidrugs approach which addresses 
all aspects of narcotics activities is needed to successfully 
wipe out the drugs. Washington has said that 60 per cent of the 
heroin in the United States originated in Southeast Asia. 
  Suwannarat, Chawalit and other guest speakers, however, 
cautioned that while heroin might be reduced eventually, other 
new addictive chemicals could spring up to fill the market. 
  According to Dr Annop Wisuthimak, director of a 
rehabilitation unit for drug addicts, alcohol is the worst and 
most devastating substance of abuse as it contributes to 
accidents and violent acts such as brawls and physical 
harassment. 
  One person is killed and three people are admitted to 
hospital every hour in Thailand as a result of alcohol-related 
incidents, said Annop, who cited survey studies to support his 
statements. 
  Other substances, such as inhaled solvents and amphetamines 
are more dangerous than heroin as they are relatively cheap and 
widely available in the market, according to Annop. But he said 
alcohol causes the largest economic loss to the country, about 
Bt80 billion per year. 
  Chawalit and Annop agreed that amphetamines will pose the 
greatest danger in Thailand in the future as the production 
process is much easier than that of heroin and can even be done 
in vehicles. 
  The ONCB secretary-general said there is a need to control 
the import of chemicals used to produce amphetamines and to 
suppress their illegal smuggling especially by fishing vessels. 
  Two years after Parliament passed new anti-narcotics laws 
which included the forfeiture of drug traffickers' assets, the 
courts have already tried and sentenced 11 narcotics cases and 
the police have subsequently seized the assets and properties of 
60 persons involved, according to Chawalit. 

