BFN 

<F P=106> [Perspectives: "To Strengthen Existing Ties"] </F>
  [Text] Singapore is our friend. The leaders and the 
peoples of Myanmar [Burma] and Singapore enjoy close affinity in 
that they were under colonial rule, and had shaken off the 
shackles not just once. 
  Today, Singapore is a shining example of success through 
sheer dint of their leaders having strived to achieve, and also 
deliver as they have vowed. Under capable leadership, the 
city-state shows others what they must do if they are to succeed 
likewise. 
  Myanmar and Singapore have a record of longstanding 
bilateral 
relations. Way back in September 1952, when Singapore was still 
a Crown colony attached to Britain, Myanmar maintained a 
consulate in there. Its status was raised to Consulate-General 
in April 1961. 
  Myanmar accorded recognition to the new Republic of 
Singapore 
on 14 August 1965, barely five days after it withdrew from 
Malaysia and became an independent and sovereign state. 
  The following year, on 12 August, Myanmar and Singapore 
established diplomatic relations at ambassadorial level when U 
Pe Kin, the doyen of the Myanmar diplomatic corps and then 
resident in Kuala Lumpur was concurrently accredited to 
Singapore until his retirement in February 1971. 
  The leaders of Myanmar and Singapore have enjoyed mutual 
regard. Senior Minister Lee Kuan Yew is synonymous with 
discipline and safeguarding of Asian values and those junior to 
him are understood here in this country as being no less 
fastidious when it comes to defending and upgrading what is 
Asian and good. 
  There have been exchanges of visits by top leaders, either 
formal or informal, and the mutual esteem they have shared is 
reflected by the sentiments of the peoples. 
  Myanmar has the resources, Singapore has the expertise. A 
combination of the two has brought forth fruitful results. 
Recently, when there was economic change, Singaporean 
entrepreneurs were among the first to see how much they could 
invest for mutual benefit. 
  Singaporeans know what can be achieved together, with a 
sense 
of mutual accommodation, and they find investments in Myanmar 
hold good prospects. 
  Singapore has also much to offer in the field of 
development, 
and being one of the 'Four Tigers', we can count on her to help 
us with almost anything we might want to do, plainly put. 
  Premier Goh Chok Tong is no stranger to us. He has been here 
before and his arrival today reassures us of further cementing 
the already strong ties. 

