Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chang Weimin: "State Vows To Reduce Pollution"] </F>
  [Text] China's power industry is to concentrate on the 
development of resources that produce less pollution than 
coal-fired generators. 
  Efforts to tap hydro and wind resources will be encouraged, 
according to an official from the Ministry of Power Industry. 
  In 2000, hydropower generating capacity will account for 26 
percent of the country's total, compared with 24 percent at 
present. 
  That means hydropower generating capacity will climb to 75 
to 
80 million kilowatts that year. The capacity at the end of 1992 
stood at 40.7 million kilowatts. 
  The industry expects to increase its power generating 
capacity to 310 million kilowatts in 2000 from the present 170 
million kilowatts. 
  The majority of electricity in China is generated by 
coal-fired power plants, which emit minute sulphur particles 
that contaminate the environment. 
  But several hydropower stations, with capacity totalling 20 
million kilowatts, are under construction. 
  Of them, a group capable of producing 9 million kilowatts 
were kicked off this year. 
  Jiang Shaojun, the ministry's spokesman, predicted 148 
billion kilowatt-hours would be generated by hydropower stations 
this year, compared with 134.5 billion in 1992. 
  Development of other energy sources, such as wind power, is 
also to be pushed forward, Jiang said. 
  The industry will strive to gain a capacity of 1 million 
kilowatts by using wind power. 
  In windy North China, especially the country's north western 
provinces and autonomous regions, wind generators are common. 
  In the meantime, the industry will make major measures to 
reduce pollution from thermal power plants. 
  The measures are significant as coal-firing plants will 
remain the mainstay of the industry for the rest of the century. 
  Installing waste-recycling systems in old power stations is 
very expensive. 
  But new thermal plants will be designed to reduce or 
eliminate pollution. 
  However, the official admitted that as a developing nation, 
China needs time to reach anti-pollution standards set by the 
Western nations. 
  The industry has made special efforts to raise the 
standards. 
  The industry has begun co-operation with the Japanese 
Government to treat sulphur-rich coal and smoke from coal-fired 
thermal power plants. 
  The industry will use funds from the Japanese Government for 
several projects. 
  Two sulphur treatment projects are under way in Huangdao, 
Shandong Province, and Taiyuan, Shanxi Province. 
  As for the nuclear power sector, another official from the 
ministry said several new plants are under consideration. 
  "We attach strict anti-radiation standards to our nuclear 
plants," the official said. 
  China has two nuclear power stations, one in Zhejiang 
Province that is already in operation and the other in Guangdong 
Province that is to go into operation this year. 
  Capacity of the two stations totals 2.1 million kilowatts. 
  No other nuclear power plants are likely to go into 
operation 
until after 2000. 
  However, construction of at least three could be kicked off 
before the end of the century, the official said. 
  China, where nuclear power generation is in its beginning 
phase, is seeking moderate development in this sector. 

