Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Sofia Wu] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, March 3 (CNA) -- Taiwan will push Southeast 
Asian countries to open their financial service markets during 
the forthcoming meeting of finance ministers from the 
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) member states, a 
Finance Ministry official said Thursday [3 March]. 
  Finance Minister Lin Chen-kuo, who will represent Taiwan in 
the March 18-19 meeting in Hawaii, will also ask Southeast Asian 
nations to allow Taiwan banks to set up branches in order to 
provide better financial services to Taiwan-invested firms 
there, the official said. 
  Taiwan businessmen have invested more than US$15 billion in 
Southeast Asian nations during the past few years but many 
investors have complained about difficulties in getting 
financing there. Most Southeast Asian nations impose strict 
restrictions on the opening of foreign bank branches. 
  Lin will also discuss the signing of bilateral tax exemption 
agreements with his counterparts from Malaysia, Thailand, 
Indonesia and the Philippines, the official said. Taiwan has 
signed an agreement with Singapore to avoid double taxation on 
investors from either side. Its negotiations with other 
Southeast Asian nations for similar accords have, however, been 
stalled for various reasons. Lin will try to mend differences 
with those nations over the tax issues during the upcoming APEC 
ministerial-level meeting, the official said. 
  APEC groups the United States, Canada, Japan, Singapore, 
Malaysia, The Philippines, Indonesia, Thailand, Brunei, Taiwan, 
Mainland China, Hong Kong, South Korea, Australia, New Zealand, 
Mexico and Papua New Guinea. 
  The Ministry of Finance has proposed three issues -- 
economic 
growth strategy, external financing and capital market 
development -- for Lin and other Taiwan delegates to raise in 
the first-ever APEC finance ministers meeting, the official said. 
  He added that eight APEC members have expressed intentions 
to 
hold bilateral talks with Taiwan during the meeting. The United 
States hopes to discuss problems concerning commodity taxes on 
imported compact cars and other goods; The Philippines wants 
Taiwan to reduce tariffs on coconut and palm oil; and South 
Korea, Japan, Canada and Indonesia will discuss Taiwan's dumping 
charges against them. 
  At the end of their meeting, APEC finance ministers are 
expected to issue a "declaration" or "joint statement" pledging 
to promote regional economic prosperity through free capital 
flows and financial cooperation, the official said. 
  Vice finance ministers from all APEC members are currently 
meeting in Hawaii to work out a full agenda for the 
ministerial-level meeting. 

