BFN 

<F P=106> [From the Economic Panorama Column by Miriam Leitao: </F>
"Strong Ties"] 
  [Text] Petrobras [Brazilian Petroleum Corporation] 
President Joel Renno was in Buenos Aires on 13 April closing 
several deals. One of them is very curious: The Brazilian 
company sold 20 percent of its participation in a prospecting 
area in the southern Argentine sea platform between Tierra del 
Fuego and the Malvinas Islands. Do you know to whom it was sold? 
To YPF [Government Oil Deposits], which no longer has the oil 
industry monopoly and is no longer a public company. Renno did 
not reveal the operation's value. 
  In that prospecting area, Petrobras already had invested $7 
million by drilling the first well and will invest an additional 
$12 million by drilling the first well 120 meters below the 
water level. Petrobras is associated in the deal with the 
company BHP Australia and other European companies. Even by 
selling 20 percent of its participation, Petrobras still holds 
40 percent of the capital of this enterprise, which is called 
San Julian-Marine. "We are still the largest shareholders in the 
deal," Renno said. 
  Petrobras also is investing in a new gas prospecting area in 
northwestern Argentina and is selling fuel oil to Buenos Aires 
thermal electric plants. 
  "Brazil is currently the main buyer of Argentine oil and 
Argentina is our second supplier after Saudi Arabia," Brazilian 
Ambassador to Argentina Marcos Azambuja said. 
  Yesterday was a good day to commemorate the increase of 
Brazilian purchases. The Argentine Government has published its 
January trade balance figures. And there was no good news. 
Argentina registered a $600 million deficit, which is larger 
than last year's accumulated January-May deficit. The Argentine 
trade deficit with Brazil in January was $96 million. 
  Yesterday was a typical Mercosur [Common Market of the 
South] 
day in the Brazilian Embassy in Buenos Aires. A group of 40 
Brazilian businessmen who already have businesses in Argentina 
was holding a meeting to analyze new business opportunities in 
the Argentine market. "They meet once a month," said Brazilian 
Embassy minister counselor Pedro Luis Rodriguez, who is also 
enthusiastic about the cooperation possibilities between the two 
countries. 

