Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Billy Paddock] </F>
  [Text] President F.W. de Klerk and ANC [African National 
Congress] president Nelson Mandela meet at the Union Buildings 
in Pretoria today to finalise details of "the most comprehensive 
peace initiative" government and the ANC have devised in the 
hope of stemming township violence. Both camps are keeping the 
meeting, the second in a week, under wraps. They refused to 
discuss details of the plan, which they said was too sensitive 
at this stage. Mandela and De Klerk have issued instructions to 
their negotiating teams to keep details confidential until the 
plan is finalised. 
  Two key sources confirmed the meeting but warned that the 
final version of the plan "is not a dramatic humdinger that is 
going to solve the violence in one quick-fix, brilliant 
manoeuvre". They refused to divulge details, saying: "Too much 
is resting on this. We have to ensure nothing gets in the way of 
the full agreement both parties are committed to setting up for 
the immediate period and on into the phase after elections." 
  The plan discussed by the two leaders last week was also 
discussed in Cabinet and at the ANC's national working committee 
and its national executive committee meetings last week. 
  The sources said the plan was a step-by-step initiative. It 
relied on building trust and co-operation between government, 
the ANC, the SAP [South African Police], the SADF [South African 
Defence Force], Umkhonto we Sizwe [Spear of the Nation, MK; ANC 
military wing], the self-defence units and the internal 
stability unit. Community co-operation would also have an 
important role. 
  Law and Order Minister Hernus Kriel has acknowledged that 
the 
internal stability unit needs to be reviewed. The possibility 
of incorporating members of other militias is being discussed. 
The peace talks have led to calls for the unit's withdrawal 
being put on hold. 
  Stephane Bothma reports that Law and Order spokesman Craig 
Kotze said yesterday the number of internal stability unit 
members deployed in East Rand townships could soon be reduced. 
Government was considering alternative policing strategies in 
the area. "We are considering the possibility of assigning 
certain tasks -- not related to normal policing -- to the SADF," 
he said. 
  Inkatha Freedom Party Transvaal leader Themba Khoza said the 
party would strongly oppose such a move, SAPA reports. He said 
Inkatha had made numerous complaints about soldiers being 
deployed in the area after "losing 10 of its members in December 
last year, when 3,000 bullets were fired at civilians in a 
single incident". 
  Inkatha MP Hennie Bekker said the proposal to reduce the 
unit's East Rand presence would be viewed as the "final 
abdication of the NP [National Party] and government to the 
ANC/communist alliance." 
  In a separate development, Inkatha Transvaal deputy chairman 
Humphrey Ndlovu said his organisation would not take part in 
West Rand peace talks brokered by the SA Council of Churches 
[SACC]. 
  Wilson Zwane reports that the proposed talks are aimed at 
reducing tensions in the West Rand township of Bekkersdal. A 
boycott of businesses in neighbouring Westonaria was called by 
the ANC and AZAPO [Azanian People's Organization] last month in 
protest at the presence of the internal stability unit and SADF 
troops in the township. 
  Ndlovu said the SACC was prejudiced against Inkatha, whose 
members it did not "regard as human beings". He added: 
"Churches affiliated to the SACC refuse to bury Inkatha 
supporters and to allow Inkatha to use their buildings for 
meetings." Because of this "bias", Inkatha was not taking part 
in talks. 
  SACC spokesman Bernard Spong said Ndlovu's statement was to 
be regretted as the SACC was impartial. 
  Also at today's talks, Mandela and De Klerk and their 
respective chief negotiators, Cyril Ramaphosa and Roelf Meyer, 
will discuss negotiations with the Freedom Alliance and ways of 
drawing Inkatha into a settlement. 
  De Klerk is insistent that the final deadline for changes to 
the constitution is next Monday. He has to sign the 
constitution into law by the end of January to meet the 90-day 
deadline before elections. 
  De Klerk will meet King Goodwill Zwelithini this afternoon 
at 
the king's request to discuss the role of a Zulu kingdom and 
KwaZulu under the new constitution. It is understood that De 
Klerk is likely to tell him that regions will have the power to 
draft their own constitutions. 

