CSO 

<F P=106> [By Kiyoshi Komatsu] </F>
  [Text] Blast furnace makers are emphasizing the development 
of electric furnace-related technology. Kobe Steel has developed 
a new manufacturing technology for the production of reduced 
steel which is a raw material used in electric furnaces and has 
decided to build a prototype production plant. On the other 
hand, electric furnaces for which orders have been placed by 
South Korea's Pohang Integrated Steel Manufacturing Company with 
Nippon Steel incorporate the newest technology which operates 
two electric furnaces from one power source. Electric furnace 
makers are powerful rivals of blast furnace makers. However, 
while the blast furnace method of manufacturing steel has become 
mature, advances in the electric furnace technology are in the 
process of accelerating and it appears that the blast furnace 
makers have decided that such advances provide an opportunity 
for expanding their scope of operations. 
  Managing Director Takuya Negami of Kobe Steel reflects hope 
for the reduced steel manufacturing process which the company 
developed jointly with its Charlotte, North Carolina, subsidiary 
Midrex, in saying, "We would like to link the new technology to 
orders for new plants, after providing a period for observation 
of responses from foreign electric furnace makers." 
  Already, Midrex is making practical use of a manufacturing 
technology that uses natural gas as a reduction material, but 
there is an increasing need for a new technology that uses coal 
as a raw material because it is procurable by steel makers at a 
lower cost than natural gas on a worldwide basis. 
  The new manufacturing technology's most significant feature 
is that coal and pulverized ore can be used as raw materials 
without any preprocessing. Among reduced steel manufacturing 
processes using coal as the reduction agent, the Corex method 
developed by Voest-Alpine of Austria is well known, but that 
method involves problems such as requiring 1) calcinated pellets 
baked through a process using pulverized ore and 2) gasification 
of coal in a smelter, and it involves the production of large 
quantities of gas that cannot be recycled. 
  Kobe Steel has conducted research in a technology using raw 
pellets representing a mixture of coal dust and pulverized ore. 
Additionally, the company developed a manufacturing technology, 
which is time-saving and low-cost, providing for rapid reduction 
through the use of a furnace with a rotating floor. As an 
example, former Midrex methods required eight to 12 hours for 
the reduction process, but the new method accomplishes the same 
task in eight to 10 minutes. 
  Kobe Steel will complete construction of a prototype plant 
at 
its Kakogawa Steel Works in Kakogawa city, Hyogo Prefecture, by 
the middle of 1995. 
  Capital investments for the prototype plant will be 1.4 
billion yen. After the plant is test operated, the company plans 
to export the new furnaces from 1996 primarily to the United 
States where there is a shortage of high-quality scrap steel 
used as raw materials in electric furnaces and to China and 
Southeast Asia where growth in demand for steel can be expected. 
  On the other hand, the productivity of electric furnaces 
ordered by Pohang Integrated Steel Company from Nippon Steel is 
30 percent higher than older models. They are of the 
two-furnace, one electric source, direct-current type with a 
capacity of 1.3 million tons, and, as one furnace operates, it 
produces gases used by the second furnace to preheat scrap, 
conserves electrical power and provides for high-efficiency 
operation of the system. 
  Reportedly, the recent contract was awarded to Nippon Steel, 
because its subsidiary Kansai Pellet Center (Sakai city, Osaka; 
Hanji Oniwa, president) had built and accumulated technical 
experience in operating a similar furnace. The Pohang facility 
is scheduled to begin operating in 1996. Nippon Steel will sell 
this type of furnace aggressively in overseas markets. 
  In Japan, Tokyo Steel Manufacturing Company has launched the 
production of hot coils and is steadily progressing on 
preparations to produce cold-rolled steel plates both on 
electric furnaces, which means that electric furnace makers pose 
a major threat to blast furnace makers. On the other hand, 
Nippon Steel executives have reached the conclusion that the 
electric furnace boom will continue in the United States and 
Southeast Asia and that, "In Asia, it would be more advantageous 
for Nippon Steel if electric furnaces were built rather than 
integrated steel plants with blast furnaces." The reason is that 
adjustments in output are difficult with blast furnaces and 
their use in other countries would mean that, when domestic 
demand fell, there would be the potential that excess production 
would be exported to Japan. Even blast furnace makers are 
expected to actively promote the sale of electric furnaces 
primarily in overseas areas. 

