Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Text" of interview with Hojjat ol-Eslam val Moslemin Dr. </F>
Hasan Rowhani, first deputy speaker and head of the Majles 
Foreign Policy Commission, by unidentified MAJLES VA PAZHUHESH 
correspondent; place and date not given] 
  [Excerpts] [MAJLES VA PAZHUHESH] We thank Your Excellency 
for granting us the opportunity to talk with you. The topics 
that we would like to discuss cover an extensive range because 
of Your Excellency's various responsibilities and records. 
However, we will have to limit these topics. With your 
permission, we will start with the Majles. 
  You are among the deputies who have been in the various 
terms 
of the Majles since its formation, and you are now the deputy 
speaker and head of the Majles Foreign Policy Commission. We 
would like you to compare the fourth term of the Majles with the 
first, second, and third terms. One of the things that is done 
at the [Majles] research center is to study the activities of 
the Majles and to see what steps can be taken to improve it. 
What is your assessment of the two years of activities by the 
fourth term, and what is your view on what should be done in the 
two years that remain of the term and that are extremely 
significant years, too? 
  [Rowhani] [passage omitted] There are many new faces in the 
fourth term of the Majles, compared with previous terms. This 
is one of the special characteristics of this term. This was 
not the case during the second term. 
  The majority of the fourth term deputies came to the Majles 
with a specific slogan: to obey the leader and to support the 
president and the government. Another slogan was the formation 
of a calm Majles within the framework of Islamic ethics and 
supervision. Actually, these are the slogans with which the 
fourth term started its work. [passage omitted] 
  In the one year and seven months since the fourth term 
began, 
about 140 bills have been approved. I think that this is a good 
figure. Some laws were important for the country. I think that 
the fourth term of the Majles has been successful in this. I am 
optimistic about what the Majles research center does. I believe 
that the fourth term will work more expertly and more precisely 
in the implementation of the Second Five-Year Plan and other 
laws. [passage omitted] 
  [MAJLES VA PAZHUHESH] Now, if you agree, we will continue 
our 
discussion on foreign policy. 
  As the secretary of the Supreme National Security Council 
and 
head of the Majles Foreign Policy Commission and because of your 
close contact with foreign political developments, please speak 
to us about the developments in the region and the world 
vis-a-vis Iran and Iran's position. Also, please state your 
views on the future and the direction things are moving, as well 
as what is being referred to as the new world order. What is 
the outlook at the close of the 20th century, and to what extent 
can economy and technology affect this situation? 
  [Rowhani] If we want to compare our current position in the 
region and in the world with our past position, I should say 
that the Islamic Republic of Iran is the manifestation of a 
well-established and strong country and that it can be counted 
on since it is a country that remains steadfast on its holy, 
revolutionary, Islamic, and national aspirations at a time when 
some countries change their face each day, each hour, and each 
month. But the Islamic Republic of Iran has shown that 
throughout the past 14 to 15 years, it has been able to 
withstand all vicissitudes. The world has realized that we are 
steadfast in our holy principles and aspirations. Also, we are 
faithful to our promises and our friendships with countries 
toward which we have extended our hand. Probably some countries 
are unable to act with the same sincerity when they are a target 
of onslaught. But the Islamic Republic of Iran has shown that 
it does not fear such tempests. 
  In their extensive propaganda, the enemies of the Islamic 
Republic of Iran portrayed Iran as a country seeking an 
opportunity to commit aggressions against other countries and a 
country seeking to interfere in the domestic affairs of others. 
But incidents during the past few years have fully proven how 
baseless this propaganda is. The Islamic Republic of Iran is 
neither an aggressor and opportunist, nor is it seeking 
expansionist objectives and it is steadfast in the principles 
that it has declared. 
  Iran's patient and friendly attitude toward the developments 
in Afghanistan, which has recently achieved its independence, 
may have been probably surprising for the world. However, 
despite its extensive borders with Afghanistan, Iran did not 
intervene in any way. Only the envoys of the Islamic Republic 
of Iran ran from one street to another amid fire and blood 
trying to establish a ceasefire and not to allow the flames of 
war to engulf the parties and groups in that country. Some of 
our diplomats were wounded in this process and some even faced 
the danger of being martyred. Even in the difficult days when 
many people left Kabul, the political envoys of the Islamic 
Republic of Iran stayed on. 
  The same situation is true in our neighbor countries to the 
north. In the Azerbaijani-Armenian incidents and in Tajikistan, 
the Islamic Republic of Iran showed that it does what it says. 
In the conflict between Azerbaijan and Armenia, the Islamic 
Republic of Iran has always tried to be a good mediator and to 
extinguish the flames of the war. It has never tried to exploit 
the situation, in the sense that it has never pursued its own 
interests. 
  The Iraqi case is a clearer example. This was a case of a 
country that had fought against us for eight years, a country 
that had perpetrated a series of crimes against our nation, and 
a country that confronted Kuwait, which had committed so much 
treason against our people during the [Iran-Iraq] war. But Iran 
accepted refugees from both countries with open arms. We 
accepted about 1.2 or 1.3 million Iraqis and tens of thousands 
of Kuwaitis when all border delineations had been upset, there 
were no borders, and we had a free hand to do what we wanted. 
But we did not enter Iraq. I think that the incidents and 
developments that took place around us make all those in the 
world who are clever and calculating--despite the propaganda 
that they disseminate against us--realize the truth. 
  I think that in recent years, the Islamic Republic of Iran 
has fully proven its Islamic and humanitarian nature to the 
world. I consider the position of the Islamic Republic of Iran 
in the world to be extremely good. All the hue and cry started 
by the Americans cannot convince their friends to sever their 
relations with Iran or to stop helping Iran. This is important, 
and more important still, we see how--under such conditions when 
all this commotion is going on against the Islamic Republic of 
Iran--Europe, Japan, and others have healthy political and 
economic relations with the Islamic Republic of Iran. It is 
only natural for them not to want to leave a country that wants 
to live independently under the current world conditions--and a 
Third World country in such a sensitive area of the world at 
that--to be in peace. But fortunately, during the past 14 to 15 
years we have shown that we are completely resistant and that we 
are very used to plots and to thwarting and confronting such 
plots. 
  Others, too, have come to know us very well. Of course, I 
think that this is the first time in history that the world is 
seeing Iran as it is today. Before this, Iran was always known 
as a country that was outwardly independent, but inwardly under 
the domination of others and it was either the British, the 
Russians, or the Americans who dominated it. But the fully 
independent face of the Islamic Republic of Iran is a face that 
was seen after the victory of the Islamic revolution and it was 
the face of unity in the religious and political management of 
the country. Until the victory of the Islamic revolution, and 
especially during the Pahlavi dynasty, these two managements 
were always in confrontation. During the Qajar and Safavid 
dynasties, the situation was different. In other words, at some 
junctures in history, there has been a closeness between these 
two managements. But during the Pahlavi dynasty, the political 
management was in total confrontation with the religious 
management. The revolution was the first time that the country 
had witnessed the unity of these two and this is extremely 
important, since we see that the same person who is the 
political head of the country is also the religious head. In 
other words, the issue of the supreme leader is an extremely 
significant issue that has been stabilized in our country and 
that our people have wholeheartedly and sincerely accepted. 
  The West thinks that Iranians accepted Imam Khomeyni but 
that 
they do not accept the supreme leader. However, things were 
later clarified and the world saw that the Iranians accepted 
both Imam Khomeyni and the supreme leader today. Therefore, a 
supreme leader will always exist. Imam Khomeyni, may his soul 
be sanctified, stood out at one time in history and we benefited 
from the light that he shed. Of course, we will always make use 
of the moral light that the late leader shed on us. But his 
physical presence was only for a while. However, a supreme 
leader will always exist. Therefore, the united management in 
the Islamic country has given the Islamic world the opportunity 
for the ruler to stand next to the people. [passage omitted] 
  Whether the world wants it or not, the Islamic Republic of 
Iran rules the hearts of the people throughout the world. This 
is not like the alleged world leadership of America, which 
accepts only itself! The Americans allege leadership. But they 
are the only ones who accept this! 
  It has been proved that they are not the leaders of the 
world 
but that the Islamic Republic of Iran is undoubtedly the leader 
of millions throughout the world. And it does not make any 
difference if these countries are near us or not. Our influence 
in countries far from us is bigger than our influence on our 
neighbor countries. The influence that we have in Algeria, over 
the hearts of the people in Egypt--despite their distance from 
us--and the influence that we have on Muslims in the Far East, 
in Africa, and in the American continent may be greater than the 
influence that we have on Muslims in our neighbor countries. 
Therefore, this is a moral and genuine influence. 
  This is in answer to the first part of your question on how 
we should view the Islamic Republic of Iran at this juncture in 
history. I think that Iran should be regarded as a power, as an 
independent country, as a country where religion and politics 
and people and officials are in full coordination, as a country 
that does not intend to commit aggression, as a peace-seeking 
country, as a country that does not intend to occupy another 
country, as a country that is fully faithful to its aspirations 
and slogans, and as a country whose word can be trusted. Today 
there is no other country but Iran in the world that portrays 
such a picture. 
  In answer to the second part of your question on how we see 
the world and the new world order, I think that we should expect 
many developments in the coming years. It may seem that 
differences stemming from the existence of two superpowers in 
the world may have ended and that it is the era of a new order 
where there will no longer be a threat of war and where peace 
and justice will reign. But this is not so. In other words, we 
have not only not seen a reduction in regional wars and clashes, 
but we have also seen the occupation of one country by another 
during this era of the new order. In other words, it was during 
the era of the new order that Iraq attacked, devoured, and 
annexed another country. 
  If this new order did not exist, such things might never 
have happened. We may not have had the wars that we see in 
Europe today, a clear example of which is Bosnia-Herzegovina, as 
well as the ethnic wars that we have witnessed. It is not as 
though we can say that what we see today is a world of peace, of 
tranquility, and of a unipolar system. None of these have been 
fulfilled, and I think that they will never be fulfilled. 
  The incidents in the Soviet Union [as published] showed the 
Westerners that they cannot make a clear judgment of what will 
happen in that country. In the recent elections there we saw 
how those who put forth extremely ultranationalist slogans and 
spoke about the people's national pride got a higher number of 
votes. Even though their slogans are dangerous, the majority of 
the people voted in favor of them. 
  The elections in the Soviet Union [as published] were not a 
simple issue. It was something that may have completely shaken 
the West and made them realize that they cannot be very 
confident that the issue of a Soviet superpower has ended once 
and for all. 
  I think that new poles are being formed in the world. We see 
that the thought that in the new world order there would be only 
one pole, where the Americans would be able to act as the world 
leader and do as they please, has not materialized. I think 
that in the coming years, and especially in the beginning of the 
new century that you referred to, we will witness many rapid and 
important developments. As to what elements will play a role in 
these developments, I can list technology as one of the most 
important elements. Of course, reference can also be made to 
economy. But economic developments may also be the result of 
modern technology. 
  The issue of technology is extremely important. In other 
words, technological developments may make countries superior to 
the current powers and may lead to a complete change in the 
world situation. The world's military situation may also change 
because of technological developments. Of course, there are 
other important elements in the world. I think that the most 
important element that can influence the future of the world is 
economy in its general sense--which also includes technology and 
science--and culture, which includes ideology and religion. 
Other developments such as military, political, and social 
aspects will all be offshoots of these. 
  In today's world, technological and scientific developments 
are extremely rapid and awe-inspiring. The same applies to 
cultural developments. This very issue of the revival of 
religious thought throughout the world is an extremely important 
issue. The forecast in the world was that by the end of the 
current century there would be no such thing as religion. But 
today we see how, at the end of this century, religious thought 
has been revived and how the situation now cannot be compared 
even with the situation at the beginning of the current century. 
We will definitely witness the further expansion of such 
developments in the next century. 
  I think that the basis of the world's future developments 
will be economy and culture, and the Americans will not have the 
first say in either of these two fields! Possibly, as far as 
Japan, Germany, and so on are concerned, we can say that they 
will play the number-one role in the future economy. But as far 
as culture is concerned, we think that Islam will be considered 
an extremely important and great cultural power because we are 
now witnessing the dawn of Islam. The rays of Islam will 
undoubtedly spread in the next few years, and at the beginning 
of the new century we will witness new cultural developments 
under the aegis of these rays. 
  [MAJLES VA PAZHUHESH] Your Excellency's reference to 
technological and economic developments calls for discussing the 
fact that energy has been gradually playing a stronger role in 
geopolitical developments for the past decade. How do you 
assess this element, and how long do you think this development 
will last? 
  [Rowhani] Energy will play an extremely important role. Of 
course, a special period started in the world after 1973. This 
period concentrated on ways to replace [oil] with other 
energies. Much work has been done on this. And now, 20 years 
later, with the advanced technology that man has at his 
disposal, we should have witnessed many rapid and profound 
developments, but we have not. 
  Moreover, oil is now considered the commodity that is the 
source of many extensive developments in the various fields. 
Now we even see that aircraft manufactured with "composites" 
[preceding word in English] are stronger than aircraft 
manufactured with special steel. Therefore, in the future of 
industry and economy, oil will maintain its special place. 
  I think that the situation that the West, headed by America, 
has created for oil today is not only treason against the 
oil-exporting countries, but treason against all mankind. In 
other words, we are offering the world's most valuable 
commodity, which is also very limited, at extremely low prices. 
We are burning and destroying this commodity, and this is 
treason against the future of mankind. It is the Americans and 
the rest of the big Western powers who should be answerable to 
history for this treason. 
  It is within the context of the significance of energy or of 
black gold that Iran and, basically speaking, the Persian Gulf 
finds its special role. It is because of this role that in the 
coming century many of the countries that are not oil exporters 
will not only not be exporters, they will also have to become 
importers. 
  In the coming decades, it is possible that there will not be 
a commodity known as North Sea oil. Of course, some opinions 
are that the North Sea oil reserves will end much sooner. 
Possibly, in the first years of the next century, we will reach 
a situation in which not only will the Persian Gulf be the sole 
exporter of oil in the world, but Saudi Arabia too will be an 
oil superpower, followed by other countries such as Iran, Iraq, 
Kuwait, and so on and will be able to export oil and gas. The 
largest gas resources are in this area. Perhaps the increased 
presence of foreign powers and their arms in this region is 
because of the energy issue. 
  But we should also be wise in preserving this valuable 
energy 
resource. The Majles and the government should make plans and 
not allow this major asset to be wasted. We should have correct 
programming at home. The [Majles] research center should study 
ways that we can economize in energy consumption. As far as the 
world is concerned, the energy problem and especially the 
problem of oil will undoubtedly not lose its importance for 
years to come. 
  [MAJLES VA PAZHUHESH] The esteemed leader's emphasis on 
relations with America shows that the system strongly rejects 
political relations with America. From the point of view of 
slogans, what political and ideological logic do you have to 
offer in justification of this policy? 
  [Rowhani] Because of its historical, ideological, and 
religious roots, the issue of America is of special importance 
to our country. First of all, when we look at history we see 
that from its outset the Islamic revolution was a struggle 
against foreign, and specifically American, colonialism in 
tandem with a struggle against domestic colonialism. [passage 
omitted] 
  Therefore, we see that the struggle against America from the 
very first years of this movement was the pivotal and major 
slogan. On the other hand, the Americans too played a major 
role in crushing the revolution. We see how at the peak of the 
revolution, the American General Huyser personally came to Iran 
in a bid to crush and to destroy the revolution. Of course, we 
knew all these things at that time, and the fact that the shah 
had plans engineered by the Americans and especially aimed at 
confronting the revolution and Islam has become clearer now. 
  In his famous speech at the Feyziyeh School, which sparked 
off the 1342 [1963] movement and the 5 June 1963 incidents, his 
eminence the imam, may his soul be sanctified, told the shah: 
"Don't do whatever the Americans dictate to you. At least, 
think and see what they are dictating to you." Therefore, we 
see that this movement, which was a struggle against America 
from the very start, led to the victory of the revolution, after 
which the American Embassy's plots started. This was followed 
by the occupation of the nest of espionage and the revelation of 
documents for the world to see how from the very outset the 
Americans were working toward defeating the revolution and 
overthrowing the system. 
  Now, too, wherever there is a plot against Iran, against 
the system of the Islamic Republic, against the revolution, and 
against the Islamic movement in the world--be it in Algeria, 
Egypt, or anywhere else where an Islamic movement is seen--we 
see how the Americans play the main role in suppressing it. 
Thus, the issue of the people's enmity with America is both a 
matter of history and revolution, and of slogans and religion. 
  The Americans have always opposed Islamic thought and 
Islamic 
movement. This opposition and confrontation continues today, 
too. The imam, may his soul be sanctified, very clearly 
specified the pivotal slogan of struggling against America. Of 
course, it is true that we did not sever our political relations 
with America and that it was the Americans who severed their 
relations with us. But the imam stated his satisfaction at 
this. What did we need these relations for? In other words, 
even though the Americans started everything, both the imam and 
the people welcomed it. 
  Throughout this period, the Americans have not decreased 
their enmity even for one day. They have frozen our assets, but 
what we owed them, compared with our frozen assets, was minimal. 
Therefore, the Americans have resorted to various means to 
express their overt hostility toward us. And when they have 
entered a war against us with such hostile feelings, what reason 
is there for us to propound the issue of relations with America 
in such an atmosphere? Basically, it is not correct to propound 
this issue at all at this juncture in history. 
  I think that the esteemed leader's remarks on 4 November 
this 
year [the anniversary of the occupation of the U.S. Embassy] 
were extremely sagacious. He clearly stated all the reasons and 
logic behind his views. Reasons why we should not establish 
relations with America have always been listed, but it was 
necessary to clarify them and to give the reasoning why. 
  Our activities should be based on our national and Islamic 
interests. What benefits will our approaching the United States 
or our establishing relations with it have? It is extremely 
simpleminded to think that our problems exist because we have no 
relations with America and that if we established relations 
these problems would be solved. Undoubtedly, in our relations 
with America, we would suffer much harm and it cannot be proven 
that such relations would reap even one of the benefits that it 
is said they would yield, especially with America's current 
foreign policy in the Clinton era. 
  Basically speaking, America's foreign policy is very sick. 
Because of their many blatant mistakes and extremely childish 
behavior, the secretary of state and the National Security 
Council of America are in a shaky position. The Americans do 
many ridiculous and childish things and say that they want to 
behave with Iran in the same way that they behaved with the 
Iraqis, and that just as they exerted pressure on Iraq they will 
put pressure on Iran! Saying such things is extremely childish 
and thoughtless and shows that basically speaking American 
foreign policy is sick and unable to analyze world issues. 
  Therefore, at a time when America is our enemy and does not 
hide its enmity and at a time when our people have always been 
harmed and harassed by America, rapprochement with America will 
definitely be to our detriment. The Americans' violent 
treatment of a couple of our Navy officers on board "Iran Ajr," 
the downing of the Iranair Airbus, the destruction of the Salman 
oil platform, the Tabas incident, and so on all speak of 
America's violent and pitiless actions. For us, the Americans' 
enmity has been obvious from the Tabas incident to the downing 
of our plane and to its actions today. I think that the 
Americans are pitiless and illogical enemies and that 
rapprochement with them will definitely be to our detriment. 
  Moreover, basically, it is up to the esteemed leader to 
delineate and to determine the major and principled policies of 
the country and the system; and he has very explicitly stated 
that we have nothing to gain from relations with America and 
that such relations are harmful to us. 
  I should also add that some people think that the entire 
world is friends with America and that the only country in the 
world that is America's enemy is the Islamic Republic of Iran, 
or that all countries in the world are in love with America and 
that it is only the Islamic Republic of Iran that detests it. 
And with this type of assessment they ask: How can America, 
which is loved by everyone, be detested by you? But I think 
that this is not so. America has extremely strong military, 
economic, ideological, and cultural enemies in the world and of 
course at the top of the list of America's military enemies -- 
despite everything that is being said and despite the 
expressions of friendship -- is Russia. There are also China 
and France. From the economic aspect, America confronts Japan 
and Germany. And from the ideological and cultural aspects, it 
is confronting the Islamic Republic of Iran and revolutionary 
Islam. 
  Therefore, we can say that the Americans have many enemies. 
All the nations in the world are the enemies of America. The 
Third World is America's enemy. Actually, there are several 
superpowers that are confronting America. The military 
superpower in the form of Russia, China, and France; the 
economic superpower in the form of Japan and Germany and so on; 
and the cultural superpower in the form of the Islamic Republic. 
Therefore, it is not as though everyone else except us is 
America's friend. The tone that the others use may be different 
from ours. They may speak in a diplomatic manner or hide some 
of their intentions. But our position is clear and explicit. 
  [MAJLES VA PAZHUHESH] The truth is that the Islamic 
Republic's foreign policy has not fluctuated so much after the 
formation of the Supreme National Security Council [SNSC]. 
Please tell us about the process that led to the creation and 
to the continued existence of this council, what role it plays 
in various developments, and what it has been able to achieve. 
  [Rowhani] I think that an institution known as the SNSC is 
among the blessings that were bestowed on us with the latest 
directives that were issued by his eminence the imam, may his 
soul be sanctified, and which was created with the revision of 
the Constitution. Actually, many countries feel the need for a 
national security council after a period of war or military 
conflict. During the war, we had a Supreme National Defense 
Council. But we had to rapidly form another council known as 
the Supreme War Support Council so that it could fill the vacuum 
that existed with the absence of a national security council. 
After the war, the need for a centralized institution in which 
"politicians" and "military officials" could sit next to each 
other and adopt or coordinate military and political decisions 
was tangibly felt. On the other hand, it was necessary for the 
heads of the three powers to sit down together and to coordinate 
decisions. 
  In the Constitution before its revision, the president was 
the coordinator of these three powers. However, no mechanism on 
how to coordinate the three had been envisaged in the 
Constitution. But in the current Constitution, this 
coordination has been created with the emergence of a new 
institution in the form of the SNSC. In short, we can say that 
in the SNSC, defensive or political decisions or, in other 
words, military and state decisions on the one hand, and the 
decisions by the three powers on the other are coordinated and 
important issues that are connected with our national 
security--be they political, military, law-enforcement, 
intelligence, economic, cultural or other issues--are discussed 
and decided upon. 
  In the SNSC, the heads of the three powers; two 
representatives of the esteemed leader; and three 
political-security ministers, such as the interior, foreign 
affairs, and information ministers, are present. Also, the 
commander-in-chief, who is the highest ranking military 
official, as well as the head of the Plan and Budget 
Organization who is actually the coordinator of the country's 
economy, are also present. Occasionally other ministers are 
invited to participate when the topics to be discussed require 
their presence. 
  This council was effective in ending the differences between 
Iran and Iraq at that juncture and in freeing the prisoners of 
war as well as in settling the issue of the part of our borders 
still under Iraqi occupation. The famous letters that were 
exchanged between the Iranian president and Saddam Husayn were 
letters that had been discussed by the SNSC. These letters were 
extremely effective and important. The decision that the SNSC 
adopted during Iraq's war against Kuwait were extremely 
important. Also, the decisions that the SNSC adopted vis-a-vis 
the disintegration of the Soviet Union were also very important. 
  I should point out that the SNSC had foreseen the 
disintegration of the Soviet Union at least two years before it 
took place and had actually concluded how many countries the 
Soviet Union would be split into and what stance we should adopt 
toward it. It had even foreseen the plots that the Westerners 
and especially the Americans wanted to hatch in this region as 
many as three years before and had foreseen that world arrogance 
would one day provoke some in the area to confront Iran's 
territorial integrity. 
  Of course, it is necessary to explain that the SNSC's 
discussions and deliberations become valuable when they are also 
endorsed by the esteemed leader, in which case they are 
implemented as a compulsory decision. I think that this 
institution has been very favorable for the Islamic Republic of 
Iran. 

