BFN 

<F P=106> [By Huang Zhiling: "Power Shortages Cramp Industry--Lift </F>
Lid on Electricity Prices To Generate Plant Investment"] 
  [Text] To ease the country's power shortage, plans are 
under way to lift price controls on electricity, introduce a 
shareholding system into the power industry and launch an energy 
conservation publicity campaign. 
  A rational pricing system will be set up in the next three 
years, said Shi Dazhen, Minister of Power Industry. 
  Letting electricity prices reflect market demand is regarded 
as the best way to attract overseas and domestic investment, he 
said. 
  And turning all State power firms into shareholding firms 
will generate investment, he added. Under the system, 
management and ownership are separate and the legal rights of 
investors and managers are protected. 
  In the next seven years, the industry needs $25 billion to 
import generating units with a capacity of 45 million kilowatts, 
he said. Foreign loans and investment are being encouraged to 
fund the construction of power plants. 
  Investors stand to make a healthy profit, Shi said, adding 
that loans to the energy sector are a very safe investment. 
  China has been plagued by a power shortage since 1970. 
Electricity production consistently falls short of demand by 20 
percent. 
  Despite the fact that China's installed power capacity ranks 
fourth in the world, per capita production is only 644 
kilowatt-hours, two-fifths of the world average and 80th among 
all countries in the world. 
  Since the 1970s, factories, government offices and 
residential quarters in many cities have had to live with 
frequent power cuts. The shortage has grown even more acute 
since 1979, when the country embarked on its market-oriented 
economic reform. 
  All areas have had power problems except the Ningxia Hui 
Autonomous Region. 
  Beijing, for example, has had an electricity shortage since 
the early 1970s. In 1991, power was short by 400,000 kilowatt 
hours, in l992, 493,000 kilowatt hours and last year, 683,000 
kilowatt hours. 
  The East China Power Grid, the largest in the country, 
generated 9.87 percent more electricity in the first half of 
last year than over the same period in 1992. But due to 
increasing demand, it had to cut power in Jiangsu and Zhejiang 
provinces 12,480 times in the first five months of last year, 
4.9 times the figure in 1992. 
  This year all eastern provinces except Anhui are expected to 
suffer severe power problems. 
  The crisis is worse in the South. In Guangdong Province, 
demand has exceeded supply by 30 percent over the past l5 years. 
Since l979, it has had to purchase electricity from 
neighbouring Hong Kong. Today, it spends 10 times as much money 
to buy Hong Kong electricity as it did in 1979. 
  The Northeast China Power Grid, which had met the region's 
needs until three years ago, fell short of demand by 900 million 
kilowatt- hours last year. And that figure is likely to reach 3 
billion kilowatt-hours this year. 
  Industry has been the top victim of the energy crisis. 
Frequently, local plants cut electricity first to factories. 
  Each year, according to the Ministry of Power Industry 
(MPI), 
about one-third of production capacity at factories is lost due 
to power cuts. For example, many factories in Guangdong have to 
stop operation three days a week, reducing production by 30 
percent. 
  The power industry itself has also been a victim. 
  Normally, 25 percent of generating units in power grids are 
supposed to be idle so they can be maintained and held in 
reserve in case of breakdowns. 
  But the energy crisis has forced all units into operation. 
As a result, generators that should be overhauled are still in 
operation. 
  According to international standards, generating units 
should 
be in operation less than 5,000 hours a year. But since 1970, 
China's have been exceeding 6,000 hours annually. 
  Worse, obsolete equipment continues to be used. In many 
cities, distribution networks 25 years old are still in 
operation. 
  In Shanghai's busiest commercial centre, equipment from the 
1920s and 1930s is still around. Four cities in Northeast China 
-- Dalian, Fushun, Shenyang and Changchun -- are still using 
machines left behind by the Japanese in World War II. 
  MPI officials blame the problem on inadequate investment. 
  To evaluate a country's power industry, experts use an 
internationally recognized yardstick -- the "power elastic co- 
efficient." 
  The co-efficient compares the power industry's growth rate 
to 
that of the industrial and agricultural output value. If the 
co- efficient is 1, the two growth rates are equal. If it is 
greater than 1, the power industry has grown more quickly; 
otherwise, there is an energy shortage. 
  During the past two decades, China's power elastic 
co-efficient has ranged between 0.7 and 0.75, according to MPI. 
  To remedy the problem, the World Bank has suggested that 
developing countries invest more than 2 percent of their gross 
national product (GNP) in the power industry. But between l980 
and l992, China put only 1.24 percent of its GNP into energy. 
  Enterprises in the power industry still live under the 
planned economy. They have not become independent commodity 
producers and are not accountable for losses. The State demands 
they hand in more than 90 percent of their revenue in taxes and 
profit turnover. This leaves them less than 5 percent of their 
revenue to upgrade equipment and improve operations. 
  By contrast, many overseas counterparts spend half their 
earnings on development projects. In some countries this figure 
is as high as 90 percent. 
  China's electricity prices have also been kept artificially 
low under the planned system, Shi said. 
  The prices were set in 1958 and, although adjusted for the 
first time last year, are extremely low. Meanwhile the cost of 
fuel, raw material and generators has risen sharply with 
inflation. 
  From 1968 to early last year, one kilowatt-hour of 
electricity cost only 0.16 yuan ($0.018). 
  Early last year, the MPI raised the price to 0.20 yuan 
($0.023), still a far cry from the actual price. 
  For every 100 yuan ($11.5) the power industry invests, it 
loses 20 yuan ($2.3). 
  Shi said the artificially low price leads to a waste of 
electricity, affects fund-raising and severely hinders 
development. 
  Many Chinese waste energy because electricity rates are so 
low. The MPI is formulating a publicity scheme to impress upon 
the public the need to save electricity, Shi said. 
  In 1992, when experts from the World Bank voted to decide 
whether to invest in the Zouxian Power Plant in Shandong 
Province, an American expert abstained because electricity 
prices failed to reflect market demand, the PEOPLE'S DAILY 
reported. 
  To keep pace with growth, the power industry plans to 
increase the generating capacity of large and medium-sized 
generating units by more than 15 million kilowatts a year 
between 1995 and 1997. From 1998-2000, 20 million kilowatts are 
to be added annually. 
  If this is done, the country's total installed electricity 
capacity will be 310 million kilowatts by the turn of the 
century. 
  Shi said this will ease the country's energy crisis and 
bring 
electricity to 95 percent of rural households. 
  But to meet this goal, the power industry must break free 
from the planned economy, he said. 
  He stressed the need for establishing modern power 
enterprises that operate free of government interference, have 
independent decision-making power and assume responsibility for 
their profits and losses. Their property rights and other 
obligations should also be clearly defined, he said. 

