BFN 

  [Text] Yesterday, Governor Jia Zhijie; Hui Liangyu, deputy 
secretary of the provincial party committee; and Vice Governor 
Meng Qingping; led those in charge of departments under the 
direct jurisdiction of the provincial government to the city of 
Huangshi to conduct investigation and study and to handle 
official business on the spot. They held discussions with 
directors and managers of large and medium-sized state-owned 
enterprises to probe plans to deepen reform, accelerate 
development, and maintain stability, and helped enterprises 
solve practical problems. 
  During the investigation tour, Jia Zhijie and others 
listened 
to the report submitted by the person in charge of Huangshi, and 
fully affirmed the work of the Huangshi City CPC Committee and 
government. When talking about the problems currently facing the 
city -- such as funding strains, the increasing amount of losses 
suffered by enterprises, and some employees being badly off -- 
Jia Zhijie said: The difficulties currently facing our work are 
rather many. They are difficulties cropping up in the course of 
reform and development. We now are discussing ways of properly 
handling the relationship between reform, development, and 
stability. He stressed that all departments should pay close 
attention to and guarantee stability from top to bottom, and 
should ensure a stable political and social environment in which 
we can carry out reform and accelerate development. As for the 
problems in economic life, such funding strains, they should be 
resolved by adopting reform measures, and the supply of money of 
some selected localities, trades, and professions should be 
ensured. He hoped that Huangshi would speed up development, 
make the best possible use of its favorable conditions and avoid 
the unfavorable, bring its strong points into full play, and 
push ahead as a whole to strive for comprehensive development, 
with the large bringing along with the small and the cities 
pushing the countryside forward. Particular efforts should be 
made to accelerate the development of individual and private 
economies and of town and township enterprises so that Huangshi, 
an old industrial base, will radiate the vigor of its youth. 

