Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Getting Tougher on Piracy"] </F>
  [Text] The government's failure to table a report on 
Chinese piracy at last year's International Maritime 
Organisation (IMO) meeting embarrassed the Marine Department, 
infuriated the shipping industry, and let Chinese authorities 
off the hook. The official excuse was that interceptions by 
representatives of a national authority could not be described 
as piracy. Such sophistry cut no ice with crews risking their 
lives in the South China Sea or with shippers facing damage to, 
or theft of, vessels and cargoes. 
  Aside from the ludicrous symbolism of forcing the IMO 
representative to hold a news conference in an airport 
lounge--as if this absolved Hong Kong from responsibility for 
hosting his visit-- the government has done better this time. 
Confidential papers describing Chinese official involvement in 
almost 50 attacks on shipping over the past 18 months have been 
handed to IMO Safety Committee chairman Admiral Thimio 
Mitropoulos. 
  For all the government's talk about preserving the integrity 
of the shipping lanes and maintaining Hong Kong's reputation as 
a safe port, this is the first time it has let international 
authorities do anything about it. For once, Foreign Office and 
Security Branch reservations about offending China or 
overstepping Hong Kong's jurisdiction have been set aside, 
giving the United Nations maritime body grounds for examination 
of China's behaviour on the high seas. 
  China's initial response to the release of the report has 
been positive. It said yesterday it would bring in new 
regulations to restore order to some anti-smuggling units. The 
words will have to be followed by firm action. But the fear 
that making the report public would cause a new rift with China 
has not been realised. Instead, there is pressure on China to 
curb piracy. What a pity it took the Hong Kong and British 
Governments so long to act. 

