BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondents Tamara Zamyatina and Vladimir </F>
Mostovets] 
  [Text] Helsinki April 18 TASS -- Russian State Duma 
Chairman Ivan Rybkin called on Bosnian Serbs to show restraint 
and support the process of political settlement in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  Speaking at a news conference in Helsinki on Monday, Rybkin 
said that owing to Russia's efforts a safety belt is now being 
established around Gorazde, similar to that around Sarajevo. He 
pointed out that "Serbia is a bare nerve of Europe," adding that 
for the first time since 1945 this state which has never joined 
any bloc is bombed. 
  He assured the journalists that the "State Duma will take 
the 
necessary measures to facilitate a peaceful settlement of the 
Bosnian crisis." 
  Asked about the prospects for Russia's joining NATO's 
Partnership for Peace programme, Rybkin linked it to NATO air 
strikes on Bosnian Serb positions. In his view, the 
participation in the NATO programme presupposes some sort of 
"family relations." "But in a good family every member tells 
what he intends to do," he said. 
  "We are for partnership for peace, but we do not want to see 
a situation when one partner acts without consulting the other 
in this partnership." 
  Summing up the results of his visit to Finland, Rybkin said 
that his talks with Finnish leaders, industrialists, farmers and 
public figures were useful and fruitful. "We say in Russia: an 
old friend is worth two new ones. Three days of hard work and 
very good and intensive meetings have proved the validity of 
this saying," he said. 
  During the talks the sides discussed a wide range of issues 
connected with the expansion of relations between Russia and 
Finland in all spheres, including their interaction in the 
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Nordic 
Council, the Council of Europe, the European bank for 
Reconstruction and Development and other international and 
regional organisations. 
  Speaking about the prospects for Russia's accession to the 
Council of Europe, Rybkin noted that the process of adopting a 
decision on this issue has obviously been dragging on for too 
long. Some connect this with the withdrawal of Russian troops 
from the Baltic republics. Russia is interested in the soonest 
possible return of its soldiers no less than any other concerned 
state. But the talks with some Baltic states proceed no exactly 
in the way Russia would like them to go, he continued. 
  Rybkin said he has requested Finnish leaders to mediate the 
process in order to find a solution to the problem. 

