Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] On 29 December the government disclosed it is 
considering plans to increase official funds for the Housing and 
Urban Development Corporation [HUDC] to promote new purchases of 
land so as to construct apartments as part of its pump-priming 
package. By increasing official funding, the government hopes 
unused and under-utilized land in large cities will be put to 
public use and will encourage private real estate transactions. 
It also hopes this will help increase the money supply and stop 
the current economic downturn. 
  In the fiscal 1993 budget, the government allocated 4.5 
billion yen to the HUDC to encourage the purchase of land for 
building apartments (3 billion yen for regular apartments and 
1.5 billion yen for specially-designated apartments). The 
government plans to provide additional funding in the fiscal 
1994 budget as well as possible allocations from its third 
supplementary budget. It is also considering easing 
requirements regarding official funding. 
  Funding to help the public corporation secure land for 
apartment buildings was first established in 1991. Funds 
extended from the government's general account are a maximum 14 
percent of the purchasing cost of the land (allocated as 
treasury investments and loans). 
  Starting in fiscal 1993, the government can extend funds for 
use in the corporation's large-scale projects, such as apartment 
buildings. These funds will be used to purchase land from the 
Japan National Railway Settlement Corporation and unused lots 
where closed factories are located. In such projects, the 
government can extend funds not exceeding 10 percent of the cost 
of the purchased land. 
  The government and the ruling coalition parties have begun 
considering other possibilities to help promote the liquidation 
of land. For example, they have begun to consider easing the 
land trade monitoring system, reviewing the capital gains tax on 
land transactions, and establishing a "Land Holding 
Organization" (tentative name). By increasing funding to the 
HUDC, the government can also hammer out financial support 
toward this effort. 
  The amount of additional funds will be determined by the 
Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Construction, and other 
related government ministries and agencies. The government is 
also considering easing funding requirements concerning such 
aspects as the ratio of building volume to lot, floor area, and 
the number of permissible housing units. 
  When the purchase of land for HUDC apartments has 
progressed, 
the outlook will become certain on the price of land in the 
surrounding commercial areas where land transactions have slowed 
due to uncertainties in future land prices. It is hoped this 
would lead to resumed market activity and help promote 
liquidation of land through the recovery of market demand. 

