BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, June 2 (XINHUA) -- Chinese women take a 
full part in administering state and social affairs, and have 
made "mammoth contributions" to the country's development of 
democracy and building of its legal system, according to the 
white paper issued by the Information Office of the State 
Council here today. 
  Women in the country have been occupying more and more 
important places in state and social organizations at various 
levels since New China was founded in 1949, says the white paper. 
  It notes that Chinese women occupy an important place in 
people's congresses. When the First National People's Congress 
(NPC) was held in 1954, there were only 147 female deputies, 
accounting for 12 percent of the total. By 1993, when the 
Eighth NPC was convened, the number of women deputies had 
increased to 626, accounting for 21.03 percent of the total. 
  And from 1954 to 1993, eight women served as 
vice-chairperson 
of the NPC Standing Committee, including Soong Ching Ling, He 
Xiangning, Cai Chang and Chen Muhua. 
  The white paper says that women deputies to People's 
Congresses pay particular attention to the problems of education 
and public health, the ecological environment, the protection of 
the rights and interests of women, children and the disabled, 
social security and the general mood of the society. 
  They are active in raising suggestions for legislation and 
policy making and working hard to promote advances in these 
fields. The enactment of the "Law on the Protection of the 
Rights and the Interests of Women" and many other laws were made 
on the basis of motions put forward by women and with their 
participation, the white paper notes. 
  Chinese women also take an active part in the activities of 
the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) 
at various levels. Deng Yingchao, Kang Keqing and Qian 
Zhengying are among the seven women who had served or are still 
serving as chairperson or vice-chairperson of the CPPCC National 
Committee. 
  The Chinese Communist Party has over 7 million women 
members, 
accounting for 14 percent of the general membership. And the 
eight democratic parties in China have some 110,000 women 
members, the report discloses. 
  China's reform and opening to the outside world have 
prepared 
better conditions for women to participate in government and 
political affairs, it says, adding that in 1993, women made up 
32.44 percent of all people working in government organs. 
  At present, the report says, China has 16 female ministers 
and vice-ministers, 18 female provincial governors and deputy 
governors. In the nation's 517 cities, more than 300 women have 
been elected mayor or deputy mayor. 
  In 1992, the country boasted 21,012 female judges and 4,512 
women lawyers, who played an important role in strengthening 
legislative construction and safeguarding state security, the 
paper states. 
  It says that the women's federation at various levels is an 
important channel for the democratic participation and 
supervision over state and social affairs by women of all ethnic 
groups and from all walks of life. 
  The white paper says that the Chinese Communist Party and 
the 
Chinese Government consider the participation of women in 
government and political affairs an important component part of 
the building of democracy in China. 
  The government attaches particular attention to training 
women cadres of ethnic minorities in order to promote equality, 
unity, progress and common prosperity among all ethnic groups. 
  By 1992, the number of minority women cadres nationwide 
reached 607,600, accounting for 26.6 percent of all minority 
cadres in the country, becoming a backbone force in the 
political, economic and social development of minority areas. 
  The white paper says that the Chinese Government is now 
working on "the Program for the Development of Chinese Women," 
which is aimed at further promoting women's participation in 
government and political affairs as well as their overall 
participation and development. 

