BFN 

  [Text] Today Azerbaijani President Geydar Aliyev received 
the members of the commission investigating the circumstances 
leading to the shooting down of an Iranian airplane by Armenia's 
Armed Forces near Khankendi [Stepanakert]. Our correspondent 
Sakit Ochaghly reports: 
  [Begin recording] [Ochaghly] The republic's president, 
Geydar 
Aliyev, said during the meeting that immediately after this 
tragedy that has befallen the Iranian people he sent a letter to 
Iranian President Hashemi-Rafsanjani expressing condolences to 
the families of those who died in the military transport plane 
that was shot down by Armenia's Armed Forces and to all the 
Iranian people. 
  The president also noted that soon after this incident, a 
special meeting was held and the relevant organs were instructed 
to provide the necessary help to Iran in investigating the 
incident. 
  (Aghayi Aminian), head of the delegation and of the Iranian 
Foreign Ministry's legal department, thanked President Geydar 
Aliyev for the warm reception accorded to the delegation and for 
his great concern and interest in the incident. The guest noted 
that they left for the site of the tragedy the day after the 
incident. By that time, the burned bodies in the aircraft had 
been taken to Yerevan. According to information from the 
preliminary investigation and from various other sources, the 
Iranian military transport plane was hit by a missile while at 
considerable height. Of course, such missiles are not produced 
in Nagorno-Karabakh. (Aghayi Aminian) also noted that the 32 
passengers in the plane were coming to Iran to celebrate Nowruz. 
The Iranian guests also admitted the fact that the Armenian 
government, and hence the Armenian Air Force, knew the route of 
the military transport plane, which had taken off from Moscow. 
Considering this, why were they unaware of the flight of the 
peaceful passenger aircraft and shoot it down with a missile? 
  (Aghayi Rizvani), the representative of the Iranian Ministry 
of Defense, and General (Aghayi Yusufi) expressed their opinions 
on the incident. 
  Geydar Aliyev indicated that we are unable to go to the site 
of the incident because Daghlyk-Karabakh [Nagorno-Karabakh] and 
Khankendi are occupied by the Armenian Armed Forces, but we are 
ready to do everything to help the investigation and clear up 
the incident. 
  The president also noted that the tragic killing of Iranian 
citizens en route to their homeland to celebrate their greatest 
holiday is barbaric, and the Iranian state cannot remain 
indifferent to such an incident. 
  [Aliyev] I hope that you, as a state, will raise this issue 
with them [Armenians] in a serious manner. I believe you will 
do that, because first of all, we have no aircraft like that one 
in Azerbaijan. Secondly, it would have been a different story 
had they shot down a plane that was bombing their positions, or 
if a plane -- no matter if it belonged to Azerbaijan, Iran or 
any other country -- while it was attacking Khankendi or any 
other place. But in this case the aircraft was on a peaceful 
mission. They should have tracked its course and movements and 
should have shot at it only after it bombed or strafed them. 
But, when an aircraft is not dropping bombs and is known to be 
carrying passengers there is no reason to shoot at it. Is this 
not a barbaric? [end recording] 

