Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Mei Tzu (2734 1311): "Hong Kong's Iron Woman -- </F>
Ms. Chen Fang An-sheng, the First Chinese Chief Secretary"] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] In Hong Kong's nearly 100-year 
history as a British colony, only the past few years have seen 
Chinese holding high posts in the government. It is especially 
unprecedented for a Chinese to be promoted to the post of chief 
secretary -- the No. 1 official under the Hong Kong governor, 
equivalent to the prime minister of Hong Kong. Now, the Hong 
Kong government has given this No. 1 post not only to a Chinese, 
but to a Chinese woman. This may be seen as a pioneer move in 
Chinese society, which is noted for its patriarchal tradition. 
  When Sir David Ford, the British chief secretary, decided to 
retire by the end of this [as printed] year, nine Chinese 
officials at the council and service levels were candidates for 
this No. 1 post in the Hong Kong government. They were all men, 
except Chen Fang An-sheng. However, the outcome of the 
competition was that Chen Fang An-sheng, the only female, beat 
all the others and became the winner. 
  It was no sheer good luck that Chen Fang An-sheng gained the 
recognition of Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten. With 30 years of 
experience in civil service, this female official has proved 
capable, sharp, bright, and sober-minded. She dares to speak 
out, talks eloquently, and is dauntless in taking on 
responsibilities. She is a very outstanding civil servant, 
demonstrating the style of a strong woman. 
  Chen Fang An-sheng's success in reaching the peak in her 
official career is, of course, due to her hard work and strong 
ability. But there is another reason -- she lives in the right 
time and place. Some commentators in Hong Kong link Chen's 
success to the rising awareness of feminism in the local 
society. In recent years the women's rights movement has been 
rather active in Hong Kong. Now, women's social status is a lot 
higher in Hong Kong than in any neighboring country or region. 
The assumption of the highest official post by Chen Fang 
An-sheng, say the commentators, indicates that the Hong Kong 
women have begun to break through the prejudice and restrictions 
imposed upon them by the patriarchal society. 
  Ironically, however, this Hong Kong woman, though 
representative of the soaring women's rights, still puts her 
husband's surname before her own name as required by the old 
Chinese tradition. Some media even call her Mrs. Chen instead of 
her maid name, Fang An-sheng. 
  In fact, it is the civil-servant localization policy pursued 
by the Hong Kong government for the transitional period that has 
given this Chinese woman an opportunity to stand out among 
others. [passage omitted] 
  In September this [as printed] year when the Hong Kong 
government officially announced that Chen Fang An-sheng would be 
the chief secretary--the first such Chinese official in Hong 
Kong history--her illustrious family background immediately 
caught the media's attention. When reporting and commenting on 
her appointment, many newspapers and periodicals added these 
words: Chen Fang An-sheng is a descendant of a celebrated 
Chinese family. Her grandfather was Fang Chen-wu, a renowned 
Kuomintang general in the War of Resistance Against Japan. 
  Chen Fang An-sheng's ancestors lived in Wabu Town of Anhui, 
which was once a well-cultured town but now is a very poor area. 
When two reporters from the English-language paper SOUTH CHINA 
MORNING POST went to Wabu to trace her family origin, what they 
saw was a poor and backward town in the cold wind. They could 
hardly believe that the No. 1 strong woman of an international 
metropolis is from a family in such a poverty-stricken and 
out-of-the-way town. 
  Yet this is the real fact. Perhaps what is noteworthy is 
that the Fangs are a celebrated family in this small town. Chen 
Fang An-sheng's grandfather, General Fang Chen-wu, was an ardent 
patriotic serviceman, who took part in the Anti-Manchu 
Revolution led by Dr. Sun Yat-sen. In the wake of the 18 
September Incident, General Fang Chen-wu contributed all he had 
for the sake of the country and organized an anti-Japan national 
salvation army in southern Shanxi, fighting many brave, bloody 
battles against the Japanese. Later, he founded the World 
Anti-Fascist Alliance and shuttled between London, Paris, and 
Cairo to appeal for international support for the Chinese 
people's anti-Japan struggle. In the War of Resistance Against 
Japan, he was away from home for six long years and did not come 
back even when his father and mother passed away. Unfortunately, 
this renowned general known for his deeds in fighting the 
Japanese was missing in 1941 when he was traveling from Hong 
Kong to Guangzhou. Rumor has it that he was assassinated by a 
special agent sent by Chiang Kai-shek. In the absence of 
evidence, however, the death of Fang An-sheng's grandfather has 
remained a mystery even as of today. 
  Though a girl from a family in Wabu, Fang An-sheng was born 
in westernized Shanghai. Her father, Fang Chen-wu's son, was a 
textile industrialist. When Fang An-sheng was two years old, the 
family moved to Tianjin, where she spent an unforgettable 
childhood. 
  In 1948, the Kuomintang army was badly crushed by the 
Chinese 
Communists' fierce offensive. With a sharp political 
sensibility, Fang An-sheng's father knew that the situation 
would undergo a drastic change. To escape the disaster, he 
brought the entire family to Hong Kong, thus beginning a new 
chapter in the Fang family's history. [passage omitted] 
  The Fangs had a clan tomb in Wabu. It was built by General 
Fang Chen-wu for his parents when he returned home in 1929. The 
tomb was destroyed in the Cultural Revolution. All of a sudden 
this [as printed] year, the Anhui Provincial government decided 
to rebuild the tomb and erect tablets for the clan members, in 
particular General Fang Chen-wu, the meritorious military leader 
in the War of Resistance Against Japan--it is not known whether 
this decision had something to do with Fang An-sheng's 
achievements in Hong Kong. Last September when the 
tomb-rebuilding project was completed, a large number of the 
Fang clansmen--some 1,000 from various parts of Anhui and 18 
from Hong Kong--came back to Wabu to attend the ceremony. Among 
them was daughter Chen Fang An-sheng, the Fang family's pride. 
She received the warmest welcome from the native people. "I will 
never forget this sentimental trip," said the iron woman. 
  HSIANG-KANG SHIH PING [7449 3263 2514 6097] says that Fang 
An-sheng's deep-rooted family origin in China has made her the 
best choice to fill the highest official post in Hong Kong 
during the transitional period, adding that this would 
facilitate Hong Kong's communications with China. A review of 
her maturing history, however, shows that she herself has no 
profound relationship with China. She is purely an elitist 
brought up by the Hong Kong government. 
  In 1962, Fang An-sheng graduated from the University of Hong 
Kong. Then, she took a job in the Hong Kong government as an 
administrative official. At that time, Hong Kong society was 
still quite conservative. Fang An-sheng, then still an unmarried 
woman, was the first female who became an administrative 
official in Hong Kong. [passage omitted] 
  Since then, this bachelor of arts in English literature has 
advanced smoothly in her official career. Starting from a 
grassroots administrative official, she worked in various 
administrative departments of the Hong Kong government, crowned 
with brilliant achievements and getting one promotion after 
another. Finally, she ascended the post of the No. 1 civil 
servant. 
  As a rule, people of extra ability draw both praises and 
criticisms. Chen Fang An-sheng is no exception. Her strict work 
style is appreciated by Governor Chris Patten and respected by 
many people in Hong Kong's political circles. But her 
subordinates are afraid of her. They revere this female boss, 
but do not like her. 
  It is said that when she was the director of the Social 
Welfare Department, she used to invite her subordinates to a 
coffee gathering every week. While drinking the hot coffee, she 
still talked profusely about work, her face being solemn without 
the slightest relaxation. Over time, the subordinates were 
afraid of this gathering, which they called a "coffee 
conference." They tried not to attend it if they could find some 
excuse. This is indicative of Chen Fang An-sheng's utter 
devotion to work. 
  Chen's stern attitude has also been experienced by the 
Chinese communists. 
  After Chris Patten presented his political reform package to 
speed up the democratic program in Hong Kong, Sino-British 
relations quickly soured. On the issues of the New Hong Kong 
Airport and the No. 9 Container Dock, Chen Fang An-sheng, who 
was then the secretary for the Economic Services, sternly faced 
the overbearing Chinese representatives without yielding in the 
slightest. She remained unswayed even when the Chinese side 
criticized her by name. No wonder even those on the Chinese 
side have said privately: sure enough, she deserves the name of 
the iron woman of Hong Kong. [passage omitted] 

