Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with economist L.I. Piyasheva by DELOVOY MIR </F>
commentator Lina Tarkhova under the rubric "Point of View"; 
place and date not given: "`I Am Coming Out of a Bleak Period'"] 
  [Text] 
  [Tarkhova] Larisa Ivanovna, the readers have "lost track" of 
you. Not so long ago, the pages of newspapers were replete with 
your name; you invariably found yourself at the center of 
discussions, and suddenly you disappeared. Where are you now, 
what are you doing? 
  [Piyasheva] After my departure from the Moscow mayor's 
office 
I headed an educational institution in which I administered 
examinations today for the last time. I am also quitting this 
job. I want to establish a new institute, likewise an 
educational one--an institute of economy and law. Due to 
domestic circumstances, the last year was very difficult for me, 
it was one solid bleak period. I am now trying to come out of 
it, and am engaging in vigorous work. 
  [Tarkhova] You criticized Gaydar's economic program sharply. 
Do you experience profound satisfaction in conjunction with his 
departure? 
  [Piyasheva] Not in the least. I believe that it was not 
worthwhile for him to return to a government in which he 
patently could not have a decisive influence. 
  [Tarkhova] In conjunction with the latest events, the 
disputes about economic transformations being reversible or 
irreversible have resumed with renewed strength. What is your 
opinion? 
  [Piyasheva] I think that they will not abandon the path of 
Gaydar's reforms. Gaydar is being rebuked for unjustifiably 
trying to accelerate, for running ahead of himself. My 
complaints about him are of a directly opposite nature: he did 
not begin reforms in earnest, after all. Apparently, being 
carried away by the idea of financial stabilization, he failed 
to see, was unable to see, which economic processes were behind 
this. Otherwise, he would not have dragged out privatization 
over a few years, would not have accepted its current model, and 
would have indeed given property to the people. "Chubays-style" 
privatization has not resulted in a change of ownership: the 
state still owns most of the country's wealth, no matter what 
joint-stock companies' or holding companies' labels camouflage 
this. Gaydar did not begin structural changes in industry; the 
institution of bankruptcy was not introduced. These mechanisms 
are rigidly interconnected, and they need to be set in motion 
simultaneously. However, an attempt was made to accomplish the 
impossible--to leap across a precipice in two jumps, an attempt 
that was patently doomed to failure. 
  Besides, Gaydar did not pursue his monetarist line firmly 
enough, either. He made concessions to the government, to the 
parliament, yielding his ground time after time. The current 
events which have disturbed everyone so much--a new upswing in 
prices, the fall of the ruble--are not at all a consequence of 
Gaydar's departure and a government crisis, as is believed. The 
populist decisions of the last months of the year, when the 
reformers wanted to look good before the elections, are becoming 
a factor. 
  Therefore, Chernomyrdin will simply stay Gaydar's course. 
The 
fight against inflation will go on in some form. The government 
will not allow unemployment to occur; subsidies to unprofitable 
industries will not be stopped. The prime minister believes 
religiously in the command economy in which wages and prices can 
be fixed and centralized supply, or more precisely distribution, 
can exist. He is not averse to adding a dash of market economy 
to this. However, it has been proven a thousand times over: one 
cannot be somewhat pregnant. A choice has to be made between two 
directions: social-democratic or liberal. Either a state plan 
and equality in poverty, or economic freedom, unlimited 
opportunity for manufacturers, but also the risk of ruin and 
bankruptcy--of course, with social protection for the old and 
weak. The richer a society, the better it handles this task. 
  [Tarkhova] In your opinion, how much time will the 
government 
need to ascertain this? 
  [Piyasheva] The current leaders will never understand this. 
This is how they were conditioned and molded by their time. What 
will happen to the country? There will be trouble. It is only 
possible to hang on within the framework of a socialist model 
through the use of force, and many steps back will have to be 
taken. Borders will have to be closed again, and the persecution 
of dissidents will have to be started. Stalin did not at all 
introduce terror because he was a bad man. It is impossible to 
build socialism otherwise, because since the people resist. 
Logically, the same should begin now. They will begin with 
bankers and farmers and take away what these people already 
have. However, people will not give up their freedom 
voluntarily, and here they are--opponents of the regime, enemies 
of the people. They are gunning down bankers already; recently, 
they killed five all at once. 
  [Tarkhova] However, this was not "at the hand" of the 
government. 
  [Piyasheva] Of course not. However, the policy with regard 
to 
commercial banks, which they cannot forgive for breaking loose 
and wishing to pursue their own financial policy, is triggering 
this. If I am not mistaken, not a single killer of an 
entrepreneur has been found and convicted yet. I am convinced 
that the notorious affair involving forged advice notes, whereby 
tremendous sums that subsequently literally evaporated were 
channeled through commercial banks, could not have succeeded 
without powerful support from the top. The banks were faced with 
the choice: either generate forged advice notes, and in this 
case, with bankruptcy and prison awaiting, or be destroyed. This 
was a purposeful action. 
  [Tarkhova] This is a sad picture. However, something 
favorable has been done in recent years, has it not? Although 
this is absolutely unscientific, could you estimate the 
percentage content of the "market" in our economy at present? 
  [Piyasheva] The "market" content is as high as the degree to 
which privatization has been implemented. Chubays intends to 
complete privatization by June; from his point of view, it 
perhaps comes to 80 [percent] even now. I believe that it is 5 
percent. I think that the elements of a market economy in the 
regions are altogether minimal. Moscow and St. Petersburg have 
been reformed the most. 
  [Tarkhova] As you see it, what should economic policy be 
with 
regard to the regions? 
  [Piyasheva] It is frequently interpreted as a transfer of 
power from the center to the localities. However, this merely 
means the redistribution of nomenklatura power. Freedom should 
be granted to producers with a minimum of participation by the 
administration in this. A private owner, an independent, free 
person should finally appear in the center and the most 
godforsaken provinces alike. 
  [Tarkhova] Why is it that the salespeople in privatized 
shops, in all these limited-liability companies with smart 
names, are as rude to customers as before, and their dress is as 
dirty as before? Economists have said so much about the magic, 
transforming power of the pride of ownership! 
  [Piyasheva] That the salespeople are rude and unclean is 
proof positive of the absurdity of the current fictitious 
privatization. Nothing has changed in real life and, 
consequently, in the mentality of these people. They do not own 
either the premises of the shop or the land underneath it. Just 
like before, a trust is ensconced above the salespeople which 
gives them managerial directives and, at the same time, shows 
some concern for supplies. A recent open letter from Luzhkov to 
the president about the failure to procure the necessary amount 
of foodstuffs for Moscow is nothing but testimony that our dear 
centralized supply system is alive and well, although all shops 
are allegedly not owned by the state anymore! Sometimes they 
say: So, they were privatized on Piyasheva's flawed pattern, and 
this is the source of all the trouble. However, I did not have 
an opportunity to conduct privatization the way I conceived of 
it: each store should become an independent unit, without 
officials above it who need to be fed. The owner of a store 
looks for suppliers himself; however, to this end, wholesale 
warehouses, transportation, and other infrastructure should also 
be privatized. I came to the mayor's office with this specific 
program. Popov, who offered me the job, created ideal 
conditions, but two months later suddenly quit as mayor. I found 
myself in a vacuum: Luzhkov has a completely different view of 
privatization. I had to quit. 
  [Tarkhova] Some figures maintain that, by virtue of their 
peculiar traits, the Russian people are not the material for 
market relations and are in principle incapable of rational 
economic behavior. For example, foreigners happen to be shaken 
when they learn that a woman here is capable of forking over an 
entire month's salary, say, for boots. Generally, what is 
"economic behavior" about? 
  [Piyasheva] It is about economic operations being geared 
toward the greatest possible result. Subsidies to unprofitable 
industries are noneconomic behavior. As far as boots for a 
month's salary are concerned.... I do understand this woman. One 
does not want to walk about in overshoes. Foreigners are 
surprised because they have an entirely different orientation to 
life. Western people eagerly invest funds in real estate, cars, 
land, stock. A Western person would buy some kind of equipment 
for his shop rather than new boots. 
  The orientation of our people is toward consumption, and the 
"nouveaux riches" display this vividly. Our millionaires are 
undoubtedly ahead of Western ones in terms of the number of 
prestigious cars, prodigious banquets, and luxury cruises. Easy 
come, easy go, because there are no long-term prospects, and 
they are not being created. Only pride of ownership, an 
opportunity to become free, provides prospects, that is, a 
foundation for economic behavior. It is based on confidence in 
the authorities and the law. What confidence can there be given 
our instability? 
  [Tarkhova] What has been your most serious disappointment in 
recent years--a person, an idea? 
  [Piyasheva] Perhaps it is the policy of conducting Gaydar's 
economic reforms. You see, a lot was expected of him. He came to 
take a place which had been cleared through a monumental effort 
of the people. Let us recall how it happened: We had fought 
Ligachev, Ryzhkov, Abalkin.... We cleared away one obstacle 
after another. So, the 1991 August putsch failed, a democratic 
government came in, and there were no objective obstacles to 
quickly implementing the entire set of reforms. It did not work 
out. 
  [Tarkhova] Are you prepared to blame Yegor Gaydar for this? 
  [Piyasheva] No. By no means should one person be blamed in 
this instance. Apparently, this has to do with the people having 
been too powerfully traumatized by everything this country has 
gone through. There are no leaders. After all, the flower of the 
nation was indeed exterminated. One may only be surprised at 
people still being human. 
  [Tarkhova] What is your philosophy in life? 
  [Piyasheva] Live no lies. Serve the idea, your convictions, 
the motherland. Live by God. 
  [Tarkhova] Did you come to religion long ago? 
  [Piyasheva] This is a personal question. 
  [Tarkhova] How do you find consolation in a time of 
difficulty? 
  [Piyasheva] Alas, there are instances when consolation is 
not 
to be found...perhaps only in music. Recently I listened to 
Paganini's violin concerto at home for one month in a row. I am 
gradually coming out of a bleak period. I intend to write a few 
articles. After all, for a while I in a way suspended all public 
and publishing activity, and quite deliberately at that. I did 
not want to criticize Gaydar and Chubays. They were working, so 
let them work. I thought: What kind of specialty do I have--to 
criticize everyone? 
  [Tarkhova] However, not so long ago you "picked apart" 
Gaydar's program on an entire newspaper page. 
  [Piyasheva] This was purely by chance. This kind of 
situation, a stressful situation, happened. I wrote the article 
to relax. Quite unexpectedly, I got a prize from the Soros 
Foundation for the article. 
  [Tarkhova] Congratulations. Are you now establishing an 
institute to "relax?" 
  [Piyasheva] It is badly needed. Economics and law--one does 
not work without the other, and we see it every day. Economists 
should know the law, and lawyers should be conversant with 
economics. The institute will train specialists of an 
international class, managers, bankers, lawyers. 
  [Tarkhova] Larisa Ivanovna, you are a hopeless optimist! You 
painted the most gloomy picture of our immediate future--and 
suddenly such a project. 
  [Piyasheva] Yuriy Mikhaylovich Luzhkov promised assistance 
in 
this matter. No matter how different our views of economic 
problems are, I must admit that he is one of the few of our 
leaders who know how to achieve a set goal. His word can be 
trusted. As far as I am concerned.... I do not know how to be 
depressed for a long time. I must work. 

