Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Kuala Lumpur, Wed.-- Datuk Sri Anwar Ibrahim 
said the decision not to give new contracts to British companies 
only involves government contracts and procurements and does not 
include the private sector and education. The deputy prime 
minister said the decision was reaffirmed by the cabinet at its 
meeting today. [passage omitted] 
  Anwar said the clarification was made in view of the various 
reports which appeared in the media after the announcement. 
Some ministers and agency heads had issued separate comments on 
the matter and this needed clarification, Anwar said. 
  Asked whether the cabinet today had revised the decision, 
Anwar said that there was no reason to revise it right now. He 
said: "The cabinet at its weekly meeting today reaffirmed its 
decision made last week to cease awarding new contracts to 
British companies. [passage omitted] 
  "We would like to state that the British Government aid -- 
both in the form of grants and concessionary loans -- are meant 
to subsidise British companies to make their bids more 
competitive. In the case of the Pergau Dam (hydroelectric 
project), no grant was involved but only concessionary loan for 
the purchase of equipment sourced from the UK. 
  "Our relations with the British Government is not affected. 
Let me state that the dispute was also not about press freedom. 
But press freedom is certainly not a licence to fabricate lies. 
We are not in the habit of sending journalists to jail as 
charged by one of the British newspapers. 
  "It is also amazing that the SUNDAY TIMES, London, could 
publish a report alleging the Malaysian Prime Minister taking a 
U.S. $50,000 (RM [Malaysian ringgit] 135,000) bribe from Whimpey 
International for a project that is non-existent. 
  "The violent reactions of some sections of the British media 
to our action since the past few days are, indeed, revealing. 
It is not only ignorance about this country that still abounds, 
but some even resorted to comments with racist undertones. They 
confirmed our worst suspicion. Thus, good sense and pragmatism 
prompt us to deal with firms from countries that treat us with 
fairness, respect, and as equal," he said. 
  Asked to cite specific examples of the racist undertones 
which he felt was seen in the British media, Anwar said there 
have been allegations that Prime Minister Datuk Sri Dr. Mahathir 
Mohamed was anti-colonial and that he was said to be unhappy for 
not getting a scholarship to study law in the United Kingdom. 
[passage omitted] 
  Anwar said that doubts were also raised as to whether the 
deputy prime minister was able to conduct a press conference in 
English considering that English was not his first language. 
  Asked whether he was aware of possible retaliation from the 
British, Anwar said that there had been no indication whatsoever 
of this possibility, adding that the problem was not with the 
British Government. He said: "As I have reiterated, our problem 
is not with the British Government, but with some sections of 
the British media, particularly those controlled by (Rupert) 
Murdoch." [passage omitted] 
  Asked whether the cabinet had decided which company would 
take over the job of building the Kuala Lumpur International 
Airport in Sepang since the Anglo-Japanese consortium's contract 
has been terminated, Anwar said this had not been decided yet. 
[passage omitted] 
  Asked whether the government decision would affect 
educational linkage between the two countries, Anwar said the 
government had no objections to the programmes conducted by the 
private colleges. 
  For instance, if MARA [Council of Trust for the Indigenous 
People] has plans to send 1,000 student to Britain, they must 
continue to do so, he said. 

