BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with North Rhine-Westphalian Minister President </F>
Johannes Rau, SPD candidate for the office of federal president, 
by Dieter Buhl and Robert Leicht; place and date not given: "`I 
Want To Be a Good Patriot"] 
  [Text] [DIE ZEIT] Mr. Rau, many years ago you talked about 
conducting an election campaign under the slogan "reconciliation 
instead of division." In the meantime, Germany has been 
reunified, but internally it is more divided than before. How 
can this divide between east and west be overcome? 
  [Rau] The situation is the same as it was in 1949 when we 
placed material reconstruction ahead of dealing with the past: 
We are now in danger of viewing unification as nothing more 
than the rebuilding of the eastern laender by way of introducing 
free market economics while too little is being done to enable 
us to understand one another. People have to talk to each 
other. We have an obligation to tell each other about our 
different lives. We also need to forge a whole series of 
relations. 
  [DIE ZEIT] For example? 
  [Rau] One can rebuild the Church of Our Lady in Dresden and 
one can visit the concentration camp at Oranienburg, places that 
lead us back to our common history in both its good and its bad 
aspects. 
  [DIE ZEIT] You have recently been criticized as someone who 
personally rejected unification. Following the collapse of the 
Wall, the government of your land, in which Bonn is situated, 
was opposed to the move to Berlin. Are or were the 
conservatives the better patriots? 
  [Rau] I never rejected reunification. It was always -- even 
if I considered the word inappropriate, because of the first 
syllable, which sounded too mechanical and smacked of 
restoration -- my political goal. Incidentally, I first became 
involved in politics through the issue of unity -- with the 
foundation of the All-German People's Party in 1952. However, 
like all other politicians, I did not envisage such a 
development in the foreseeable future. However, that is also 
true of the chancellor, the foreign minister, and almost 
everybody else. 
  As far as Berlin is concerned, in 1991 I expressed support 
for the parliament and government remaining in Bonn, but before 
the decision was made, I said that whatever decision is adopted, 
it should be loyally implemented. I have maintained that. The 
first section of the motion that I backed in the Bundestag on 20 
June 1991 stated: "The seat of federal president is in Berlin." 
I do indeed believe that the role of federal president can best 
be performed in Berlin. 
  [DIE ZEIT] The Stasi files are a source of discord in the 
country. Is it not time that they were closed and the matter 
put aside? 
  [Rau] Sometimes, one wants to say what the chancellor said 
spontaneously: Close the files. However, I can see that such 
an approach will not work. It will not work because of the 
victims, who have a right to see that the people who committed 
crimes against them are punished. I sometimes become concerned 
only about the way in which we Germans go about all of this. 
  [DIE ZEIT] Germans are wealthy, but they are not 
necessarily economically successful anymore. What must happen 
for the economy and society to once again achieve an external 
and internal balance? 
  [Rau] Many people are rich, but poverty is growing. I 
think that the current discussion about Germany as a center for 
business does not go far enough. The issues that are being 
argued are cost factors and the duration of permit procedures. 
That is not enough. I believe that we must concentrate more on 
technological advancement as well as new products rather than 
the export of established goods. 
  [DIE ZEIT] Technological renewal -- does that not encounter 
great obstacles in Germany with respect to genetic engineering 
or other future-oriented technologies? 
  [Rau] Our postwar history has been marked by a pendulum-like 
movement between euphoria over technology and fear of 
technology. This cannot be rectified by speeding up the 
movements of the pendulum, only by seeking a balance. That 
means that one must increase the opportunities for research in 
the case of genetic engineering and other appropriate scientific 
disciplines. However, one must also set limits. In my opinion, 
interference with human embryos should not be permitted. As far 
as I am concerned, there are no relative boundaries, only 
absolute ones. 
  [DIE ZEIT] In difficult times for the economy, how can one 
achieve both, higher performance -- in the context of 
international competition, too -- and greater solidarity? Is 
our society not too egoistical? 
  [Rau] The past few decades have witnessed a process of 
individualization that also contains elements undermining a 
feeling of solidarity. There is a form of personal development 
that is so absolute that it rules out any form of reference to 
solidarity or love of one's fellow man. The dangerous thing is 
always to demand solidarity from those who need it and not from 
those who must be ready to display such feelings. I do not like 
the kind of discussion in which the factory director says: "We 
must tighten our belts," which means lower wages, but for those 
who receive their wages from the factory director and not for 
factory directors themselves. By saying that, I do not want to 
conduct any kind of outmoded class war, but I do believe that 
this has something to do with the example set by those who are 
models and create models in this society. 
  [DIE ZEIT] The "political class" has fallen into disrepute. 
The current president, Richard von Weizsaecker, has given the 
parties a piece of his mind. What must change for you not to 
find yourself scolding the parties one of these days? 
  [Rau] There are many things about the president's diagnoses 
that I consider correct, and it also somewhat hurt me that I had 
to contradict him. I could understand part of the criticism but 
it was also polemical, and I also believed that what we needed 
was more encouragement for politics rather than polemics 
directed against parties. 
  We are witnessing a development that sees fewer people 
becoming involved in politics, because they are concerned that 
they will be placed on the same level as bad examples and will 
only be considered to be people who can do nothing other than 
destroy their political opponents. The result is that politics 
severely lacks an up and coming generation. 
  [DIE ZEIT] What can parties themselves do to become more 
responsive to those who are committed to issues and to problems? 
  [Rau] The parties still do not have an adequate answer. The 
commitment that is there is bypassing the parties, the 
churches.... 
  [DIE ZEIT] ...and the unions.... 
  [Rau] ...and the unions. That is why I believe that we are 
dealing with an institutional crisis for which I have no simple 
solution, but which, I think, must be overcome. I still say 
that we have a wonderful house, a fine brick building, but the 
mortar is beginning to crumble. The institutions no longer keep 
people together. However, we cannot change people so that they 
fit into our organizations, we must change our organizations so 
that people want to join. 
  [DIE ZEIT] Germany's position has changed since 
reunification. Should the FRG be a normal country that presents 
itself in the way that its neighbors in the EU and United 
Nations expect or should the Germans choose a special course, 
because they have better morals and a better understanding of 
history? 
  [Rau] I do not think that the Germans should pursue a 
special course and I do not think that it would be right for the 
Germans to do so. However, it seems to me to be right and 
important that the Germans be particularly conscious of their 
history and draw lessons from it. We Germans must make it 
perfectly clear that what we want is a European Germany, not a 
German Europe. We do not want our feeling of national identity 
to be a product for export! We need to be a part of Europe, 
because if such a large country in the center of Europe is not, 
it will be viewed as a threat by others and might indeed turn 
out that way -- I would consider that to be a disaster. As far 
as Germany's history this century is concerned, I believe in 
what Gustav Heinemann said: "There is only a chance of others 
forgetting what happened because of Germany, if we do not forget 
what happened." 
  [DIE ZEIT] What does that mean in the context of the 
anniversaries that will be celebrated this year and next year -- 
in Normandy, the end of the war. How should we approach those 
dates? 
  [Rau] Before that, we have a key date that concerns only us 
and I believe that it will be a moving day. I mean the 20th of 
July, the 50th anniversary of the Stauffenberg's attempt on 
Hitler's life. I think that it would be a good thing if this 
anniversary were not only an occasion for discussing the men and 
women of 20 July, but also for discussing the history of 
resistance in general. 
  We have our own dates. For example, 8 May of next year, 50 
years since the end of the war: It must be clear to us that it 
is the day of liberation and a day of defeat for Germany, that 
it was not a catastrophe the befell us from without, but was the 
consequence of a disaster that we ourselves set in motion. 
  [DIE ZEIT] What conclusions are to be drawn from German 
history? Should we keep out of every conflict? Or should we, 
because of historical experience, be particularly active in 
international politics and shoulder responsibility? 
  [Rau] Undoubtedly the latter. I would only say that the 
question of whether "particularly active" is only "responsible" 
when German soldiers are involved has been put to me too 
quickly. I do not think that one should think of soldiers as 
soon as one thinks of international assistance, especially as 
one knows that most military conflicts have social or ecological 
causes. I think that the idea of a European peace corps that is 
available for peaceful missions should be revived. 
  [DIE ZEIT] Would that have helped in the case of Yugoslavia? 
The SPD [Social Democratic Party of Germany] approached the 
Constitution Court in Karlsruhe in connection with several 
specific questions, but before the deliberations in Karlsruhe, 
it had approved military operations in former Yugoslavia in the 
Bundestag. How can those two things be reconciled? 
  [Rau] The approach to Karlsruhe was about clarification of 
our constitution and not that we were of the opinion that 
Karlsruhe could or had to prohibit or facilitate certain steps. 
We went to Karlsruhe because we considered the chancellor's 
statement that such missions were not possible unless the 
constitution was amended to be correct. We really wanted to 
know that and when the constitution has been amended, we want to 
make political decisions on a case by case basis. 
  [DIE ZEIT] If the Bundeswehr becomes more intensively 
involved abroad in UN missions, there will be casualties. Can 
you envision missions for which German soldiers should die? 
  [Rau] I cannot view the matter so casually, because without 
blood being shed by Americans, Englishmen, and Frenchmen as well 
as Russians in our case, there would have been no liberation 
from national socialism. Despite my previous reservations about 
the rearmament of Germany, that is why I said yes to national 
defense, as we expressed it in Bad Godesberg in 1959. However, 
I want to exhaust all ways and means involved in national 
defense unless the international community sees no other option 
and demands that we make a contribution to peacekeeping. What I 
do not want is for us to become a kind of rapid deployment force 
that is dispatched wherever there is a crisis. 
  [DIE ZEIT] For decades, a feature of the discussion about 
policy on Europe in this country has been harmony, but now it is 
the subject of disagreement. How can one continue to advocate 
European integration and more involvement in Europe? 
  [Rau] There can be no internal calm in Europe if a people 
that is 80-million-strong, living in the center of Europe and 
surrounded by neighbors, is not integrated in the process of 
European unification. 
  I can understand why many people view the community as 
strongly oriented toward agriculture, as being a subsidy 
machine. I can understand that German steelworkers are 
skeptical about Europe, because the policy on steel is wrong. I 
can also understand that many are opposed to excessive 
bureaucracy and excessive regulations, because there is no 
adequate democratic control system to counterbalance that, that 
more and more guidelines are initiated, approved by national 
governments, guidelines that cannot be overseen. In that 
respect, I agree with Stoiber's criticism, but I do not want to 
have anything at all to do with the basis for his criticism. 
  [DIE ZEIT] Is it true that Helmut Kohl is the last German 
statesman who is firmly committed to Germany's integration with 
Europe? 
  [Rau] I was just about to say that if I were president, 
there would be two of us, at least two of us. 
  [DIE ZEIT] The republic has to deal with right-wing 
extremism, not for the first time, but it has never had to do so 
intensively before. There are the right-wing terrorists and 
right-wing parties. What should be done? Should the 
Republikaner be kept under surveillance or should the party be 
banned? 
  [Rau] I believe that the Weimar Republic did not collapse 
because there were too many extremists, but because there were 
too few democrats. That is why I am in favor of a political 
debate, which must, of course, take into account its effects. I 
am not in favor of holding a discussion with Schoenhuber on 
television, and I think it is wrong for us to be taken in by 
provocations staged for the media. 
  We have conducted research in those areas where the 
Republikaner have obtained a high number of votes and we have 
come to the conclusion that the areas are consistently trouble 
spots, always towns and neighborhoods where the prospects for 
young people are particularly bad because there are few 
occupational training positions, few jobs, few meeting places. 
We must pay more attention to the reasons people are drawn to 
extremism and try to remove the causes. 
  [DIE ZEIT] So, that means that right-wing voters are not so 
much the result of Mr. Schoenhuber's activities as society's 
indifference. 
  [Rau] That is correct. That is true of a great many voters. 
Everywhere there are people who cannot be taught anything. 
There are such people in France, in Italy, and in Germany. 
However, we as Germans know best -- or we should know best of 
all -- what the result of such views being held by a majority of 
people can be. That is also why we have to react in a 
particularly sensitive manner. We do not have more extremism 
than in other countries, but we need to have a higher threshold, 
because once bitten twice shy. 
  [DIE ZEIT] If that is the case, then why are we ready to 
introduce new national, partly nationalist sentiments into 
politics? 
  [Rau] There is no place for nationalist sentiments. 
However, I concede that -- in view of the rupture in our 
history -- I consider a natural relationship to one's country 
to be necessary, we should not leave that to the extremists. 
What I say is that a patriot is someone who loves his 
fatherland, whereas a nationalist is someone who despises other 
peoples' fatherlands. I want to be a good patriot. 
  [DIE ZEIT] What can a president do in this situation in this 
difficult fatherland -- to quote your political mentor Gustav 
Heinemann? Has Richard von Weizsaecker's presidency not shown 
that regardless of how much of an effort he makes, the president 
cannot influence the course of politics, but can only accompany 
it symbolically? 
  [Rau] I think that Richard von Weizsacker has accomplished 
much more than that. The speech that he delivered on 8 May 1985 
in itself justified the 10 years in office. It was the kind of 
speech heard once in a century. One can hardly overestimate the 
effect that the speech had all over the world in clearly showing 
Germany to be a democracy. 
  At least half of a president's role is connected with 
foreign 
policy. He is to a certain extent the first ambassador, and 
that applies not only to travel, with which I would be sparing. 
However, I believe that the way in which one visits foreign 
countries and the experience that one introduces into political 
talks can be more than a symbolic "accompaniment." 
  [DIE ZEIT] Can the president be someone who makes people 
think about their lives? 
  [Rau] No, he cannot and should not act that way, not even as 
a constitutional organ. However, in the way in which he poses 
questions and the way in which he brings people together, he can 
be -- to point to areas where meaning is lacking in life and 
make people think that way. 
  I believe that it is desirable for the president to have a 
clear-cut image, but it should always be an invitation to others 
to show where they stand. 
  [DIE ZEIT] Which country would you visit first if, as 
president, you were free to decide that? 
  [Rau] I would be drawn to Israel, but perhaps I would go to 
the Netherlands, to our neighbor, which has problems with us. 
Then, of course, talks with our neighbors in the east would be 
important for me. 
  [DIE ZEIT] Every president has sought a role for himself, 
and the question that arises every time is how political can a 
head of state be? How would you answer that question in 
relation to yourself? Is it not the case that a politician 
sometimes has to cause divisions or a polarization to set things 
in motion? 
  [Rau] He must also be able to focus on minority positions, 
knowing that they are minority positions: If he thinks it is 
useful to make them majority positions, then he can seek support 
for them. 
  [DIE ZEIT] Mr. Rau, it now seems unlikely that you could be 
elected with the votes of the SPD alone. How do you want to win 
votes from the liberals and the Greens? 
  [Rau] My candidacy is an offer addressed to all democratic 
parties. I know from many talks I have had that there is a lot 
of support for my candidacy in other democratic parties. I hope 
that it will be translated into votes. 

