Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 28 Mar (DPA) -- An article published today 
in the TRABAJADORES weekly newspaper indicates that the much 
awaited extraordinary session of the National Assembly of the 
People's Government [ANPP] may not adopt all of the 
controversial measures proposed to clean up the internal 
financial situation and the budget deficits. Entitled "To Be 
Hasty Could Be Disastrous, But Inertia Would Be Fatal," the 
article by Deputy Lazaro Barredo argued that just because there 
are discussions "does not mean we have to adopt all of the 
measures." The session is scheduled for an undetermined date in 
April. Barredo said that it would be better to define basic 
policies for dealing with the various economic phenomenon based 
on specific action. The government can then make the proper 
decisions. 
  The National Committee of the Cuban Workers Federation [CTC] 
will carry out an "in-depth assessment" of the proposals and 
recommendations drafted by the union's chapters in nearly 80,000 
meetings. The CTC will present its conclusions regarding the 
adjustment plan for cleaning up the island's economy. 
  Through the "Parliaments in the Workplace," the Cuban 
Government promoted social consensus in an attempt to keep the 
effects of the economic adjustment measures to a minimum during 
this fourth year of the so-called Special Period. The measures 
being considered include a new taxation system, the end of 
subsidies for consumer goods and services, price increases, and 
a reduction in the size of the government apparatus with the 
resulting increase in unemployment. 
  Since the disappearance of the USSR and the Socialist 
regimes 
in Eastern Europe, with which it carried out 85 percent of its 
commercial trading activity, Cuba has been experiencing a strong 
recession. This is worsened by an increase in the U.S. trade 
embargo. 
  Regarding the more significant issues of the policies to be 
chartered by the ANPP, Barredo believes that although these 
decisions cannot be postponed for very much longer, the 
legislature should neither build false expectations or address 
the matter lightly. The former vice president of the Union of 
Cuban Journalists and current member of the ANPP said that "if 
the measures were capable of immediately solving the difficult 
situation which we have been thrown into, they would have been 
adopted a long time ago." Therefore, he added, it would be 
extremely naive to believe that by discussing and adopting 
decisions made by the ANPP, the country's problems will 
disappear like magic. 
  Besides the partly paralyzed state of industry and the drop 
in agricultural production levels, Cuba faces a budget deficit 
of over $4.2 billion. There is also an excess of currency of 
over $11 billion circulating in the economy. The measures are 
more closely related to the labor situation, more specifically, 
the possible closure of approximately 69 percent of the 
country's enterprises due to inefficiency and the expense caused 
by Cuban workers, who are accustomed to receiving constant 
subsidies from the state. According to Barredo, almost 11 
million Cubans are faced with a dilemma without precedent 
anywhere in the world: how to solve the budget deficit and the 
excess currency problem while upholding the decision to continue 
with free social services, such as education and health. 
  The essay recognizes that the island is facing a necessary 
reorganization process. The process will necessarily and 
inevitably affect the habits, customs, and way of thinking of 
the country's inhabitants. Barredo flat out said that it is 
impossible, under the present conditions, to expect to work on 
the country's economic recovery without getting the domestic 
cash flow situation under control and within manageable limits 
first. "Everything must be carefully studied. It is clear that 
hurrying such important issues could be disastrous, but inertia 
would be fatal." The deputy offered his "personal opinion" in 
an article that covers almost half of the weekly publication's 
center page." 

