BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Fahd al-Rimawi] </F>
  [Text] Royal Court Chief al-Sharif Zayd Bin-Shakir returned 
quickly to his palace in al-Hummar [near Amman] when he learned 
that his guests had arrived. The guests were received by his 
friend [former minister] Ibrahim 'Izz-al-Din, while another 
friend, Dhuqan al-Hindawi, member of the Senate, also arrived 
early for the luncheon. 
  Al-Sharif Zayd was late because he was attending the 
celebration on the completion of the al-Aqsa reconstruction 
work, which took place on Monday [18 April]. On the same day, 
the chief of the Royal Court hosted a working luncheon for a 
delegation of the Islamic Action Front [IAF], including Dr. 
Ishaq al-Farhan [secretary general of the IAF], Dr. 
'Abd-al-Latif 'Arabiyat [member of the Senate], and Deputy Dr. 
'Abdallah al-'Akayilah, to discuss the developments between the 
government and the Hamas Movement. 
  Abu-Shakir [Zayd Bin-Shakir] began by saying that the 
confiscation of the passports of [Hamas officials] Muhammad 
Nazzal and Ibrahim Ghawshah is the last measure to be taken by 
the Jordanian Government against Hamas leaders. He added that 
the government has no intention of taking any repressive 
measures, such as the closing down of the Hamas offices or the 
deportation of its leaders from Jordan. 
  Al-Sharif Zayd then hinted that this measure was taken not 
out of a Jordanian conviction, but under Israeli-American 
pressure on the eve of Christopher's shuttle tour of the Middle 
East. He then said: We provided the Hamas leaders with security 
protection in their capacity as Jordanian citizens. 
  Dr. 'Arabiyat, who did not speak much during the luncheon, 
noted that the Israeli-U.S. objective for which they are 
exerting pressure on Jordan and Hamas is to peddle the Oslo 
accord, remove all obstacles on its road, and strike at national 
unity in the Jordanian arena by driving a wedge between the 
government and the Islamic current. 'Arabiyat added: We, in 
both sides, should remain alert and prevent the schemes and 
attempts to drive wedges from affecting our ranks. 
  Dr. 'Abdallah al-'Akayilah spoke more frankly than the 
others. After joking with al-Sharif Zayd more than once, he 
reiterated the strong relationship between the Jordanian rule 
and the Islamic Movement. He then firmly asked that the 
restrictions on Hamas leaders not exceed the confiscation of 
passports and that the confiscation be temporary, until the 
Israeli-U.S. storm calms down. Al-'Akayilah then smartly warned 
against striking at the fundamentalists like Egypt, Algeria, and 
Tunisia. 
  Dr. Ishaq al-Farhan briefly touched on the ideological 
aspect 
of the issue and called for coherence and solidarity, not 
estrangement, between the various forces and currents. He also 
called for coherence and solidarity from top to bottom under 
these delicate Jordanian and Arab conditions. 
  Dr. al-Farhan said: The IAF has begun an effort to close 
ranks and to lay down a political framework that would include 
all nationalists and Islamists in Jordan now that all illusions 
about a contradiction between Arabism and Islam have been 
disproved. 
  Al-Sharif Zayd, who looked strong and confident in his role 
in bridging gaps and running things, and who was pleased with 
the poem presented by Haydar Mahmud [Jordan's ambassador to 
Tunisia] at the Dome of the Rock renovation celebration, told 
his guests at the end of the working luncheon, which lasted four 
hours, that he would brief his majesty the king on what took 
place during the working luncheon and that he intentionally 
invited them to have lunch at his house instead of meeting them 
at his office. He added that he wanted the meeting, which was 
requested by the Islamists, to be separated from protocol and 
journalists so that the relationship between the leaders and the 
Islamic Movement could remain cordial and fraternal and based on 
dialogue and understanding regardless of the different views and 
interpretations. 

