CSO 

  [text]-There is fresh evidence that the Khun Sa group is 
very much active refining opium, producing its most deadly 
derivative, heroin, which eventually finds its way to capitals 
of countries where the perpetrator of drug-related problems 
still finds allies, for obvious reasons. 
  Acetic anhydride, the most potent of precursor chemicals in 
the refining process, was on its way in bulk toward the 
tri-border area where the rogue has his den when a lightning 
raid by the Tatmadaw sent the caravan people running for dear 
life. 
  The chemicals, in 126 plastic containers, measure over 3,333 
litres. Calculating in terms of what those familiar with the 
process say, the end product would be 3,333 kilos of pure white 
heroin. 
  Where would the miscreant despatch that much of lethal 
powder? Wherever there is demand. That is why the Government 
here is pushing for demand reduction while striking at the root. 
  The interdiction of the chemical caravan also left 62 
pack-saddles in the hands of the law-enforcers. Plain reasoning 
will help deduce that there were in the trail 62 pack 
horses/mules. 
  Knowing they must jettison their precious contraband in 
order 
to save their lives, Khun Sa's men had taken to mule-back 
riding, which they would not have done under normal 
circumstances. Moreover, they had not crossed the Thanlwin and 
were still far from where they were holed out. 
  There were earlier occasions, as divulged yesterday, when 
similar chemical contraband was seized, meaning the law 
enforcement personnel were able to deprive the refineries of the 
most essential element. 
  From time to time, opium and various other forms of opiates 
and even psychotropic substances which were seized through 
Tatmadaw and police checks were destroyed in the presence of 
local and foreign newsmen, diplomats and other guests. 
  There are times when the wholesale producer of heroin is 
portrayed as hero by the Western media. Seldom is he made a 
villain. The way we in Myanmar see it, those like him who 
perpetrate such atrocities against humanity must be villains. 
  Anyone with enough sense in his head would not bother to 
argue on his behalf. Plainly put, a drug man, and those who 
lend that person support of any measure, must be treated as 
intent on and actually doing harm to society world-wide. 
  Caught red-handed. Indicted. 

