Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] La Paz, 18 Mar (EFE) -- Expressing their position in 
defense of coca, the Bolivian Labor Federation (COB) and the 
Tahuantinsuyo Authentic Indian Front (FIAT) today labeled the 
stopovers U.S. Vice President Al Gore will make in the La Paz 
and Santa Cruz airports as "non grata." 
  Gore, his wife, and official delegation are making their 
first trip to several South American countries. They will make 
a five-hour stopover in Bolivia on 20 March en route to Buenos 
Aires, Argentina. 
  Union leader Toribio Hinojosa said: "Mr. Gore's visit would 
be fine if he came to make a commitment to stop the forced coca 
eradication but we know he comes to increase pressure for the 
continuation of coca destruction." 
  The FIAT issued a communique in which they say the U.S. 
Government and vice president are "enemies of the sacred coca, 
and he is coming to eradicate it." 
  The greatest advantage will be taken from Gore's five-hour 
stay in Bolivia on his way to Argentina. Official reports state 
that he will be declared guest of honor in La Paz and Santa 
Cruz, even though he will not visit those cities. 
  Local officials are preparing a folk music show of the 
Altiplano and the tropical regions, and will give him presents. 
  During the 45-minute flight from La Paz to Santa Cruz, Gore 
will meet with Bolivian President Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada and 
his Bolivian counterpart Victor Hugo Cardenas. 
  Vice President Gore will also meet the Bolivian Government 
economic team in the Santa Cruz Viru-Viru Airport. 
  The Bolivian Government and the U.S. Embassy are working on 
the final details of Gore's arrival in the midst of strict 
security measures at the airports of the two cities. 
  The highway from La Paz to Lake Titicaca will be closed for 
about three hours and security will be strengthened at the two 
airports to guarantee Gore's security. 
  Gore will leave the La Paz El Alto international airport, 
located about 15 km from downtown La Paz, for Achica Abajo -- by 
Lake Titicaca -- which is the town where Bolivian Vice President 
Cardenas was born. He will return to the airport and leave for 
Santa Cruz. 
  The signing of several agreements between the two 
governments 
was also announced and, if time allows, a brief meeting with the 
media at the Santa Cruz airport will be held. 

