Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ignacio Gutierrez A.] </F>
  [Text] Tomas Colsa McGregor, one of the most wanted drug 
traffickers, and an ex-assistant to the Arellano Felix brothers, 
was captured yesterday in Jalisco by agents from the Office of 
the Attorney General of the Republic [PGR]. The federal 
detectives also arrested four accomplices of the Arellano Felix 
brothers. 
  Through an operation concluding an exhaustive investigation, 
the elusive gangster was caught in a safe house located in the 
town of Zapopan, where he was hiding. When arrested, he had 360 
grams of cocaine in his possession. 
  According to the authorities themselves, Jalisco, Yucatan, 
Quintana Roo, and Sinaloa States were the main areas for this 
criminal group's activities. They stressed that the 
investigations are being continued to establish the 
ramifications of these activities, thought to extend not only to 
the United States, but also to Central and South America. 
  Based on Colsa McGregor's criminal record, he was engaged 
for 
several years in drug dealing operations with various 
organizations and individuals involved in that activity. The 
records underscore his links with the Arellano Felix brothers 
and, previously, with Miguel Angel Felix Gallardo himself, the 
drug "capo" currently confined at the high security prison of 
Almoloya de Juarez, Mexico State. 
  According to the PJF [Federal Judicial Police] report, after 
completing the investigation that uncovered the drug trafficker, 
they set up an operation resulting in his capture, through the 
respective search warrant for entering the premises where he was 
hiding. They were located at 41 Circuito de San Bernardino 
Street, in the Colinas de San Javier subdivision. 
  Also captured with Tomas Colsa McGregor were Jose Angulo 
Hernandez, Jesus Porfirio Diaz Medina, Sergio Edmundo Gomez 
Partida, and Salim Hamden Cano. All were placed at the disposal 
of the agent of the Federal Public Prosecutor's Office. 
  The PGR announced that the investigation would be continued 
to probe the ramifications of the criminal organization headed 
by Tomas Colsa McGregor. 

