BFN 

<F P=106> ["ban"-signed report: "Bonn Resumes Supply of Weapons to </F>
Turkey"] 
  [Text] Bonn, 4 May -- The German-Turkish disharmony, 
including the impact on the internal situation in the countries, 
has apparently been settled. The Federal Government yesterday 
announced that, after examining the documents presented, there 
is no evidence to prove that Turkey is using German weapons in 
the fight against the Kurds, thus violating the agreement with 
Germany. Thus, the suspended deliveries will be resumed in May, 
Foreign Minister Kinkel (Free Democratic Party of Germany) 
announced after a meeting of the ministers involved at the 
Chancellor's Office. Apart from 15 Phantom aircraft and a 
reconnaissance plane, ammunition, armored cars, and quencher 
cars from the stocks of the National People's Army, as well as 
spare parts, are to be supplied. The aid program involving 
approximately 300 million German marks will expire at the end of 
the year. Turkish Foreign Minister Cetin assured Kinkel on the 
telephone and in a letter that the weapons are only being used 
for the agreed purposes. Meanwhile, it has become clear that no 
legal consequences will be drawn from the violent Kurdish 
demonstrations in Germany at the end of March. A report by the 
Interior Ministry that Chancellor Helmut Kohl (Christian 
Democratic Union) commissioned for the end of April was not yet 
available yesterday. Negotiations with Turkey on the treatment 
of deported Kurds have not yet been concluded. The view that is 
beginning to prevail is that existing laws are not sufficient. 
  After visits to Turkey, human rights organizations and 
politicians from the Greens Party handed over photographs to the 
government to prove that the Turkish military is using weapons 
and tanks provided by Germany within the framework of German 
defense aid to Ankara against the Kurds. As a result, the 
Federal Government suspended the weapons supplies until the 
accusations could be further researched. The materiel was 
checked at the Defense Ministry. Government Spokesman Vogel 
announced, however, that witnesses were questioned and no 
investigations were carried out in Turkey. The suspicions are 
completely unfounded, he stated. The weapons and tanks that can 
be seen in the pictures are also supplied by other states to 
Turkey or are being produced there under license. Also, they 
were not photographed while in use. Kinkel announced yesterday: 
"The result of the examination is that the use of the weapons 
in breach of the agreement cannot be proven on the basis of the 
photographs. The Federal Government has decided to resume the 
deliveries stipulated in the international agreement on NATO 
defense aid, materiel aid, and special armament aid with 
Turkey." Voigt, the foreign policy expert of the Social 
Democratic Party of Germany, has described the government's 
behavior as "scandalous." Kinkel's statement is a "derision" of 
the victims of attacks by the Turkish Army. Kinkel knows that 
the situation there has not changed. Greens Deputy Vera 
Wollenberger accused the government of contributing to the 
Kurds' suffering with its exoneration of the Turkish Government. 
She accused the Federal Government of "deceiving the public." 
  The conference of the federal and provincial interior 
ministers on Thursday and Friday [5-6 May] will once again 
discuss the treatment of Kurds who have committed criminal 
offenses in Germany. Kohl asked Interior Minister Manfred 
Kanther (Christian Democratic Union) to propose consequences 
from the March protests at the highways by the end of April and 
to suggest amendments to the aliens law if need be. It was 
considered unlikely among the government that such a report will 
be available at the cabinet session next week. During a meeting 
of the coalition, during which internal security and the policy 
vis-a-vis foreigners were discussed, the participants realized 
that there will not be enough time before the elections to 
tackle new controversial issues on which the Christian 
Democratic Union [CDU] and Free Democratic Party of Germany 
[FDP] might disagree. After the CDU/Christian Social Union 
rejected the FDP's wishes for dual citizenship, the FDP is 
likely to reject other aspects of the aliens law until the 
elections. 
  Talks with Turkey on a deportation agreement have not 
progressed very far. Germany wanted Turkey to guarantee respect 
for the human rights of deported Kurds and to promise that the 
deported Kurds will not be sentenced to death. Initial 
considerations concerning the form and the contents of such an 
agreement were voiced within the Federal Government. However, 
formal talks have so far not been held with Turkey. 

