Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Mayor Huang Ju's Congratulatory Letter to the Shanghai </F>
Conference for Promoting Computer Use of and Developing the 
Computer Industry"] 
  [Text] Comrades: 
  At this important time, when all sectors in Shanghai are 
carrying out the "Decision" made by the Third Plenary Session of 
the 14th CPC Central Committee and going all out to establish a 
socialist market economic system, the holding of this meeting to 
promote computer use and develop the computer industry in 
Shanghai fully demonstrates the earnest expectations and firm 
determination of the municipal party committee and municipal 
government to speed up the development of the computer industry. 
I wish to take this opportunity to express my warm 
congratulations to this meeting [of the Shanghai Municipal Party 
Committee and the municipal government called on 1 February to 
promote the use of computers and the development of the computer 
industry]! I am convinced this meeting will go down in history 
as a turning point for the development of the computer industry 
in Shanghai. 
  The success Shanghai has achieved, from developing its first 
computer to having established a computer industry and trained a 
relatively strong contingent of computer scientists and 
technicians, embodies the painstaking efforts of several 
generations in Shanghai. Aside from exploring and developing new 
technologies, the significance of the development of computers 
rests even more on promoting the use of computers and developing 
the computer industry so that, like Shanghai's automobile and 
telecommunications industries, our computer industry will also 
become a major industry and a new benchmark for industrial 
growth. This is the urgent task confronting us today. 
  "Science and technology are the primary productive forces." 
As one of today's high-tech industries, the computer 
information industry is the foundation and prerequisite of all 
high-tech industries. The development of this industry and the 
widespread use of computers will significantly expedite the 
progress of economic, technological, and social development. 
Shanghai's economic revitalization has everything to do with 
the use of computers and the development of its computer 
industry. The rapid growth of the computer industry will 
certainly and significantly expedite Shanghai's economic 
take-off and prosperity. Only when we understand the role 
played by the computer industry from such a strategic 
perspective can we make the firmest determination to surmount 
the toughest problems, explore new fields, and boost the 
development of this industry like we have done in promoting our 
automobile and telecommunications industries. 
  To promote the use of computers and the development of the 
computer industry, we need a sense of urgency and a strong 
awareness of market needs. No matter how advanced its 
technology may be, an industry will not have the solid basis it 
needs for development if society does not need it. Thus, to 
promote the use of computers and the development of the computer 
industry, Shanghai must do away with its traditional way of 
thinking and must face the market, produce according to the 
guidance provided by the market, and open the market with 
products. The computer market in China is potentially broad. 
We must take steps to promote the use of computers in the 
banking, postal and telecommunications, commercial and trading, 
industrial, and construction sectors -- in which the use of 
computers is extensive -- beginning with the development of the 
software they need. We must create a new situation for the 
development of the computer industry by helping people see both 
the real significance of computer use and the enormous 
capabilities of computers in improving efficiencies and 
achieving higher returns. Only when market needs provide 
guidance and pull can the development of the computer industry 
have a bright future and boundless hopes. 
  Like other high-tech industries, the development of the 
computer industry also rests with the training of proficient 
personnel. While the development, management, and use of 
computers requires a large number of highly proficient 
scientists, developers, and managers as well as promoters and 
sellers, promoting the use of computers also rests with the 
quality of the people in the country. Thus, when we promote the 
use of computers and develop the computer industry, we must also 
attach great importance to training proficient personnel. 
Efforts in this regard include hiring specialists from abroad, 
training people to use computers, and sponsoring sizable 
educational programs to train computer users. Only by doing this 
can we ensure the development of Shanghai's computer industry 
continues to escalate. 
  Comrades, the situation in Shanghai today is both gratifying 
and pressing. Let us act immediately and strive to make 
Shanghai's computer industry into another pillar industry which 
can further expedite Shanghai's economic development. 
  [Signed] Huang Ju, mayor of Shanghai 
  [Dated] 1 February 1994 

