Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Cristina D. C. Pastor] </F>
  [Text] The Senate yesterday paved the way for an easier 
entry of investments from multilateral financial institutions 
(MFIs) and projects from neighbors in the Association of 
Southeast Asian Nations after it approved an amendment to the 
Omnibus Investment Code that will lift the nationality 
requirement provision. 
  The amendment will require the Board of Investments (BoI) to 
recommend to the president the lifting of the restriction which 
was, under the existing law, only an option that could be taken 
by the investment regulating agency. 
  In a statement, Senator Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, chairperson 
of the committee on economic affairs, said the nationality 
requirement could be suspended in preferred investment areas 
where BoI- registered MFIs could come in like manufacturing and 
processing of textiles, petrochemicals, and ventures needed for 
industrialization. 
  The amendment said the suspension, which covered ASEAN 
projects, investments of ASEAN nationals or MFIs, or other 
international complementation schemes for particular products 
will allow the country "... to take advantage of economies of 
scale" from among ASEAN neighbors. 
  A statement from the Senate press office said the mandatory 
lifting of the nationality requirement would benefit MFIs like 
the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the United Nations 
Development Programme, which have signified interest in 
investing in the country's development and industrialization. 
Based on the ADB Quarterly Review, ADB made direct equity 
investments last year of $23 million compared with $10.6 million 
in 1992. 
  MFI activities in the country have so far been limited to 
providing financing to government and the private sector for 
development projects. 
  The Senate measure will liberalize the MFIs' operations to 
allow them to participate in specific undertakings. 
  The Senate will also approve today the bill allowing at 
least 
six new foreign banks in the country to establish branches, 
subsidiaries, or buy up to 60 percent equity into existing 
Philippine banks. 
  Senator Raul Roco said the bill, once enacted into law, will 
have the effect of dispersing control within the banking 
industry. He said five big banks dominate the sector by 
controlling more than 50 percent of deposits, while existing 
foreign banks control only 8 percent. 
  "In 1981, when the top five Filipino banks controlled 30 
percent of deposits, the profit spread was 1.8 percent. After 
13 years today, the top five now hold up to 52 percent control 
and their profit spread has risen to 7.3 percent," he said. In 
Senate Bill 1606, the number of foreign banks may increase to 
eight on approval of the president, said Mr. Roco, chairman of 
the Committee on Banks, Financial Institutions, and Currencies. 
  A foreign bank will be allowed to establish up to six 
branches. For the first three branches, there is a "permanently 
assigned capital" of P250 million [Philippine pesos] converted 
in dollars for one major branch, and another P100 million for 
two additional branches. 
  The bill says foreign banks may enter the country through a 
60 percent owned subsidiary or by acquiring 60 percent of an 
existing Philippine bank. 
  The bill, Mr. Roco stressed, has a provision on "equal 
treatment," which states that "any right, privilege or incentive 
enjoyed by foreign banks shall also be extended to the 
Philippine banks." It also allows any listed company to buy 
into any Philippine bank, he said. 
  Also yesterday, the Senate was scheduled to ratify the bill 
proposing amendments to the build-operate-transfer (BOT) law. 
  Senator Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo said Senate Bill 1586 
amending Republic Act 6957, or the BOT law, will make it easier 
for investors to undertake projects under a "climate of minimum 
regulations." The bicameral panel approved the compromise bill 
yesterday. 
  The Senate yesterday lined up for approval a number of bills 
certified by the president. These bills have to be approved on 
final reading today or tomorrow before Congress goes on its 
Lenten break: 
  -- Senate Bill 1127 or "An act increasing the stocks 
transactions tax amending certain sections of the National 
Internal Revenue Code"; 
  -- Senate Bill 1237 or "An act authorizing immediate 
disconnection of electrical service as sanction for illegal use 
of electricity"; 
  -- Senate Bill 1539 or "An act providing for a six-year 
public works and highways infrastructure program"; and, 
  -- Senate Bill 1630 or "An act restructuring the value-added 
tax system to widen its tax base and enhance its administration." 

