BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Evald Kessariyskiy] </F>
  [Text] Nizhniy Novgorod, 27 Jun -- Vladimir Zhirinovskiy, 
leader of the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia [LDRP] faction 
in the State Duma, who is visiting here, is today at the center 
of another political scandal. He sat himself in the chair of 
the governor of Nizhniy Novgorod oblast to use the government 
communications telephone to notify the president's secretariat, 
the government, and the Russian Federal Counterintelligence 
Service of the obstruction he and 11 other members of an LDPR 
parliamentary delegation encountered during their visit to the 
town. 
  In a statement for the press, the visitor from Moscow 
accused 
the local authorities of nothing less than "gross violations of 
the law on the status of deputies and of the Russian 
Constitution." "Yesterday, at the airport," the LDPR leader 
said, "we were met by pickets, bussed in just for the plane's 
arrival. There was heckling from the crowd, not only directed 
at us, but also at the president. It transpired that the 
demonstrators did not have permission to stage a picket, yet the 
hecklers were led by an assistant of the Nizhniy Novgorod 
governor." 
  Zhirinovskiy expressed dissatisfaction that his delegation 
"was not given an escort group," as a result of which it was 
forced "to travel in the town at its own risk." He said that 
planned meetings with workers at the "GAZ" joint-stock company 
and the machine-building works, and also in the town of 
Dzerzhinsk, had been cancelled. An air balloon bearing the 
words "Zhirinovskiy -- No Way!" floated in the sky above the 
Volga. 
  The LDPR leader alleged that he tried to meet the governor, 
[Boris] Nemtsov, but without success. Other leaders of the 
administration also were unwilling to meet the visitor from 
Moscow. When he did eventually decide "to inform Sergey Filatov, 
Yuriy Yarov and Sergey Stepashin about these events," people 
"threw a monkey wrench -- they switched off the government 
communications line." Zhirinovskiy called this antistate 
activity, which is taking place "at a point when political 
parties and movements have actually achieved a fragile accord, 
by signing that document [as received]." 
  He said he intends very soon to raise the issue of the 
immediate dismissal of governor Nemtsov from his post at the 
State Duma. 

