BFN 

<F P=106> ["Text" of speech by Army General Raul Castro Ruz, minister </F>
of the Revolutionary Armed Forces, commemorating Militiamen's 
Day and the 33d anniversary of the proclamation of the socialist 
nature of the Revolution; in Guantanamo on 16 April -- recorded] 
  [Text] For many years we have observed in La Cabana 
Fortress in Havana the 16 April ceremony commemorating the 
proclamation -- on the eve of the victorious Bay of Pigs 
struggle -- of the socialist nature of our Revolution and 
Militiamen's Day. 
  Today, we want to observe this occasion at Mariana Grajales 
Revolution Square in Guantanamo, at the foot of the monument to 
the mother of the fatherland, an exemplary woman who wrote a 
unique epic for her people with her life and that of her sons, 
whom she fed with the milk of heroism. 
  What better square than this one, where Mariana calls on us 
to kneel and swear to defend the liberty of the fatherland or to 
die in the process, and where she orders us to stand and head 
for the rebel encampment, as she did with all her sons, even the 
youngest? 
  What better region than this, the heroic east, birthplace of 
our revolutions: Guantanamo Province, where there is no beach, 
path, valley, or mountain that does not deserve glorious mention 
in our national history? 
  For the glorious deed of the Mambi rebels in last century's 
three wars against the colonial yoke; 
  For the most tenacious and successful struggle by peasants 
for land at Realengo 18 [20 degrees 18 minutes north 75 degrees 
27 minutes west]; 
  For the solid support it gave to our guerrilla columns to 
found and expand the 2d Frank Pais Eastern Front by giving us 
their better sons, giving us ammunition and all sorts of 
supplies, surrounding us for nine months with their 
uncompromising support until the 1 January triumph; 
  For its contribution to the Bay of Pigs victory. Perhaps not 
enough has been said about the fact that the mercenaries sent to 
land on the coast of Baracoa to open a front to divert us from 
the main thust of the attack did not dare to set foot on 
Guantanamo soil where a people, in arms, alert, and committed to 
annihilate them, waited. 
  Faithful to their tradition of rising to the occasion in the 
face of danger and adversity, the people of Guantanamo, under 
government and party leadership headed by Comrade Juan Carlos 
Robinson, faced with courage, energy, and efficiency the 
devastating effects of the November floods. With the solidarity 
of the entire nation and the support of the state, they quietly 
made their repairs. Here, nature's catastrophe has served as an 
incentive to work rather than as an excuse for failing to meet 
production plans or defense tasks. 
  We are gathered here to promote 33 outstanding militiamen 
and 
reservists from this province who represent the 33 years that 
separate us from the heroic Bay of Pigs and who represent all 
those throughout the nation who are today receiving this well 
deserved reward. 
  We are also gathered here to hand over replicas of Maximo 
Gomez's glorious machete -- as in previous years -- to a group 
of writers, journalists, artists, and cultural institutions on 
behalf of the Revolutionary Armed Forces [FAR] in recognition of 
their significant contributions to strengthening the nation's 
combat capabilities and our people's patriotic and 
internationalist awareness. 
  It is a great satisfaction, in keeping with the Council of 
State decree, to reward the heroic fighters and civilian workers 
of the border guard brigade who, in fulfilling their duties, 
many times have risked their lives or been mutilated in the mine 
fields bordering the territory illegally occupied by the United 
States. On those who have fallen while carrying out this 
dangerous mission -- First Lieutenant Arturo Ruiz Martinez and 
soldiers Raul Milanes Labrada, Roberto Navarro Hernandez, and 
Wilbert Vasquez Gamboa -- today we posthumously confer the 
Antonio Maceo order. 
  They offered up their budding lives, these brave youths, 
worthy followers of soldiers Ramon Lopez Pena and Luis Ramirez 
Lopez, who decades ago lost their lives to treacherous bullets 
fired from the other side of the fence. The sacrifice of those 
who have been wounded or forever mutilated; the hard test of 
thousands of soldiers and officers who, throughout the 30 years 
of the existence of the border guard unit, have repeatedly 
guarded the fatherland, risking danger and suffering the 
pressures of the front line -- all this is part of the high 
price we are forced to pay by the existence of that foreign 
military base on a portion of our soil. 
  We have said and reiterated, from the very triumph of the 
Revolution, that this base was imposed on the Cuban people by 
force, and we demand that it be dismantled and returned to Cuba. 
Its presence, in disregard of our people's manifest will and the 
requests of their legitimate government, violates every norm of 
international law. It is a brutal act of arrogance by the empire. 
  Today, from a military point of view, this base is obsolete 
and constitutes an unnecessary expense that must be borne by the 
U.S. taxpayer. 
  To reduce its uncontrollable military budget, the United 
States has closed dozens of military bases in the United States 
and abroad. Nevertheless, it maintains this one as a source of 
constant provocation against and for the humiliation of Cuba. 
  We will never relinquish our sovereign right to that part of 
our island, of our national territory. 
  We reiterate today what we said a little over a year ago in 
this same square: There is not one day on which we are not 
reminded that we have a dagger in our country's side, just a few 
kilometers south of where we are now standing. We have never 
lost the hope of someday removing this dagger in a peaceful and 
civilized manner in accordance with the principles of 
international law. 
  As everyone knows, our state's social system, as well as our 
military doctrine, dictates that we will never become the 
aggressor who fires the first shot. 
  Everything we do to strengthen our defense is precisely 
directed toward making any aggression against Cuba so costly as 
to make it a deterrent by making war prohibitively expensive and 
illogical and, at the same time, toward securing our people's 
peaceful and creative endeavors. For Cuba, avoiding war is 
equivalent to achieving victory. 
  As long as we fail to achieve the legitimate and unwavering 
aspiration of recovering the territory now occupied by this 
base, our position is to avoid incidents along the line of 
demarcation between this area and the rest of the island. 
  As we stated several weeks ago, last year and this: A 
climate 
of tranquillity has prevailed on both sides of the fence, and 
our goal is to continue doing everything we can to maintain this 
atmosphere. 
  This is the reason we have taken and will continue to take 
every measure required to prevent any foolish endeavor on the 
part of those who try to leave Cuba by this route. 
  To try to cross the densely mined field on both sides of the 
fence, attempting to evade our checkpoints and patrols, is 
madness and, at the same time, an act of provocation against 
Cuba's security. 
  Two armies are deployed face to face on either side of the 
fence. Given the United States' permanent hostility toward our 
nation and its illegal occupation of this part of Cuba, these 
two armies are not precisely friendly armies. 
  It is evident that such illegal departure attempts, the 
crossing of the demarcation line, could result in incidents of 
war of unpredictable consequences. 
  If it were the will of the U.S. Government, it would prevent 
those attempts, once and for all, by declaring that the illegal 
entry of Cubans wishing to emigrate to the United States will 
not be tolerated. It could also prevent the tragic deaths of 
those who drown in the Florida Straits in their attempts to 
reach U.S. shores on frail rafts or vessels by not welcoming as 
heroes the so- called raft people [balseros] or automatically 
giving them the residence status not extended to any other 
foreigner in the United States. However, we know U.S. 
immigration policy with regard to the Cuban people is to deny 
the majority of the visa requests presented to the U.S. 
Interests Section in Havana, in order to encourage those illegal 
and dangerous departures and thereby deliberately boost the 
smear campaign against Cuba. This policy is very contradictory 
when contrasted to that for Haitians in Caribbean waters, or 
Mexicans, or Central Americans at the Mexican border. It is so 
cynical as to be indefensible. Sooner or later, it will have to 
be changed. 
  We are opening our doors wider every day so that anyone who 
wants to try his luck in a capitalist regime can do so through 
normal and legal means. We have always believed, and the 
commander in chief has said many times in the last 30 years, 
that socialism is a social system that can be built only through 
voluntary efforts, with awareness. 
  Ours is, precisely, a system radically different and 
opposed to capitalism. Our creed is to eliminate the 
exploitation of men by men and to give men true liberty and 
human status. Therefore, for those who dislike socialism and 
prefer capitalism -- in the belief that in that system, where 
men prey on men, they can gnash their way up and fulfill their 
personal ambitions -- we are not blocking the departure of 
selfish persons, who think in that way, to any capitalist 
country of their choosing. 
  I have said that we will do everything in our power to 
maintain a situation of normalcy and calm at the line of 
demarcation. We will therefore prevent, by every possible means, 
attempts to leave Cuba through that dangerous military area. 
  In order to make this policy viable, the courts have begun 
strict implementation of our laws against those arrested for 
trying illegally to reach the naval base and who are therefore 
committing an extremely grave crime by endangering national 
security. 
  It is fitting to remember the nonpenal treatment issued by 
the authorities in most of these cases where the persons had no 
previous record, and the generous release that made it possible 
for some of them to try again. 
  We warn those who may try to emigrate by this means not to 
run the fatal mistake of choosing to do so. This carries not 
only the risk of a court trial, but also the more ominous risk 
of death or mutilation from a mine exploding on either side of 
the demarcation line. 
  With the same passion that with we request the return of 
that 
part of our territory occupied by the naval base, we are aware 
that the officers, noncommissioned officers, and soldiers who 
guard the border in rotation are not directly responsible for 
this usurpation of our sovereignty. We are not moved by any 
feelings of personal hate against those soldiers who have been 
sent by their government to fulfill such a disgraceful mission. 
Even less could we harbor any animosity against their families, 
spouses and children, who are part of the American population 
living on base. 
  If the United States were to unleash a war against Cuba, no 
matter under what pretext, we would wage a no-holds-barred fight 
against the enemy in whatever corner of Cuba they may be. The 
Guantanamo Naval Base would, of course, be no exception. In this 
territory, we have, as we said here last year, everything needed 
to neutralize this enemy enclave. [applause] 
  In this case, as long as the aggression does not originate 
in 
this region of Guantanamo and the lapsed time is not used to 
reinforce the naval base, we are willing to allow the necessary 
time to evacuate civilians -- the spouses and children of the 
personnel stationed there -- from the base. 
  The Mambi army and their worthy heirs, the rebel army, have 
never tainted their weapons by attacking women, children, the 
defenseless elderly. The FAR will not do this either, for it 
cherishes the military honor and humane traditions of its 
predecessors. 
  Our historic legacy is to fight fiercely for the 
independence 
of the fatherland, under highly disadvantageous conditions, 
against the enemy; to take their weapons; to respect prisoners 
of war; and to help injured prisoners. 
  As Marti said of Mariana Grajales: Was she not steadfast 
during the entire war, surrounded by her children? Did she not 
encourage her compatriots to fight? And later treat the injured, 
Cuban or Spanish? 
  This is how Cuban revolutionaries from every period act. 
  We are proud that never, in Cuba, has a prisoner been 
tortured or mistreated; nor is there a single missing person, 
thousands of whom are still being sought by Latin American women 
and grandmothers. 
  Comrades, our people feel gratitude and admiration toward 
their brave sons, the members of the border guard unit. The FAR 
are proud of the valor, dedication, and discipline of this unit 
deployed on the front line. 
  By presenting the Antonio Maceo order today to Brigadier 
General Jose Solar Hernandez, who for over a decade led this 
region with exemplary dedication and efficiency, we render 
homage to his personal performance and work, the high level of 
readiness, and the high morale attained by the force of which 
the border guard is part. 
  This order is also granted to Major Jose Alvarez Beliz, 
chief 
of the engineer battalion, who on more that 20 occasions has 
entered the mine fields and whose most recent act of courage was 
the rescue of [soldier Elmis] Brooks [Chivas], where he was also 
injured. 
  Luckily, his injuries were not serious, and he was able to 
retrieve his injured comrade from the mine field. 
  By bestowing this order on Lieutenant Elmis Brooks Chivas, 
we 
are acknowledging not only his personal courage, demonstrated in 
many highly dangerous acts, but also the deep human sensitivity 
that moved him to risk his life, a plethora of virtues, to 
rescue the vacuous lives of a group of dumbbells, as generously 
described by comrade Elmis. With this award we are also exalting 
his decision to rejoin his beloved unit and the risky job of 
combat engineer. Young men like Brooks, who come from the most 
humble sectors of our people and are forged by the Revolution, 
strengthen our belief that the next generation is ready. 
[applause] 
  In addition to the Antonio Maceo order to which I have 
referred, the Calixto Garcia medal for valor is presented to 13 
other comrades: several officers, noncommissioned officers, 
soldiers, and one FAR civilian worker. Most of them have been 
mutilated or injured. All of them have on numerous occasions 
performed heroic acts. Two-thirds of them are still in active 
military service in this brigade or other units. 
  To all the comrades awarded today: We reiterate our 
gratitude 
and most heartfelt congratulations on behalf of the FAR and 
relay to you a warm embrace and salute from the commander in 
chief. [applause] 
  To those who gave their lives for the fatherland and 
nurtured 
with their noble blood the undefeatable land defended by the 
Guantanamo forces, we dip our combat flags and swear before 
Mariana that we will be ever deserving followers of her example; 
and before her we shout, louder than ever: Viva Free Cuba! 
[Crowd: Viva!] [applause] 

