BFN 

<F P=106> [By Amy Liu] </F>
  [Text] A farmer from Guangdong province was shot in the 
leg yesterday after scores of angry villagers clashed with 
Public Security Bureau officers over land compensation. The 
man, one of the protesters, attempted to stop the officers from 
arresting villagers for setting up an anti-corruption group 
following a row about land compensation. Villagers set up the 
anti-corruption group last year after complaints of official 
corruption in land compensation. 
  During the incident, a public security officer fired two 
warning shots over the heads of the protesters, one of the 
bullets ricocheted and hit the victim in the leg. The shooting 
occurred at about 5 am, when officers raided the homes of 
several residents of Xia Yong town, in Huiyang county, Guangdong 
province. No one was arrested then, but seven people were 
detained at 10 am when they went to the town's Public Security 
Bureau to demand the release of fellow villagers. 
  Witnesses said the protesters had surrounded the bureau's 
offices in a bid to bargain for fair compensation. Some of the 
farmers, armed with weapons, broke windows. Local police 
deployed a large number of officers at the scene. No fresh 
incidents of violence have been reported. 
  Huiyang is an area of Guangdong which has attracted a lot of 
overseas funds to develop high-rise residential properties. 
There has been a property boom in some parts of China in recent 
years. 
  Local authorities, in cooperation with overseas investors, 
have turned real estate development into a lucrative business, 
but disputes have arisen over compensation for people whose land 
is sold to developers. In some cities, such as Shanghai, the 
cost of resettlement rose by up to 40 percent last year. This 
had led to a tightening of regulations governing land sales. 
  In a move to cool the overheated property market, the 
Chinese 
government early this year announced a land-appreciation tax of 
between 53 and 73 percent of the improved value of a developed 
plot of land. 

