Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Lima, 10 Jan (EFE) -- The human rights situation in 
Peru will be one of the main topics Alexander Watson, U.S. 
assistant secretary of state for inter-American affairs, will 
discuss during his visit to Lima next week. Meanwhile, friction 
between the two countries continues over this issue. 
  Opposition lawmaker Manuel Moreyra said today "serious 
difficulties exist" between Peru and the United States over the 
human rights issue. These difficulties, according to Moreyra, 
are reflected in the the United States' freezing of $105 million 
which it should have given Peru as a member of the second 
Support Group on the condition that Lima had to show an 
improvement in human rights in its territory. 
  Peruvian President Alberto Fujimori stated on Sunday he 
hopes 
the "United States will keep the pledge made when the Support 
Group was created, because that $105 million has not been 
disbursed yet." 
  In this respect, Fujimori added, "I hope to meet all of the 
goals established by international organizations." The Peruvian 
president confirmed Watson will visit Lima 18-21 January "surely 
to engage in a direct review." He added that Watson must not 
only review the human rights situation but also that of civil 
and social rights, as well as Peru's right to achieve peace in 
the face of the political violence that has raged for more than 
13 years. 
  Political observers indicated today that besides the topic 
of 
human rights, Watson, who served as ambassador in Peru from 1986 
to 1989, will discuss matters dealing with possible ways to 
improve the war on drug trafficking, progress in the nation's 
democratic institutional life following the "self-inflicted" 
coup of 5 April 1992, and advances to make the judicial branch 
more independent. 
  On this last point, Justice Minister Fernando Vega Santa 
Gadea today said, "we are trying to enforce respect for human 
rights as much as possible" in Peru. Talking to local radio 
station Radio Programas del Peru, Vega Santa Gadea admitted he 
had refused to meet with the Goldman Commission from the United 
States, which investigated the human rights situation in Peru 
and its judicial system. 
  The commission, which arrived in Peru in early December, was 
chaired by lawyer Roberto Goldman of Washington's American 
University, asked to meet with the minister through Charles 
Brayshaw, the U.S. charge d'affaires in Lima. 
  Vega Santa Gadea stated today that Brayshaw's letter "was 
unacceptable to a sovereign country, and he added "I do not let 
anyone come to tell me how I must run our justice system" -- 
something that constitutes meddling in the internal affairs of 
the country. 
  In August 1993, the Goldman Commission visited Peru and 
drafted a 150-page report, which the business newspaper GESTION 
described today, citing government sources, as "totally and 
absolutely biased" and full of preconceptions. 
  Meanwhile, the Peruvian congressional Human Rights Committee 
has drafted a report on 12 cases of human rights violations 
cited by the U.S. State Department, which range from mass 
murders in the country's jails in 1986, during the government of 
Alan Garcia (1985-90), to the murders of residents in the town 
of Cayara (Ayacucho Department) in 1988. It also includes the 
death of 16 peasants in Iquicha (Ayacucho) in 1990, the murders 
of journalist Hugo Bustios (1988) and Fernando Mejia, a lawyer 
of peasant communities, and others. 

