BFN 

  [Text] Production of opium in Thailand has fallen from 150 
to 20 tons a year, the secretary-general of the Office of the 
Narcotics Control Board claimed yesterday. 
  Pol Gen [Police General] Chawalit Yotmani, speaking at a 
panel discussion on "Drugs As the World's Problem," claimed the 
reduction reflects the efficiency and hard work of the police in 
conducting raids on a large number of opium plantations. 
  But to reduce opium production further, the demand for drugs 
must be reduced, Pol Gen Chawalit said. 
  To suppress drugs in Northern Thailand, the government must 
speed up the development of the region as the hub of the 
Economic Quadrangle. 
  Convenient transportation resulting from development will 
help the police suppress drugs more effectively, he said. 
  If people have better jobs, better financial status and 
better standard of living, they will never grow opium or get 
involved with drugs. 
  Warm family relationships will help protect children from 
drugs, he suggested. 
  Thailand consumes about 40 tons of opium a year, half of 
which is produced locally and half brought from neighbouring 
countries, especially Burma and Laos. 
  Thailand has asked the Burmese government to tackle its 
drugs 
problem, without success because that government's battles 
against rebel minority groups have prevented it from 
concentrating on narcotics. 
  He said sentences for people involved in drugs in Thailand 
are lighter than those of other countries. 
  In Malaysia, those guilty of possession of 15 grammes of 
heroin face capital punishment, while in Thailand the figure is 
100 grammes. 
  The Narcotics Control Board's assistant director-general, 
Pol 
Lt Gen [Police Lieutenant General] Kowit Phakdiphum, pointed out 
during the discussion that the main production point is in the 
Golden Triangle. 
  Most drugs delivered abroad, especially to the United 
States, 
pass through the region from neighbouring countries, adding to 
the number of drug addicts in Thailand, Pol Lt Gen Kowit said. 
  He cited a police report which estimated that about 2,700 
tons of opium were produced in the Economic Quadrangle area last 
year, 70 per cent of which was produced in Burma, 20 per cent in 
Laos and 10 per cent in Thailand. 
  The work of combating the narcotics trade is an "unending 
job," he said. Police are unable to arrest the big drug 
traffickers. Most traffickers arrested are small fry. 
  It takes a lot of police time to gather sufficient evidence 
to arrest the big fish, and most of them are "influential 
people". 
  It is a risky job for police to carry out raids without the 
help of their leaders, he said. 
  It is necessary to beef up the law to give police more 
responsibility and authority to deal with drug traffickers, he 
said. 
  The initial anti-money laundering law put to the cabinet by 
Deputy Prime Minister Amnuai Wirawan will help the authorities 
deal with drug traffickers but it must be handled carefully as 
it may affect innocent businessmen, he said. 
  The tax system can also help check the sources and amount of 
money suspected to have come from the drugs business. 
  Mr Pakon Thawisin, executive director of Thai Thanu Bank Co 
Ltd, said he will co-operate with police if there is a law 
authorizing them to inspect the bank accounts of suspects. 
  Such a law should include measures to protect bankers from 
being sued for failing to respect client confidentiality, Mr 
Pakon said. 
  He said the forms of investment in Thailand are different 
from those of foreign countries because people use more cash 
here. It is not easy to check on what kinds of investment they 
are really making. 
  Any money-laundering bill should be drawn up 
comprehensively, 
because honest businessmen could be affected. 
  The president of Chiang Rai Chamber of Commerce, Dr 
Thanomsak 
Seriwityasawat, said the province has great potential in many 
investment fields. 
  All relevant provincial authorities are working hard to 
develop the province as a gateway to Indochina. 
  He said one way of tackling the drugs problem is to develop 
the province's economic growth, to which the tourist industry is 
acknowledged as an important contributor. 

