Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["News Analysis" by Wang Nan: "Clinton's Initiatives Tough, </F>
Response Divided"] 
  [Text] Washington, January 25 (XINHUA) -- It was the warm 
and prolonged applause in the House Chamber that greeted 
President Bill Clinton's first state of the union address. 
  But after the speech, in the Statuary Hall, the lawmakers' 
response to Clinton's proposal on crime fighting and health care 
reform was divided. 
  The President, addressing the joint session of the Congress, 
outlined his major tasks for 1994, which include tougher 
penalties on criminals and a stronger push for health care and 
welfare reforms. 
  In his 11-minute response, Senate Minority Leader Robert 
Dole 
commented that this idea would "put a mountain of bureaucrats 
between you and your doctor." 
  Dole also said that the administration has damaged its 
credibility on the crime issue by cutting the federal prison 
construction budget by 20 percent. 
  Combining toughness and compassion in his speech, the 
President attempted to energize his setback-loaded one-year 
presidency, which however has gained in popularity. 
  According to the latest polls by ABC News, far ahead of the 
economy, crime posed as the top issue for average Americans, 
reversing the trend only half a year ago. 
  So people found few surprises in Clinton's speech which 
touched briefly on the economy, but was long on community 
policing, tougher penalties for criminals and increased funding 
for drug education. 
  "We cannot renew our country when 13-year-old boys get 
semi-automatic weapons and gun down nine-year-old boys -- just 
for the kick of it," Clinton said. 
  "We cannot renew our country when children are having 
children and the fathers of those children are walking away from 
them as if they don't amount to anything," he added. 
  Ric Fazio, a Democrat from California, said tonight's speech 
showed that Clinton has "begun to reach out and started to 
provide more leadership for the country, which is very risky in 
many ways." 
  "It should be a speech that unifies us, rather than divides 
us," complained Robert Walker, a Republican from Pennsylvania, 
suggesting that the President spent too much time defining the 
Republicans as the bad guys on everything. 
  The Republicans disagreed with Clinton's health care reform, 
saying that the President's plan imposes too much bureaucracy on 
the industry which should be guided by market forces. 
  Clinton's health care proposal, first made last September, 
aims to guarantee health insurance for all Americans by the year 
1996, by way of asking employers to pay up to 80 percent of the 
insurance premiums for their employees. 
  U.S. health care spending consumes 14 percent of the 
country's gross domestic product. Last year, however, it 
witnessed the lowest increase in hospital bills and medical 
technology expenditures in years along with low inflation rates. 
  On crime fighting, most lawmakers agreed that Clinton's 
proposal on tougher penalties, including sending three-time 
offenders into prison for life, would get bipartisan support. 
  "Three strikes and you are out, yes. Community policing, 
yes. Strong measures like banning assault weapons, yes," 
responded Paul Wellstone, a Democrat from Minnesota. 
  Some lawmakers, meanwhile, appeared anxious that since the 
nation's economic recovery was still unstable, much attention 
should be focused on arranging defense conversion and increasing 
employment. 
  "We're not seeing the rebound in our economy," said Olympia 
Snowe, a Republican from Maine. "The President should spend 
much more time on the issue." 
  Predicting 1994 as "a good year" for Clinton, Barbara 
Kennely, a Democrat from Connecticut, appeared worried that "we 
can't do it all because of the deficit." 

