BFN 

<F P=106> [By Xie Yicheng: "Airports Need Renovating To Fuel Industry </F>
Growth"] 
  [Text] Equipping airports with modern facilities is a 
priority for China's booming airline industry, said a senior 
aviation official. 
  Advanced airport equipment, know-how and management skills 
are needed to boost the sector's handling capacity, said Shen 
Yuankang, deputy head of the Civil Aviation Administration of 
China (CAAC), on Wednesday. 
  And this will provide foreign manufacturers with 
opportunities to enter China's rapidly growing market, he said. 
  Shen also announced that CAAC and China's Association for 
Science and Technology will host an international airport 
technology fair in Beijing from October 6-10. 
  "We want to improve aviation ground facilities by drawing 
from the experience of the international airline market and by 
absorbing advanced know-how and equipment," he said. 
  The fair, the first of its kind in China, has been warmly 
welcomed both at home and abroad. Germany has already set up a 
delegation to take part in the event. 
  China's aviation turnover is expected to grow 18 per cent by 
the turn of the century, double the estimated growth of the 
national economy. More than 50 airports have been built or 
renovated across the country over the past few years, but many 
still lack the necessary facilities, Shen said. 
  CAAC plans to renovate and expand the nation's three largest 
airports in Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou to satisfy the 
increased volume predicted for 2000. 
  At the same time, a dozen smaller airports will be upgraded 
and another 20 airports with a handling capacity of 100,000 
passengers will be provided with quality equipment. 
  The projects all require special vehicles, ground facilities 
and manufacturing technology. 
  Telecommunications, navigation, air traffic control and 
meteorological facilities will also get a major boost in a bid 
to improve safety standards and efficiency. 
  Between 1995 and 2000, the government will focus on these 
areas and routes as key points to completely or partially renew 
communications, navigation, radar and air traffic control 
facilities, while experimenting with the satellite orientation 
system. 

