Language: <F P=105> Swedish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Katarina Koivisto: ``Finnish Forestry Acquiring </F>
an Ecological Dimension''] 
  [Text] Finnish forests are growing older all the time and 
forest growth exceeds the amount of timber that is cut. Thus 
there is no reason for concern on this score. 
  But to a large extent the aging Finnish forests are also 
so-called managed forests, forests that have already been 
affected by logging and forest management. These forests lack 
the really old trees, the dead and rotting trees and vegetation 
that many fungi, beetles, mosses, and lichens need for survival. 
  ``We have talked a lot in Finland about forestry and how to 
take care of our managed forests without paying enough attention 
to the ecological dimension and the multiplicity of species,'' 
said chief supervisor Pertti Rassi of the Environment Ministry. 
``Nor has enough research been done in the 1980's on the effect 
efficient forestry has had on the flora and fauna in our 
forests.'' 
  But now there is agreement that ecology must be taken into 
account in forest management and no irreparable damage has yet 
occurred, according to Rassi. He is also chairman of the working 
group that is making an inventory of Finland's old forests. The 
inventory of southern Finland is complete but work is still 
being done on a list of forests in Lapland. 
  There is also a political consensus on the need to protect 
our last natural forests and the government could issue a 
directive as early as next week on the preservation of around 
10,000 hectares of state-owned forestland in southern Finland. 
There is also a need to protect around 5,000 hectares of private 
land, but according to Rassi this will be an expensive operation. 
<H5>  Thickets, Scrub Growth Scarce </H5>
  Around two-thirds of Finland is covered with forests today 
and around 2 percent of the forests are part of a protected 
area. In the southern part of the country only 1 percent of the 
forests are protected; the big protected areas are north of 
Uleaborg. According to Rassi there are also gaps in the mapping 
that was done to determine the protection needs in Lapland south 
of the Arctic Circle and there is a special need for increased 
forest protection in this area. 
  ``We estimate that there are at least 65,000 hectares of 
forest worth protecting in Lapland,'' said Rassi, whose working 
group has now received an expanded mandate to inventory the 
Lapland forests. Most of the projected protection areas are 
located on state-owned land. 
  Even if regional forestry boards were reprimanded for 
logging 
and inadequate protection of their forests, there would be no 
very old forests left on privately owned land, Rassi pointed 
out. Private forests and those belonging to logging companies 
have been managed according to economic principles in order to 
produce the biggest possible yield. 
<H5>  Research Lagging Behind </H5>
  Sound forestry became a common term back in the 1980's, but 
the concept was not given much weight in Finland, according to 
the Environment Ministry supervisor. Biodiversity and the 
multiplicity of species have been lacking in forest research 
here, while in Sweden, for example, it has been included in 
research since the 1970's when they began discussing these 
issues there. 
  The endangered species in Finland that have received the 
most 
publicity and are dying out precisely because of the lack of old 
forests are the white-backed woodpecker and the flying squirrel. 
But there are also other woodpecker species and many kinds of 
beetles and fungi that do not survive in managed forests. There 
is not enough space for species that live solely in thickets or 
in old scrub growth in particular. 
  When considering which areas should be preserved and 
protected, forest age and structure are taken into account, 
Rassi noted. The idea is to make it possible to ensure the 
survival of species in these areas and to provide a sufficiently 
varied forest environment that also contains old and rotting 
trees. 
<H5>  Species Must Now Be Preserved </H5>
  The basis for forest management today, one that all sides 
are 
in relative agreement on, is to prevent other species from dying 
out in our forests, Rassi said. One problem is that as a result 
of the lack of research in the 1980's we lack a clear picture of 
what has actually been lost, he complained. 
  But if we look at research results from Sweden and try to 
apply them here, around 15 percent of Finnish forests should be 
protected to safeguard biodiversity. Preserving the animal 
species that exist today will be a very demanding task, 
according to Rassi. 
  ``To do this, approximately 1 million hectares of forest 
would have to be designated as protected areas and we are not 
yet even halfway there,'' he said. ``There are simply not enough 
economic resources to protect all the forests that should be 
included.'' 
  However, forestry can be managed differently, and in recent 
months the people in charge of practical logging operations in 
the forests have been retrained in accordance with the 
principles of sound forestry, Rassi said. There is also 
agreement on which methods are sound, he said, so these kinds of 
measures should eventually be seen in the forests. One problem 
when one discusses forests and growth is that the time 
perspective is so long that it is hard to see the results of 
various measures in the period of a single generation. 
<H5>  Forests Get Along Without Us </H5>
  ``It will be five or 10 years before we have research 
results 
that tell us what should be done in the forests, even though we 
need the results now,'' Rassi pointed out. ``Much time will be 
lost before the decisions that are made by politicians and the 
authorities get down to the concrete level in the forest, I 
fear.'' 
  The worst that could happen is a failure to prevent more 
species from becoming extinct and a continued decline in the 
number of species that cause irreparable damage. If we get into 
a situation where fungi, lichens, and beetles have disappeared 
and the forest cannot get along without human assistance and 
intervention, we will have caused irreparable damage, he pointed 
out. 
  In the past forests renewed themselves as a result of forest 
fires, for example, and Rassi thinks controlled burning is still 
a good way to renew forests. Unfortunately it is also an 
expensive method, he noted. 
  The age structure in our forests is such that the forests 
are 
now growing older, and efficient forestry and managed forests 
have not caused any damage that cannot be repaired, in Rassi's 
opinion. He is now hoping for a comprehensive inventory that 
also includes private forests. The working group that is 
currently reviewing the forests in Lapland should finish the job 
in 1995. 

