Language: <F P=105> Danish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Morten Pihl: "Europe Declines to Legalize </F>
Drugs"--first paragraph is BERLINGSKE TIDENDE introduction] 
  [Text] Justice Minister Erling Olsen (Social Democrat) has 
rejected the proposal made by Pelle Voigt (Socialist Party) that 
the Baltic countries form a joint maritime police force in order 
to put a stop to the activities of the Russian Mafia in the 
Baltic. 
  ``No'' to legalizing drugs. ``Yes'' to more prevention, 
treatment, and rehabilitation. And ``yes'' to focusing on 
pursuit of drug traffickers and producers rather than drug 
addicts. 
  According to Olsen, this was the prevailing consensus last 
week in Strasbourg at a narcotics summit meeting of European 
justice and health ministers, in which Russia and a number of 
former Soviet republics participated. 
  "The principle theme was that drugs should not be legalized. 
Efforts should be directed primarily toward prevention, 
treatment, and rehabilitation. The objective is, first of all, 
to lessen the demand for drugs and, second, to limit the harm 
they do," said Olsen: 
  "People must be weaned away from the use of drugs, until the 
drug dealers are left standing in the streets like men selling 
Christmas trees on New Year's." 
<H5>  Limit on Control </H5>
  The supply of drugs must be cut off by police action, but, 
according to Olsen, there is a limit to what can be done. 
  "This should not be the only way or be relied upon 
exclusively. You cannot get rid of drugs just by going after 
drug addicts. To a great extent it is the dealers and producers 
that you have to get. We cannot have open drug dealing on the 
streets, but on the other hand, we cannot turn everybody's 
pockets inside out to see whether or not they have drugs. We 
have to go after the big quantities," he said. Together with 
Health Minister Torben Lund (Social Democrat), Olsen will 
introduce a drug initiative later in the month. 
  Olsen would also like to beef up international police 
cooperation as a step in combating the international criminal 
syndicates who deal not only in drugs, but also in other 
activities such as theft. He regards the 500 break-ins in 
Jutland over the last four months are an indication of this. 
  Greater cooperation with Russia and the Baltic countries is 
essential in the battle against the Russian Mafia, the justice 
minister feels. 
  Even so, Olsen does not support Voigt's proposal that the 
Baltic states should form a joint maritime police force in order 
to put a stop to the Russian Mafia's illegal transport of drugs, 
weapons, radioactive material, and people over the Baltic. 
  The problem was brought home last Friday morning when 36 
Tamil asylum-seekers entered the country via Koge in life rafts 
set into the frigid water under cover of darkness. The Tamils 
were very likely shipped out from a harbor in one of the Baltic 
states after a stopover in Moscow. 
<H5>  Cooperation "Here and Now" </H5>
  "Closer political cooperation is an absolute necessity, but 
we do not have time to wait for new organizations to be built 
up. The idea of a maritime Baltic police would be good if it 
could be formed quickly, but I doubt that it can. It would 
become entangled in reports, committees, and what have you. And 
that would simply mean that we lose more time. For this reason, 
I am opting for a `here and now' approach, for strengthening the 
cooperation that already exists with countries such as Russia 
and the Baltic states, as well as for those organizations we 
already have in place," said Olsen, citing Interpol and 
Europol's Drug Unit as examples. 
  It is not the large organizations so much as the personal 
contact between the police corps and an increased exchange of 
information between countries that is needed. This must be done 
here and now, because according to Olsen, the international 
criminal syndicates are knocking on Denmark's door: 
  "For a long time, we were spared much of the criminal 
activity perpetrated by the international syndicates, but they 
are moving nearer our borders. The meeting in Strasbourg 
emphasized to me how important it is that we seriously get to 
work on implementing the proposal I will introduce this summer 
on combating organized crime." 

