BFN 

  [Text] Foreign Minister Velayati, in meetings today with 
Croatian, Bosnian, and Albanian officials on the sidelines of 
the world forum foundation [Crans Montana Forum] in Bucharest, 
discussed the status of Muslims in the Balkan peninsula and the 
latest developments in Gorazde. Here is our correspondent's 
report: 
  [Correspondent] Foreign Minister Velayati, who is in Romania 
to take part in the world forum foundation session, held 
separate meetings today with the Croatian parliamentary speaker 
and the foreign ministers of Bosnia-Herzegovina and Albania at 
the embassy of the Islamic Republic of Iran [IRI] in Bucharest, 
and discussed the situation facing Muslims in the Balkans and 
the latest developments in Gorazde. 
  Bosnia-Herzegovina Foreign Minister Irfan Ljubljankic 
described the latest situation in Gorazde and referred to the 
Serbs' destructive acts of destroying 800 mosques and Islamic 
monuments. He also stressed the effective role of the IRI in 
eliminating the problems facing Muslims in his country. 
Velayati pointed out the sensitivity and sympathy of the people 
of Iran and described the special attention of our country's 
president to the situation in Bosnia as the basis for a new 
round of extensive diplomatic moves by the IRI in international 
forums. 
  Velayati referred to his talks with the UN secretary 
general, 
the Islamic Conference Organization [ICO] secretary general, and 
a number of foreign ministers of Western and Islamic countries, 
and said: The future session of the ICO foreign ministers 
contact group, which will take place at the United Nations at 
Iran's proposal, is a new move to speed up UN Security Council 
decisions in support of the people of Bosnia. 
  Velayati said that he is ready to visit Bosnia-Herzegovina 
in 
the near future. 
  In a meeting with Croatian Parliament Speaker Stjepan Mesic, 
Mesic expressed satisfaction at the trend of talks with Muslims 
and the agreement reached and further explained a proposed 
confederation in the agreement with Bosnia. Velayati expressed 
the hope that recent agreements would last and be respected, and 
called for further expansion of the two countries' ties. 
  During the third meeting today, Albanian Foreign Minister 
Alfred Serreqi briefed Velayati on the inhumane and harassing 
actions taken by Serbia against the Muslim people of Kosovo. 
Velayati expressed sympathy, and said: The IRI will endeavor 
at international forums to promote the removal of the problems 
facing the people of Kosovo, and will continue to support them. 

