CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Former Georgian Defense Minister Tengiz </F>
Kitovani, by CHELYABINSKIY RABOCHIY correspondent K. Voronin, 
under the rubric "Politics": "Georgia's Fate Is in Russia's 
Hands"] 
  [Text] It is not often that guests like this come to our 
city. Even on an unofficial visit, even a former defense 
minister, and not even of America but just of Georgia, still the 
figure of Tengiz Kitovani is significant. 
  In December 1991, the former dissident seized power in 
Tbilisi, drove out Gamsakhurdia, summoned Shevardnadze to 
Georgia, and then, due to disagreement with his policies, 
retired as minister of defense. This is basically all we know 
about Kitovani. Meanwhile, in his homeland the former minister 
is almost a national hero. The Caucasus in general respect men 
of strong character. Dzhokhar Dudayev, Suret Kusseynov, Tengiz 
Kitovani--the Chechens, Azeris, and Georgians take great pride 
in their heroes. Unlike the other two, Kitovani is not now in 
power; in fact, he is in opposition to the official regime. 
  [CHELYABINSKIY RABOCHIY] Tengiz, what brings you to the 
Southern Urals? 
  [Kitovani] My destiny is closely tied to this land. In my 
life as a dissident I learned the Urals well from the inside, 
but I was prevented from admiring your sights by . . . barbed 
wire. Now the goal of my visit is to learn the opinion of the 
Urals' inhabitants--the simple people, the businessmen, and the 
politicians--about Georgia, about prospects for collaboration. I 
would like the people of the Urals to have their say about 
closer ties with my people. 
  I was in Moscow for two months, meeting with deputies of the 
State Duma and members of the Russian government. It seems to 
me, though, that you have to look for the opinion of the real 
Russian people in the provinces, not in the capital. That is why 
I'm here. So much links Georgia the with Urals, with 
Chelyabinsk. Students from Tbilisi used to come here to study, 
and they did their field work in your metallurgical plants. Now 
it is essential that we restore the broken ties. 
<H5>  From the Biography of Tengiz Kitovani </H5>
  By profession, an artist, laureate of many prizes. During 
Khrushchev's "thaw" he got involved in political activity. A 
monarchist by conviction. After the end of the "thaw," in 1969, 
he was sentenced. At the time, dissidents were put in prison on 
criminal articles, so Kitovani was "set up" with a road 
accident: for a harmless DTP [highway traffic accident] he got 
15 years. That was how he ended up in the Urals: Katav-Ivanovsk, 
Zlatoust, Kasli, a "double" special regime prison at the ChMZ 
[not further identified]. . . . In Bakal the hot-headed Georgian 
called the camp warden a "red fascist," so another year was 
tacked on--for disrespect for authority. After serving 13 years, 
Kitovani was freed on an amnesty. He went back to Georgia, 
returned to his profession as an artist, and once again took up 
politics. 
  [CHELYABINSKIY RABOCHIY] What's going on in Georgia right 
now? 
  [Kitovani] Of all the former union republics, Georgia has 
suffered the most. Because of Zviad Gamsakhurdia's nationalistic 
politics, we fenced ourselves off from our neighbors and above 
all--from Russia. Right now the instability in the country is 
great and economic ties have been broken. We are suffering badly 
as a result. So far, though, some of our politicians feel that 
we don't need Russia, that it's better to collaborate with 
Europe and America. It doesn't seem that way to me. Georgia 
needs an alliance with Russia, firm ties with its regions. I 
have been saying this in the Georgian parliament for two years. 
At first they didn't listen to me. Georgia lost the war and only 
now is coming to its senses. Georgia has joined the CIS and is 
hoping for an improvement in relations with its neighbor to the 
north. 
  For us the CIS means Russia. Until our relations improve, my 
republic is going to have it bad: 99 percent of our population 
is living below the poverty line, and the ruble's rate against 
the coupon is very high--1:125. Our entire hope rests on Russia. 
  [CHELYABINSKIY RABOCHIY] How do you assess Russian policy 
toward Georgia? 
  [Kitovani] Recently the friendship and cooperation agreement 
signed by the presidents of Georgia and Russia was received 
negatively by Russian politicians, especially in the State Duma. 
I understand them, though. The "Shevardnadze factor" plays a 
role here. Russians have a bad attitude toward him, the former 
Soviet minister of foreign affairs. I met with Zhirinovskiy in 
Moscow, and he told me that he does not want friendship with 
Shevardnadze's Georgia because of his role in the destruction of 
the Soviet Union. Zhirinovskiy is wrong: Georgia is not 
Shevardnadze. And this is another reason for my visit to 
Chelyabinsk. I am meeting with local national patriots and 
trying to convince them of this. 
  [CHELYABINSKIY RABOCHIY] Recently the days of the first 
Georgian president, Zviad Gamsakhurdia, came to a tragic end. 
Many contradictory opinions have been expressed about his death. 
What do you think? 
  [Kitovani] Gamsakhurdia was a nationalist conducting a 
nationalistic policy, and that is why he lost. I don't believe 
that Zviad committed suicide, though. I think it was a murder, a 
purely political murder. It was disadvantageous to someone to 
see him alive. I cannot say more. Zviad was a dangerous enemy, 
he nearly came to power a second time, not when his brigades 
seized Lanchkhuti and prepared to storm Tbilisi, but on 3-4 
October. 
  If the Moscow putsch had succeeded, Gamsakhurdia would have 
been in Shevardnadze's place right now. Don't forget: he lived 
in Chechnya, near Dudayev, and Dudayev is Khasbulatov, so there 
is a direct link between them. Had a Chechen come to power in 
Moscow, then the Chechen protege, Gamsakhurdia, would have come 
to power in Tbilisi. But the putsch did not succeed, and the 
dangerous ex-president was removed. 
  He could not have killed himself, I know him well. We 
studied 
in the same school and knew each other since we were children. 
We participated in the dissident struggle together. After 
perestroyka, having headed up the national liberation movement, 
we came to power together. Zviad became president, and I became 
commander of the national guard. Our paths diverged on 19 August 
1991, however, when he supported the Communist putsch. 
<H5>  From the Biography of Tengiz Kitovani </H5>
  In August 1991, Kitovani, virtually the number two man in 
the 
state, accused Gamsakhurdia of aiding and abetting the GKChP 
(State Committee for the State of Emergency). Not waiting to be 
arrested, he took 12,000 guardsmen loyal to him out of the 
barracks and went off into the mountains. In a bold move he took 
the "Georgian Bastille," freed his comrades-in-arms from 
prison--Georgiy Chanturiya, chairman of the National Democratic 
Party, and Dzhaba Ioseliani, commander of the armed group 
Mkhaderioni ("Horsemen"). For five months he was a partisan in 
the forests. It was then that Tengiz Kitovani was given the 
nickname "the Georgian Che Guevara" in the Russian and world 
press. 
  In December 1991, the opposition stormed Tbilisi, firing 
cannons on the presidential palace and seizing power. Georgians 
call that storming the best work Kitovani the artist ever did: 
the city scarcely suffered from the cannon fire, and only the 
ideally exact block was destroyed--the president's. 
  Gamsakhurdia fled to Chechnya, and Kitovani headed up the 
Military Council--in fact, Georgia. His monarchist views were 
not meant to be, though, and he was forced to turn for help to 
Shevardnadze, to whom all power over Georgia transferred soon 
after. 
  [CHELYABINSKIY RABOCHIY] Tengiz, why did you give the power 
you had seized up to Eduard Shevardnadze? 
  [Kitovani] There were 400,000 Communists in Georgia awaiting 
his arrival. We could not go against our own people. Especially 
since he enjoyed an authority and trust in the world, and that 
was very important at that moment: after all, we had come to 
power by means of an armed revolt, and the world did not trust 
us. 
  Shevardnadze's coming to power, unfortunately, made sense in 
a post-Communist state. We have other examples--Azerbaijan, 
Turkmenistan, other republics. But Shevardnadze wanted to make 
great policy in a small state. When he was the Soviet minister 
of foreign affairs, Russia stood behind him. In little Georgia, 
his "great policy" brought the country to its knees. 
Shevardnadze did not take into account the processes going on in 
Georgia--that is, the Abkhazian and Ossetian issues. He placed 
the integrity of Georgia in jeopardy. I could not work with him 
so I left my post as defense minister. 
  Still, Shevardnadze is not Zviad. Therefore, I did not go 
into the mountains, I just went into the opposition. Chanturiya 
right now is with me, too, but Ioseliani supports the current 
head of the republic. Maybe Shevardnadze is a great politician, 
but Georgia has not benefited from his policies, I don't think. 
  [CHELYABINSKIY RABOCHIY] How do you assess the future of 
Russian-Georgian relations? 
  [Kitovani] Our tsars and forefathers concluded an alliance. 
They were smarter and more far-sighted than we are. We must 
follow their example. The two Orthodox Christian peoples must 
unite. I see Georgia's future only with Russia. 

