BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Rudolf Scharping, chairman of the Social </F>
Democratic Party of Germany, by Vlastimil Kovar and Petr Nemec; 
place and date not given: "The Social Democratic Party of 
Germany Is Ready To Assume Power"] 
  [Text] [HOSPODARSKE NOVINY] How realistic is it to expect 
that the Social Democrats will return to power after the October 
Bundestag elections? 
  [Scharping] The first elections this year -- Landtag 
elections in Lower Saxony -- were a good starting point for the 
Social Democratic Party [SPD] in "superelection" year. (In 
Germany, there will be 18 elections this year -- editorial 
note.) The results of the Lower Saxony elections are a clear 
signal that the SPD has a chance of assuming the leading 
position in Germany. If we work hard and concentrate on our main 
tasks, we can become the strongest party after 16 October. 
  [HOSPODARSKE NOVINY] Where will you look for coalition 
parties if you win? Are you considering the so-called grand 
coalition with the Christian Democratic Union/Christian Social 
Union [CDU/CSU]? 
  [Scharping] I am conducting no coalition talks. My 
objective is to convince the electorate that a political change 
in Germany is possible only if the SPD becomes significantly 
stronger. It is my impression that the supply of possible 
coalition partners is greater than the demand, which squeezes 
their price down, of course. I rule out the possibility of a 
grand coalition. 
  [HOSPODARSKE NOVINY] In Germany and elsewhere, they speak 
about a crisis of the large political parties, since the 
electorates do not clearly understand their policies. For 
example, what is the difference between the SPD and the CDU? 
  [Scharping] I could certainly react to any political 
question by clearly saying that our solutions differ from those 
of the CDU. However, I will confine myself to the essentials. 
The SPD is of the opinion that to allow a large number of 
people to arrange their lives according to their ideas, our 
state and society must undergo an essential change. The CDU, 
however, wants to introduce only partial corrections to the 
evidently erroneous development. There are two fundamentally 
different ways of approaching the challenges of the present and 
the future. 
  The SPD does not have the exclusive right to provide 
solutions. When searching for solutions, however, it seeks an 
opportunity to discuss them with as large a number of people, 
groups, and institutions as possible. In this sense, the CDU 
lacks openness and spiritual flexibility. The CDU also lacks 
openness and honesty when dealing with people. 
  While the SPD has been stressing for a long time that the 
reunification of Germany and the unification of Europe will 
demand efforts from each of us according to our abilities, the 
CDU has created the impression that nothing will change in the 
daily life of the people. In fact, they have retained this 
philosophy until now. 
  The living and working conditions of each and every man are 
in the center of all our considerations. The CDU, however, 
which is not an independent force but only a herald of 
government's messages, has lost the feel for reality in this 
country. The SPD is concentrating all its forces on the fight 
against unemployment, which should be conducted by introducing 
the ecological modernization of the economy and the state and by 
reinstating social justice. 
  These are the basic conditions for preserving social peace 
in 
Germany; for unifying our country's economic, social, and 
cultural spheres; and for contributing to the unification of 
Europe. The CDU intends to retain Germany's competitive 
economic position by abolishing social measures. 
  [HOSPODARSKE NOVINY] Can you describe the SPD's economic and 
social program? 
  [Scharping] We want to finance jobs, not unemployment. We 
want to strengthen support for public works and programs aimed 
at creating jobs, even part-time jobs, and to intensify 
retraining courses. 
  To be able to preserve existing job opportunities and create 
new, competitive ones, we need an economic growth that would be 
in harmony with the environment. We must reduce our consumption 
of raw materials and energy, and support the development of new 
technologies that have good prospects. It will be important to 
introduce tax reliefs for enterprises that conduct their own 
research, who invest and create capital. 
  The German economy needs stable guidelines and good 
financial 
conditions. State-provided services must become more efficient. 
The state must be modernized even in the social sphere. We have 
to eliminate costs that we all have to pay. In this sense, 
extra costs for wages -- such as unemployment and retirement 
insurance -- are very important. These costs are linked to the 
reunification of Germany. 
  The reunification can be financed by providing compensation 
which will be calculated according to everyone's needs. The tax 
burden and levies in 1995 will be too high. They must not be 
increased. However, we must allow redistribution in the 
interests of economic progress and social justice. 
  [HOSPODARSKE NOVINY] High wage costs and good social 
security are affecting the competitiveness of the German 
economy. How is the SPD going to solve this problem? Will this 
not influence your relations with the trade unions? 
  [Scharping] Our knowledge and ability, the creativity and 
imagination of our working people, and social peace in the 
country are our most important advantages. Whoever is able to 
efficiently use these factors and support them, will be able to 
compete on foreign markets in the future. Whoever wants Germany 
to compete with countries with low labor costs is using methods 
of the past, and is placing the fundamentals of our economy at 
risk. 
  [HOSPODARSKE NOVINY] How does the leadership of your party 
see the reformist development in countries of Central and East 
Europe, in the Czech Republic, specifically? Do you have a 
specific concept in that direction? 
  [Scharping] We congratulate the countries of Central and 
East Europe on their success in reform policy. We appreciate 
the decisiveness and the speed of transformation, and the 
ability of your society, people, and social organizations and 
institutions to push for changes and create your own future in a 
democratic way, while putting up with difficulties necessarily 
associated with that. 
  From our viewpoint we believe is it remarkable that each 
country has been able to find its own way while following the 
same general path toward a market economy. The self-confident 
policy of the reformist countries is creating the new face of 
Europe and shows us how imperfect our previous image about 
Europe was. 
  We want to introduce a policy of good neighborly relations 
as 
soon as possible. Regarding our relations with the Czech 
Republic, the best way is to go beyond the limits that have been 
drawn in the treaty of good-neighborly relations. 
  German foreign policy will basically follow the European 
concept. We believe that in the future it will be impossible to 
conduct an isolated policy that pushes for interests that are 
not in harmony with the European Union. Of course, such policy 
must be established in cooperation with the countries of Central 
and East Europe, not without them. 
  [HOSPODARSKE NOVINY] Some politicians in the "Central 
European" space believe that social programs drafted by West 
European governments are overblown and hurt the economy. What 
would you say? 
  [Scharping] I can only speak about the social ideas of my 
party. We are convinced that the future economic growth will 
depend on whether we are able to offer products on the world 
markets that need little energy and raw material to manufacture, 
operate, and dispose of, that is, products that place as small a 
burden as possible on the environment. Only well-trained, 
motivated, and socially secure employees can do that. I am 
aware of the fact that our experience cannot be transferred 
elsewhere, since every country has different possibilities. 

