Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by the NEZAVISIMAYA MOLDOVA political department </F>
under the rubric "Press Digest `Elections-94'": "All the Faces 
Are Familiar"] 
  [Text] The Reform Party "launched" two press publications 
all at once last week. The DNEVNOY EKSPRESS and OBSERVATORUL DE 
KISHINEU gave considerable attention to the party's program 
positions on their pages. This is what Anatol Salaru, the leader 
of the party, declared in an interview with DNEVNOY EKSPRESS: 
  "The aim of our party is the creation of political and 
juridical conditions for the development and expansion of a 
stratum of well-to-do, or even, according to our yardsticks, 
wealthy people--what in the West is called the middle class. The 
middle class, after all, is not just prosperous businessmen and 
owners of firms and plants, it is highly paid 
employees--teachers, engineers, doctors, and also workers who 
own stocks of enterprises and farm owners. This class is the 
foundation of consolidation and stability in society, and 
changes in financial and tax policy, legislation, etc., mostly 
affect it. 
  "Our aim also is to achieve equal rights for private 
property 
with respect to state property. 
  "We must change the existing order, but only in an 
evolutionary way, with the help of political, economic, and 
legal reforms, and reforms in education. We already have a 
program that is worked out for attracting foreign investors that 
went through expert analysis in Switzerland. We are counting on 
the support of private business, including in industry. We are 
against the policy of favorable credits, it is this that 
ratchets up the spiral of inflation." 
  The leaders of the recently created Liberal Convention of 
Moldova also are for radical economic reforms. Excerpts from the 
statements of the LKM [Liberal Convention of Moldova] are 
printed in the government newspaper GRAZHDANSKIY MIR: One more 
or less clear direction is appearing in the social-democratic 
reality of Moldova--the so-called "social market economy," which 
frequently has something directly in common with the tendency to 
return to the administrative-command system. The main deficiency 
of this direction lies in the attempt to preserve the absolute 
role of the state and the public sector in the economic and 
social activity of the people, permitting the nomenklatura 
oligarchy, which, as a rule, is incompetent and unsound, to 
preserve power under the new conditions. The Liberal Convention 
sets as its task the development and establishment of a 
social-economic and political system in Moldova that is capable 
of stimulating the EFFICIENCY and DYNAMISM of a new evolutionary 
development of the country that can be implemented on the basis 
of the creative application of basic principles that ensure the 
efficiency and dynamic balance of democratic and industrially 
developed countries... 
  At this moment in Moldova, on the threshold of the election 
of a new structure of the higher legislative organ of the 
country, the necessity has arisen to consolidate all forces that 
are for LIBERAL-ECONOMIC REFORMS in a united LIBERAL CONVENTION 
OF MOLDOVA. 
  An interview with Victor Puscas, the chairman of the 
Republican Party, is published in this issue of the newspaper. 
He gave this answer to a question on ways to get out of the 
crisis: "A rejection of extremism, no matter what form it takes; 
the creation of a civil society with all its attributes; the 
development of political pluralism, and at the same time putting 
both state and antistate ideologies outside the bounds of worker 
collectives... The development of the economy depends directly 
on political stability in society. Emergence from the crisis is 
possible, given an open economy, its decentralization, the 
development of all forms of property, first and foremost, 
private property. One of the reasons for today's crisis is the 
loss of state control over the economy and, most of all, over 
the products that are being produced, not even to speak of the 
loss of control over the process of privatization. 
  "I await the election programs of those political forces 
that 
are the 'fathers' of privatization. I wonder how these forces 
will explain the impasse in which we all find ourselves. Why did 
we not seriously begin privatization, although we should have 
completed it a long time ago? Why is privatization being 
implemented according to the principle of egalitarianism, and 
what are the consequences of this egalitarianism for all of us?" 
  Eugeniu Girla, a candidate for deputy from the KhDNF 
[Christian Democratic People's Front] electoral bloc, focuses 
his attention on economic questions. We quote from the weekly 
TARA: 
  "The structure of the national economy is characterized by 
an 
exaggerated share of the agro-industrial sector that does not 
correspond to the correlation between agriculture and industry 
and, simultaneously, by an unfavorable situation in the sphere 
of services. However, inasmuch as the transition to the market 
has already begun, we cannot delay the start of restructuring 
national income and the gross domestic product according to 
branches. The restructuring of the branches and sub-branches of 
the national economy, both from a quantitative and qualitative 
standpoint, can be conducted through the employment of a policy 
of priorities and support of some of them and the elimination or 
reduction of a shared part of others, in this way bringing the 
structure of the work force, the importance of the first, 
secondary, and tertiary sectors, and other macroeconomic 
criteria into a channel that is generally accepted by countries 
with a wealth of experience in a market economy. 
  "It will be necessary to carry out structural changes in the 
economy of the Republic of Moldova in consonance with the 
metamorphoses that are occurring in the economy of Romania: 
Joint efforts will reduce to a minimum losses associated with 
these processes by means of joint investments in all branches, 
in particular, industrial branches that require colossal sums 
that are almost inaccessible to each country by itself. At the 
same time, the Republic of Moldova in this way will have access 
to new sources of raw materials and energy, while participating 
in the development of the substantial energy potential of 
Romania and, with its help, breaking into third markets. The 
easing of the level of reprofiling, with a mutual expansion of 
sales market zones, will also lead to real economies." 
  Last week, communists made unexpected announcements about 
themselves. Vladimir Voronin, cochairman of the republic council 
of the Communist Party, shares his opinions on the forthcoming 
elections with readers of KISHINEVSKIYE NOVOSTI: 
  "First of all, I want to say that in my opinion the election 
of parliamentarians according to party lists is still another 
concession to certain forces. For to talk today about parties 
that have an adequate social basis in society is simply 
frivolous. Especially since a majority of them are small in 
numbers and, in fact, are "parties on asphalt," that is, parties 
that do not extend their influence farther than Chisinau and one 
or two other cities. 
  "Under these conditions, the Party of Communists of Moldova 
intends to help the voters to correctly orient themselves before 
the elections so that decent and competent people come to 
parliament." 

