Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" report No. 1 (51) of 30 December] </F>
  [Text] THIS PARLIAMENT WILL BE DIFFICULT TO WORK 
WITH, SAYS ANATOLIY SOBCHAK 
  The Mayor of St. Petersburg and a member of Russia's new 
parliament Anatoliy Sobchak is a leading political figure in his 
country. He may be expected to run for President in three years 
from now, at least he has said nothing to rule out the 
possibility. A Petersburg-based reporter for INTERFAX has 
approached Sobchak with a few questions on the outcome of the 
December 12 parliamentary elections. 
  ANATOLIY SOBCHAK: I believe both Russian and European 
political leaders must draw lessons from the results of the 
elections. Nationalism coupled with militarism always equals 
fascism and nationalism rooted in the complicated problems odf 
the Russian armed forces and military-industrial complex, is 
raising head in Russia today. 
  This comes as no surprise now that nationalistic tendencies 
are growing in all the post-Communist countries. The West has 
even supported and hailed the bloom of nationalism in the Baltic 
republics and Ukraine because it produced the breakup of the 
Soviet Union. Now that the Russians have responded with a 
nationalism of their own, many are feeling flabbergasted. I am 
convinced, however, that the democratic forces will meet the 
outcome of the elections with serious political action - that 
all the democratic forces will join hands because, let me make 
it clear once again, Russian nationalism in its present guise 
translates into fascism. 
  IF: Do you feel the results of the parliamentary elections 
will move the Russian government to make serious changes in its 
economic and foreign policies? 
  ANATOLIY SOBCHAK: That was a question you'd better address 
to 
the President and government, although I feel the government 
can't help amending its policies. It must, among other things, 
concentrate on a thought-out foreign strategy which would take 
into consideration the Russian national interests, especially in 
relations with the former Soviet republics. Priorities must be 
changed in domestic policies. A new approach must be taken to 
relations with the constituent parts of the Federation, and more 
attention must be paid to the Russian interests, although not at 
the expense of the rights and interests of other peoples on the 
Federation's territory. 
  IF: Being a lawyer, how do you feel about the possibility of 
opposition to the majority in parliament? 
  ANATOLIY SOBCHAK: The Federal Assembly has neither majority 
nor minority forces, as yet. The parliament is divided more or 
less accurately into the Democrats and those who may eventually 
emerge as the opposition. Those who are customarily described 
as the Independents, make up approximately one third of the 
lawmakers and have yet to define their political views. 
  Besides, all the parties and blocs have yet to mature into 
full-sized political units. Many of them were founded the last 
moment before the elections and who can tell whether part of 
their representatives won't decide to join other parties or 
blocs. Russia's new parliament is so far unpredicatble. It 
would be a mistake to say out of hand that antidemocratic forces 
are commanding a majority in the new legislature. If one made 
that mistake, those who have yet to define their positions, 
would be prompted to join that majority. So I see the need for 
serious and very flexible tactics - real parliamentarism. 
  Transition to normal professional parliamentary work will 
rid 
Russian parliamentarism of the infantile disorders of the 
defunct Supreme Soviet. The transition, however, will take a 
lot of effort because most members of the Federal Assembly have 
no experience of law-making. This will be sure to influence, 
very seriously, the effectiveness of their performance and their 
division into parliamentary factions as well as the formation of 
ad hoc coalitions. In other words, I feel this parliament will 
be very difficult to work with. It may be expected to confront 
both the President and government with many problems, especially 
if neither Boris Yeltsin nor the national Cabinet draw lessons 
from the outcome of the recently held elections. 
  IF: Russia's partners in Europe have voiced serious concern 
about the outcome of the elections... 
  ANATOLIY SOBCHAK: Everyone is concerned about the outcome 
of the Russian elections, Europe even more so that Russia. The 
party wins the elections on party tickets whose leader says he 
is not going to think twice about putting to use a few dozen 
nuclear devices just to make Germany or Ukraine or Kazakhstan 
submit to Russia. (Vladimir Zhirinovskiy of the Liberal 
Democratic Party - IF). 
  The Europeans can't help taking such statements close to 
heart now that they - especially Germany - have already met with 
this kind of leaders. Many remember that no one in Germany gave 
serious thought to Hitler's first calls for expanding eastwards. 
Hitler was made fun of, he was a laughing stock in Germany with 
the result that Europe, and somewhat later the world as a whole 
were plunged into the bloodiest of all wars. So, the western 
concern about what is happening in Russia is understandable. 
  IF: The Commission of Big Europe could, in all likelihood, 
emerge as a mechanism for fighting this threat... 
  ANATOLIY SOBCHAK: There is no doubt of that. As a very 
strong mechanism, I would say. The Commission must play a role 
in the efforts to achieve political unity in Europe and map out 
one blueprint and concerted strategies for foghting nationalism 
and fascism in Russia and other countries of Europe. The 
problem of nationalism is pressing on everyone, including the 
untroubled Belgium, Britain and Spain. It is sitting on 
everyone's agenda. Explosions are heard and other terrorist 
actions are being carried out. 
<H3>  GENERAL BASKAYEV: RUSSIA'S MILITARY DOCTRINE LEAVES MUCH 
ROOM FOR CONTROVERSY </H3>
  Now that the situation in Russia is fairly complicated, the 
internal troops of the country's Ministry of Internal Affairs 
are emerging as a guarantor for domestic stability. The 
commander of the internal troops' Moscow district and the man 
who acted as the military commandant of Russia's White House 
during the October developments in Moscow Major-General Arkadiy 
Baskayev and Viktor Akimov of INTERFAX are focusing on the 
condition and future of those troops. 
  IF: The district under your command is not only central but 
the biggest in Russia? 
  ARKADIY BASKAYEV: The Moscow district of the internal troops 
is one of the biggest among the Federation's nine such 
districts. Its units are deployed in 16 regions of Central 
Russia. But the North Caucasian district is the biggest of all. 
  IF: What characterizes the state off affairs in the units 
under your command? Part of the men are being demobilized and 
new forces are joining the units... 
  ARKADIY BASKAYEV: The situation is complicated. First of all 
there are problems with the draft. Some army commissariats are 
unable to meet the draft quotas. On the whole, men are 
enlisting only thanks to our officers'efforts. Officers meet 
with the mothers of our future troops , brief them on the 
conditions of service and make them feel beeter. As a result, 
there are no AWOL cases. 
  On the other hand, we are receiving weak boys, whose height 
and weight are under the norm. From the very first day we are 
offering them extra rations to be able to work them. 
  Basic training in the internal troops is different from 
basic 
training in other units. Army commissariats are to select boys 
for our operational and motorized units in a bid to insure the 
better physical condition and higher morale of our recruits. 
Our men are committed to action in various parts of this 
country and under especially complicated, if not extreme 
conditions. 
  IF: How do army commissariats select recruits? 
  ARKADIY BASKAYEV: Officers of the internal troops sit on the 
commissariats' panels to find out more about the draftee's 
interests and favorite sports. Men with a criminal record are 
not accepted. 
  IF: What about the draftee's weight and height? 
  ARKADIY BASKAYEV: We used to pay attention to that. Now that 
we are facing problems with drafts, we pay no attnetion to that. 
If we have drafted a sufficient number of men, we ourselves 
take care of that problem. Incidentally, the same army 
commissariats are in charge of drafting men to the internal 
troops and the armed forces under the Defense Ministry. There 
are drafting quotas. 
  IF: How many boys appear unable to meet your requirements 
and 
drop out of your units? 
  ARKADIY BASKAYEV: Practically none these days, which does 
not 
mean everyone copes. Those who fail to cope, are transferred to 
our logistics units. 
  IF: What about the officers, or those who have come to serve 
under a contract? 
  ARKADIY BASKAYEV: Unfortunately, we are facing even more 
problems with the officers than with the men under their 
command. We are losing a growing number of career servicemen 
owing to the shortage of housing facilities and low payments. 
What a commissioned officer earns today - an average of 120,000 
Roubles a month - is no money. Commercial structures lure 
internal troops officers to serve as their security men. A 
deputy company commander is offered 500 000 to 600 000 Roubles a 
month and currency bonuses. So far, our men have, by and large, 
been rejecting such job propositions but are beginning to yield 
to pressure. Under the existing legal regulations I have no 
right to reject a serviceman's request for the severance of his 
contract. As a result, there's a shortage of company and 
platoon commanders in the internal troops. We are seriously 
worried about this. 
  Drafts are a success only in the provinces. Units of the 
internal troops in the provinces are working under regular 
organizational charts. Those who have signed up to serve under 
a contract make up 96 percent of our regiment in the city of 
Briansk. In Moscow,however, and other cities, very few men are 
signing up to serve under a contract. Housing presents a very 
difficult problem. 
  IF: A short while ago the media accused you of resorting to 
force in the attempts to resolve this problem. A residential 
project was seized... 
  ARKADIY BASKAYEV: The housing problem is one of the most 
pressing. Only in Moscow more than 500 commissioned and non- 
commissioned officers have nowhere to live. My deputies in the 
rank of General down to commissioned and non-commissioned 
officers with a seven-to-eight-year length of service are living 
in dormitories. Only men who have served at least five years 
with the internal troops are regarded as those without housing 
facilities and are placed on a housing list. 
  Not so long ago the district bought 14 apartments in a 
residential project built by veterans of the war in Afghanistan. 
The families of officers who moved into those flats used to live 
in emergency conditions, without heating and gas. We had to 
position our men around the house because people who described 
themselves as refugees started moving in without any legal 
reason for it. We were allowing in only those who could prove 
their right to live in that house. 
  I was surprised and very angry when several mediaa editions 
started twisting facts to accuse the internal troops of the 
arbitrary armed seizure of housing facilities. Repeat: In full 
keeping with law and in line with an appropriate formal 
agreement, we bought and are protecting housing facilities for 
our homeless officers. 
  IF: You are a career officer with a lengthy service record. 
Even though the internal troops will not be acting directly 
under the recently adopted military doctrine, what is your view 
of the doctrine? 
  ARKADIY BASKAYEV: In my view, it leaves much room for 
controversy. On the one hand, the Russian armed forces are 
adopting a totally new strategy, and on the other the troops are 
unable to meet their new objectives. I think, thought must be 
given to this. 
  Incidentally, there is a clear-cut strategy for the internal 
troops and prospects are clear for their advance. Instead of 
guarding penitentiaries, the internal troops will be enegaged 
primarily in operational assignments. Only police forces will 
from now on be used as prison guards. There will be no more 
soldiers atop the penitentiaries' observation towers. 
  The internal troops are to help the police to enforce law 
and 
order, especially in the areas under a state of emergency, say 
Ossetia and Ingushetia (Russian republics where inter-ethnic 
tension is running extremely high, in the northern Caucasus - 
IF), and to act hand in hand with the police to fight crime. 
The elite brigade quartered in Sofrino near Moscow has already 
been committed to action in this kind of operations in Moscow. 
I see the results as good. 
  IF: What exactly is the Sofrino Brigade? 
  ARKADIY BASKAYEV: It was formed in October or November of 
1988. It took part in the enforcement of law and order in 
Tbilisi and Baku in 1989. By 1991, it had been engaged in the 
efforts to disengage the conflicting parties in Nagorni Karabakh 
and in 1992-1993 it was used to insure security in the areas of 
interethnic conflicts in the Northern Caucasus. More than 200 
of its commissioned and non- commissioned officers have received 
government awards for the role they played in the October 
developments in Moscow. 
  As of date, all its men are staying in Sofrino. They are 
undergoing combat and special training. As well as men of any 
other unit, they are expected to know how to use different kinds 
of arms. And, they may be engaged in street fighting and will be 
expected to know how to use plastic shields and police 
truncheons, and they may be committed to action under emergency 
conditions. 
  IF: Back to the October developments in Moscow. What lessons 
did you, a commander with a combat record, draw from them? 
  ARKADIY BASKAYEV: The main lesson I am drawing from them, is 
this: All political problems must be resolved by political 
means- by way of negotiation - without dragging the 
military,including the internal troops, into attempts to settle 
differences. As soon as the military come to play a role, blood 
is shed. 
  On the other hand, I am sure a civil war was averted in 
October. If the confrontation had continued, the country woul've 
split into two camps. Thank God, that was averted. 
  IF: Was there an alternative to the military action? 
  ARKADIY BASKAYEV: I don't think there was. Procrastination 
would've led to a civil war. Law and order forces were acting 
without hesitation, as well as the internal troops. They abided 
by the law and in full recognition of reality. There was no 
alternative to what they did on October 3 and 4. 
  IF: Was the use of tanks fully justified? 
  ARKADIY BASKAYEV: In my view, their experience and technical 
means at their disposal enable the internal troops to seize 
control of buildings without the use of tanks. 
<H5>  ALEKSANDR RUTSKOY DID NOT VOTE </H5>
  Yuriy Ivanov, the legal counsel of former Russian Vice 
President Aleksandr Rutskoy, related to INTERFAX Exclusive what 
his client had to say about the results of recent elections. 
  Above all, Rutskoy did not vote because he believes that a 
coup was staged in the country and "the legal basis" decreed by 
Yeltsin for the constitutional reform was a sham. The reports 
of his voting were untrue. 
  He also understands that the disbandment and shelling of the 
country's top legislature and its defenders "brought about a 
hopeless situation which could only be aggravated if there was 
no parliament at all." 
  In Rutskoy's view, the election results are significant and 
instructive. In his view, constructive patriotic forces must 
make certain conclusions because the nearly 50 percent of the 
eligible voters who did not go to the polling stations "lost 
faith in the ability of the present leaders to change the 
situation in the country for the better. Serious work is needed 
with these Russians and those who are still naively optimistic 
about pseudo-democrats and 'radical reformers'." 
  Rutskoy appreciates the position of the voters who rejected 
the "bankrupt presidential policy and those who grabbed power 
for the sole purpose of dismantling the country and plunging the 
Russian people into mud." The people saw through "defenders of 
the people" such as Russia's Choice, PRES and the Democratic 
Russia Movement and deprived them from "a clear victory" so much 
awaited by Yeltsin. 
  Rutskoy attributed the success of the LDPR and its leader 
Zhirinovskiy to the well-planned electoral campaign and clear 
presentation of their political platform. They succeeded in 
persuading the Russians that the party did not want their votes 
for selfish purposes but sincerely wanted to do something for 
the sake of the Russian state and "the impoverished and hunted 
down Russian people." In the LDPR platform "the Russian idea" 
sounds convincing against the background of lies, perpetuated by 
"democrats," about anti-crisis policies and successes in 
countering inflation. "It is a pity that the people did not 
fully understand who drove the country into this crisis." 
  The former vice president noted that "all post-electoral 
groans about Zhirinovskiy's domination of the TV and radio time 
are ridiculous." He could hear one of Moscow radio programs in 
his prison cell and he found that most of the radio time was 
taken up by interviews and programs with "government and other 
pseudo-democrats who were brainwashing the population." 
  Rutskoy thinks that Zhirinovskiy must be thankful to 
"gentlemen democrats" for the shelling of the parliament 
building and barring the National Salvation Front, the Russian 
All-Popular Union, the Russian Christian Democratic Movement and 
other patriotic movements from the elections. 
  The good showing of the Russian Communist Party "which has 
gotten rid of various opportunists especially significant in the 
light of what the communist movement has been through over the 
last two years," Rutskoy thinks. He believes that the party 
will increase its popularity if it pursues an intelligent policy 
of defending the national interests for the sake of the state 
and the people. 
  In Rutskoy's view, the Agrarian Party could do even better. 
He "wished that party well and is sincerely glad that it will 
have a large parliamentary representation and this will help the 
party to gain even larger support." Rutskoy wanted to 
congratulate the party and its leader Lapshin on their victory. 
(By the latest reports, the party won 4,261,398 votes, or 7.90 
percent - IF). 
  Rutskoy also congratulated the Russia's Women bloc which, he 
is confident, will vigorously protect the rights of the better 
half of the Russian population and the interest of the family 
and child. 
  Rutskoy denounced the "flagrant duplicity" of democrats, "in 
particular the Kozyrevs, Poltoranins, Shumeykos and others who 
are now publicly wooing those whom they called fascists and 
reds-and- browns as recently as a month ago." 
  Two weeks ago, Rutskoy says, Kozyrev demanded banning the 
Communist Party but now he is prepared to ally with it. This, 
the former vice president thinks, "is a classical case of the 
ease with which such politicos are sold and bought. Should we 
not expect statements about the importance of joint actions with 
communists from people such as Novodvorskaya, Bonner, Popov, 
Yakunin and Sobchak? Communists, he thinks, must be especially 
cautious in dealing with such new "friends" and remember that 
people of this kind are the worst anti-communists. 
  Rutskoy was glad that Lipitskiy and other Civic Union 
figures 
had a measure of support, even though the results fell short of 
the expectations. 
  He objected to using the term fascism in describing 
Zhirinovskiy and the millions of Russians who voted for the LDPR 
because that would offend a major part of the electorate. 
Rutskoy emphasized that "fascism and fascists are those who 
ordered building a barbed wire fence around the House of Soviets 
and shelling parliament for the whole world to see." He 
recalled that one salient feature of fascism was legalized 
authoritarian rule and running the country by decree rather than 
by decisions made by democratically elected bodies. 

