Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Indian Must Not Give Up GATT </F>
Membership: Panel"] 
  [Text] New Delhi -- A parliamentary standing committee of 
the Commerce Ministry on Tuesday rejected the non-BJP [Bharatiya 
Janata Party] opposition parties' view that India should not 
hesitate to opt out of the ongoing Uruguay round of trade talks 
on Dunkel proposals, saying it was wrong to argue that India's 
interest would be served best by giving up GATT [General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade] membership. 
  In its third report on Dunkel draft proposals, tabled in the 
Rajya Sabha by its Chairman, I.K. Gujral, the committee admitted 
the final outcome was not in the best interest of India on every 
count. But, it argued, in multilateral agreements, "it is always 
the question of give and take." 
  Stating that in today's world with increasing 
inter-dependence of nations, multilateral pacts with 
most-favoured-nations (MFN) status was advantageous as compared 
to bilateral pacts, the committee cautioned the country's 
commercial interests would be ill-served by ceasing membership 
of GATT. 
  As such, it asked India to actively negotiate to bring about 
a more reasonable balance in the proposed agreement which 
remains loaded against developing countries, and actively 
consider ways in which the sovereign economic space of 
developing countries was safeguarded by making common cause with 
other developing countries. 
  The committee is of the view that with ratification of the 
present round of GATT negotiations, the option now available 
with the US to clamp Super 301 of their trade laws unilaterally 
against any country should also cease to operate. However, it 
urged Indian negotiators to obtain specific clarifications to 
that effect. 
  Referring to individual issues that have a bearing on the 
country's economic well-being, the committee said a witness 
deposing before it stated he did not think that Indian 
agriculture would gain the export market due to reduction in 
subsidies made by the developed countries. 
  This is because the liberalisation in agriculture would be 
limited and the international support levels for their 
agricultural products would be reduced by 20 per cent only. 
  Besides, the witness argued the Dunkel text provided for 
very 
strict phytosanitary standards to be observed for agricultural 
exports. India and other developing countries would hardly be 
able to meet these standards, resulting in rejection of their 
exports. 
  The committee said the Dunkel proposals would discriminate 
against Indian agriculture as the subsidies have to be limited 
to an upper bound of ten per cent of the value of the output for 
developing countries. This might have grave implications for the 
poor resource farmers because with increasing cost of energy and 
other inputs the sectorwise subsidy might exceed this limit. 
  The committee opined that contrary to the avowed object of 
including agriculture in GATT, the result of complying with the 
Dunkel draft proposal could enable the developed countries to 
capture the food markets to developing countries and also to 
control the gene sequences, microbiological resources and 
genetic engineering. 
  It was of the view if the Dunkel draft was accepted at its 
face value, the public distribution system could come under 
severe strain and jeopardy and as such a clear understanding 
must be obtained from the GATT secretariat that the country's 
PDS [Production Distribution Sector] would not be hit in any way 
-- presently or in future. 
  Taking exception to an informal understanding that the 
traditional rights and practices of Indian farmers for 
preservation, sale and free exchange of seeds must remain 
unaffected, the committee said this might not serve the purpose 
in days to come and said these safeguards must find `specific 
mention' in the GATT. 
  Referring to trade-related intellectual property rights 
(TRIPS) the committee viewed with grave concern the impact of 
the proposed patent regime would have on India's drug prices. 
  It was of the view that specific instruments must be 
provided 
in the TRIPS agreement to ensure the patent holders did not use 
their monopoly power to cause steep increases in prices of drugs 
and also to ensure that India's fast developing indigenous drug 
industry was not "gobbled up" by the foreign multinationals. 
  "The primacy of public interests over the rights of the 
patent holders should be ensured," it added. 
  The committee said the Indian patent law had been rightly 
emphasising patenting of the process and not the product and 
this should be maintained. 
  The proposed extension of patent from the current five to 
seven years to 20 years period virtually discourages any 
research and development (R and D) and this should not be 
conceded, the committee said. It said India should insist for 
grant of automatic licensing in certain circumstances from the 
patent-holders in public interests. It said micro-organism and 
biological process should be kept out of the patent regime. 
  The committee said to sustain the ongoing modernisation of 
the Indian industry, it was important that technology transfers 
continue unimpaired. The position could be otherwise if import 
is treated as working of patents. 
  "The Dunkel draft on TRIPS militates against GATT principles 
that countries at different stages of development need to be 
treated differently in as much as the interests of developing 
countries like India have been ignored in favour of developed 
countries," the committee said. 
  On textiles and clothing, the committee said India should 
explore possibilities to get reasonable improvement in the text 
as this was one area where India's interest from a liberalised 
trade was clearly visible and there should be efforts to ensure 
the potential gains were realised. 
  The committee was also of the view the integrated dispute 
settlement mechanism as provide in the multilateral trade 
organisation (MTO) was heavily loaded against developing 
countries like India. 

