CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Chowdhery M. A. Sheed: "Drugs: An Major Problem"] </F>
  [Text] The UN officials working to control drugs have 
announced that Afghanistan has become the largest producer of 
heroin in the world. This situation has affected Afghanistan 
also. The UN officials believe that 15 percent of the Afghan 
population is addicted to drugs. A BBC correspondent reported 
that according to UN officials Afghanistan produces 2,000 tons 
opium annually. Almost all of this heroin goes to European 
nations. The opium producing region in Iran and Pakistan, known 
as the Golden Crescent, is the largest producer of opium in the 
world. Until recently, the area in Laos and Myanmar was known as 
the Golden Crescent and produced most opium in the world. Each 
year, hashish fields in Afghanistan are photographed from 
satellites and estimated figures are prepared based on these 
photographs. The estimates so far are based on the sources from 
Afghanistan as foreigners are not permitted to travel in 
Afghanistan due to war. According to information available, they 
are growing opium in areas where they did not grow in the past 
to meet the expenses of preparing land. The refugees who had 
returned after 14 years of war have also made growing opium 
their occupation because this is the best way to make a lot of 
money in short period of time. Opium is being grown for the 
first time in Sangarmar near Pakistani border and in Kandhar and 
Herat west of it. In the past, opium was grown mostly in 
Badkhshan in the northern region. A UN drug control official in 
Kabul said that it was not possible to impose any law because of 
war. He said that he did not hesitate in saying that no 
government in this region has taken any steps to control this 
affliction to protect the people from this curse forever. It is 
a proven fact that drugs are prepared in tribal areas in 
Pakistan, however, this ugly trade is not limited to Pakistan 
only. China, Malaysia, and Singapore are also active in this 
trade. In Sichuan, a northern province, a restaurant is known 
for some special delicacies. This restaurant became very crowded 
when it introduced a new dish called "Chindo hot pot." This 
restaurant offers four traditional Chinese dishes with its own 
special spices. According to SHANGHAI EVENING NEWS, the health 
department and the police became suspicious seeing such 
popularity of this dish. This dish and the spices and ingredient 
used in it were analyzed in a laboratory. The laboratory 
indicated use of an addictive drug in this dish. Detailed 
analyses revealed use of opium in this dish. It should be known 
that this Chinese border province is notorious for drug 
smuggling. It is fortunate that the Chinese government has 
strengthened its campaign against drug abuse. According to CHINA 
DAILY, 82.6 kilograms of drugs were confiscated during this 
year. This is a 56 percent increase over the last year. Most of 
the action was taken in southwestern provinces that share border 
with Myanmar, Thailand, and Laos. Most of world's hashish and 
heroin was produced in this region. In the Chinese province of 
Xingxia, there are dozens of laboratories on the border that 
manufacture Number 4 heroin known as China White around the 
world. This is the purest heroin and extremely lethal. If we 
shed light on the evil drug trade in connection with Singapore, 
we will find that drugs here are smuggled from its neighbor 
Malaysia. About two to four kilogram heroin is smuggled each 
week. According to one magazine report, six persons including a 
16 year old girl, were accused of selling heroin. The narcotics 
authorities said that this girl was the youngest among the drug 
dealers arrested until now. These people were arrested by the 
Central Narcotics Bureau officials after a two-day operation. 
They had recovered two kilograms heroin worth 800,000 Singapore 
dollars. According to Singapore laws, any person caught with 15 
kilograms of heroin can be sentenced to death However, this 
sentence is applied only to persons above 18 years of age. The 
president has discretionary powers for punishing persons below 
the age of 18. The Central Narcotics Bureau officials said that 
heroin to Singapore is smuggled via Malaysia. The magazine 
further wrote that the Singapore High Court has given death 
sentence to a person for smuggling heroin. Phatak Sao, 32 years 
old, had committed this crime in August 1990. Thirty-eight grams 
of heroin was recovered from his person. The court was told that 
10 packets of heroin were recovered from the accused. Later, he 
took the police officers to his flat where they found a machine 
for making packets. Any person with more than 15 grams of heroin 
in Singapore can be sentenced to death. After this death 
sentence was announced in the middle of the 1970's, 40 persons 
including some foreigners have been hanged for this crime. As 
this writer mentioned in the beginning of this article, no 
government has taken any effective step to eradicate this ugly 
trade. It is expected that this evil and ugly trade will be 
abolished now. Drugs are seized from almost all the tribal 
areas. This proves two facts. One, the center of producing and 
smuggling heroin is still in tribal areas and this wicked trade 
could not be stopped despite government's efforts. Second, 
despite the government's announcement of exemplary punishments 
for drug dealers, the drug mafia is still very active. 
Therefore, the government must implement the punishments that it 
has announced. The mere announcement of these punishments will 
not stop the smugglers from these activities. The ultra modern 
equipment that the smugglers have procured can be estimated by 
the fact that they own very expensive cars and mobile 
telephones. It is very difficult to arrest these smugglers 
because of their secret and effective communication system. We 
need organized efforts against these drug smugglers. 
  It is fortunate that according to an agreement between 
Pakistan and the United States, the latter will provide $3.5 
million in additional aid to Pakistan for drug control 
activities. This aid is in addition to the aid that the United 
States gives to Pakistan through other economic agencies. 
Pakistan received economic aid from many countries including the 
United States for controlling drugs. However, we can say with 
confidence that this aid was not used properly. 
Misappropriations on a large scale were committed. We have heard 
very embarrassing scandals related to the millions of dollars of 
U.S. aid being used for helping the poppy farmers in Gadun. The 
prominent people involved in drug trade and important officials 
in drug control agencies are working together to find new ways o 
smuggle drugs. Some extremely powerful persons with close 
contacts with the government are not only involved in this ugly 
trade but also protect drug smugglers. The lists of such 
influential persons that the United States and Saudi Arabia had 
given to Pakistan prove this claim. The major reasons why drug 
smuggling has not been controlled is the abuse of foreign aid 
for drug control and the silence of our government over the 
involvement of influential people in this trade. The Western 
nations do not give this economic aid to control drugs because 
of their sympathy for us. The United States and other Western 
nations provide this aid to protect their people there from this 
curse because smugglers go directly to these countries as the 
drugs are expensive. It is the result of our failure that one 
reason for declaring Pakistan a terrorist nation [as published] 
was its government's patronizing of drug smugglers. All these 
reasons not withstanding, the production and smuggling of drugs 
is a terrible crime from humanity perspective alone. This trade 
should be discouraged at every level because the drug smugglers 
earn billions and as newly rich people corrupt the society. In 
addition, they are guilty of ruining health of the people in 
their own country when they sell it there. Hundreds of thousands 
of families have been ruined. What is necessary is to make sure 
that the money the United States provides to Pakistan for 
controlling drugs is used appropriately. A plan must be 
implemented to stop the large-scale misappropriations and 
stealing so that practical steps can be taken to uproot the 
curse of drug abuse. 

