BFN 

<F P=106> [Dick Ljungberg report: "Social Democrats Have Majority </F>
Alone"] 
  [Excerpt] Only four parties have managed to stay above the 
4-percent threshold for representation in the Riksdag in DAGENS 
NYHETER/Temo's poll for April. Some four and a half months 
before the election the government parties show little sign of 
shrinking the Social Democrats' large lead. 
  The Social Democrats can celebrate May Day with 51 percent 
of 
voters behind them. For the Christian Democratic Party and the 
Left Party spring celebrations will be more gloomy; they have 
fallen below the representation threshold below which New 
Democracy and the Green Party are already languishing. 
  Will the government be able to win the race? At the same 
point before the 1991 election the Social Democrats' gains in 
the lead-up to the election had not yet begun to register in the 
Temo poll. In April 1991 they had a record-low score of 26.6 
percent. In the September election their result was 37.7 
percent -- Ingvar Carlsson did not quite make it all the way to 
the finish line. 
  The parties of the nonsocialist government currently have 
40-percent support between them. In the four previous polls 
they achieved figures of 38.5, 38.0, 38.0, 37.0 percent. If 
this is an upward trend, it is a very slow one. 
  But Swedish voters are choosing which party to vote for at 
an 
ever later stage of election campaigns. The 18 September 
election will be a thriller, where the question of who governs 
will be decided by the four parties struggling around the 
4-percent representation threshold. 
  The Temo poll was carried out in the period 20-27 April and 
comprises 1,014 interviews. These were carried out by 
telephone, and this is the first poll using this method that has 
been published. However, since November Temo has been 
conducting telephone interviews in parallel with interviews 
carried out during visits to homes. The comparison figures 
[with March] given here apply to the telephone method. 
  The results for April with the changes over March in 
parentheses: 
  Moderate Coalition Party 21.5 percent (no change), Liberal 
Party 7.5 (+\0.5), Center Party 7.5 (+\1.5). Christian 
Democratic Party 3.5 (-\0.5), Social Democratic Party 51.0 
(-\0.5), Left Party 3.5 (-\0.5), New Democracy 2.0 (-\0.5), 
Green Party 3.0 (no change), and other parties 0.5 percent (no 
change). [passage omitted] 

