BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, April 27 KYODO -- A female legislator of the 
Social Democratic Party (SDP) [of Japan -- SDPJ] denounced the 
ruling coalition's top strategist, Ichiro Ozawa, on Wednesday 
for regarding women as a "mere tool of sex" in the wake of his 
quip on the creation of a new parliamentary bloc. 
  Tomiko Okazaki, chief of the SDP's intraparty panel on the 
promotion of civic and womens' rights, told a news conference 
that Ozawa's remarks on Monday to reporters reflects "his 
contempt for women." Okazaki was responding to Ozawa's remark 
which defended Monday's abrupt move to create a unified 
parliamentary alliance in the House of Representatives, 
excluding the SDP, that led to the SDP's decision to quit the 
coalition. 
  Comparing the convergence of various political parties to an 
extramarital affair, Ozawa reportedly told reporters at the Diet 
building, "It does not matter which women you may sleep with." 
  "If the SDP felt jealous of the new alliance, they have only 
to come and join us. The SDP is putting up irrational 
resistance," he was quoted as saying. 
  Okazaki, reading from the SDP's press statement, said 
Ozawa's 
remark is full of "discrimination and prejudice as if he 
regarded women as a mere tool of sex." The remark "corresponds 
with the move to create the new parliamentary bloc that violated 
the rules of mutual respect and trust," she said. 
  The SDP pullout from the ruling coalition plunged Japan into 
political chaos, as it risks rendering the new administration of 
Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata a fragile minority government. 
  Former Chief Cabinet Secretary Mayumi Moriyama and Michiko 
Ishii, head of the women's section of the opposition Liberal 
Democratic Party (LDP), demanded that Ozawa apologize to the 
people for his remarks. Moriyama and Ishii, both House of 
Councillors members of the LDP, made the demand at a news 
conference. 
  Teiko Kihira, an independent upper house member, also issued 
a statement, which said Ozawa's comment is "shameful 
internationally." 

