BFN 

<F P=106> [Eva Bach-Koenig report on UN drug conference which took </F>
place in Vienna "this week;" statements of participants in 
English with superimposed German translation] 
  [Text] [Bach-Koenig] Fifty percent of all crimes are 
drug-related. At a conference in Vienna, representatives from 
53 countries discussed new strategies in the fight against drugs 
this week. Whereas some countries consider the legalization of 
drugs the only solution, the South Asian countries are adopting 
increasingly tough measures. Japan again executed a drug 
smuggler after three years. In Taiwan and Singapore, more drug 
dealers were executed this year than in the whole of last year. 
In China, a total of 1,400 executions took place last year. In 
Singapore, the possession of 15 grams of heroin is forbidden on 
penalty of death. Portugal is an example of a more liberal 
policy. As Father (Feydor Pinto) stated at the UN drug 
conference, Portugal practically does not punish drug consumers. 
Their rehabilitation should be facilitated in this way. In 
Austria, there are also considerations concerning the 
legalization of so-called soft drugs, including cannabis 
products like hashish. However, this soft attitude is the 
reason for the adoption of tighter laws by Asian politicians, 
the president of the International Drug Control Council, (Hamid 
Godze), claims. 
  Godze: Legalization only makes matters worse. I 
do not believe that there is any bad intention behind the 
legalization of drugs. It is only a sign of frustration. 
Legalization is certainly not the right path toward a solution 
of the problem. In fact, we are facing numerous setbacks in the 
fight against the abuse of drugs, but we also achieve successes. 
We must not give up hope. 
  Bach-Koenig: However, the tough position does not 
seem to be particularly successful either. As the Iranian 
representative (Golam Hosseyn Sadegigarache) pointed out, the 
antidrug campaign has developed into an outright war. The drug 
smugglers are being fought by the military in Iran. For this 
reason, the drug smugglers possess ultra-modern military 
equipment. 
  Russia and Ukraine do not believe that they are in a 
position 
to get the smuggling of drugs from Iran, Afghanistan, and the 
Golden Triangle in Southeast Asia under control. Russia 
estimates the turnover of the drug dealers in its country at 
approximately $150 million. The Russian representative stated, 
referring to the worldwide sale of drugs: 
  Unidentified Russian representative: This is a 
lot. Not millions and not hundreds of millions, but billions of 
dollars are involved in drug trafficking, in illegal deals. 
This is probably the largest or second-largest turnover 
worldwide. The profit of the dealers is enormous. This makes 
them so powerful. Thus, the countries must closely cooperate in 
the fight against drug-related crime. Drugs are no national 
problem. Every piece of money earned by the drug dealers, no 
matter how small it is, makes somebody suffer somewhere. 
  Bach-Koenig: The drug dealers are estimated to 
turn over $100 billion worldwide every year. With a new 
computer network, the 53 member states of the council want to 
control the international trade -- not only the illegal one -- 
more efficiently. Like other countries, Austria has been urged 
to join the UN convention on curbing the legal trade. This 
convention also contains the ban of 10 legal substances which 
are used to produce drugs, including the chemical acetone, which 
is used for the production of cocaine. In Austria, Switzerland, 
Belgium, the Netherlands, and Ireland, some of these substances 
are used on a large-scale basis by the pharmaceutical industry. 

