BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS special correspondent Viktor Dmitriyev] </F>
  [Text] Quito June 2 TASS -- "In spite of the huge distance, 
separating Russia and Ecuador, our two countries are unanimous 
in their desire for peace, broader democracy and economic 
renovation," Chairman of the Council of the Federation (upper 
chamber of the Russian parliament) Vladimir Shumeyko told 
journalists at the airport here on Wednesday. He heads a 
Russian parliamentary delegation which arrived here from 
Venezuela. This is the last lap of its official tour of several 
Latin American states, including Chile, Argentina, Brazil, and 
Venezuela. 
  "The Russian Federation's special friendliness towards the 
Republic of Ecuador is confirmed by President Boris Yeltsin's 
message, which I will present to President Sixto Duran-Ballen 
Cordovez," Shumeyko added. "An Ecuador-Russia chamber of 
commerce will be inaugurated during the delegation's visit to 
Ecuador, the very name of which testifies to the country's 
unique geographical location." Shumeyko is expected to address 
local businessmen, while members of the delegation will meet 
representatives from the government, parliament and business 
circles. 
  The agenda of the delegation's stay in Ecuador includes a 
visit to the Galapagos Islands. This unique preserve, declared 
the property of all mankind by the UNESCO, is under the 
jurisdiction of Ecuador. 
  On the eve of its departure from Venezuela, the delegation 
met leaders of the Ministry for Power and Mining. The 
Venezuelan side touched on the possibility of Russia's accession 
to the OPEC, stressing that their country would welcome such a 
step. Chairman of the Committee for Economic Reforms, Property 
and Property Relations of the Council of the Federation Vitaliy 
Zelenkin assured the Venezuelans that the Russian leadership was 
closely following all the OPEC activities. He said that the 
question of Russia's accession to that organisation might be 
considered shortly. 
  The talk also touched on the resumption of bilateral 
cooperation within the frameworks of the so-called "oil 
triangle", interest in which was expressed by Russian 
representatives. Until 1991, the USSR had delivered oil to 
several European countries to meet Venezuela's commitments to 
them, while the latter supplied oil to Russian partners in the 
Western hemisphere, primarily Cuba. The sides agreed to discuss 
these subjects during the visit that is to be paid to Moscow by 
the Venezuelan minister for power and mining. The visit is 
expected to take place already this year. 

