BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Nadim Ka'wash] </F>
  [Text] Muscat, April 17 (AFP) - Officials from Israel, Arab 
states, and other countries and organisations opened talks on 
water resources here Sunday [17 April] with a call by Oman for 
an agreement to ensure stable supplies. 
  Omani Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Yusuf Ibn-'Alawi 
Bin-'Abdallah said water was one of the most important issues 
being negotiated in the region, as he opened the session at 
Muscat's Intercontinental Hotel. 
  Social and economic development plans required an agreement 
among all the countries of the Middle East to manage water 
resources and develop secure and stable supplies, he told the 
participants. 
  Deputy Foreign Minister Yosi Beilin was heading the Israeli 
delegation at the talks, due to last four days. It is the first 
ever visit to a Gulf Arab state by Israeli officials. 
  The water committee is one of five set up within the 
framework of the Middle East peace negotiations. 
  The talks on water resources are the first to take place in 
a 
Gulf country. It is the fifth session since the multilateral 
meetings began, following the 1991 Madrid peace conference. 
  "We had not expected such hospitality and warmth here," said 
a member of the Israeli delegation of more than 15 officials, 
accompanied by 20 journalists. "We are really impressed." 
  Another Israeli delegate said he had "the impression that 
the 
barriers between all the people of the region could come down 
and we can become friends." 
  Beilin met the head of the Omani delegation on Saturday to 
discuss the agenda of the meeting. 
  Conference sources said the Israeli delegation had 
threatened 
to boycott the meeting following a Palestinian delegate's 
statement that the PLO and Israel had agreed to set up a 
National Palestinian Committee to manage Palestinian water 
resources. 
  "The Palestinian delegate later corrected his statement and 
said the committee was part of the autonomy agreement. His 
earlier comments implied a Palestinian state", said an Israeli 
journalist who spoke to Beilin. 
  The Israelis are also due to attend a meeting on arms 
control 
in Qatar early next month, and a tourism conference in Dubai 
this year, officials said. 
  'Alawi said Oman had finalised studies with international 
help to upgrade water desalination facilities. The studies were 
presented to the meeting. 
  "We hope this effort will be a successful beginning for 
serious research to develop water desalination," he said. 
  "Such an achievement will also contribute greatly to 
preventing the danger of potential conflict over water 
resources. There is no doubt such a trend requires joint 
cooperation, especially with industrialised countries which have 
the experience and technology in this field". 

