BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Jacques Bihozagara, Rwandan Patriotic Front </F>
member and vice prime minister designate in the transitional 
government, by Henri Vernet in Geneva; date not given: "Jacques 
Bihozagara: `International Court Needed'" -- first paragraph is 
LE QUOTIDIEN DE PARIS introduction] 
  [Text] A member of the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), 
Jacques Bihozagara is the "vice prime minister designate" in the 
transitional government which was expanded to integrate members 
of the Tutsi minority and which is to take power in Kigali, 
according to the Arusha agreement signed in August last year. 
Mr. Bihozagara, who was in Rwanda's capital when the fighting 
was at its fiercest, is currently a refugee in Geneva. 
  While overtly skeptical with regard to the UN "long overdue" 
planned intervention, he wants an international court to be 
convened "to try the initiators of the genocide in Rwanda." 
  [Vernet] The UN decision to send more Blue Helmets to Kigali 
met with little enthusiasm on the part of the RPF. Why is that? 
  [Bihozagara] We simply consider that this decision was long 
overdue as the massacres and genocide have been consummated by 
now. Action was needed last month, when the Blue Helmets were 
still in Rwanda. All it would have taken then to avert the 
slaughter was to broaden their mandate. The UN special envoy in 
Rwanda, who displayed partiality and, above all, who proved 
unable to evaluate the situation, bears a heavy responsibility 
for what happened. 
  [Vernet] But those Blue Helmets will still serve a purpose. 
For example, Bernard Kouchner [former French humanitarian 
minister] suggests that "humanitarian corridors" should be 
created... 
  [Bihozagara] True, in Kigali and elsewhere in Rwanda, there 
are "pockets" of refugees gathered in hotels, hospitals, 
churches, etc. They must be rescued. But to achieve such a 
humanitarian mission, UN troops still in the country (400 men), 
possibly with limited reinforcements, would be enough. There is 
no need whatsoever to send in 5,500 soldiers, as decided by the 
Security Council, where, if I may remind you, Rwanda's 
representative is a man friendly with the "self-proclaimed 
government," that bunch of murderers we do not recognize as 
representing anyone but themselves. 
  [Vernet] As a permanent member of the Security Council, 
France wanted an even stronger UN mandate. What are your 
suspicions with respect to the United Nations? 
  [Bihozagara] I have no "suspicions" and I repeat I favor a 
strictly humanitarian mission. Still, the planned intervention 
will give the government Army time to regroup, which is a shame 
since it was being routed by the RPF yesterday. And this will 
strengthen the self-proclaimed government. In other words, the 
United Nations is helping the very people responsible for the 
April massacres! 
  [Vernet] Speaking of which, there have been large 
discrepancies in the -- horrifying -- body counts. There is 
talk of "100,000 to 200,000 dead," and some people, such as 
Germany's Klaus Kinkel, mention 500,000 casualties... 
  [Bihozagara] What is beyond doubt is that such figures will 
be a serious thorn in the side of those who wrote history books 
in Rwanda in the last three decades. Officials always claimed 
that out of a population of seven millions, only 10 percent were 
Tutsis. But since there are Tutsis that are still alive after 
this genocide, it means that we must have been lied to for 
years. Because not only is a 500,000 figure likely, but it will 
presumably increase... 
  [Vernet] Militarily, the RPF has now gained the upper hand. 
What is your goal? 
  [Bihozagara] We want to oust, capture, and bring before the 
courts the members of this bogus government. They are the 
initiators of this genocide, which was carried out according to 
a carefully devised plan as early as the night that followed 
President Habyarimana's assassination on 6 April. We wrote the 
UN Security Council asking that it convene an international 
court should we fail to stop these people ourselves. A court 
like the one set up in Europe after the fall of Nazi Germany, or 
the one decided for the former Yugoslavia. They are Nazis. 
African Nazis, but Nazis just the same, like Hitler. 
  [Vernet] You have been steadily charging France with 
"complicity" with the late president's regime. To what extent? 
  [Bihozagara] Is it a coincidence that, as I told you, so 
many dignitaries of that dictatorship sought refuge in your 
country? This long-lived complicity has been proved time and 
time again. Several months after Arusha, which was concluded in 
August 1993, Habyarimana would still not enforce the peace 
agreement and establish a transitional government including RPF 
members. At that time, that complicity was still going strong. 
  Need I remind you that Paris remained silent when, from 1992 
onward, after conducting investigations in the country, the 
International Human Rights Federation (IHRF) and other NGO's 
[nongovernmental organizations] condemned the regime's many 
crimes? Among other things, we can prove that the slaughter of 
the Bagogwe, a tribe of shepherds that belong to a Tutsi 
subgroup, took place under the nose of French soldiers. They 
were the very ones who trained the militia leaders who 
perpetrated the killing! 
  [Vernet] Since you believe France is party to the crime, 
does it mean it currently cannot play any part? Not even to 
contribute to a ceasefire? 
  [Bihozagara] We need to agree on which ceasefire we are 
talking about. There are two wars in Rwanda. One between the 
self-styled government and the population. And another one 
between the "government" and the RPF. A ceasefire is urgently 
needed for the former. Here, Paris can indeed act as an 
mediator, it can exert its influence on its friends, the 
militias of extremist parties and the Presidential Guard. 
  [Vernet] But after such horrors, can a reconciliation 
between Hutus and Tutsis be possible? 
  [Bihozagara] This is not a conflict between the Hutus and 
the Tutsis. Many Hutus from the civilian community and 
democratic political circles have been massacred by the regime's 
extremists: 90 percent of the country's politicians, including 
Prime Minister Agathe Uwinlingiyimana, have been exterminated. 
Survivors, i.e., the ones we saved in Kigali, sought refuge in 
areas under our control north of the capital. The same goes for 
the whole population. All in all, we have some 250,000 Hutu and 
Tutsi refugees now living together and everything is working out 
fine. Once the extremists have been controlled, we, the 
politicians, shall have to direct a coherent message at the 
people to show that the so- called ethnic rivalries are 
senseless. 
  [Vernet] The UN high commissioner for refugees (UNHCR) has 
charged the RPF with crimes of its own. What is your answer? 
  [Bihozagara] The UNHCR bases his allegations on testimonies 
collected in refugee camps outside Rwanda. People in these 
camps include a number of yesterday's killers, including the 
mayors who organized and led militias, who handed out machetes 
and grenades. How can one place any faith in such testimonies? 
I have just sent a letter of protest to the UNHCR. 

