Language: <F P=105> Vietnamese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Communique issued by National Assembly Standing Committee; </F>
date not given] 
  [Text] From 28 January to 2 February, the National Assembly 
Standing Committee [NASC] held a meeting under the direction of 
National Assembly Chairman Nong Duc Manh. Vice President Nguyen 
Thi Binh attended the meeting. 
  1. The NASC spent a great deal of time discussing and 
deciding on the 1994 NASC program of actions, including issues 
related to its law-building program, supervision program, and 
external relations activities to execute resolutions adopted by 
the Ninth National Assembly Fourth Session. 
  The NASC outlined concrete guidelines and measures to 
accelerate its legislation, supervision, and external relations 
activities together with 1994 key duties, especially the fight 
against corruption and smuggling. It also discussed and drew on 
experience for the guidance, regulation, and coordination of 
activities performed by the Nationalities Committee and other 
committees of the National Assembly in order to satisfactorily 
complete the outlined duties. 
  2. The NASC listened to reports presented by representatives 
of the government, the Supreme People's Court, and the Supreme 
People's Organ of Control on the implementation of the National 
Assembly resolutions and laws introduced by the National 
Assembly in its Fourth Session. It also examined reports from 
the Ministries of Interior, Commerce, and Construction on their 
urgent works to execute the National Assembly resolutions. 
  The NASC praises the government, central organs, and local 
authorities for their quick implementation of recently-adopted 
resolutions and laws. At the same time, the NASC wants to 
emphasize the importance of the introduction of documents to 
provide guidance for the execution of the laws and concrete 
guidelines and measures for the government and responsible 
organs to observe in their implementation process. 
  3. The NASC examined the government report on the allocation 
of the 1994 state budget after the government had completed his 
working sessions with ministries, government agencies, and local 
authorities. The NASC approves the allocation planning. It 
reminds that in the implementation process, the government must 
closely observe the estimation of budget revenues and expenses 
mentioned in the National Assembly resolution. At the same 
time, the government must introduce concrete measures and 
policies to increase revenue, save money, and create more 
capital resources to accelerate the socioeconomic development. 
  4. The NASC offered its opinions on the draft regulation on 
the coordination between different government agencies in their 
guidance for the implementation of the National Assembly 
resolutions on practicing frugality and fighting waste, 
corruption, and smuggling. The NASC discussed many important 
issues of the draft regulation, especially the objectives and 
scope of the coordination and the responsibility of each 
government agency, head of government agencies, National 
Assembly deputy, and National Assembly delegations in executing 
the National Assembly resolutions. This draft regulation needs 
to be perfected by seeking opinions from related organs for 
early implementation. 
  5. Based on the recommendation of the chief justice of the 
Supreme People's Court, the NASC approved the appointment of 
Senior Lieutenant General Nguyen Nam Khanh, deputy director of 
the Political General Department of the Vietnam People's Army, 
to the Selection Committee of Judges for the Supreme People's 
Courts and to the Central Military Court to replace retiring 
Lieut. Gen. Nguyen Oanh, deputy chief justice of the Supreme 
People's Court and Chief Judge of the Central Military Court. 

