Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, March 8 (BTA) -- On March 6, at 5.50 AM, the 
Khan Kubrat ship called at the port of Prahovo, Bulgaria's 
Embassy in Belgrade said, quoting official Serb sources. Reports 
said the ship towing 6 barges loaded with 5,136 tonnes of fuel 
were placed under surveillance and the fuel was not unloaded. 
This was done to meet the request of the Bulgarian captain, a 
Foreign Ministry spokesman said today. Ways for bringing back 
the ship, the barges and the crew are being considered at the 
moment at Bulgaria's insistence. 
  The Bulgarian Foreign Ministry and the Bulgarian Embassy in 
Belgrade continue their efforts to clear up the circumstances on 
the Khan Kubrat case, the spokesman also said. 
  The Khan Kubrat ship and the barges were detained by 
monitors 
of the Western European Union (WEU) near Calafat, Romania, on 
January 31 on suspicion of embargo-busting. Pending a ruling by 
the Nikipol Regional Prosecutor's Office the ship was held under 
customs control at the port of Sumovit, which it left uncleared 
on the night of March 3 to sail to Romanian and Serb territorial 
waters. Customs officials, the State Shipping Inspectorate and 
the local BTA correspondent said the ship was hijacked but did 
not rule out the possibility of a sham hijacking. The cabinet 
on March 6 said that the ship had entered the Serbian section of 
the Danube. A decision was taken not to use force to rescue the 
hostages so as to avoid bloodshed and pollution of the river is 
case the ship was blown up, the Cabinet's press office said. 
The WEU monitors chose not to use their right to halt the ship 
for the same reasons, Monitor Mission Head Rainer Boyssel told a 
BTA reporter last night. According to Mr. Boyssel, organized 
gang groups were to blame for the case and the government was 
not involved. A National Radio report yesterday said that 
meeting with Foreign Ministry's Southeastern Europe Department 
Chief Konstantin Andreev, Yugoslav Charge d'Affaires in Sofia 
Smilkovich expressed the readiness of the Serb authorities to 
assist in the detention of the hijackers, in assuring the crew's 
safety and returning the ship to Bulgaria. 
  Union of the Democratic Forces (SDS) leader Filip Dimitrov 
today said that the SDS parliamentary faction will insist on 
holding a parliamentary hearing on the case and setting up an ad 
hoc commission of inquiry to collect details on Khan Kubrat's 
hijacking. 

