CSO 

  [Text] The recent discovery of 14 furnaces for making 
charcoal in the Pongo Natural Forest, in Azuayo de Giron Canton, 
alerted the public to a method of destroying natural forests 
that is all the more reprehensible because it is unnecessary. 
However, it has proven impossible to curb. 
  Cuenca--Pongo is an expanse of over 300 hectares of woods 
consisting of large-sized native species that, according to 
British biologists, must have taken at least 600 years to grow. 
During the past three years, 50 hectares of this virgin 
vegetation have been converted into firewood or charcoal. 
  The destruction of part of the forest was confirmed by the 
undersecretary of agriculture in the South, Carlos Moscoso. On 
two visits to the site, access to which is difficult because it 
lies amid dense vegetation, he discovered 14 furnaces and eight 
persons working on the processing of charcoal. 
  When the Ecuadoran Institute of Forests, Natural Areas, and 
Wildlife (INEFAN) was alerted, four men were given a fine of two 
minimum wages each. It was also decided to seize the motorized 
saw and the material already processed. 
  Nevertheless, the INEFAN, which is the only judge for this 
type of administrative process, cannot auction the items that 
are seized, because it lacks the means for removing them from 
the site. 
  The landowner, fined three minimum wages on a previous 
occasion for felling trees without a permit, has not yet been 
penalized in this case. 
<H5>  "Now They Realize" </H5>
  Carlos Moscoso claims that action has been taken, in 
cooperation with the INEFAN, to make confiscations at the market 
and during the clandestine transport of plant materials. 
  He also notes that identification cards will be given to 
interested private individuals, giving them the authority to act 
as forest wardens. 
  A visit to the charcoal and firewood market, now moved from 
the famous Otorongo to the most secluded part of Arenal, the 
city's principal market, proves the contrary. A vendor makes the 
rather explicit statement: "Yes, they bother us once in awhile, 
but lately they have realized that people have to make a living 
from something." 
  Most of the charcoal comes from the coast, and this 
informant 
confirms the statement made by the MAG [Ministry of Agriculture 
and Livestock] and the INEFAN to the same effect. However, the 
INEFAN director, Pablo Vintimilla, wonders: "Now, where will the 
coast's charcoal come from?" Statistics prepared by the 
institute in December also indicate that much of the firewood 
sold at Arenal comes "from the hills": in other words, from 
natural forests. Considering the fact that felling trees for 
lumber makes use of a minimum amount of the material, the INEFAN 
tolerates the processing of charcoal from cultivated timber and 
from material originating in the routine chopping of woods. This 
is more than sufficient for making charcoal that, apparently, 
continues to be consumed. The INEFAN's legal adviser, Franklin 
Bucheli, places great hope in the expedient that the institute 
has for collecting taxes on lumber and for controlling 
transportation permits. 
  He trusts more in educating people than in coercion, but 
admits that, in the meantime, something should be devised by the 
experts and other technicians for controlling this situation. He 
says that it seems manageable, compared with the problem caused 
by the felling of woods for the powerful lumber industry. 

