93 p 29 
<F P=103> 944K0533A </F>
<F P=104>  Tallinn aRIPaEV </F>
 Language: <F P=105>Estonian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Margus Mets: "Andres Sarri--1993 Businessman of </F>
the Year"] 
  [Text] 
  Andres Sarri (35), chairman of the board of AS Eesti 
Talleks, and a man completely unknown to Estonia's world of 
business only three years ago has, by now, become one of the 
major pullers of strings in the small state's economic life. 
After a nervous albeit successful year, Sarri has finally 
privatized Talleks, risen to lead the Central Industrial 
Alliance, assumed control of the former Esttex Bank 
[Esttexpank], created the Taxpayers' Association, along with 
some influential friends and, to top it off, was named 
businessman of the year by aRIPaEV. 
  As director of a private company that purchased one of the 
first large enterprises to be privatized, and the other 
protagonist in the court epic initiated by Paul Treier, former 
director of the excavator company, Andres Sarri has made a name 
for himself both at home and abroad. 
  The first business experiences of Sarri, a graduate of 
machine construction technology at the Technical University, 
goes back to a small business venture Tipnet, founded at TPI 
[Tallinn Polytechnical Institute, Technical University's 
previous name] in the early stages of the cooperative era. The 
groundwork, however, for the first of his companies AS Kadeks 
that went into wholesale business and ran a grocery store on the 
Talleks premises, was laid while he was working at the state 
enterprise Talleks in 1989. 
  Even though this year's 100-million kroon sales volume 
projected for AS Talleks and its affiliates, now headed by 
Sarri, represents a big jump from the one-time shop, it is far 
from being the ultimate achievement for an active man like 
Sarri. "If I had been engaged in business activity in a firm 
that is exclusively mine, I would have been a millionaire for 
sure," he admits. But since his energies are spent on companies 
dealing with production that will start paying off later, he'll 
have to wait a little. "I forego quite a few things today, so as 
to get more tomorrow." 
  About his shares in Eesti Talleks Sarri says that, right 
now, 
his participation percentage can be noted by a single digit, but 
he has an agreement with the board of the corporation 
stipulating that, upon meeting certain objectives, the chairman 
can buy additional shares to have control of about one fifth of 
Talleks. 
<H5>  Sarri Also Became Owner of a Bank </H5>
  Compared to some of his fellow members of the taxpayers' 
club, Sarri was more like a poor cousin up until this fall. At 
the end of November, Sarri made it to the league of men by 
having acquired a controlling interest in Esttexpank in the name 
of his companies. 
  Today, the bank that was created to be a money machine for 
Estar by Juri Kraft five years ago is controlled by 
corporations Kadeks and Hobeseekel [Silver Shekel]. The 
latter was created by Sarri in cooperation with Meelis Milder 
(Baltika) and other entrepreneurs specifically for investing in 
the bank. "The purchase of shares was handled by an unknown 
company, so as not to create unnecessary emotions," the 
businessman of the year hinted. 
  In addition to owning the bank, Sarri's first company Kadeks 
also deals in gasoline and is building a gas station in 
Parnu. Local construction firms make no secret of their 
displeasure, because Sarri has been owing them 200,000 kroons 
for some time now. The man has promised, however, that 
everything will be straightened out before Christmas. 
<H5>  TKP--Sarri's Lasting and Painful Memory </H5>
  Sarri, who was appointed chairman of the commission to 
liquidate TKP [Tartu's Bank of Commerce] by Bank of Estonia 
president Siim Kallas in January, went on believing way into 
March, that the Tallinn City Court will declare Eesti 
Kutus 
[Estonian Fuel] bankrupt, and that the millions thus regained 
will be used to compensate the shareholders of the failed bank. 
  In May Sarri made a magnificent gesture of dropping the 
claim 
for the amount which, according to an interim-agreement 
negotiated by Laar and Kallas with the fuel company's Toomas 
Saks, had passed the billion mark, counting all the late fees. 
Estonian Fuel admitted its liability to the liquidated bank to 
be 125 million kroons, out of which a little over 35 million had 
been paid back at the time. The state, as owner of the fuel 
company, however, has not seen fit to transfer the money, and 
debate over the validity of the agreements has made its way back 
to the court. 
  "For me, it will be a long and painful memory," Sarri admits 
in mid-December, as he comments on the TKP problems, and voices 
his hopes for the umteenth time to have this bank's affairs 
staightened out as soon as possible. In the meantime, other 
members of the commission have voiced strong criticism of Sarri, 
as a person not overly interested in the daily activities of the 
commission. 
  In March, Sarri assumed another important honorary position. 
At the Central Alliance of Estonian Industry [ETKL: Eesti 
Toostuse Keskliit], power went from old industrial 
leaders Veskivali and Kraft to entrepreneurs of the new 
generation. Sarri became chairman of the ETKL council, and 
Meelis Milder, chairman of the board at Baltika, became his 
deputy. 
  In the course of the year, Sarri has had a lot of dealings 
with Milder, as he has with the other 12 members of the 
Taxpayers' Club because, for some reason, many business dealings 
in Estonia will have to go through these men. "The Club simply 
evolved from a group of people who like to meet for dinner, 
occasionally, have some wine and talk," Sarri explains, looking 
his public straight in the eye, just like all the other 
prominent club members. 

