BFN 

  [Excerpts] The war continues in the country. It was a 
bloody Monday for Cuito residents. According to provisional 
figures, 25 civilians have been killed and 65 wounded. Our 
correspondent Abel Abraao reports. 
  [Begin Abraao recording] More than 700 shells of various 
calibers were fired at the martyred city of Cuito by the rebels 
of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola 
[UNITA] at dawn today. The heavy artillery shelling was 
accompanied by constant attacks on positions of government 
forces in the south of Cuito. It was the bloodiest attack since 
the Black Cockerel's men resumed their shelling of the city on 
26 May. 
  According to provisional figures, the shelling of the 
besieged city of Cuito by the enemies of the people and peace at 
dawn today resulted in the death of 25 people and the wounding 
of 65 others, mostly old people, children, and women. To raze 
Cuito to ground, Jonas Savimbi's army used all its sophisticated 
war materiel, including 120-mm guns [words indistinct]. [end 
recording] [passage omitted] 
  UNITA has also been carrying out actions in Moxico. Our 
correspondent Paulo Cahilo reports: 
  [Begin Cahilo recording] A source from the Moxico Military 
Region said yesterday that UNITA forces murdered a 22-year-old 
woman and her baby, less than one year old, and then threw them 
into Luena River. This criminal action by the Black Cockerel's 
men took place at Saimina Ward, a few kilometers to the west of 
Luena. The source also said that over the past few days, UNITA 
troops have been murdering defenseless citizens, as part of 
their military strategy, thus increasing the people's suffering. 
  The military source also revealed that yesterday UNITA 
murdered three people on the outskirts of the city of Luena and 
wounded one person at Calanda, 18 km to the west of Luena. Also 
yesterday, one civilian was killed and another wounded after 
detonating a mine planted by UNITA. The military source also 
said that by 27 May, UNITA forces had murdered nine people and 
wounded 10 others on the outskirts of the city of Luena. 
  These actions once again confirm recent information that 
UNITA has been concentrating men and war materiel to launch a 
large-scale on the city of Luena. Meanwhile, the military 
command here in Luena has given assurances that the Angolan 
Armed Forces [FAA], the national police, and the civilian 
defense will not allow Jonas Savimbi's men to fulfill their 
objectives. FAA forces, the national police, and the civilian 
defense are ready to give adequate response to UNITA rebels, as 
was the case in 1991. [end recording] 

