BFN 

  [Text] Brussels, Apr 07, BNS -- Estonia is optimistic it 
will soon have free trade access to the European Union [EU], 
Foreign Minister Juri Luik said Wednesday [6 April]. 
  In Brussels for meetings with EU officials, including the 
union's trade chief, Sir Leon Brittan, Luik said he hoped talks 
on a free trade agreement between the two sides would be sewn up 
in late May. 
  The talks have narrowed their focus down to the sensitive 
areas of agriculture and textiles, he told reporters. 
  Estonia's policy of allowing imports to enter the country 
freely, without tariffs, gives the tiny nation "a very strong 
hand in negotiating with the European Union," Luik said. 
  EU trade talks with the Baltic nations of Latvia and 
Lithuania are progressing more slowly, "but the aim to have 
working agreements in place by Jan. 1, 1995 is still a goal for 
all three states," Luik said. 
  Estonia already has a free trade zone with Finland, which is 
expected to join the union on Jan. 1, along with Austria, Norway 
and Sweden. 
  Luik said Baltic states hope to upgrade their talks with the 
EU soon so they can move beyond trade to political and 
immigration issues. "We hope in autumn that the Baltic states 
might move on to the association agreements," he said. 
  Those agreements ensure regular political dialogue and hold 
out the prospect of eventual EU membership. 
  The EU has signed similar accords with the Czech and Slovak 
Republics, Hungary, Bulgaria and Romania. 
  Luik said Baltic governments feel strong support from EU 
states, especially from Germany. 
  "This path needs political courage, both from ourselves and 
from the European Union," he said. 
  He would not guess as to when Baltic states would find their 
place in the union. "It depends more on the EU than on us," he 
said. "We are ready to move at the quickest possible speed." 
  "We don't want the Baltic states to be left behind." Last 
month, the presidents of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia announced 
they would combine diplomatic efforts to gain membership into 
European and international organizations. 
  Since breaking with Moscow in 1991, the three states, with a 
combined population of 7.8 million, have expressed the desire to 
integrate their nations. 
  Luik said coordination so far has been "mostly political," 
adding that there are "clear differences" between their economic 
policies. 

