Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Statements by Duma Deputies Irina Khakamada, Vladimir </F>
Lysenko, and Yekaterina Lakhova; carried under "The Duma Through 
the Eyes of Deputies" rubric] 
  [Text] Irina Khakamada: Walking the Tightrope 
  The parliament which we elected is unpredictable. No one has 
an absolute majority. Whether a decision is passed or not will 
depend each time on what forces reach agreement between 
themselves in the Duma. Not only are the interfactional 
alliances movable, but each faction itself is not monolithic and 
is also movable, since the leaders' ambitions and the increasing 
influence of personalities within their associations will also 
play their role. 
  Why the democrats lost and what conclusions should be drawn 
from their defeat is a question that has been discussed quite 
thoroughly already. I only wish to stress that if the 
government carries out unpopular reforms and at the same time 
wants to win elections, it should prepare itself support among 
the population in advance. The decisions on increasing pensions 
and the transfer of the militia to municipal authority (after 
all, our militia today cannot defend the citizen -- I have 
encountered this in my own life) should have been published not 
today, after the elections, but before them. Voters refused to 
follow the word "democrats" out of inertia, thus demanding that 
they be shown respect: If you want their support you have to 
give them money and responsibility. Give them the chance to see 
what they get for their taxes: Here is where they are going, 
and this is the sort of return I am getting. Therefore 
populists of all sorts were able to play on the absolute 
insolubility of social problems. From the example of my 
election campaign I can assert how difficult it is to oppose 
categorical, "splendid" promises. I was a candidate in a 
district where there is a concentration of "dormitory suburbs" 
[spalnyye kvartaly] which are unsound in every aspect, including 
ecologically. And one of my rivals promised that, if elected, 
he would close down the plant that is poisoning life in the 
entire region. Of course, he will not close the plant. But it 
sounded good! There is, of course, the normal mechanism -- but 
one which, admittedly, requires a longer time to take shape: 
The plant's profits should be taxed only after all expenses 
necessary for purification installations have been deducted from 
them. I am sure that I managed to win the election campaign not 
by handing out impossible promises but only because my program 
-- notice that it is a liberal program, and therefore does not 
enjoy absolute support today -- was absolutely specific. 
  The Liberal Democratic Party pf Russia has such a broad 
representation in parliament because it combined the votes of 
those who thereby expressed their dissatisfaction with the 
inconsistency of the reforms, and of those who truly share the 
ideas of the leader of that party. However, Zhirinovskiy's 
party today represents a big question mark, in my view. 
Everyone is talking about its leader, but what do his comrades 
in arms represent? Will it receive a political weight in 
parliament corresponding to its size? This will be shown by the 
proceedings in parliament. Even today, however, it is clear 
that, given such a parliament, it is impossible to expect the 
clear-cut advancement of reforms. There will also be 
difficulties over the formation of the government, the power 
ministries, and foreign policy. Much will now depend on the 
president, who, thank God, has been given significant powers 
under the new Constitution. A huge part will also be played by 
the extent to which both communists and democrats take 
responsible stances, to what extent they are professional and 
analytical in their choices. Let us have no more fighting to 
prove who is cleverer and stronger. Let us have as much 
negotiation and as much accord as possible. 
<H5>  Vladimir Lysenko: "Period of Grace" for Parliamentarians </H5>
  The "Yavlinskiy-Boldyrev-Lukin" bloc is preparing quite 
seriously for parliamentary work: Yavlinskiy in the "EPItsentr" 
[Economic and Political Research Center] has drawn up many 
documents, and we have interesting social and economic programs; 
we will have plenty of things to propose to the State Duma. 
  Our faction is one of the few which proposes to create a 
parliament based not upon a rigid faction system but on a "soft" 
option. That is to say that, as a rule, deputies should work in 
the factions for whom they were elected; but it would be 
incorrect to bind deputies so rigidly that they could be 
expelled from parliament if they have some kind of difference 
with their faction or want to switch to another faction. This 
is incorrect because the rules of the game were initially 
different; neither the Statute on the Federal Assembly nor the 
Constitution provides for rigid discipline within factions. 
Second, it should be borne in mind that, in a transitional 
period, much changes, events move from one stage to another, and 
positions change too. For instance, I have many friends in 
"Russia's Choice" and in Shakhray's bloc with whom I would like 
to cooperate. But I do not rule out that the situation could 
reach a point -- as often has been the case with the democrats 
-- where we could end up virtually as each other's main enemy, 
if we pursue the previous policy. I am also thinking of the 
activity of certain bloc leaders. Hence, it seems to me, a 
deputy should have the right to change faction at least once. 
  I am for the democrats coordinating their actions in 
parliament. Everything should be discussed and agreed between 
ourselves beforehand; we should find common ground on which to 
stand in negotiations with the rest. Unfortunately, there are 
other approaches in our faction. Some deputies believe that we 
should reach agreement with the communists on one issue and with 
"Russia's Choice" on another. This position -- keeping 
equidistant from either side -- is quite frankly alarming. 
<H5>  Yekaterina Lakhova: Women Will Not Be "Tame" </H5>
  We realize that voters who supported the "Women of Russia" 
bloc in the elections will follow closely how we justify their 
trust. Either we will discredit the women's movement, or we will 
strengthen it. We intend to work seriously in parliament in 
order to overcome the traditional idea of women's low political 
activeness and to fight to increase women's social status -- 
right now it is intolerably low. We seriously intend to fight 
to see that a woman is elected one of the deputy chairmen of the 
State Duma. It is time to stop treating half the population of 
the country like second-class people; we should not be a 
laughing stock in the world community. 
  I think that parliament should actively influence the 
formation of state policy. Insofar as this policy is formed in 
laws, everything is in our hands. I object to the idea that, if 
the government does not change its course, we should not support 
it; we can influence this course by adopting new laws and making 
rational amendments to existing legislation, especially as 
regards property questions, privatization, and so forth. 
  Will our faction's voice be heeded in parliament? It is hard 
to predict at this stage. But we will not be "tame" -- that is 
unequivocal. People are constantly trying to pin "Women of 
Russia" to someone else's coattails -- now to one bloc, now to 
another. I think that every faction will try to preserve its 
autonomy. We will find common approaches in resolving some 
problems, but we will also seek allies in other factions to 
lobby for our issues. We will try to make ourselves heard. 
Especially since there is the experience acquired in the 
previous parliament. We will take account of this, just as we 
will take account of past mistakes. 

