Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, Feb 5 (XINHUA) -- A senior Chinese official 
said here today that China will strengthen cooperation with 
international organizations, as well with countries where rhinos 
and tigers live, in its efforts to protect the endangered 
species from becoming extinct. 
  State Councillor Song Jian made the remarks to a visiting 
international delegation led by Murray Hosking, chairman of the 
Standing Committee of the Convention on International Trade in 
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES). 
  The CITES delegation, which arrived here this week, 
inspected 
rhino horns and tiger bones sealed at a storehouse of a Beijing 
Chinese medicine factory yesterday and flew to Zhanjiang in 
Guangdong Province this afternoon to watch the burning of rhino 
horns tomorrow. 
  ``China has lost two billion yuan since the Chinese 
Government banned the trade in rhino horns and tiger bones last 
year,'' Song said. 
  But he noted that it was necessary for the Chinese 
Government 
to take proper protection measures to save rhinos and tigers 
from becoming extinct. 
  ``This policy is not only in line with the interests of 
Chinese people but will also benefit mankind as a whole,'' he 
said. 
  ``It indicates that the Chinese Government has taken a firm 
and serious stand in implementing international conventions, and 
the international community should show its full understanding 
of it and give it the evaluation it deserves,'' he said. 
  ``China has thousands of years of history of producing 
medicines from fauna and flora, while it has been only five 
years since it enforced the law to protect wild life,'' Song 
said. 
  ``It is a gradual process in perfecting the laws and 
increasing the public's awareness of the importance of 
protecting wild life,'' he said. ``You cannot expect to achieve 
all this overnight.'' 
  Song said that he hoped that the international community 
would understand the actual difficulties China is facing in 
protecting endangered species, as well as the Chinese 
Government's determination and achievements in protecting wild 
life. 
  ``It will not help solve problems to put pressures on China 
and force China to do something which it is not able to do for 
the time being, disregarding the country's national 
conditions,'' Song said. 
  He added that China is completely open to the outside world 
in the area of environmental protection. ``We welcome 
international organizations to send people to China to offer any 
criticism of our shortcomings and improve our work by giving 
their help and support.'' 
  Murray Hosking said that his delegation had clearly seen 
that 
China has taken resolute measures to protect wild life, and the 
country's legislative work in wild life protection was 
outstanding. 
  ``We particularly appreciate China's open policy in wild 
life 
protection and the country has proved this in its policy banning 
the trade of rhino horns and tiger bones,'' he said. 
  The other members of the delegation expressed their 
appreciation of the sacrifice China's state-run medicine 
factories have made in implementing the government's policy 
banning all trade in rhino horns and tiger bones. 
  ``I urge Chinese scientists to step up their research on the 
substances of the Chinese medicines and find substitutes for 
them as soon as possible,'' said Izgrev Topkov, a member of the 
delegation. 

