BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Jose Maria Monzon for NOTICIAS ARGENTINAS] </F>
  [Text] Buenos Aires, 8 Apr (NA) -- Carlos Menem's 
administration took advantage of the nearly unnoticed visit by 
Madeleine Albright, U.S. permanent representative before the 
United Nations, to once again raise one of the issues that 
worries the Argentine military the most; namely, NATO member 
countries' refusal to sell weapons and military hardware to our 
country. 
  During their talks with the U.S. diplomat, officials from 
the 
Defense and Foreign Ministries pointed out that it was totally 
incoherent that on the one hand the United Nations asks 
Argentine servicemen to participate in peacekeeping missions 
like those in Croatia and Bosnia, while at the same time 
Argentina is hampered from being able to reequip itself in a 
manner suitable to the dangers being faced in those places. 
  "If we are trustworthy enough to participate in such 
important missions as those in the former Yugoslavia, we should 
also be trusted with access to the latest generation 
conventional weapons," they underscored during the meetings with 
Albright, in which they did most of the talking. 
  The Argentine strategy seeks basically to undermine the 
United Kingdom's influence on its NATO partners, which is, in 
short, the root cause of the discrimination against our country 
concerning military materiel. 
  London so far maintains its ability to exert pressure on its 
partners in the Atlantic alliance nearly intact. Proof of this 
are the countless obstacles the Argentine Air Force has had to 
overcome to purchase the old Skyhawk planes. It is still not 
known whether the U.S. Government is willing to fit them with 
second generation tactical radars. 
  The Menem administration is interested -- as a priority 
issue 
-- in opening a breach in the embargo imposed following the 
Malvinas war, and feels it has made all the necessary gestures 
and efforts to that effect in the international arena. Sending 
ships to the Persian Gulf, participation in the blockade against 
Haiti, sending humanitarian aid to Somalia, and the deployment 
of more than 900 servicemen in the former Yugoslavia are 
concrete examples that Argentine officials intend to offer as 
proof of the country's faithfulness to the initiatives taken by 
Western countries within the UN Security Council. 
  The Argentine military's concern is not limited to the 
impossibility of having at their disposal the appropriate 
materiel for participating in peacekeeping missions. It also 
includes the imbalance which is indeed taking place in the 
region, as the Chilean Armed Forces have found a clear path to 
reequipping themselves. 
  With regard to this, Margaret Thatcher's recent visit to 
Santiago and the special interest the British showed in the 
military aeronautics fair held in Santiago caused uneasiness 
among the Argentine military, who believe that behind these 
gestures of rapprochement London is pursuing a strategy of 
pressure. 
  The Argentine Government has allegedly discussed its 
uneasiness with the new civilian authorities in Chile, and 
although they are not fostering this rapprochement with Great 
Britain, they seem unable to control their military's public 
relations. 
  Leaving this mistrust aside, what the Argentine Government 
is 
trying to do is to neutralize London's influence in the 
international scene. In order to achieve this, it is interested 
in becoming a permanent member of the UN Security Council. 
  The Argentine Government is aware that the United States is 
in favor of increasing the number of permanent members to 20, 
and intends that our country be taken into account when the 
latter are appointed. In any case, it remains to be seen what 
the United Kingdom's stance is on this aspiration. Actually, 
one should bear in mind that it still has enough clout with 
Washington to twist any important decision that has to do with 
Argentina. 

