Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Chitra Subramaniam: "Indian Manages To Get </F>
Dunkel Text on Textiles"] 
  [Text] Geneva -- In the wee hours of Wednesday morning, US 
textiles negotiator Jennifer Hillman (a friend of Hillary 
Clinton) gave up. She had spent Tuesday night and many hours 
since, trying to tell the Indian negotiators (Islamabad crumbled 
earlier on) to open up their textiles and clothes markets for 
exports. 
  Just before 4 a.m., her chief Rufus Yerxa walked into the 
room, probably to force the issue. The Indians dug in. Later in 
the day, replying to journalists wanting to know how and why 
Washington threw in the towel, chief Indian negotiator 
Ambassador Bal Krishan Zutshi said: "We didn't blink." 
  Meanwhile, EC foreign ministers approved a GATT world trade 
deal, diplomats said. Asked whether the whole deal had been 
agreed upon, a diplomat said: "Yes, it has been done." 
  Closely following the India versus United States textiles 
match were the Latin Americans, who have their heart with India 
and purse strings attached to the United States. When the 
results were declared one Latin American diplomat asked aloud 
"Why didn't India stand up to the US earlier?" 
  India has managed to save the unsatisfactory Dunkel 
proposals 
on textiles from getting worse by the skin of its teeth. Zutshi 
is the first to admit that the proposals do not give Indian 
textile goods sufficient access, but what the Americans were 
asking for would have been much worse. 
  "Textile lobbyists in the United States and the European 
Community are an unreasonable lot, some of them are the absolute 
limit," Zutshi said. So is India's chief negotiator happy? 
  "If a negotiator says he is happy, it means he has done a 
bad 
job," Zutshi told a press conference in the afternoon. "As for 
the overall results, it is too soon to say anything, only time 
will tell," he added. 
  Zutshi said India had given nothing away in agriculture, in 
so far as it had made no commitments under the agriculture 
package and had also managed to secure an understanding about 
the country's public distribution system and food securities. 
While these concerns will not be reflected in the main text, 
they will appear as footnotes. 
  The ambassador said India was not too unhappy with the TRIPS 
[Trade-Related Intellectual Property Rights] texts. Two issues 
that had come for particular scrutiny related to the issue of 
sui generis for plant varieties and patenting of 
genetic material and gene patenting -- under the current 
agreement farmers would be able to replant their seeds and 
researchers rights would be safeguarded. 
  On anti-dumping rules, Zutshi said that American attempts to 
make a mockery of the rules had been somewhat circumscribed and 
that the anti-dumping text "had not been considerably" weakened. 
On the contentious issue of standard of review (panels), Zutshi 
said it was too soon to say anything but that one thing was 
certain because of it, "litigation within GATT would increase 
because countries will have recourse to one more instrument," he 
said. 
  In services and especially financial services where the US 
wants a two-track process, Zutshi said it will be kept open with 
basic commitments for six months after the multilateral trade 
organisation (MTO) comes into effect from India's point of view, 
the issue of movement of persons will also be kept open for the 
same length of time under the same conditions. 
  Early on Wednesday, the United States said that the MTO 
should be re-christened to the `World Trade Organisation.' That 
was done. The joke in town is that Washington does not like the 
world multilateral. 

