Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tallinn, Feb 16, BNS -- The Baltic free-trade 
agreement signed Sept. 13 in Tallinn comes into force as of 
April 1. 
  Lithuania was the last Baltic state to ratify the agreement 
in January and the Estonian Government, with whom the agreement 
is deposited, was officially notified of this in February. 
  The agreement integrates the three markets of Estonia, 
Latvia 
and Lithuania into one economic area with about 8 million 
consumers. The Estonian Foreign Ministry informs in its survey 
of the agreement that it is similar to the agreements which all 
the three countries have so far concluded with Finland, Sweden, 
Norway and Switzerland. 
  The agreement lays down the principles of trade in 
industrial 
goods, while an agreement on trade in agricultural produce will 
be concluded separately. 
  The agreement stipulates that all customs duties and import 
quotas in trade between the three countries will be abolished 
and no new duties on imports will be introduced. 
  At least for the initial period, however, some restrictions 
on exports will be maintained. Namely Latvia will limit exports 
of gypsum, limestone flux, raw hides, logs and timber, as well 
as scrap metal by export tariffs of 20-100 percent. 
  Lithuania will maintain tariffs on the export of raw hides, 
glands and certain types of timber. Estonia may limit exports 
of oil shale, gravel, clay and quartz sand by quotas. 
  The reason for maintaining the restrictions for the time 
being is to encourage domestic industries to use local raw 
materials and to prevent their exports so as to direct the 
development and structural reform of local processing industries. 
  An important feature of the Baltic free-trade agreement are 
the provisions of cumulation of the rules of origin which will 
enable the industries which use inputs originating in one 
country to export their manufactured production into Finland, 
Sweden, Norway and Switzerland free from tariff. Thus, the 
agreement widens the markets of EFTA [European Free Trade 
Association] for Baltic industries. 
  The agreement includes provisions on customs cooperation and 
defines the ways and means of determining the rules of origin 
under which goods qualify for tariff-free import. Certificates 
of origin issued by the respective customs authorities will be 
the documentary evidence for meeting these criteria. 
  Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania agreed to liberalize trade, 
but 
also to create favorable conditions for competition. 
  State aid and dumping are not considered to be in line with 
the general functioning of the free-trade agreement. Emergency 
measures, however, can be taken if products originating in one 
country seriously threaten the market of any other party. The 
tariffs imposed must not exceed 25 percent and their term of 
validity must not be above five years. 
  The agreement allows temporary restrictions on export, 
import 
and transit to protect moral standards, national security, 
health and life of animals, people and plants, environment, 
intellectual property, and in some other cases. 
  The three states will set up a joint commission to supervise 
the functioning of the agreement, solve any possible problems, 
and develop closer cooperation in the future. 
  The agreement will stay in force indefinitely. 
  The Foreign Ministry survey notes that the Baltic states 
have 
earlier signed bilateral agreements on avoiding double taxation, 
which also foster trade between the three countries. 

