Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Agreement With European Union"] </F>
  [Text] Brussels -- After a dogged struggle, Austria 
concluded the negotiations for membership of the European Union 
[EU] late on Tuesday evening [2 March]. A maximum duration of 
nine years with two reviewing conferences was agreed upon with 
regard to the transit treaty. The first reviewing conference 
will be held after three years. 
  The transit treaty will be continued automatically unless 
another decision is reached unanimously. 
  After six years, the EU Commission will present a study on 
whether the ecological objectives of the transit treaty 
(reduction of pollutants by 60 percent) have been achieved. If 
this study concludes the objectives have been reached, the 
transit treaty will expire on 1 January 2001. If the objectives 
of the transit treaty are not reached, the EU Council of 
Ministers can decide on measures that ensure the equivalent 
environmental protection (reduction of pollutants by 60 percent) 
with a qualified majority. Should such a resolution not be 
achieved, the transit treaty will be valid for another three 
years. 
  Immediately after conclusion of the negotiations, 
Agriculture 
Minister Franz Fischler said that the result in the field of 
agriculture is "a result for which one has struggled hard." The 
EU did not make it easy for Austria, and the EU negotiators "did 
not give anything away." The agricultural sector can live with 
the result that has been achieved, Fischler said in a first 
statement. 
  Concerning financing, the EU will provide Austria's 
agriculture with 13 billion schillings in the first year alone. 
  As a result of resistance from the EU, it turned out that 
the 
compensation plan for entry that was offered by Austria "cannot 
be implemented." Therefore, prices will be reduced to the EU 
level on the day of entry and farmers will be compensated by 
decreasing amounts over a period of four years, Fischler 
reported. The EU will contribute 9.2 billion schillings to this 
effort. The gradual opening of the market has been recognized in 
principle by the EU. An expert group will define the technical 
details, he said. 
  Thus, it was also possible to establish the principle of a 
gradual opening of the markets for sensitive products. 

