BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Zhang Yijun (1728 4135 0193)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 14 May (XINHUA) -- Qiao Shi, chairman of 
the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress [NPC], 
met here this afternoon with a delegation of the State Duma from 
the Russian Federation headed by Chairman Ivan Rybkin. Qiao Shi 
told the guests that China treasures its good-neighborly 
relations with Russia and wishes for such relations to be 
further developed. 
  At the start of the meeting, Qiao Shi extended a warm 
welcome 
to Rybkin and his party on behalf of the NPC Standing Committee 
and in his own name. He said: China and Russia are neighbors. 
China attaches great importance to the good-neighborly 
relations between the countries, which have not come easily. 
  Qiao Shi said that it is China's consistent policy to 
develop 
friendship with all countries in the world, including Russia, on 
the basis of the five principles of peaceful coexistence. 
  He said that the friendship and cooperation between China 
and 
Russia has seen new development over recent years, and he hopes 
the two countries will continue to strengthen such relations for 
they share common interests and the prospects for their 
cooperation are promising. 
  Qiao Shi also briefed the guests on China's economic 
development. 
  Rybkin thanked Chairman Qiao Shi for meeting him. He said 
Russia is conducting reforms and is interested in learning from 
Chinese experience in this regard. 
  Rybkin and his party arrived in Beijing this morning at the 
invitation of the NPC Standing Committee. This is the first 
high-level delegation of the State Duma of the Russian 
Federation to visit China since its inauguration. 
  Wang Hanbin, vice chairman of the NPC Standing Committee, 
held working talks with the delegation in the morning. The two 
sides exchanged views on parliamentary exchanges and cooperation 
between the two countries. 
  Later, Chen Jinhua, minister in charge of the State Planning 
Commission, and Vice Foreign Minister Tian Zengpei met with the 
delegation, respectively. 
  Apart from Beijing, the delegation will also visit Shanghai 
and Shenzhen during their 5-day stay in China. 

