Language: <F P=105> Thai </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Deputy Prime Minister Dr. Amnuai Wirawan was on a 
visit to the Union of Burma to attend the second ministerial 
meeting on cooperation in narcotics suppression between the 
Union of Burma, the Lao People's Democratic Republic, and 
Thailand, which was held in Rangoon on 10 February. Commenting 
on his visit, Dr. Amnuai said that Prime Minister Chuan Likphai 
might visit the Union of Myanmar [Burma] in the near future in 
order to forge ties between the leaders of the two countries in 
their pursuit of national development, especially in the areas 
of investment. Amnuai said the Burmese Government has in the 
past few years adjusted its policies in line with economic 
realities, and has opened up the country more for foreign 
investment. Several countries have already had investment 
ventures in Burma. They are, for example, the United States, 
Japan, and South Korea. 
  Concerning Thailand, the deputy prime minister noted that, 
although Thailand's investment in Burma has been recorded as 
high as 220 million U.S. dollars, there is still little 
investment in major projects such as opening factories. It is 
hoped that there will be bigger projects in future. Thailand 
should explore new possibilities for investment in Burma, taking 
into account the advantages offered by Burma, such as its cheap 
labor and rich natural resources. Besides, investment in Burma 
will involve new technologies, especially the development of 
telecommunications, and communications infrastructure. Burma 
also needs technical cooperation to develop its natural 
resources, including mineral ores and zinc; its water sources, 
including the Salween River; and its natural gas deposits. 
  The deputy prime minister said both sides agreed in 
principle 
about cooperation, but some obstacles emerged when they went 
into details. He therefore proposed that there should be a plan 
on cooperation. In 1993, Thailand proposed to the Burmese 
Government a draft memorandum of understanding on the 
development of the Salween River for irrigation and for power 
generation. It is still being studied by the Burmese 
Government. Meanwhile, the Thai private sector, namely, the 
Petroleum Authority of Thailand, also has a plan to buy natural 
gas from the Gulf of Martaban in Burma. A survey has been made 
for the laying of gas pipelines. What is left to be done is 
price bargaining with the Burmese authorities. Regarding 
logging in Burma, Dr. Amnuai Wirawan said Burma had no policy to 
block off the trade, but it said it needs time to make a survey 
of Burma's natural resources in order to plan a long-term 
exploitation. On this, Thailand offered to cooperate with Burma. 

