Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Luis R. Aizpeolea and Anabel Diez report: "Serra and </F>
Arzalluz Meet at Moncloa Palace"] 
  [Text] Madrid -- The government and the PNV [Basque 
Nationalist Party] have taken a first step toward relaxing their 
relations after three months of mutual affronts. Deputy Prime 
Minister Narcis Serra and PNV Chairman Xabier Arzalluz met 
Wednesday [19 January] at the Moncloa Palace, at the government 
"number two's" request, in order to normalize relations which 
have been troubled since the approval of the overall state 
budgets in November. 
  On that occasion, the PNV voted against several sections of 
the budget when the government did not take some of its 
amendments into account. 
  At that time, the Basque Nationalists reproached the 
government and the Socialist parliamentary group for 
discriminatory treatment in comparison with the Catalan 
nationalists of Convergence and Union (CiU). 
  Serra offered Arzalluz a reopening of dialogue between the 
government and the PNV, whose relations have passed in just six 
months from the possibility of taking part in a coalition 
government to the most severe dialectical confrontations, 
ranging from traditional condemnations of the government's 
failures to keep its word on autonomy, through a warning about 
the role of the king, to public criticism of some action by the 
Civil Guard. 
  Part of the meeting was devoted to surmounting 
misunderstandings and stopping the snowballing criticisms. This 
flood of mutual accusations reached its peak with the Basque 
Socialists' proposal for negotiating politically with Herri 
Batasuna [People's Unity Party], without previously consulting 
with the parties comprising the Ajuria Enea Pact. 
  The immediate result of the new atmosphere of dialogue will 
be an impending meeting between Minister of Public 
Administration Jeronimo Saavedra and Councillor for the Basque 
Premier's Office Joseba Zubia in order to unblock the 
negotiation of the package of 54 transfers [of areas of 
responsibility] demanded by the Vitoria government. 
  The central government intends to offer immediately to the 
Basque government a block of 15 to 20 transfers, whose ownership 
is indisputable and whose only point of friction is their 
valuation. 
  However, despite the atmosphere of relaxation created 
following the meeting between Serra and Arzalluz -- whose 
personal relationship is excellent, confirmed by regular 
contacts since Serra took up the deputy premiership in 1991 -- 
skepticism still prevails among the Basque Socialists and 
Nationalists. The proximity of the Basque autonomous community 
elections, scheduled for the fall, is the cause of the suspicion. 
  The political rivalry existing between the PNV and the 
Basque 
Socialist Party on the Basque scene must not be forgotten at a 
time when Ramon Jauregui's supporters have in mind the 
possibility of defeating Jose Antonio Ardanza's Nationalists in 
the elections. This battle will inevitably have repercussions on 
relations between the PNV -- and, as a result, the Basque 
government -- and the central administration. 
  Felipe Gonzalez' government, however, is determined as far 
as 
possible to prevent the political rivalry from going beyond the 
framework of the autonomous community and tainting the 
institutional relations which both Felipe Gonzalez and Narcis 
Serra deem essential. 

