BOOKS,   JOURNALS, COMMERCIAL DATA BASES, AND OTHER OPEN-SOURCE 
PUBLICATIONS, OR ON RADIO AND TELEVISION BROADCASTS.  SOME OF THE 
MATERIALS USED IN THIS PUBLICATION WILL APPEAR AS ABSTRACTS OR FULL 
TRANSLATIONS IN FBIS SERIAL REPORTS.  COMMENTS AND QUERIES 
REGARDING THIS PUBLICATION MAY BE DIRECTED TO THE MANAGING EDITOR 
(RENEE MCG. AT (703) 733-6339), THE EDITORIAL ASSISTANT (CHRIS R. AT 
(703) 733-6450), OR INDIVIDUALS AT THE NUMBERS LISTED WITH ITEMS. 

   DEVELOPMENTS 

   DEVELOPMENTS highlights worldwide S&amp;T events reported in the 
foreign media. Items followed by an asterisk will be published in 
full by FBIS. The contributor's name and telephone number are 
provided. 

   Advanced Manufacturing 

   (Japan) Kyoden, a company that designs and manufactures printed 
wiring boards, has launched a prototype modeling service that uses 
rapid prototyping (RP) equipment. Kyoden recently added the Solid- 
Object Ultraviolet Laser Plotter SOUP-600 RP device from 
Mitsubishi's joint venture, CMET, to the SLA-500 machine previously 
acquired from the US company 3D Systems. Kyoden, which has already 
begun receiving orders to produce models of portable telephones and 
computer mice, is aiming for 120 million yen (approximately $1.2 
million) in sales from its RP business in 1994. (For previous 
reporting on Japanese RP developments, see PERSPECTIVES Vol. 8 No. 
12, 30 Dec 93.) (NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 2 Mar 94)* Stephen M. 733-6343 

Aerospace 

   (France) The National Office for Aerospace Studies and Research 
(ONERA) has tested a solid-fuel supersonic-combustion ramjet 
(scramjet) engine containing a plexiglass combustion chamber. The 
chamber, which consists of a short, uniform section attached to a 
flared section, is fueled by hot airflow at Mach 1.5. During the 
test a small amount of gaseous hydrogen was injected into a 
"stabilization zone" in the chamber's inlet to help maintain 
combustion at supersonic speeds. ONERA achieved exhaust speeds of 
Mach 1.1 to 1.4 and up to 87 percent combustion efficiency, with a 
calibration ratio of between 0.49 and 0.66. Heat buildup and 
friction inside the chamber, however, contributed to a 50- to 70- 
percent drop in stagnation pressure throughout the chamber. (AIR &amp; 
COSMOS/AVIATION INTERNATIONAL 10-16 Jan 94)* Alexis M. 733-6345 

   Biotechnology 

   (Russia) A recent press report describes a biotechnology R&amp;D 
contract between the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences' Institute 
of Biomedical Chemistry and the US company Procter &amp; Gamble as the 
"start of a new stage" in the Russian "brain drain" that is 
characterized by the "wholesale purchase" of entire groups of 
scientists at well-equipped research facilities. Both the Russian 
and American partners will retain rights to medicines jointly 
developed under the five-year contract for collaboration in the 
identification of new proteinases, basic research on the computer- 
aided design of drugs, and the development of antiallergens. 
(IZVESTIYA 9 Feb 94) Roberta D. 733-6331 
   (Russia) A Russian scientist at the Academy of Sciences' Physical 
Chemistry Institute has developed and patented geobioscotula (GBS), 
a non-antibiotic, anti-infectious therapeutic agent. The researcher 
produced GBS by saturating water with copper and silver ions through 
electrolysis, using a copper-silver alloy plate as an anode. GBS is 
reported to be effective in killing viruses and bacteria and in 
treating infectious diseases. The scientist achieved positive 
results in 70 percent of patients to whom GBS was administered in 
clinical tests and is seeking government permission for further 
testing to determine optimum concentrations and methods of 
application for the treatment. (NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA 15 Feb 94) 
Roberta D. 733-6331 

   High-Energy Physics 

   (Japan) Ritsumeikan University plans to install a powerful 
synchrotron radiation facility at its Science and Engineering 
Faculty campus, due to open in April 1994 in Kusatsu City, Shiga 
Prefecture. The radiation facility is expected to be operational in 
the spring of 1996. Equipped with large superconducting magnets 
developed by Sumitomo Heavy Industries, the synchrotron device will 
produce intense radiation from electrons accelerated to an energy 
level of 600 million electron volts. The radiation will be used in 
ultrafine semiconductor processing, new materials development, and 
study of the internal structure of living organisms. Ritsumeikan, 
which will be only the second Japanese university with independent 
ownership of a synchrotron radiation facility (Tokyo University has 
a small-scale device), plans to make it available to academia, 
industry, and the government for joint research. (NIHON KEIZAI 
SHIMBUN 31 Jan 94)* John H. 733-6341 

   Power Generation 

   (Japan) The Japan Gas Association and Japanese industry are set 
to begin a five-year joint research project to develop ceramic 
natural gas engines for cogeneration systems and natural gas 
vehicles. The new engine system is expected to reach 46 percent 
power generation efficiency, 50 percent higher than that of 
conventional engine systems. 

   GRAPHIC: Line drawing of ceramic natural gas engine 

   In addition to the Japan Gas Association, project participants 
include Tokyo Gas, Osaka Gas, Toho Gas, and Seibu Gas and industry 
manufacturers Isuzu Ceramics Research Corporation, Noritake Company, 
and Nippon Shokubai. The budget for the project, which is to end in 
fiscal year 1997, is estimated at approximately 5 billion yen ($50 
million), with a first-year budget of 400 million yen ($4 million). 
MITI's Agency of Natural Resources and Energy will fund 50 percent 
of the project's development cost; the groups of participating gas 
companies and manufacturing firms will each provide 25 percent of 
the financing. (NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN 5 Jan 94; ENERUGI FORAMU Dec 
93)* Junko A. 733-6346 
   (China) The Nuclear Power Institute of China (NPIC) has completed 
the research and design process for the AC-600, an improved version 
of the 600-megawatt-electric pressurized-water reactor. The new 
reactor, a key science and technology project of China's Eighth 
Five-Year Plan (1991-95), features a core with a higher safety 
margin and simpler systems than the previous 600-megawatt-electric 
reactor. It also has nondynamic systems safety installations 
approved by international atomic energy organizations. The 
conceptual design for the AC-600 was completed in 1987 and an 
independent feasibility study concluded in 1990. The key element in 
the reactor's design, the critical heat-flow density, has been 
completed. The three nondynamic systems safety installations are 
being assembled, with completion expected in 1995, by which time 
NPIC also expects to complete testing and analysis of the reactor's 
overall design and operation. (ZHONGGUO KEXUE BAO 21 Jan 94)* Parker 
H. 733-6336 

   S&amp;T Policy 

   (Kazakhstan) The Kazakh National Academy of Sciences' newly 
elected president, Kenzhegali Sagadiyev, is an economist and the 
first person to be elected to the presidency who is not a member of 
the small, elite class of academicians who have traditionally held 
the top post. He is also the first to assume the position following 
an election in which there were alternate candidates. Sagadiyev's 
selection as a candidate did, however, occur at a secret meeting 
chaired by Kazakhstan's President Nazarbayev. According to the 
Russian weekly POISK, impending reforms in the Kazakh Academy played 
a role in the decision of its former president, Umirzak Sultangazin, 
to retire and undertake full-time scientific work. (POISK, 11-17 Feb 
94) Gary T. 733-6325 
   (Ukraine) The research institutes of the Ukrainian Academy of 
Sciences are facing enormous budget shortfalls as a result of 
dramatic increases this winter in the cost of energy. According to 
Anatoliy Shlak, chief scientist secretary of the Ukrainian Academy 
of Sciences, many institutes do not have enough money to heat their 
buildings and have had to send their personnel home until spring. 
Academy institutes now spend about one-third of their revenues on 
wages and the rest on energy (electricity, fuel oil and coal). 
Especially hard hit are energy-intensive institutes such as the 
Paton Institute of Electric Welding and the Institute of Nuclear 
Research, which employ two-thirds of the academy's workers. The 
budget shortfalls created by the energy crisis leave no funds for 
even local conferences or meetings, and many institutes have been 
unable to procure scientific equipment or renew subscriptions to 
foreign scientific literature. While some scientists are able to 
work at home, those who need laboratories to do their research 
cannot work at all. These problems, coupled with lagging wages, are 
driving Ukrainian scientists out of the academy to commercial 
organizations and accelerating the brain drain to the West. Shlak 
said the academy is experiencing the worst period in its history. 
(PRAVDA UKRAINY 3 Feb 94) Gary T. 733-6325 

   FEATURE ARTICLES 

   JAPAN: H-2 LAUNCH USHERS IN NEW SPACE ERA 

   Topic Sentence: The launch of Japan's first indigenous large 
rocket will be followed by a series of experimental launches 
culminating in the development of a space shuttle by the end of the 
century. 

   Key Points: Japan's successful launch on 4 February 1994 of its 
H-2 rocket positions the National Space Development Agency (NASDA) 
to proceed with the H-2 Orbiting Plane (HOPE) program. The program 
began in 1988 with the ultimate objective of flying by 1999 a 
reusable unmanned space shuttle demonstrator intended to conduct 
service missions to the International Space Station and to validate 
space plane development technologies. 
   Following the successful launch on 4 February 1994 of the H-2, 
the first all-Japanese heavy-lift rocket, Japan's National Space 
Development Agency (NASDA) is poised to proceed with the H-2 
Orbiting Plane (HOPE) program it began in 1988. The goal of the 400- 
to 500-billion yen ($4-5 billion) program is to fly a reusable 
unmanned space shuttle demonstrator--launched by the H-2--by 1999 to 
perform service missions to the International Space Station and to 
validate technologies for future space plane development. Besides 
the Orbiting Reentry Experiment (OREX) vehicle, which was launched 
by the H-2 on 4 February, the program calls for two additional 
experimental vehicles to be launched during 1995-96 to test 
materials and technologies for the shuttle development program. The 
program also calls for upgrading the H-2 and studying ways to make 
the launcher competitive in international markets (NIKKAN KOGYO 
SHIMBUN 5 Feb 94, 14 Feb 94; ASAHI SHIMBUN 5 Feb 94, 7 Feb 94; 
NATIONAL AEROSPACE LABORATORY 1993). 

   HOPE Shuttle 

   Construction of a reusable HOPE space shuttle demonstrator for 
structural, thermal protection, and landing technologies is 
scheduled to begin in 1995. The demonstrator will be 16 meters long 
and 10 meters wide--about the same size as a future operational HOPE 
under NASDA consideration--but will weigh only 10 tons, half as much 
as the operational shuttle. Payload capacity will be 1 ton, whereas 
that of the operational HOPE space plane will be 3 tons. Aluminum 
alloys will be used for the structural material in the airframe, 
which will be coated with protective carbon/carbon materials, 
ceramic tiles, and flexible heat-shielding materials.  In 1999, the 
demonstrator will be launched by an H-2 rocket to a 100-kilometer 
low-Earth orbit. It will reenter the atmosphere at Mach 24, touching 
down on a runway. The shuttle's main functions will be to carry out 
experimental, observation, and satellite-service missions and to 
transfer materials to and from the Japanese Experiment Module (JEM), 
which will be attached to the future International Space Station. It 
will also serve as a technology demonstrator for future space plane 
development. The total cost of the demonstrator program is expected 
to reach 150 billion yen ($1.45 billion). For fiscal year 1994, 
4.779 billion yen ($47.8 million) has been allocated. 

   OREX 

   One of two test spacecraft launched by H-2 on 4 February, the 
OREX collected data on HOPE's thermal protection system and reentry 
profile. (For previous reporting on the OREX experiment, see 
PERSPECTIVES, Vol. 8 No. 10, 31 Oct 93.) 

   ALFLEX 

   The Automatic Landing Flight Experiment (ALFLEX), is to be 
carried out in 1995 over a three-month period. ALFLEX is a one- 
third-scale vehicle designed to validate automatic landing and 
navigation technologies and equipment, including automatic angle-of- 
attack control during flare, an inertial sensor unit, a microwave 
landing system, and a radar altimeter. The scale model, currently 
under development, is 6.1 meters long by 3.8 meters wide and weighs 
760 kilograms. It will be released from a helicopter at an altitude 
of approximately 1.5 kilometers and will make a fully automatic 
landing on a 3,000-meter runway. (For reporting on ALFLEX and on 
wind-tunnel tests being conducted in preparation for this 
experiment, see PERSPECTIVES Vol. 9 No. 2, 28 Feb 94.) 

   HYFLEX 

   In February 1996, a J-1 rocket is scheduled to launch the 
Hypersonic Flight Experiment (HYFLEX), a one-fifth-scale vehicle 
designed to validate HOPE's heat-resistant structures and guidance- 
control systems. The model measures 4.4 meters long by 1.36 meters 
wide by 1.04 meters high, and weighs about 1 ton. It will have 
highly heat-resistant carbon/carbon material covering the nose cone 
and elevons, heat-resistant ceramic tiles on the fuselage and 
stabilization fins, and flexible, heat-shielding materials on the 
upper portion of the fuselage. The model will also be equipped with 
a gas jet, an elevon actuator, and a parachute. It will separate 
from the rocket at an altitude of 110 kilometers and a speed of 4.4 
kilometers per second, then descend into the atmosphere at a high 
angle of attack using the gas jet and elevons for guidance and 
control. When the vehicle reaches subsonic speed, it will parachute 
into the Pacific near the Ogasawara Islands. 

   COVER GRAPHIC: Color illustration of Hypersonic Flight Experiment 
Vehicle 

   GRAPHIC: Line drawing of HYFLEX experiment 

   Enhanced H-2 

   As currently configured, the H-2 can launch a maximum of 10 tons 
to low-Earth orbit at an altitude of up to 250 kilometers. The 
20-ton HOPE would require an upgraded launcher with a lift capacity 
of 15 to 39 tons. Three configurations are being studied for an 
upgraded H-2: 

   GRAPHIC: Line drawing of three configurations for upgraded H-2 

   -- A 15-ton capacity can be achieved by replacing the second 
stage of the existing H-2 with a total of six solid-fuel boosters; 
   -- A 17-ton capacity can be achieved by replacing the two 
existing solid-fuel boosters with two liquid hydrogen boosters, each 
of which would have two LE-7 engines; 
   -- A 27-ton capacity can be achieved by using an LE-7 engine 
together with two hydrocarbon-fueled boosters, each containing four 
additional LE-7 engines. 

   Preparing the H-2 for Commercial Markets 

   With a domestic market that in fiscal year 1992 amounted to only 
200 billion yen ($2 billion), Japan's space industry has largely 
depended on government-driven programs, such as the H-2 program, 
which has involved the participation of various aerospace firms 
under contract to NASDA. (See appendix for corporate participants in 
the H-2 program and large satellites planned for H-2 launch by the 
year 2000.) The Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) 
will conduct a study during fiscal year 1994 to examine ways of 
expanding Japan's aerospace market. 
   Although the development cost for the H-2 was only 270 billion 
yen ($2.6 billion)--one-third to one-half that of other countries' 
launchers--its launch cost is 19 billion yen ($189 million), or 
about twice that of the European Ariane-4. That, plus the fact that 
H-2 launches can only take place twice a year--during January/ 
February and August/September so as not to disrupt the local fishing 
season--puts the H-2 at a significant competitive disadvantage in 
global markets. Negotiations are under way with local fishermen for 
a more flexible schedule. In addition, cost-cutting measures, such 
as mass-production, increased automation, use of cheaper materials, 
and more efficient testing procedures are being considered. 
According to Takaaki Yamada, president of Rocket Systems 
Corporation--a consortium formed in July 1990 by about 70 
Japanese aerospace firms to market the H-2--these measures could 
lead to cost reductions of some 30 to 50 percent. 

   Appendix 
   Major Corporate Participants in the H-2 Rocket Development 
Program 
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Ltd. (MHI) (prime contractor for 
airframes and engines) 
Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries, Co., Ltd. (IHI) (engines) 
Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Ltd. (KHI) (fairings) 
Nissan Motor Company, Ltd. (solid rocket motors) 
Nippon Electric Corporation (NEC), Mitsubishi Electric Corporation, 
Japan Aviation Electric Industry, Ltd., and Mitsubishi Precision 
Co., Ltd. (onboard electronic equipment) 
MHI, IHI, KHI, Oki Electric, NEC, and Toshiba (launch complex 
facilities, communication and radio systems, and launch control 
system facilities) 
MHI as head of a group of seven manufacturers (the OREX vehicle) 
IHI and Toshiba (the VEP, an H-2 launch vehicle evaluation payload) 
(For previous reporting on the VEP package, see Perspectives Vol. 8 
No. 11, 30 November 1993) 

   Large Satellites Planned for H-2 Launch by the Year 2000 

1. ETS-6, a 2-ton engineering test satellite (summer 1994) 
2. GMS-5, a 345-kilogram geostationary meteorological satellite 
(February 1995) 
3. SFU, a 4-ton space flyer unit (February 1995) 
4. ADEOS-1, a 3.5-ton Earth-observation satellite (February 1996) 
5. ETS-7, an engineering test satellite (summer 1997) 
6. TRMM, a 3.6-ton tropical rainfall-observation satellite (summer 
1997) 
7. OICETS, an optical intersatellite communication experimental 
satellite (February 1997) 
8. COMETS, an advanced communications technology satellite (February 
1997) 
9. ADEOS-2, an Earth-observation satellite (February 1998) 
10. HIROS, a high-resolution observation satellite (1999) 
   Junko A. 733-6346 

   SOUTH KOREA: ACQUIRING DUAL-USE ADVANCED WEAPONS TECHNOLOGY 

   Topic Sentence: Articles on several new technologies and 
equipment types that qualify as "dual-use" by standard criteria have 
appeared over the past few months in South Korean and Japanese 
publications. 
   Key Points: Press articles written last year by members of South 
Korea's military and civilian S&amp;T establishments call for a 
coordinated program to develop dual-use technologies that can be 
used to manufacture highly advanced weapons "if the need arises." 
South Korean press sources note that any efforts by South Korea to 
acquire advanced weapons components or technology would be enhanced 
by S&amp;T agreements recently concluded with Russia, China, and Israel. 

   In the past year, several articles have appeared in the South 
Korean press urging the government to support dual-use technology as 
a hedge against an "uncertain" future. For example, the December 
1992 issue of KUKBANG KWA KISUL argued that changes in the world's 
geopolitical relationships have made it impossible for South Korea 
to defend itself by relying on foreign equipment and technology. Not 
only are traditional suppliers reluctant to transfer technology, but 
the defense requirements themselves are changing, forcing South 
Korea to "consider medium and long-term plans to secure the military 
power to deal with countries on the periphery through S&amp;T 
development for national defense and qualitatively superior weapons 
systems." The journal claimed the key to both problems lies in 
"strengthening the bonds" between government and the defense 
industry, and in South Korea's use of its own technology to develop 
sophisticated independent weapons systems. 
   The same journal featured an article in May 1993 by a nuclear 
engineer from South Korea's Agency for Defense Development on the 
need to apply nuclear technology to national defense. The article 
maintained that the distinction between civilian and military use of 
nuclear technology is unclear, and that products with defense 
applications can be "derived" by improving South Korea's use of 
nuclear power. The article highlighted the engineer's remark that 
South Korea "must vigorously invest right now in research and 
development of the nuclear power industry, so that we can make use 
of it under new conditions if the situation changes. We have to 
maintain at least a technical capability." 
   Similarly, a senior researcher at the Korea Institute of Science 
and Technology's (KIST's) Policy Management Research Institute wrote 
in the July 1993 issue of KUKBANG KWA KISUL that "South Korea needs 
to establish a new policy that can achieve the two national goals of 
economic development and national security." What is needed, 
according to the KIST researcher, is a "coordinated program" to 
develop "dual-use technology" with both civilian and military 
applications, that will enable South Korea to "deal with changes as 
the need arises." The 4 August 1993 CHUGAN MAEGYONG made the same 
basic plea for "dual technologies," developed through coordination 
between the South Korean Defense Ministry, the Ministry of Trade, 
Industry, and Energy (MOTIE), and the Ministry of Science and 
Technology (MOST). In the 30 August 1993 MAEIL KYONGJE SINMUN (MKS), 
the head of the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 
(KAIST), which was directly responsible for two of the dual-use 
projects listed below, wrote that South Korea's present task is to 
create an independent national defense based on high technology 
appropriate to the post-cold-war era and developed through greater 
cooperation between the military and industrial sectors. 

   New Technology, Equipment With Potential Weapons Applications 

   Recent South Korean and Japanese media reports describe some 
commercial technologies developed or acquired by South Korean 
companies and government institutes that could be used to design or 
manufacture highly advanced weapons. All of the technologies listed 
below qualify by widely accepted criteria as dual-use in the sense 
described above. 
   -- An electron-beam welder developed jointly by the Korea 
Institute of Machinery and Metals (KIMM) and Korea Ion for some 200 
million won ($250,000) can be used for precision welding and to join 
different types of metals (MKS 23 Oct 93). 
   -- An ion-nitriding electric furnace and numerically-controlled, 
gas-powered metal-cutting machinery has been developed by KIMM 
(CHUGAN MAEGYONG 29 Dec 93). 
   -- An ultra-high precision (nanometer-scale) lathe has been 
developed by KAIST (CHUGAN MAEGYONG 29 Dec 93). 
   -- High-speed image processing equipment has been developed by a 
team from KAIST's chemical research laboratory to observe "how 
molecules of a material undergoing a disintegrating reaction are 
spatially distributed." The equipment uses a high-energy charge- 
coupled device for "direct observation of the size and form of the 
disintegrating material's distribution in three dimensions." The 
only other institutions in the world that reportedly have this 
equipment are the US Sandia National Laboratory and one US and one 
Japanese university (MKS 22 Jan 94). 
   -- Manufacturing technology for instruments able to measure high 
pressure was obtained from an unidentified Russian research 
institute. This is one of several technologies reportedly being 
acquired by South Korean firms through R&amp;D contracts with Russia 
(HANGUK KYONGJE SINMUN 11 Sep 93). 
   -- A high-energy capacitor developed by Daewoo can withstand 
severe shock and extreme temperatures, and can operate in a vacuum 
(CHUGAN MAEGYONG 9 Jun 93). 
   -- Technology for a solid-fuel rocket engine able to boost a 50- 
to 70-kilogram payload to an altitude of 80 to 90 kilometers has 
been developed by the Korea Aerospace Research Institute (KARI). 
Projected performance doubles that achieved by South Korea's 
indigenous KSR-420 rockets launched in 1993, and gives South Korea 
the ability to develop a rocket booster that "meets South Korea's 
particular needs" (CHUGAN MAEGYONG 29 Dec 93). 
   -- A small gas turbine is to be developed by Korea Air for 
commercial use in generating electricity and as a prototype to 
develop related technology "for such things as aircraft engines." 
Without mentioning the Korea Air project, KIMM's director also said 
his institute would "indigenize" a "small gas turbine engine" (MKS 7 
Jan 94). 
   -- An inertial navigation system (INS) has been developed by 
Korea Air, a company that also plans to acquire aviation electronics 
technology through a buyout of Litton Korea, a firm specializing in 
INS equipment (MKS 5 Jan 94). 
   -- A pilotless helicopter being developed by Daewoo Heavy 
Industries in cooperation with Russian scientists is to be used for 
sowing seeds and spraying agricultural chemicals (SIN TONGA Apr 93; 
CHOSON ILBO 5 Apr 93). 
   -- A Cray model C916 supercomputer, reportedly the company's 
most powerful, has been acquired for KIST's Systems Engineering 
Research Institute. The computer reportedly will be used for 
structural analysis and fluid mechanics simulations, weather 
forecasting, and researching environmental problems (NIKKEI SANGYO 
30 Jun 93). 
   -- A computer software research center has been established in 
Moscow by Samsung Electronics. Samsung, a major defense contractor, 
hopes to take advantage of the large number of high-level Russian 
military software development technicians in Moscow and plans to 
become involved in joint projects with Russian Government research 
agencies (NIKKEI SANGYO 29 Nov 93). 

   Foreign S&amp;T Agreements Conducive to Weapons Technology Transfer 

   As noted in the South Korean press, the country's efforts to 
acquire dual-use technologies are likely to be enhanced by recent 
S&amp;T agreements with three major arms and arms technology exporting 
countries: Russia, China, and Israel. Russia, in particular, has 
attracted South Korean media attention with its reported offers to 
barter advanced weapons (CHUNGANG ILBO 24 Jan 94) and enriched 
uranium (YONHAP 25 Jan 94) to repay its debts to South Korea. The 
infrastructure is already in place for acquiring other types of 
sophisticated Russian technology. In addition to various "S&amp;T 
cooperative centers" and "industrial cooperation information 
centers" established in Russia during the past year, the South 
Korean Government operates at least two organizations through MOST 
(HKS 13 Oct 93) and MOTIE (MKS 9 Nov 93) aimed at recruiting Russian 
scientists and transferring advanced technology. 
   Arrangements to acquire Russian aerospace technology have been 
concluded by South Korea's three largest defense contractors, Daewoo 
Heavy Industries (MKS 8 Jan 93), Samsung Aerospace (HKS 1 Aug 93), 
and Hyundai--which reportedly sent some 30 PhDs to Russia to study 
"satellite technology" (HKS 31 Jul 93), and has a joint venture with 
the aerospace firm Yakovlev (CHUNGANG ILBO 5 Nov 93). A 24 December 
1992 CHUGAN CHOSON report describes how an unnamed South Korean 
company successfully bribed a Russian technician to hand over 
electronics technology that could not be obtained through formal 
channels. 
   On 5 November 1993, YONHAP reported some details of an S&amp;T 
agreement signed by China and South Korea on 20 September 1993, 
including joint development of a "multipurpose satellite, aircraft 
design and testing technology, and medical lasers." The satellite 
project was described by YONHAP as paving the way for a Chinese- 
Korean partnership in the defense industry. Citing diplomatic 
sources, YONHAP also noted that "cooperation in nuclear energy may 
be not only in the reactor sector but could possibly develop into a 
closer and wider partnership in the field." In addition, the 5 
October 1993 CHOSON ILBO reported on an agreement with Israel 
concerning scientific cooperation on several levels. The paper 
observed that Israel, which is shifting much of its state-funded 
research from military to civilian projects, is entering the 
agreement partly out of "concern about employment for its high-level 
S&amp;T personnel in defense-related industries." 
William H. 733-6521 

   FRANCE:  EXPERIMENTAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS SATELLITE 

   Topic Sentence: France plans to develop a 1.5-ton experimental 
telecommunications satellite to be launched by mid-1998. 

   Key Points: The French Government has approved the development by 
the French aerospace industry of an experimental telecommunications 
satellite for use by both military and commercial customers. The 
satellite will conduct experiments in geostationary orbit on 
technologies for ion propulsion, active antennas, and onboard 
switching systems. The $410 million development project will be open 
to participation by France's traditional European aerospace 
partners. 
   French Minister of Industry, Post, Telecommunications, and 
Foreign Trade Gerard Longuet has approved the development of an 
experimental telecommunications satellite recommended in a 
government report that identifies the advanced technologies that 
will be critical to the French space communications industry by the 
end of the decade (AIR &amp; COSMOS/AVIATION INTERNATIONAL 20 Dec 93-2 
Jan 94). The report, written in collaboration with the private and 
public sectors, identifies experiments in geostationary orbit to 
validate technologies for ion propulsion, active antennas, and 
onboard switching systems as a top priority. It recommends a small, 
1.5-ton satellite with a development cost of about 2.5 billion 
francs (about $410 million) as a "realistic" option, given current 
financial constraints. Although Longuet admits that 1994 project 
funding may be difficult to obtain, he has asked the National Center 
for Space Studies (CNES) to prepare a technical proposal to present 
to Prime Minister Edouard Balladur this spring. Longuet hopes to 
begin the project by late 1994 and is aiming for a mid-1998 launch 
date. 
   The satellite development project, which will serve both civil 
and military interests, will be managed by a committee reporting to 
the Ministries of Industry and Defense. The committee will oversee a 
team including the General Directorate for Armaments (DGA) and 
France Telecom and headed by CNES, which will assume the bulk of the 
operating costs. Alcatel Espace, Aerospatiale, and Matra Marconi 
Space (MMS) will make up the industrial committee, with MMS as the 
project leader, Aerospatiale responsible for the platform, and 
Alcatel responsible for the payload. MMS will build the satellite in 
Toulouse and Aerospatiale will assemble it in Cannes. According to 
Longuet, France will take the leading role, and French equipment 
manufacturers Dassault Electronique, Thomson, Sagem, Sextant, and 
European Propulsion Company (SEP) will participate in the 
satellite's construction. In the interest of competitiveness and to 
help finance the project, it will be open to other European firms as 
well, especially France's traditional aerospace partners, such as 
Germany's Deutsche Aerospace, Belgium's ETCA, and the UK's MMS-UK. 
The experimental payload for the satellite will consist of two 
Ku-band active electronic-scanning antennas and an onboard switching 
system, all built by Alcatel. The antennas, one for transmission and 
another for reception, will consist of 46 and 32 modules distributed 
on panels measuring 900 and 600 millimeters square, respectively. 
Each antenna will aim, and reconf igure according to ground control, 
four beams at 12 to 14 gigahertz. The antennas will be linked to 
three traveling-wave-tube transponders, one of which is connected to 
the microprocessor-based onboard signal processing system (OBP). 
This equipment will be either a smaller (4 x 33 megabits) version of 
the civil OBP developed by the European Space Agency or the military 
OBP (with coding and antijamming capability) developed by the 
General Directorate for Armaments (DGA). 
   The satellite will also have the first European electric xenon- 
plasma propulsion system, consisting of two small, energy-efficient 
thrusters developed by France's SEP and the Russian firm Mireva (see 
PERSPECTIVES Vol. 8 No. 10, 31 Oct 93) in an effort to reduce the 
weight and cost of telecommunications satellites. 
   These components will be mounted on a modular "hybrid" platform 
that combines Aerospatiale's Eurostar and MMS's Spacebus 1000 three- 
axis-stabilized designs with structures of aluminum/carbon sandwich 
composite materials. The lightweight wiring system will consist of 
aluminum wires and subminiature connectors. The satellite platform 
is box-shaped, with flat panels surrounding a central cylinder 
containing the two tanks that hold the chemical bipropellants for 
the propulsion system. One component of this system, a 400-newton 
engine, will be used for orbit transfer and control; small 10-newton 
thrusters will be used for three-axis control of the satellite's 
attitude and for north-south stabilization if the experimental ion 
propulsion system should fail. Three-axis attitude control will also 
be ensured (to nearly 0.05 degrees by several means, including: 
using a momentum wheel on a magnetic bearing; using a new technique 
for shifting the satellite's center of gravity by moving the solar 
panels; and using an autonomous Navstar/Global Positioning System 
(GPS) satellite navigation package. 
   The platform will also have autonomous onboard management 
capability based on a 1750-type central computer with uploadable 
software, linked by a high-speed bus to the peripherals for the 
payload and servicing equipment. The thermal control system for the 
platform will use passive technology based on coatings, insulators, 
heaters, and optical solar reflectors. Thermal control for the 
payload will be active, consisting of capillary-pumping fluid loops 
for the antennas and constant-conductance heat pipes linked to 
deployable radiators. Electric power will be supplied by a 
lightweight, GSR-3-type solar generator with two deployable wings, 
each consisting of two segments, one made of silicon photocells, the 
other of gallium arsenide cells on a germanium substrate. The 
panels, which are regulated by electric motors, will be fully 
deployed in transfer orbit and will provide 1.6 kilowatts of power 
over a service life of three years. The circuit will be continuously 
controlled by nickel-hydride (NH2) batteries. 
   The satellite will weigh about 1.5 tons, including the payload 
(about 220 kilograms), the platform (about 600 kilograms), and the 
propellant (about 680 kilograms). Depending upon the type of OBP 
used, the satellite's projected budget is 2.5 to 2.8 billion francs 
(about $410 million to $460 million), including launch by either 
Ariane 4 or 5 at a cost of 300 million francs (about $50 million). 
Alexis M. 733-6345 

   REPORTS 

   REPORTS surveys science and technology trends as detailed in 
articles, books, journals, and other open source documents. 

   JAPAN: SUPERCONDUCTING POWER GENERATOR 

   On 21 October 1993 the Engineering Research Association for 
Superconductive Generation Equipment and Materials (SUPER-GM), which 
has been conducting R&amp;D on "superconducting power applications" 
under contract with the New Energy and Industrial Technology 
Development Organization (NEDO) since 1989, announced plans to build 
a 70-megawatt-class superconducting power generator prototype, the 
world's largest. 

   GRAPHIC: Artist's color illustration of 70-megawatt 
superconducting power generator prototype 
   SUPER-GM has already developed a number of the components (shown 
below) that will be included in its 70-megawatt generator. 
   GRAPHIC: Color photo of field winding prototype (ultrahigh-speed 
response) 
   GRAPHIC: Color photo of stator winding prototype undergoing 
testing 
   GRAPHIC: Color photo of rotor field winding mounting axis 
prototype (low-speed response) 

   The helium cooling system developed for the 70-megawatt power 
generator prototype has achieved 10,000 hours of continuous 
operation and maintained a level of helium impurity concentration 
below 0.1 part per million. An oil-free compressor currently under 
development should improve reliability. 

   GRAPHIC: Color photo of helium supply/exhaust device undergoing 
testing 
   GRAPHIC: Color photo of helium cooling system's cold box 
prototype 
   GRAPHIC: Color photo of helium cooling system's turbo-style oil- 
free compressor unit prototype (under development) 

   The SUPER-GM program has already developed superconducting wires 
for use in field windings in superconducting power generators. The 
photos below show niobium-titanium 10-kiloampere-class 
superconducting wires. 

   GRAPHIC: Color photo of high-stability conductor 
   GRAPHIC: Color photo of high-current-density conductor 
   GRAPHIC: Color photo of low-loss conductor 
   GRAPHIC: Color illustration of superconducting field winding 

   R&amp;D is under way to develop alternating current (AC) metal 
superconducting wires and high-temperature superconducting oxide 
wires (shown in photos below) designed specifically for future 
applications in power equipment (SUPER-GM Oct 93, NIKKEI SANGYO 
SHIMBUN 22 Oct 93). 

   GRAPHIC: Color photo of superconducting stranded wires (Nb3Sn) 
   GRAPHIC: Color photo of yttrium-based oxide tape-like wire 
material 

   From fiscal years 1996 to 1999, researchers will conduct 
demonstration tests to assess system performance and operational 
reliability and ultimately, to help design a 200-megawatt pilot 
generator. The demonstration facility will consist of a 
superconducting power generator, an electric motor acting as the 
drive, and a helium cooling system that maintains extremely low 
temperature (-269 degrees C). Total construction costs are expected 
to be about 7 billion yen ($70 million). Compared with previously 
developed superconducting power generators, improvements in the new 
design include a 1-percent increase in generation efficiency, a 
50-percent reduction in size and weight, and an increase of up to 
1.5 times in the power sent through transmission lines. Japanese 
developers expect to market the superconducting power generator 
early in the 21st century. 
   The diagram below illustrates the R&amp;D schedule for SUPER-GM's 
superconducting power generator. 
   GRAPHIC: Diagram of the 1988-1998 development schedule for SUPER- 
GM's 70-megawatt superconducting power generator 
Junko A. 733-6346 

   CHINA: ATOMIC-SCALE LITHOGRAPHY USING SCANNING TUNNELING 
MICROSCOPE 

   Researchers from the Chinese Academy of Sciences' (CAS') Beijing 
Vacuum Physics Laboratory (BVPL) have achieved room-temperature 
direct modification of single-crystal-silicon surface atoms using a 
scanning tunneling microscope (STM) probe. An STM micrograph of the 
three Chinese characters, "Mao Zedong", drawn with the probe, is 
shown below. The background shows the lattice of individual silicon 
atoms. 

   GRAPHIC: B/W photo of STM micrograph 

   In the micrograph, average line width is 2 to 3 nanometers (20 to 
30 Angstroms), or three to six silicon atoms; individual character 
size ranges from 28 to 34 nanometers (280 to 340 Angstroms). To 
date, the best effort of a joint team of BVPL and CAS Institute of 
Chemistry researchers was a 10-nanometer linewidth for 200-nanometer 
x 200-nanometer characters drawn directly onto a graphite surface 
using the STM probe (see PERSPECTIVES Vol. 7 No. 13, 31 Dec 92). The 
BVPL scientists also succeeded in sequenced "transplantation" of the 
surface silicon atoms, moving them from one straight line and 
redepositing them to form a second, raised straight line. The 
Chinese researchers expect to apply their atomic-scale lithography 
to developments in nanoelectronics and nanomachines, especially 
nanorobots (KEJI RIBAO 7 Feb 94). 
Thomas T. 733-6342 

   JAPAN: ATOMIC-SCALE DESIGN WITH SCANNING TUNNELING MICROSCOPE 

   Scientists at the Research and Development Corporation of Japan's 
Aono Atom Surface Control Project have developed a technology they 
claim greatly reduces the time required for the fabrication of 
atomic-scale structures and designs. After applying pulse voltage (5 
volts at 30-millisecond intervals) to the probe tip of a scanning 
tunneling microscope placed near a silicon substrate, researchers 
were able to transfer atoms from the tip to the silicon surface. In 
repetitive, reproducible experiments, each of the atoms was 
extracted from the surface. When the voltage polarity was reversed, 
the atoms were released and re-deposited at selected locations on 
the surface. Such atomic manipulation was not reproducible before 
the Aono project because scientists could not be certain when the 
extracted atom was adhering to the probe tip and when it was being 
released. The Japanese researchers developed a method to detect and 
analyze in real time very weak signal changes that always occur when 
the atom is either adhering to the tip or being released from it. In 
these experiments the researchers used both hydrogen atoms and 
silicon atoms to etch nanometer-scale grooves and ridges onto the 
substrate; in future tests they plan real-time analysis of other 
types of atoms. The developers expect this "atomcraft" to be used in 
future-generation ultra-fine semiconductor processing and in the 
development of new materials (NIHON KOGYO SHIMBUN 7 Jan 94). 
John H. 733-6341 

   EUROPE: JOINT FINANCING FOR SPOT 4 VEGETATION INSTRUMENT 

   The European Union and France's National Center for Space Studies 
(CNES) have agreed on joint financing for an agricultural and 
environmental monitoring package to be included on board France's 
SPOT 4 Earth-observation satellite, scheduled for launch in mid- 
1997. This agreement follows 1989 budget cuts in the SPOT 4 program 
and France's subsequent cancellation of its plans to develop the 
package. The European Union will provide 16 million ECUs or half of 
the program's estimated construction cost (about $36 million). CNES 
will be responsible for construction, with Aerospatiale as prime 
contractor. Subcontractors will include other French companies as 
well as Belgian, Italian, and Swedish firms (AIR &amp; COSMOS/AVIATION 
INTERNATIONAL 7-13 Feb 94). 
   The sensor package, known as the Vegetation instrument, will 
weigh 160 kilograms and will consist of a platform carrying an 
optical bench with five cameras, associated electronics, and an L- 
band antenna. Capable of photographing the Earth in the visible and 
near infrared ranges with a resolution to 1 kilometer, the 
Vegetation instrument will be used to observe natural ecosystems as 
well as continental agricultural systems, according to CNES. The 
European Union will use the data gathered by the instrument to guide 
policy on agriculture, environment, research, and related 
international cooperation. The data will be used specifically by the 
Institute for Applications of Remote Sensing, which is part of the 
European Union's Joint Research Center in Ispra, Italy. 
Alexis M. 733-6345 

   CHINA: FREE ELECTRON LASER RESEARCH 

   Chinese physicists who used a radio-frequency linear accelerator 
to generate Asia's first infrared free electron laser (FEL) light in 
May 1993 (see PERSPECTIVES, Vol. 8 No. 8, 31 Aug 93) have succeeded 
both in raising the charge density of the electron beam in the 
undulator interaction zone and in improving the uniformity of the 
electron-beam quality factor within the 4-microsecond-wide 
macropulse. This permitted researchers at the Beijing FEL (BFEL) 
facility of the Chinese Academy of Sciences' Institute of High- 
Energy Physics to improve system gain from the original 6 percent to 
17 percent. On 28 December 1993 the scientists thereby achieved 
saturated oscillation with a saturated-oscillation maximum output 
energy of 3 millijoules, a saturated-oscillation pulse plateau width 
of 2 microseconds, and an intracavity oscillation average power of 
190 kilowatts. The BFEL physicists also raised stimulated 
oscillation signal strength by 100,000 times and spontaneous 
radiation strength by 100 million times (RENMIN RIBAO OVERSEAS 
EDITION 15 Jan 94; ZHONGGUO KEXUE BAO 10 Jan 94; GUANGXUE XUEBAO 
Vol. 13 No. 5, May 93). 
   In related research, scientists at Beijing University's Technical 
Physics Department and at the Chinese Academy of Engineering 
Physics' Institute of Applied Electronics have been conducting joint 
experiments on an 8-millimeter-wavelength multi-electron-beam 
Cerenkov FEL oscillator. Using a small accelerator to provide 374- 
kilovolt, 1,036-ampere electron beams, the physicists generated a 
laser output power of 9.1 megawatts at a wavelength of 8.3 
millimeters with an efficiency of 2.3 percent, ten times higher than 
that achieved with similar devices developed and tested in other 
countries (KEJI RIBAO, 27 Jan 94). 
Thomas T. 733-6342 

   JAPAN: RAMJET TEST FACILITY COMPLETED 

   Construction of Japan's first ramjet test facility, which began 
in 1989 at the Kakuda Research Center, has been completed with a 
total investment by the Science and Technology Agency's National 
Aerospace Laboratory (NAL) of about 3.5 billion yen ($35 million). 
The new test facility can simulate a high-speed, low-pressure 
atmosphere like that in which space planes will fly at 20- to 35- 
kilometer altitudes. 
   Researchers use a heat reservoir heater and a combustion heater 
together to heat gas under high pressure (up to 100 atmospheres) to 
2,300 degrees C. The heat reservoir heater, 2 meters in diameter and 
about 10 meters high, contains aluminum oxide bricks that function 
as heat exchangers. The combustion heater burns a mixture of 
hydrogen and oxygen. Performance, pressure, and temperature 
throughout the engine are measured while it is kept in an air 
current accelerated through a supersonic nozzle with a 51-centimeter 
x 51-centimeter outlet. To simulate conditions at altitude, the 
ramjet facility is connected to the exhaust system of the existing 
rocket engine high-altitude performance test facility. The pressure 
in the low-pressure chamber, which houses the engine and propulsion 
measurement equipment, is lowered to between 0.1 and 0.01 
atmosphere. 
   Other features of the ramjet test facility include: a wide range 
of flight simulation capabilities, from Mach 4 to Mach 8; the 
ability to test at up to Mach 6 using pure gas heated by the heat 
reservoir heater; a comparison of engine performance using heated 
pure gas and combustion exhaust gas; the capability to simulate 
engine regenerative cooling by holding the temperatures of hydrogen 
and engine fuel to between -253 degrees C and 500 degrees C; and the 
capability to measure the main thrust, lift, and vertical moment 
generated by the engine. 
   The ramjet will serve as the main engine for Japan's space 
planes, aircraft that will take off like airplanes, fly like 
satellites in space orbit, and land once again like airplanes 
(KAGAKU GIJUTSU JANARU Dec 93, KOGIKEN NYUSU Nov 93). 
Junko A. 733-6346 

   GERMANY: HYPERSONIC TURBORAMJET ENGINE 

   Researchers at Motoren- und Turbinen-Union (MTU) have completed 
the design for the first-stage hybrid airbreathing propulsion system 
for the future Saenger hypersonic space transportation vehicle (AIR 
&amp; COSMOS/AVIATION INTERNATIONAL 7-13 Feb 94). (For previous 
reporting on the Saenger program, see PERSPECTIVES Vol. 5 No. 12, 31 
Dec 90.) The coaxial, liquid-hydrogen turbojet/ramjet engine 
consists of a rectangular air inlet attached to a diffuser, an 
af terburner duct that also serves as the ramjet's combustion 
chamber, and an asymmetrical, hydrogen-cooled ejector nozzle with a 
carbon-fiber- reinforced carbon expansion ramp at the rear. The 
turbojet is designed to propel the plane to about Mach 3.5 (and is 
protected during hypersonic flight by a shutoff system). The ramjet 
would begin operating between Mach 3.0 and 3.8 (the transition 
phase) and would propel the plane to Mach 7. Researchers are 
currently testing the ramjet's air inlet, combustion chamber, 
ejector nozzle, and cooling system. (For previous reporting on 
nozzle tests, see PERSPECTIVES Vol. 8 No. 7, 30 Jul 93). 
   Phase two of the program calls for development of a reduced-scale 
hypersonic flight demonstrator engine, called TDR 500, by 1995. The 
7-meter long engine will consist of a variable-geometry, rectangular 
air inlet, a circular combustion chamber 50 centimeters in diameter, 
and an asymmetrical nozzle with an expansion ramp. The tests will 
have to be conducted in the United States or in Russia because there 
are no facilities in Europe to test such an engine. 
   During the third phase of the program to begin about the year 
2006, supersonic combustion ramjet (scramjet) technology studies 
will be carried out by the German Aerospace Research Establishment 
(DLR) in cooperation with Russia's Central Institute of 
Aerohydrodynamics, which has been involved in the program since 
1992. 
Alexis M. 733-6345 

   RUSSIA: MILITARY ELECTRONIC MEDICAL TREATMENT CONVERTED TO 
CIVILIAN USE 

   Russia has declassified and begun selling an electronic stimulant 
pill developed in 1984 by the Soviet military. The capsule contains 
a power source and a microprocessor that stimulates organs by 
sending them electrical pulses through nerve endings in the stomach 
and intestine. The pill is eliminated from the body within 25 to 30 
hours, but its therapeutic effect lasts for several months. The 
developers claim that in addition to enhancing immunity and physical 
stamina, the pill reverses intractable coma and shock and that it 
may have applications in oncology. Since developing the capsule, 
researchers have determined that applying a thin layer of zinc, 
copper, or silver to the pill's surface facilitates absorption of 
the metal ions by the blood, increasing the effectiveness of the 
treatment. The pill was clinically tested at the Institute of 
Surgery and the military initially produced it in small quantities 
for treatment of elites. Since 1991, the plant has converted to 
civilian production, and Russia's Ecomed scientific production 
association has begun selling the capsule through pharmacies (TRUD 
12 Mar 94; MOSCOW NEWS No 7, 18-24 Feb 94). 
Roberta D. 733-6331 

   JAPAN: ELECTROSTATIC MOTOR FOR MICROMACHINES 

   Matsushita Research Institute has developed a miniature 
electrostatic motor for micromachines by combining semiconductor 
manufacturing technology with machining techniques. The motor, 1.4 
millimeters in diameter and approximately 10 millimeters long, 
consists of a rotating shaft laminated with a dielectric substance 
and electrode and supported by a bearing attached to a substrate. 
The tube-like bearing contains 16 electrodes, separated from the 
shaft by an 11-micron gap. Electrostatic force generated by the 
sequential application of 350 volts to the electrodes drives the 
motor at 100 revolutions per minute. Its torque is about 500 times 
that of other motors of comparable size. Matsushita developed the 
motor as part of a contract with the Micromachine Center, a 
nonprofit foundation established in January 1992 within the 
Machinery and Information Industries Bureau under the Ministry of 
International Trade and Industry (MITI). The Micromachine Center is 
working under MITI's New Energy and Industrial Technology 
Development Organization (NEDO) as an information "clearinghouse" in 
MITI's 10-year micromachine program (fiscal years 1991 to 2000). 
(NIKKEI SANGYO SHIMBUN 21 Jan 94, 18 Feb 92; NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN 23 
Jan 92) 
Stephen M. 733-6343 

   JAPAN: TEMPERATURE-CONTROL PAINT FOR AEROSPACE APPLICATIONS 

   Nippon Paint Company has developed a paint that will be used to 
control the surface and interior temperatures of satellites. The 
paint, certified by the National Aerospace Laboratory for use on 
aerospace parts, will be used for the largest Japanese advanced 
earth observation satellite, the ADEOS, which is scheduled for 
launch in February 1996. (For previous reporting on ADEOS, see 
PERSPECTIVES Vol. 8 No. 11, 30 Nov 93). Developers believe the new 
paint could also be used to control temperature fluctuations in 
automobiles and buildings if production costs can be lowered. 
   Nippon Paint has also developed temperature-control paint for 
antennas, using a paint base material that contains the silicon 
resin, "NOVA500 ASTRO WHITE" (trade name). Another paint developed 
for equipment uses a base that contains the urethane resin, "NOVA5OO 
ASTRO BLACK" (trade name). In addition, Nippon claims it has 
developed a white pigment that controls absorption of solar energy 
by antennas. Adding the pigment to the paint results in a solar 
absorption rate of about 0.26, and a solar energy vertical radiation 
rate of about 0.88 for the antenna. This holds the surface 
temperature of the antenna to about 120 degrees C, whereas an 
unpainted antenna would reach nearly 500 degrees C. The new paint's 
high elasticity prevents it from cracking, even when exposed to 
extreme temperatures. Addition of a special inorganic ultraviolet 
absorbent material also increases durability under extreme 
conditions. The paint used on satellite-mounted sensors, receivers, 
and recorders contains a special elastic urethane resin that excels 
at heat radiation and irradiates outward the heat waves emitted by 
the onboard equipment. 
   The company solved the problem of paint gasification by 
developing a technology to remove the low-molecular-weight portion 
of the resin (KAGAKU KOGYO NIPPO 10 Dec 93). 
Junko A. 733-6346 

   SPECIAL PUBLICATIONS 
   JAPAN: AUTOMOTIVE TECHNOLOGIES 
A special issue of the JPRS report series SCIENCE &amp; TECHNOLOGY/JAPAN 

entitled "Electric Vehicle, Other Automotive Technology 
Developments" (JPRS-JST-94-014-L, 5 April 94), presents reporting on 
Japanese developments concerning electric vehicles, car navigation 
systems, and related advanced design techniques. 
Stephen M. 733-6343 

   FOREIGN MEDIA NOTES 

   Foreign Media Notes are narrative reports that summarize and 
distill information from one or several sources for rapid processing 
and targeted dissemination. 

   JAPAN: SPOTLIGHT ON JAPAN ASSOCIATION OF DEFENSE INDUSTRY 
The Japan Association of Defense Industry, under the administration 
of the Japan Defense Agency and the Ministry of International Trade 
and Industry, promotes the development of Japanese defense 
technology and equipment, monitors foreign technology, lobbies on 
behalf of its corporate members, and cooperates with the government 
on export controls. (FB PN 94-036, 21 Mar 94) 
Stephen M. 733-6343 

   EUROPE/INTERNATIONAL: HIGH-TECH INDUSTRY HIGHLIGHTS 

   This report includes articles on French research policy, a German 
semiconductor laser research program, an agreement between China and 
the German company DASA for the development and marketing of 
telecommunications and Earth observation satellites, and a list of 
annual reports for various European companies involved in R&amp;D of 
economically competitive technologies. (FB PN 94-037, 22 Mar 94) 
Bryan C. 733-6335 

   GRAY LITERATURE 

   Technology Issues Division has acquired the proceedings, other 
conference-related papers, and corporate and organization reports 
listed below, copies of which are available upon request for a 
period of six months from the date of this PERSPECTIVES--contact 
Cathy G. (703) 482-4182. 
   All contractor requests must be received in writing, by letter 
(FBIS/CSG/PPD, GE47 OHB, Washington, DC 20505) or by fax ((703) 734- 
9408), on the sponsoring agency's letterhead and signed by the 
contracting officer technical representative. 
   Please use the number in parentheses at the end of the paragraph 
when requesting proceedings. 

   PROCEEDINGS 

   23rd EUROPEAN SOLID STATE DEVICE RESEARCH CONFERENCE, held 13-16 
September 1993 in Grenoble, France. The 969-page proceedings 
contains abstracts of 189 papers in English by authors from Europe, 
Asia, Russia, and the United States. Topics covered in the 
proceedings include modeling of silicon and compound semiconductor 
devices, low-frequency and microwave noise, thin-film transistors, 
silicon bipolar devices, complementary metal oxide semiconductor 
(CMOS) devices, lasers, dielectrics, silicides, and detectors and 
surface lasers (v9n3-1). 
   STRATEGIC PROGRAM FOR INNOVATION AND TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER (SPRINT) 
CONFERENCE ON THE FUTURE OF RESEARCH TECHNOLOGY ORGANIZATIONS IN 
EUROPE, held 16-17 November 1993 in Brussels, Belgium. Project 
reports obtained at the SPRINT conference include (v9n3-2): 
   "The European Network of Research and Technology Organizations: 
Synopsis of Projects," a 125-page booklet in English that summarizes 
62 SPRINT projects involving more than 200 organizations in the 
European Union; 
   "Innovation Project and Marketing Policy in European Research 
Centers," a 56-page report in English that presents the results of a 
survey conducted by six European research organizations to analyze 
the commercial exploitation of new technologies and expertise by 
government-sponsored research centers; 
   "Typical Steps in Starting up SME Research Projects," a 56-page 
report that was compiled by 13 research organizations from various 
European Union member states and that identifies techniques for 
transferring technologies from research technology organizations to 
small and medium-sized companies. 
   Other material obtained at the SPRINT conference includes 
brochures reviewing SPRINT projects, investment opportunities, 
science parks, technology transfer networks, and the research 
technology organizations listed below: 

   -- PERA International (UK) 
   -- Advanced Manufacturing Technologies (AMT) (Ireland) 
   -- Technical University of Delf t (Netherlands) 
   -- Imperial Exploitation Limited (IMPEL) (UK) 
   -- Institute for Material Research and Application Engineering 
      (Germany) 
   -- Bioquant (Germany) 
   -- Freiberger Ne-Me tall GmbH (Germany) 
   -- TNO (Netherlands) 
   -- The Welding Institute (UK) 
   -- Technology, Innovation, Information (Luxembourg) 
   -- European Association of Contract Research Organizations 
(EACRO) 

   REPORTS FROM COMPANIES, OTHER ORGANIZATIONS 

   Annual reports and other documents in English concerning the 
corporations and other organizations listed below present financial 
highlights, R&amp;D activities, and/or other information for the 
business year 1993. 

   Europe 
   -- European Space Agency (Transferable European Technologies) 
   -- Alcatel (3rd, 4th quarter reports on electrical communication) 
      (Italy) 
   -- Racal Electronics (UK) 

   Pacific Rim 
   -- Kobe Steel (Japan) 
   -- Tokyo Electric Power Company (Japan) 
   -- Kawasaki Heavy Industries (Japan) 
   -- Fuji Heavy Industries (Japan) 
   -- Marubeni (Japan) 
   -- Nippon Sanso Corporation (Japan) 
   -- Dae Ryung Industries (South Korea) 
GIG/McGinnis/CS 19/0143z apr 

