CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yuriy Baturin, national security adviser to the </F>
president of Russia: "The Special Service That 'Came In From the 
Cold'"] 
  [Text] Yuriy Mikhaylovich Baturin is a doctor of law. 
He was born in 1949 in Moscow. In 1973 he graduated from the 
airspace research department of the Physics and Technology 
Institute in Dolgoprudnoye. He worked in the Energiya 
Scientific-Industrial Association. Since 1980--in the State and 
Law Institute. He graduated by correspondence from the All-Union 
Juridical Institute and the Moscow University School of 
Journalism. The topic of his doctorate dissertation was computer 
law. In 1990 he went through internship in Washington, and since 
1991 worked on the staff of G. Shakhnazarov--M. Gorbachev's 
aide. Since 1992--in the Gorbachev Foundation. On 17 March 1993 
he was appointed a member of the Presidential Council, and in 
June of the same year--the Russian Federation president's 
adviser on legal issues. In January 1994 he was appointed the 
Russian Federation president's national security adviser. Since 
March 1994 he has also chaired the commission on supreme 
military positions, supreme military and supreme special ranks 
of the Personnel Policy Council. He has authored many works. He 
was one of the authors of the draft law on the mass media. 
  "In from the cold"--this term, not quite precisely 
translated after Le Carre's novel was published in 
Russian--today reflects rather precisely the true situation of 
Russian security organs. The structure that kept society 
fettered by cold fear and mutual suspicion, and then itself 
experienced harsh criticism bordering on revenge, is gradually 
thawing, acquiring a normal human face, and becoming capable of 
carrying out its real tasks. Russian citizens' natural interest 
in the topic of special services cannot be explained by vain, 
idle curiosity, or by the fact that the shroud of secrecy 
surrounding the activities of this kind of structure always 
arouses interest. And not only because reforms of our security 
services are frequently accompanied by disturbing details. To a 
large extent this interest is a logical trait of an emerging 
civil society. 
  A society coming out from under the state's control and 
intending in turn to control the latter has a vital stake in 
getting the maximum possible information on state structures 
whose activities to some or other degree affect human rights. 
Especially our, Russian, society. However, for well-known 
reasons heightened public sensitivity to the topic of special 
services is manifested in morbid forms. The pulling down of the 
Dzerzhinskiy monument in front of the KGB building in Moscow, as 
well as the demand to liquidate "competent organs," became the 
symbol of the public mood in recent times. 
  Today we see this as somewhat romantic, but also 
somewhat naive. Russia is gradually regaining its historical 
memory. The picture of the past is emerging increasingly fully 
and in more detail. Of course, we do not want to return to state 
arbitrariness, but we also reject other things--sedition, 
anarchy, in other words, "grass-roots arbitrariness." The 
reasons for the latter are known--a weak, impotent state. The 
symptoms of this dangerous disease manifested themselves 
graphically last year, and seriously alarmed most citizens. The 
Russian special services felt this change in the public mood, 
too. By now it is possible to formulate on the whole the social 
order Russia's nascent civil society placed with them: to 
effectively ensure the security of the country and its citizens, 
and to protect Russia's national interests, one of the central 
among which is the protection of democracy. 
  Last year, at a conference of high-ranking personnel of 
the central staff department of the Russian Ministry of Security 
[MB], President B. Yeltsin said that it puzzles him that there 
are legally existing organizations in the country that openly 
and publicly propagate ideas of seizing power and ethnic and 
social strife, form and train armed commando brigades, and 
openly operate as a mafia and control individual regions, while 
the MB is either unaware of this or not showing the proper 
initiative. Each of these questions is topical today. They 
represent a threat to our national security. Russian special 
services currently have the legal base to combat them. 
<H5>  In Search of Balance </H5>
  The Statute on the Federal Counterintelligence Service was 
recently published in the open press, and anybody may 
now read it. 
  The document directly defines the area of the service's 
responsibility. Among other things, it is tasked with 
identification, prevention, and suppression of intelligence and 
sabotage activities of foreign special services and 
organizations, as well as unlawful encroachment on the 
constitutional system, sovereignty, territorial integrity, and 
defense capability of the Russian Federation. 
  This general definition is elaborated on in the form of a 
detailed list of tasks set for Russian counterintelligence. 
Among them: combating smuggling, corruption, international arms 
trading and drug trafficking, illegal armed formations, as well 
as illegally created or banned public associations encroaching 
on the constitutional system of the Russian Federation. 
  The Russian Federation president's message to the Federal 
Assembly outlined the priorities as we move toward a strong 
state capable of ensuring conditions for safe development of the 
individual and protecting him from criminal encroachment. Those 
who see the idea of a strong state as equivalent to state 
arbitrariness either are not being honest or simply are not 
aware of the vitally important needs of modern Russian society. 
For instance, the need to combat runaway organized crime aimed 
at seizing command positions in the state. 
  At the same time, boosting the FCS's effectiveness, as well 
as strengthening the state as a whole, today no longer may be 
based on the notorious "at any cost" principle. 
  While constantly lamenting the lack of a law-based state and 
neglect of legal norms, we clearly underestimate the processes 
of disintegration of totalitarian traditions in Russian society, 
which actually served as the main pillar of arbitrariness; 
moreover, they continuously reproduced the need for it. 
  During the memorable times of the Communist Party's 
political 
hegemony, the lack of detailed legislation regulating 
operational work was not considered a serious problem. State 
security officers were guided mainly by the orders of their 
superiors, and the latter--by the directives of party honchos 
(the consequences are well known). Currently the situation is 
already different. The very meaning of what is commonly called 
military discipline is changing. It no longer represents a lever 
one may use arbitrarily, outside of boundaries of the law. 
  Let us put it straight: The current legal base is far from 
perfect. What we have so far is only the foundations for 
regulating special services' activities. There are many 
unresolved issues. 
  In special services' practical activities, a collision 
frequently arises between political, operational expediency and 
prohibitions imposed by legal acts. Undoubtedly a contradiction 
between expediency and legality must be resolved in favor of the 
latter; however, neither should the latter be reduced to 
democratic slogans: It must ensure that we move along the road 
of long development of democratic society and remove the 
obstacles encountered along this road. 
  Russian legislation is oriented to a greater extent toward 
protection of citizens' rights than toward giving special 
services freedom of action. In principle, this is correct. 
However, shifting the center of gravity in the matter of 
ensuring the vitally important interests of the individual, 
society, and the state at the expense of the latter, without 
taking into account concrete realities in the life of our 
society, may in the final analysis jeopardize the security of 
the individual as well. 
  The priority for our lawmakers is to find the balance which 
would allow human rights to be guaranteed and at the same time 
ensure effectiveness of law enforcement organs' activities. 
There are problems in this respect that require their immediate 
attention. I will give just one small illustration. 
  The law on operational-investigative activities permits 
listening to telephone conversations only with respect to a 
specific person, regarding whom there is information 
that he is at the stage of preparation of an especially grave 
crime or has already committed one. But what does one do if such 
an individual has not yet been identified? 
  The simplest example are foreign special service stations, 
which operate, as high-ranking officials of foreign services 
contend, under the cover of embassies in Moscow. Naturally, 
foreign intelligence officers do not register themselves as 
such; they must be identified, and, given their skills, 
accomplishing this through regular methods is a hopeless 
undertaking. 
  It is a vicious circle: In order to identify a specific 
individual, who intends to commit a violation of the law, an 
operational-technical measure is needed. But in order to obtain 
permission to conduct such, it is necessary to have valid 
information that the specific person has violated the 
law. There are also other examples of the impossibility of 
effectively conducting a counterintelligence investigation among 
criminals. You may ask: Then how did counterintelligence act in 
these circumstances? It varied, depending on the point of view 
of the procurator who issued the sanction. 
  Since the new constitution has gone into effect, 
operational-technical measures involving individual rights are 
conducted on the basis of a court decision. Questions arise, 
however: In obtaining such a decision, is it permissible to 
present materials obtained as evidence for court consideration, 
as is done in many countries? Within the framework of which 
procedure? These questions, which define the specificity of 
special services' work, remain unanswered. 
  On the other hand, neither are legal departments of security 
organs very active in helping lawmakers find a way to resolve 
these problems. Those abroad, on the other hand, actively seek 
ways to influence Russia's leadership in the direction of 
"fundamental reform of Russian special services." For instance, 
the Heritage Foundation on commission from the U.S. Congress has 
drafted a document with recommendations of how to bring 
activities of Russian special services into line with Western 
standards. The document proposes modification of normative acts 
covering counterintelligence activities, specifically, for it to 
stop monitoring foreign citizens' travel inside the country and 
cut down on the use of covert sources of information. It also 
recommends urging the Russian leadership to publish as soon as 
possible drafts of new laws regarding special services' 
activities and their financing. 
  We, too, want clear legal regulation and civilized methods 
of 
special services' operations, but of course on a parity basis. 
For instance, a kind of gentlemen's agreements are reached 
between special services of some countries on methods that 
preclude violence. As to a common espionage 
practice--recruitment and use of agents, use of technical means 
for penetration and information-gathering, and so on--everything 
in this respect is the same as before. No agreements will remove 
the eternal problem of espionage. 
  In any case it is hard to imagine reaching such agreements 
with terrorist organizations, organized crime groups involved in 
illegal arms trading and drug trafficking, and illegal armed 
formations. 
  Thus, what our counterintelligence lacks is not a civilized 
demeanor, but rather aggressiveness, initiative, and 
concentration on the greatest threats to the state. The 
practice of years past, when, for instance, counterintelligence 
officers were sent to monitor compliance with trade regulations 
in stores and maintain order in the streets, and lately to 
inspect motor vehicles in search of contraband, should be 
completely eliminated. Special services are an expensive item 
for society, and therefore they must produce the maximum return. 
The task of counterintelligence is to select several targets 
that are commensurate with its great capabilities, and try to 
hit them. 
  Strictly speaking, some of the tasks included in the Statute 
on the Federal Counterintelligence Service are not really 
counterintelligence but rather belong in the sphere of domestic 
intelligence, and all of them are part of the sphere of state 
security. 
  One may argue to what extent the agency's name reflects the 
range of tasks it is charged with. Still, I think that this is 
not the main problem. The main issue is what place the FCS 
should take among special services in order to successfully 
carry out its functions. 
  The first thing one notices in reading the statute is a 
certain crossover of FCS authority and that of a number of other 
special services, as well as of law enforcement organs. There is 
a temptation to concentrate efforts, for instance, on 
suppression of corruption in one agency--for instance, the MVD 
[Ministry of Internal Affairs]. But then by the same criterion 
the tax police should be merged into this ministry, although 
this is not done anywhere in the world. The simplicity of such 
solutions is deceptive, since the sphere of law enforcement 
needs a certain margin of safety. 
  The danger of duplicating activities between special 
structures may be overcome by increasing the degree of their 
coordination and, so to say, dividing spheres of interest. There 
are examples of this both in our practice and foreign practice. 
For instance, thanks to existing agreements no particular 
conflicts arise between services engaged in intelligence 
gathering (the FIS, the GRU [Main Intelligence Directorate], the 
FCS, and others). A good example is the U.S. FBI, which over the 
past few years has concentrated its efforts--thus making it 
different from other law enforcement organs--on penetrating the 
top organizational echelons of the drug mafia. 
  In addition, while considering the advantages of 
concentrating all special forces along selected directions, we 
also cannot dismiss another point of view presented by a number 
of responsible politicians, who emphasize the lack of a sensible 
balance of forces among organs of internal affairs and security. 
  Thus, in an organizational sense and in the matter of 
interaction with other agencies the FCS occupies its own 
specific niche in the system of special services. What remains 
is the issue of coordination, but this is achievable on the 
basis of the existing system of working liaison between agencies 
participating in this work. 
  In keeping with the FCS Statute, counterintelligence organs 
are subordinated directly to the head of state--the guarantor of 
the Constitution of the Russian Federation, and hence its 
sovereignty, independence, and territorial integrity. Their 
independence from local authorities is quite justified by the 
specificity of the period our country is going through and gives 
it sufficient freedom of action for aggressive offense against 
corrupt groups and anticonstitutional manifestations. 
  Some corrections regarding counterintelligence could be made 
through the law on counterintelligence which is currently being 
drafted. In particular, it involves investigation of espionage 
cases. Counterintelligence needs a reliable, professionally 
trained investigative staff that specializes along these lines; 
this is a necessity, not a sign of the FCS's punitive functions. 
During the confirmation of the FCS Statute there were debates on 
this matter and, it is becoming clear, it has not been fully 
resolved. The idea of creating an investigative committee 
remains an idea, while skilled cadres capable of investigating 
complicated cases remain unutilized. Perhaps we should come back 
to this problem once again. Consider it, weigh all the pros and 
cons, and prepare proposals. 
  The organizational, legal, financial, and material-technical 
conditions being put in place for the FCS are only half of the 
matter. The main part is a trained corps of counterintelligence 
professionals, without whom it will not be possible to get the 
activities of this service going effectively, meeting the 
demands of modern Russian statehood. Certification of Russian 
counterintelligence cadres has been completed recently; it 
showed that the FCS has sufficient potential. Evidence of this, 
among other things, is the recent successes in disrupting the 
activities of German and British agents in Russia. Any 
counterintelligence operation requires a lengthy preparation 
stage; therefore, the latest of the publicly known successes of 
our counterintelligence are the result of the painstaking 
activities that preceded them. 
  Whether there are many such successes or not is another 
matter. The times when an NKVD [People's Commissariat for 
Internal Affairs] oblast administration received a quota for 
catching a certain number of Australian, Mexican, Thai, or other 
spies--which was always met and exceeded--are past. But if we 
compare the current effectiveness of counterintelligence work in 
Russia and, for instance, the United States, the achievements 
are roughly comparable. With respect to other lines of work, 
however, Russian counterintelligence still has a long way to go. 
<H5>  "Feel the Difference" </H5>
  Almost none of those who support the creation of a law-based 
state argue, for instance, the need for a democratic state to 
have such a special service as foreign intelligence. No wonder. 
Intelligence organs as a rule do not work against their own 
citizens--their activities are aimed outside, and this situation 
almost everywhere is codified in the law. 
  This means that when the interests of the state do not 
conflict sharply with the interests of its citizens, as is the 
case with intelligence, the problem of special services 
violating rights and freedoms does not look all that topical. 
The main heat of criticism is reserved for domestic intelligence 
used in combating terrorism, organized crime, etc., as well as 
counterintelligence. But while the former, which is frequently 
associated with political surveillance, is simply rejected as an 
instrument of a totalitarian state, counterintelligence 
seemingly is permitted to exist but under a constant fire of 
criticism from all sides: from the authorities--for being 
passive in uncovering and preventing internal threats against 
the state; and from the public--for attempts to expand its 
sphere of functions. 
  Against this background the public is offered time and again 
novel but rather lightweight reasoning on the ways to 
reorganize Russia's security organs. In it, the 
authors usually work mainly from two premises: the need to 
remove the threat to democracy presented by the heirs of 
"competent organs" and foreign experience of building a special 
service. 
  Let us leave aside at this point deliberate attempts to 
mislead the public. The reason the authors of reform schemes do 
not understand the substance of the issue, in my opinion, is 
that they apparently incorrectly formulate their goal. After 
all, if the goal is to remove a potential threat presented by 
special services, the easiest way to achieve it is to liquidate 
them. In other words, the best cure for a headache is the 
guillotine. 
  If, however, the task is to create a democratic state that 
possesses all means of maintaining its stability, the solution 
should be sought in the balance of strength and efficiency of 
special organs and the ability to keep them under control. 
  In this, it would be wrong to disregard extensive foreign 
experience--without, of course, succumbing to the other extreme 
of automatically copying other models without consideration for 
the important special features of Russian reality. 
  Since there is an opinion that MOSKOVSKIY KOMSOMOLETS 
forecasts usually come true, let us take as an example 
information received by the newspaper from a "reliable" source 
about potential disbandment of the FCS and the transfer of its 
component administrations to various ministries and agencies. 
(Actually, this version was mentioned in other publications as 
well.) 
  The economic counterintelligence administration allegedly 
will go to the Ministry of the Economy. The counterintelligence 
operations administration will find its rightful place in the 
Ministry of Justice and will become something like a Russian 
FBI. Everything almost like in the United States. But that is 
the point--almost. 
  It would be appropriate to recall that many ministries which 
have similar or even identical names here and abroad carry out 
different functions. For instance, the U.S. Department of the 
Interior deals with land development, management of natural 
resources, and is in charge of natural preserves. The American 
Department of Justice is more like the Russian general 
procuracy. It is responsible first and foremost for monitoring 
compliance with federal laws, represents federal organizations 
in civil litigation, and acts as a prosecutor when violations of 
the law are committed. By the way, the head of this organization 
is at the same time, using our terminology, the general 
procurator of the United States of America. "Feel the 
difference," as the famous commercial tells us. 
  Besides, the FBI, strictly speaking, is not so much 
counterintelligence, which is the task of only one of the 
bureau's many services, as it is a special combination of a 
special service and a law enforcement organ. Along with 
counterespionage, the FBI's tasks include: combating bank 
robberies, aircraft hijacking, bribery, and corruption; 
kidnapping investigations; and other functions. Thus, 
implementing the project "Let Us Do As They Do in the West" may 
lead to the situation described in a fairy tale, where the genie 
Khottabych made a precious-metal telephone apparatus. It looks 
like a real one, but you cannot make a call on it. 
  This is the kind of "counterintelligence apparatus" we may 
get under this version. In order to avoid this we would have to 
make dramatic modifications to the functions of the Ministry of 
Justice, special services, and law enforcement organs. But this 
is already reorganization on a much greater scale, which will 
demand an all-out reshaping of the structure of executive 
authority. When are we to work then? And how much will such a 
"reorganization"--performed for the sole purpose of bringing it 
more or less closer to the American original--cost the taxpayer? 
Continuing the polemics with such a proposal, it would make 
sense to ask one more, most important, question: Will such a 
structure work effectively in our conditions? 
  An example of a more or less successful reorganization of 
security organs along Western models is the separation of the 
Foreign Intelligence Service into an independent agency. The 
relatively low cost of this undertaking (and there is cost 
attached to everything) is the result first and foremost of the 
fact that its predecessor--the First Chief Directorate--had 
quite considerable autonomy even when it was part of the KGB. 
The Border Troops were split into a separate service without any 
particular complications for the same reason. However, such a 
straightforward "improvement" of counterintelligence is 
impermissible. 
  First, even within one counterintelligence 
service, coordination of activities against diverse foreign 
services aiming at different objects and persons in Russia 
already represents a rather complex problem, which even now is 
being handled with difficulty. 
  What will happen then if counterintelligence were broken up 
into independent agencies responsible for individual foreign 
services or objects or, even worse, both attributes at the same 
time? A complex and very expensive setup for control and 
coordination of all domestic special services will be 
required--something like a Ministry of Coordination. 
  Second, in additional to actual operational units, 
counterintelligence has support units--such as technical support 
for operations--which in their current state simply cannot be 
divided. This means that additional money will be needed to 
create their own, "pocket" technical services, or the 
aforementioned units will have to be given the status of 
interagency bodies, with the resulting need for an additional 
bureaucratic structure. 
  The situation is the same with respect to reference records 
and information funds, dividing which and subsequently working 
with them presents an awesome problem. 
  Third, what do we do about local 
counterintelligence organs in republics, krays, and oblasts? 
Divide them by offices-"departments"? 
  In principle, we could experiment, using any model of 
building a system of national security organs--German, American, 
French, or some other. But this is a costly undertaking for our 
current situation, with the Ministry of Finance trying to save 
every ruble. It is even more impermissible in the atmosphere of 
political instability, where each imprudent move causes 
thunderous reverberations. 
  Reforming the special services is normal practice even in 
the 
life of states where democracy is an established practice and 
problems of distribution of authority have been resolved. But 
nowhere in the world will we find reorganization for the sake of 
reorganization. 
  New geopolitical realities and the emergence of new threats 
after the end of the "cold war"--all this requires from any 
state greater attention to special structures. 
  Reorientation of special services is quite natural. The 
organizational capabilities, technical equipment, and financial 
resources of criminal organizations in a number of instances are 
on par with those of the intelligence services of some 
countries. For instance, the income of South American drug 
cartels is comparable to the budget of the U.S. CIA. One can 
hardly hope to successfully uncover and disrupt extremely secret 
activities of criminal groups without using special methods and 
means. 
  One can hardly find a country these days where the tasks of 
special services, as well as organizational methods of carrying 
them out, are not being revised to some or other extent. 
  Our country is no exception in this respect. It has tried a 
great variety of forms--from the VChK [All-Russian Special 
Commission for Combating Counter-Revolution, Sabotage, and 
Speculation], OGPU [United State Political Directorate], NKVD, 
NKGB [People's Commissariat for State Security], MGB [Ministry 
of State Security], and KGB to MSB [motorized-rifle battalion], 
AFB [Agency for Federal Security], MBVD [Ministry of Security 
and Internal Affairs], MB [Ministry of Security], and finally 
FCS. There have also been attempts to merge the special services 
with neighbor organizations. For instance, an Information 
Committee under the USSR MFA [Ministry of Foreign Affairs] was 
created and functioned, and even had its own intelligence 
school. One can only be amazed at the variety of forms. It seems 
that only the word "bureau" (if we leave aside the Komintern 
[Communist International] intelligence service) has not been 
used in the names of domestic security organs. It is a rare 
ministry or agency that can boast a history so replete with 
numerous transformations. 
  It is expected that we learn lessons from the past. One of 
them is that any reform, in addition to planned positive 
results, inevitably produces negative ones as well. First of 
all, with respect to cadres. A special service is not just 
buildings, equipment, and methods of operation--it is first and 
foremost professionals. If they leave, succession is 
broken; the ability to self-reproduce is lost, which is 
absolutely counterproductive for a self-contained organization, 
which special services always are. 
  One must also mention persons who assist security organs, 
including on a covert basis. Successful use of a covert agent 
network, without which special services' operations are 
impossible, is predicated first and foremost on public awareness 
of the tremendous role of these specific state structures, which 
they play in protecting the civil society. 
  Let us draw some conclusions. For instance, how delicate is 
the sphere of national security, which to a considerable extent 
is linked with the general problem of distribution of authority 
in a state. That society's expectations, its reserve of 
patience, have reached the limit, and we cannot make any more 
mistakes. That each reorganization is another trial for 
professionals, and that an organizational failure, which 
practically undermines the authority of counterintelligence, is 
the worst propaganda anyone could conceive. 
  Thus, we can hardly qualify as an informational or 
analytical 
breakthrough of some mass media the fact that they regularly 
spin out a version of another reorganization of the FCS. 
  Let us emphasize that standards for special services' work 
are set not on the basis of theoretical models and foreign 
analogies, but are based on the existing state system and the 
tasks the state is dealing with at any particular moment in 
history. How and with what resources counterintelligence organs 
will be handling the task of ensuring national security, and 
what changes are necessary in the FCS structure must be defined, 
among other things, also at the initiative and with the direct 
participation of the counterintelligence service itself. 
  On the whole, however, it may be said that the task of 
reorganization has been solved by the Russian 
Federation President's Edict No. 19 of 5 January 1994, which 
approved the Statute on the Federal Counterintelligence Service. 
These documents protect Russian special services from "cavalry 
attacks," from destructive temptations--wherever they may come 
from. It may be a paradox, but they complete the succession of 
continuous transformations of special services that has long 
acquired the attribute of ill-conceived perpetuality. The 
meaning of these decisions is to protect the structure necessary 
for society and the state from emotional, incompetent, faddish 
changes; to create conditions not for future reorganizations but 
for normal work of the Federal Counterintelligence Service in 
the new situation. 
<H5>  Access to Special Kitchen? </H5>
  It is obvious that a strong state needs strong special 
services. For a country that wants to strengthen the state 
foundation, the might of the special services must be 
commensurate with the obstacles that will have to be overcome 
along this road. However, in order for special services 
themselves not to become such an obstacle, their activities must 
be subject to strict state and public oversight. The creation of 
such oversight is a problem for any state, since it inevitably 
conflicts with such an attribute of any special service as 
secrecy. 
  We know, for instance, of a recent incident involving Lady 
N., head of the British MI-5 counterintelligence service, whom 
the press "tracked down" after her name was made public. In 
their evaluation, it would present no difficulty for numerous 
terrorist groups in the country to organize a kidnapping of 
Great Britain's counterintelligence chief from her home. This 
scandalous incident is another argument in favor of those who 
insist on preserving the British tradition of complete secrecy 
when it comes to special services and their personnel. 
  British law sets very strict limitations on public access to 
the special services' "kitchen." For instance, it is considered 
a crime for any staff member (including former) to make public 
any information about his organization. Even committed by a 
regular civil servant, disclosure of information on special 
services may fall under a criminal statute. There is also 
liability for disclosing information concerning the activities 
of intelligence and counterintelligence organs if such a 
disclosure is made abroad. If we had such laws, perhaps this 
article could not be published. 
  Nevertheless, the British taxpayer is not deprived of the 
ability to find out through parliament what his money is spent 
on in the case of special services. Let us note, however, that 
Westminster is in no hurry to introduce broad parliamentary 
oversight of special services and relies on a very small circle 
of persons who have access to the shrine, first and foremost the 
prime minister, who is personally responsible for the 
organization of activities and oversight of special organs. 
  We should not blindly copy any democratic experience, but it 
makes sense to study it. Especially considering that we do not 
have our own traditions in this sphere. Therefore I 
would like to warn those who advocate comprehensive deputy 
oversight: A special service that is under open oversight is 
finished. In this respect, our lawmakers must accomplish 
extremely delicate work in creating and fine-tuning an 
appropriate oversight mechanism, and certainly do so in 
interaction with the judiciary and executive authorities. 
  Within the boundaries of his authority, the president of the 
Russian Federation not only organizes the activities of main 
Russian special services, including the FCS, but also conducts 
oversight, and is responsible for them before society and the 
state. 
<H8>  * * * </H8>
  Special services per se are not a threat to democracy and 
society. The threat stems from the desire to subordinate their 
activities to any one political force or, worse, political or 
nationalistic clan or group. In order to keep this from 
happening in Russia, each branch of authority should provide in 
an appropriate form a legal base for the activities of 
intelligence and counterintelligence structures. However, these 
structures, too--and first and foremost the Federal 
Counterintelligence Service that "came in from the cold"--will 
have to make a tremendous effort as well. 

