I.      DIPLOMATIC 

   Consular Representatives--Trieste citizen Aldo Kolleoni, chairman 
of the Italian-Mongolian Friendship Society, was named Mongolian 
consular representative in Italy and Kuo Shiyu Mongolian consular 
representative in Hong Kong.  (ARDYN ERH 12 Sep 92 p 1) 

   II. ECONOMIC 

   Border Crossings--The number of vehicles from Germany, Hungary, 
Czechoslovakia, and Russia arriving at the Altanbulag Customhouse 
border point increased dramatically in late summer 1992.  The usual 
processing time for vehicles at this border point was reported to be 
one week.  (ARDYN ERH 4 Sep 92 p 3)  By order of the minister of 
finance, effective 1 March 1994, changes will be made in the 
priority of work at aymag and local custom bodies.  The order 
provides for special attention to vehicles crossing the state 
border.  (Ulaanbaatar MONTSAME 17 Feb 94) 

   Mongolian Construction Workers in Russia--Mongolian workers have 
beenemployed under contract at large Russian construction trusts 
since November 1990.  As of 1 July 1992, 481 construction workers 
were employed in Ulaan-Ude, Irkutsk, Bratsk, and Chita, and 25 in 
the vicinity of Khabarovsk.  The monthly wages of these workers, who 
contract for one to three years in Russia, averaged 4,500-10,000 
rubles.  (ARDYN ERH 2 Sep 92 p 1) 

   International Selenge Bank--The Joint Mongolian-Buryat 
International "Selenge" Bank, which began operations in September 
1992 in Ulaanbaatar, has the following objectives:  expanding 
finance-credit and trade-economic, scientific and technical 
cooperation between the two countries, supporting joint enterprises, 
augmenting the opportunities to compete in markets, organizing free 
zones, and bringing the services of the bank closer to the 
organizations and citizens.  (ARDYN ERH 5 Sep 92 p 1) 

   III. EDUCATION 

   Mongolian State University--In 1992 some 2,200 students 
participated in more than 40 specialized programs at the nine 
faculties and education-research institutes of the Mongolian State 
University.  More than 300 scholar-instructors and research workers 
were employed in the 45 departments and 12 education-research 
laboratories, centers and sectors.  During the first session 620 
individuals were enrolled in 31 specialized programs.  (ARDYN ERH 1 
Sep 92 p 2) 

   "Maharashi Vedic" University Branch--T. Sumiya, member of the 
commission concerned with organizing branches of the International 
Maharashi Vedic University, announced that the commission was 
considering opening a branch at the Mongolian State University. 
(ARDYN ERH 1 Sep 92 p 2) 

   Economic Law Training in Germany--A group of lawyers, under the 
joint sponsorship of the Mongolian Democratic Party and the Konrad 
Adenauer Fund,spent ten days in Germany to study the basics of the 
economic laws of market economy countries.  Participants included 
Mongolian Democratic Party members D. Dorligjab, D. Battulga, and 0. 
Ochirjab, lawyers A. Amarsanaa, J. Chinbat, and N. Rinchindorj, who 
was affiliated with the State Great Hural Seal Office.  (ARDYN ERH 1 
Sep 92 p 2) 

   IV.   SCIENTIFIC 

   Earthquake in Omnogobi Aymag-- On 31 August 1992 an earthquake 
occurred at 1626 Ulaanbaatar time 170 kilometers northeast of 
Dalandzagad City in Omnogobi Aymag.  The intensity approximated 5 on 
the Richter scale.  (ARDYN ERH 1 Sep 92 p 2). 

   Federation of Laboratories--Delegations representing the 11 
largest laboratories in Ulaanbaatar agreed to organize the 
Federation of Laboratories for the purpose of assisting in the 
coordination of the work performed in laboratories throughout the 
country, raising the scientific and technical level of research 
work, exchanging information, and improving the supply of materials 
and cadres.  O. Dorjrentsen, director of the Central Geology 
Laboratory, was named head of the organizing group.  (ARDYN ERH 1 
Sep 92 p 2) 

   Mongolian Medical University--The Mongolian Medical University, 
founded in 1942 as the medical faculty of the Mongolian State 
University, became an independent institute in 1961 and a Medical 
University in 1990.  During this period almost 10,000 persons 
completed their training.  In 1992 almost 3,000 students studied at 
this university and 300 scholars and professors served as 
instructors.  Students are trained as physicians, pediatricians, 
oral specialists, pharmacists, and public health managers.  Russia, 
China, Italy, and the United States have established relations with 
the university.  Students from Russia, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, 
Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam, Ethiopia, China and India were enrolled 
here in the 1992 school year.  (ARDYN ERH 30 Sep 92 p 2) 

   Institute of Technology--The Institute of Technology, subordinate 
to the Ministry of Science and Education and the Academy of 
Sciences, participated in the 1992 National Chemistry, Biology and 
Mathematics Competition.  The first classes of this institute had an 
enrollment of 30 students.  The curriculum was patterned after that 
of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.  The primary goal of 
this institute was identified as follows:  to train science cadres 
to achieve the same training and research level attained among the 
students educated in highly developed countries and to acquire 
sufficient ability to conduct research work immediately after 
graduation.  B. Chadraa, vice president of the Academy of Sciences 
and academician, was identified as the director of this institute. 
(ARDYN ERH 5 Sep 92 p 1) 

   V.  BIOGRAPHIC 

   ADIYAA, G.--President of the Federation of Mongolian Trade Unions 
(ARDTh ERH 4 Sep 92 p 1) 

   BAYASGALAN, N.--Director of the Animal Husbandry Policy 
Department of the Ministry of Food and Agriculture  (ARDYN ERH 5 Sep 
92 p 2) 

   BUYAN-ERDENE, M.--Director of the Mongolbank Control Office 
(ARDYN ERH 4 Sep 92 p 1) 
   DABAASUREN, T.--Responsible secretary of the State Harvest 
Commission (ARDYN ERH 5 Sep 92 p 2) 

   GANBAATAR, G.--Director of the.Transport Department of the 
Mongolian Civil Air Transport Cooperative  (ARDYN ERH 5 Sep 92 p 2) 

   GANBOLD. C.--President of the Federation of Mongolian Peace and 
Friendship Organizations  (ARDYN ERH 4 Sep 92 p 1) 

   GANSUH, D.--Assistant director of the State Geodesy and 
Cartography Office and candidate  (ARDYN ERH 5 Sep 92 p 3) 

   JAMBAA, Y.--General director of the Impeks Supply Cooperative for 
Various Commodities.  ((ARDYN ERH 4 Sep 92 p 3) 

   JAMBAL, G.--Medical University rector and professor  (ARDYN ERH 
30 Sep 92 p 2) 

   MANALJAB, T.--Director of the Transportation Office of the 
Ministry of Roads, Transportation, and Communications  (ARDYN ERH 8 
Sep 92 p 1) 

   OYUUNGEREL, J.--General director of the Petroleum Import 
Cooperative (ARDYN ERH 4 Sep 92 p 2) 

   SANUNDAGBA,C.--Colonel; deputy chairman of the All Military 
Special Court  (ARDYN ERH 1 Sep 92 p 3) 

   SHUURAB, I.--Assistant director of the Institute for Management 
and Development  (ARDYN ERH 9 Sep 92 p 3) 

   SORONDZON, J.--Director of the Joint Mongolian Russian Secondary 
School for Russian Language Training in Ulaanbaatar  (ARDYN ERH 5 
Sep 92 p 1) 

   TOMOR, PUREBIYN--Died on 22 August 1992 following an illness; 
born in 1932 in the territory of Nomgon Somon, Omnogobi Aymag; 
completed primary school, the Technical School for Finance and 
Economics, and the Moscow City International Relations Institute; 
worked since 1953 as an inspector, deputy chairman of the board, 
chairman of the Board of the State Bank, deputy director of the 
International Investment Bank in Moscow and vice president of the 
Academy of Sciences; recipient of the Order of the Gold Star, and 
the Distinguished Labor and People's Anniversary Medals; obituary 
concluded with the listing of the following organizations:  Board of 
Directors of the State Bank and members of the President's Office of 
the Academy of Sciences  (ARDTh ERH 1 Sep 92 p 4) 

   TOMORBAATAR, D.--Deputy minister of fuel and power  (ARDYN ERH 9 
Sep 92 p 2) 

   ULAAN, C.--Director of the National Development Office  (ARDYN 
ERH 4 Sep 92 p 3) 

(AUTHOR:  MIAB/CISD.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
MILITARY/INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS BRANCH, CIS DIVISION, (703) 733- 
6375.) 
ENEAG/08 MAR/POLCHF/CIS DIVISION/sdj 06/0033Z mar 

