BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "News Flow Important"] </F>
  [Text] The statement by Sun Nansheng, head of XINHUA's 
propaganda department, effectively ending penalising Hong Kong 
reporters who signed a petition protesting against the jailing 
of MING PAO journalist Xi Yang is to be welcomed. 
  The move is a promising gesture towards pragmatism over news 
coverage of the mainland's affairs. For far too long the 
country has been shrouded in a Machiavellian secrecy which fails 
to benefit its people or the world at large. Furthermore, the 
first impact of the boycott, which was to blacklist petitioners 
who wanted to cover the murder of 32 people including 24 
Taiwanese tourists on Qiandao Lake, smacked of political 
censorship which boded ill for the future freedom of the Hong 
Kong press. 
  By withdrawing this ban on at least some of those 
journalists 
so that they can cover the next Preliminary Working Committee 
meeting in Beijing, perhaps one can hope for further openness on 
the part of the mainland. 
  At the moment, Hong Kong reporters have to apply for 
official 
permission to report in China. They also have to specify 
precisely what event or events they would like to cover. The 
effect of this is to seriously contain the free flow of 
information from the republic. What, for example, is a 
journalist to do if he were to witness events of great moment 
which have nothing to do with his officially-sanctioned trip? 
What if Deng Xiaoping passed away during his stay? If he 
chooses to write about such an occurrence, he faces imprisonment 
for reporting illegally. And as one now knows from Xi Yang's 
case, such offences can be dealt with extremely harshly. If he 
takes the safe option and ignores the event, not only is he a 
discredit to his trade, he is also indulging in dangerous 
self-censorship without the advocates of secrecy having to 
breathe too closely down his neck. 
  At the end of the day, it is in the interests of China's own 
people to have full, fair, and contemporary reporting. Without 
this, they will never be able to learn fully about the world 
into which they are emerging and to make judgments accordingly. 
Instead, they will be playing with the cards stacked against 
them and open themselves to exploitation by those more 
worldly-wise. The jailing of two Chinese Americans last week 
for attempting to defraud China of U.S.$ 10 billion is just a 
case in hand. Had Chinese bankers been better briefed on 
Western financial practices they would not have been so naive as 
to issue standby letters of credit for such an incredulous 
amount. 
  Efforts to stifle the flow of information between China and 
the outside world will not help Beijing's modernisation drive. 
This, surely, cannot be a situation which Chinese leaders, in 
all their wisdom, could condone. 

