Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Bucharest, ROMPRES, 25/1/1994 -- The cabinet met on 
Monday evening, 24 January, under the chairmanship of Prime 
Minister Nicolae Vacaroiu for an in-depth analysis of the 
factors causing the financial blockage in the Romanian economy 
and of the solutions proposed to fight it. 
  Present at the meeting were State Minister Mircea Cosea, 
head 
of the Council for Economic Coordination, Strategy and Reform, 
State Minister Dan Mircea Popescu in charge of labor and 
welfare, State Minister Florin Georgescu in charge of finance, 
Justice Minister Petre Ninosu, Industry Minister Dumitru 
Popescu, Transport Minister Paul Teodoru. Also present were 
National Bank Governor Mugur Isarescu, the presidents of the 
main merchant banks, representatives of the State Ownership 
Fund, counselors, experts. 
  The meeting examined a report drawn up by a panel of 
experts, 
and debated a plan to ease financial circuits with immediate, 
medium and long-range effects. The decision was made that for 
1994 the shortage of liquidities in the payment system should be 
tackled gradually and cautiously by first addressing the root 
causes of the financial blocking and then its effects, in 
parallel with the gradual easing of money issuance based on the 
actual offer of goods and services in demand on the market, so 
that a spiralling inflation-inducing surplus of the money mass 
could be averted. Basically, the government will take over as 
part of its public debt some of the unsettled expenditures in 
the region of lei 210 billion, an amount now incorporated in 
nonperforming stocks of goods generated by investment projects 
started prior to 1990, and in foreign trade deals engaged on 
behalf of the Romanian state before the 1991 unification of the 
currency rates. Besides the takeover by the government of some 
of the nonperforming credits deriving from discontinued 
investment projects in state-run companies, relief is expected 
to come also from an injection of liquidities from these 
companies' working capital estimated to grow by 46 billion lei, 
with which the companies in question will be able to pay some of 
their arrears. In compliance with the regulations adopted in 
1993, the government directed that 23 billion lei be supplied to 
financial circuits as damages for the 1993 natural calamities; 
another 83 billion lei for the payment of fertilizers 
distributed free to agricultural producers; and 50 billion lei 
for incentives to industrial units exporting 
long-manufacturing-cycle goods. 
  It was resolved as well that credits in the worth of 400 
billion lei be granted for farm works, phased out for the entire 
length of the spring agricultural campaign. Three quarters of 
the amount will be secured from the sale out of the food stocks 
for the winter period, credited by the Agricultural Bank (BA). 
  The strategy the government has opted for in agreement with 
the National Bank pursues a better allocation of resources 
through market mechanisms and by maintaining the current credit 
lines at the reference interest of the National Bank within the 
ranges agreed upon by Romania with its external partners. 
Maximum attention will be devoted to correlating a stronger 
currency discipline with domestic payments. The Ministry of 
Finance and the National Bank shall regularly inspect and report 
on how the hard currency repatriation regulations and the access 
are being to the hard currency market rules are being complied 
with. 
  The working capital of the state companies working on profit 
shall be augmented by 50 billion lei from the dividends paid 
into the Private Ownership Funds (FPP) and the State Ownership 
Fund (FPS). The improvement will be sought of the refunding 
mechanisms and instruments at the level of the entire economy. 
The prime minister particularly stressed the need to have it 
clearly settled as to the degree of responsibility incumbent on 
the administrative management of state-run units, and to spell 
out the duties of the FPP's and FPS. In his opinion, the 
financial blocking is concentrated, paradoxically so, he said, 
in the raw material and energy producing sectors, and requested 
the ministries concerned to center their circuit smoothing 
actions on state companies that owe arrears to primary sectors. 
He insisted on the necessity for a more active participation of 
the FPP's and of the FPS as rightful owners of the units 
generating the financial blockage. 

