Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by 'Isa al-Shubul] </F>
  [Excerpt] The House of Representatives met yesterday 
evening and listened to a government statement by Talal Sat'an 
al-Hasan, the minister of state for foreign affairs, on UN 
Security Council Resolution No. 904 concerning the settlers' 
recent massacre in the Hebron al-Ibrahimi Mosque and on relevant 
Jordanian moves by His Majesty King Husayn and the government. 
The following is the text of the statement: 
  The Hebron massacre in the holy al-Ibrahimi Mosque in the 
blessed month of Ramadan was a violent shock as it resulted in 
the shedding of the blood of innocent worshipers. The massacre 
is a reminder of the danger to which the Palestinian people are 
exposed day and night at the hands of the armed settlers and 
soldiers. The importance of this serious incident stems not 
from the number of people who were killed or wounded en 
masse--people are martyred or wounded on the Palestinian soil 
everyday--but from the cold-blooded manner in which this tragic 
crime was committed and from the identity of this criminal, who 
perpetrated it without any of the pretexts or excuses usually 
advanced by Israel such as self-defense or pursuit of those who 
are allegedly disturbing security. 
  This serious incident drew angry reactions around the world 
and stirred the feelings of those who detest injustice and 
tyranny. It has been proven that arming the settlers on the 
pretext of a threat posed by the Palestinian citizens is merely 
a false allegation; it is the defenseless Palestinian people who 
need security and protection. This painful incident has also 
refuted the possibility of so-called coexistence between the 
Jewish settlers and the Palestinian people on the Palestinian 
territory under the settlers' feeling of ethnic superiority. 
The horrible massacre has proven that the Israeli settlements 
are an obstacle to a just and comprehensive peace. 
  His majesty the king, his government, and all his Jordanian 
people immediately dealt with all political, legal, and human 
aspects of this issue on all levels. Jordan undertook serious 
political activity to obtain a Security Council resolution that 
rises to the level of this event. We worked continuously within 
the United Nations through contacts with the Security Council 
members, the Arab group, and Islamic states. During the 
decisive hours prior to voting on the resolution, his majesty 
the king pursued contacts with his brothers the Arab leaders in 
Morocco, Syria, and Egypt and with President 'Arafat and U.S. 
President Clinton for the sake of adopting a convincing 
resolution and maintaining the phrase related to occupied 
Jerusalem in the resolution. The Foreign Ministry summoned the 
ambassadors of the Security Council permanent member states and 
other member states and emphasized to them Jordan's desire to 
see the resolution adopted in its entirety and unanimously. 
  Resolution 904 provided the required level of positive 
points, foremost being its strong condemnation of the massacre 
and provision of protection and security for the Palestinian 
people in Palestinian territories. It held Israel, in its 
capacity as an occupying force, responsible for security and 
protection in accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention and 
for disarming settlers. Moreover, the explicit reference to 
Jerusalem as an occupied territory is a positive step toward 
recognizing the Arab and Islamic right to this holy city. 
Obviously, the implementation of this resolution requires 
intensive Arab efforts, cooperation, and follow-up for the sake 
of providing protection and security for the Palestinian people 
against aggression and oppression. 
  There is no need to remind the deputies of the Jordanian 
position on Jerusalem as directed by his majesty the supreme 
commander and of Jordan's insistence on maintaining its 
identity, solemnity, and sanctity; on renovating the holy 
places, the Dome of the Rock, and the al-Aqsa Mosque courtyards; 
on supporting the establishments operating in Jerusalem; on 
returning it to Arab sovereignty; on combating attempts to 
obliterate the Arab and Islamic nature of the holy city; and on 
standing up against the attempts of the so-called Temple 
Faithful to encroach on the al-Aqsa Mosque and holy places. 
  You may also recall that the Declaration of Principles 
signed 
on 13 September 1993 states that negotiations on Jerusalem will 
be conducted in the final and not the transitional phase. 
Therefore, Jordan has actively worked to defend the historical 
and religious sovereignty of Jerusalem so that Israel would not 
exploit the transitional period and continue to change the 
situation in Jerusalem, especially since it has annexed the city 
and considers the eastern and western parts of the city the 
unified capital of Israel even though this annexation was not 
internationally recognized. 
  Several Security Council resolutions have been issued since 
the start of occupation. They dealt with the protection of the 
Palestinian people and held Israel responsible in its capacity 
as the occupation authority. However, these resolutions 
referred to Israel's responsibility in all the occupied Arab 
territories without explicitly mentioning Jerusalem. This means 
the responsibility for protection in Jerusalem was implicitly 
included in the text. Therefore, the United States abstained 
from voting on two paragraphs referring to occupied Jerusalem on 
the pretext that the issue of Jerusalem will be discussed in its 
entirety at the beginning of the third year of the transitional 
phase and that attention is now focusing on the implementation 
of the Declaration of Principles. 
  He added: The resolution as a whole is a good one, both in 
its preamble and its operative paragraphs. The United States' 
abstention from voting on two paragraphs in the preamble on the 
pretext that discussion of the issue of Jerusalem is postponed 
does not undermine the resolution, which was unanimously 
approved by the Council. 
  Hence, the Jordanian move was carefully studied because 
omitting reference to occupied Jerusalem after that lengthy 
debate would result in a problem. Likewise, the failure of the 
resolution through a U.S. veto would be a diplomatic and 
political setback. Consequently, the U.S.'s abstention has not 
blocked the resolution, which is now valid and applicable. 
  You are well aware of the place Jerusalem occupies in King 
Husayn's heart and mind and of what he is always doing for its 
sake. The Jordanian Government's position on the resolution [as 
published] remains as you have always known it; namely, peace 
should be just, permanent, and comprehensive; the occupied Arab 
territories, including Arab Jerusalem, should be regained on the 
basis of Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338, which 
contained other clauses like the rights of refugees and 
evacuees, water, and other issues, and on the basis of land for 
peace; and the Palestinian people's legitimate rights to their 
full national soil should be secured. The issue of Jerusalem is 
one of the most serious and complex issues. We cannot envisage 
peace without restoring full Arab and Islamic rights in the city. 
  The House Foreign Affairs Committee denounced the U.S. 
position during the UN Security Council vote on the resolution 
condemning the ugly Zionist massacre of worshipers at the holy 
al-Ibrahimi Mosque. In a statement issued yesterday, the 
committee denounced the U.S. reservation on two clauses in the 
resolution, the first considered holy Jerusalem part of the 
occupied Arab territories and the second called for securing 
international protection for the Palestinian people in the 
occupied Palestinian territories and demanded that the competent 
quarters do so. 
  The committee voiced its pride in and appreciation for His 
Majesty King Husayn's courageous stand and his initiative in 
contacting the Arab leaders to formulate a united and effective 
position toward what is taking place. It also voiced full 
satisfaction with the position of the 14 Security Council 
members who condemned the massacre and called for providing 
protection for the Palestinian people in the occupied 
territories. 
  The committee chairman and members had earlier yesterday met 
with Talal Sat'an al-Hasan and discussed with him some issues 
related to the important events on the Jordanian and 
international arenas, including Security Council Resolution 904, 
which included the international community's condemnation of the 
holy al-Ibrahimi Mosque massacre. The minister reviewed the 
Jordanian Government's position toward this resolution and 
explained Jordan's moves before and after the issuance of the 
resolution and its intensive contacts on the Arab and 
international levels. [passage omitted] 

