BFN 

<F P=106> [Viktor Krokhmalyuk commentary: "Beware: Disinformation!"] </F>
  [Text] KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA published an article by its 
correspondent Olga Musafirova under the title "The Hetman 
[Bohdan Khmelnytskyy] With a Nuclear Mace; There Is No Strength 
To Hold It, and It Is Terrifying To Drop It.... Khmelnytskyy Is 
Agitated by Rumors." Here is a quotation from that publication: 
"At the site near Bohdanivtsi, 20 liquid-fuel SS-18 missiles 
seem to have been disabled and dismantled. There arose some 
problems with the storage of the "liquid," and heptyl, a poison 
of group "S" that is extremely toxic for all living organisms, 
is already poisoning the surrounding woods." 
  In this connection, a news conference was held at Ukraine's 
Security Service Administration in Khmelnytskyy Oblast. 
  What actually happened? Missile specialist Ye. Arkhypov has 
this to say: 
  "Today, about 90 launchers have been taken off the alert -- 
one regiment here and one -- in Pervomaysk. The technology for 
pouring out the liquid fuel is such that no environmental damage 
may occur as a result. It is carried out by the method 
involving high pressure, and, therefore, not a single drop of 
heptyl may get either into the soil or onto the people servicing 
these operations." 
  Colonel Ye. Arkhypov also said that the system of control 
over the course of dangerous operations has a triple and, in 
some cases, fivefold guarantee. Work on servicing missile sites 
is conducted, as usual, according to plan and systematically, 
and specialists from all countries arrive there, so that it 
would hardly be possible to conceal any problems from them. 
  In the near future, Khmelnytskyy missile specialists are 
expecting U.S. ecological safety inspectors; they will see what 
they themselves want to see and not what the Ukrainian side will 
recommend. Therefore, it is unlikely that our missile 
specialists may conceal anything even if they wanted to. 
  As emphasized at the news conference, nuclear fuel is too 
valuable a commodity to export or to sell at a very cheap price 
to CIS countries, in particular, to Russia, as some people are 
suggesting. The fuel remains on site, and then some of it is 
sent to special arsenals for storage and some -- for processing 
at chemical plants. Such a component of propellant fuel as the 
oxidizing agent is a very important product for manufacturing 
mineral fertilizers. Today, we must also think about Ukraine's 
space future. 
  Recently, an accord was signed with Kazakhstan on the joint 
use of Baykonur. We will be able to operate Ukrainian missiles 
with our own fuel instead of paying thousands and millions of 
dollars for this. 
  I will add my personal remark: Even following the 
KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA material under the provocative title 
"Khmelnytskyy Is Agitated by Rumors," the situation in the town 
is calm, and I did not see any signs of fear, panic, or 
complaints against the missile specialists stationed here. 

