CSO 

    [Editorial Report] The Openness Club, a media monitoring 
organization, contends that by exhibiting blatant bias against 
the Hungarian Socialist Party (MSZP) as its popularity increased 
in the months before the May election, Hungary's central public 
service radio and television damaged their own credibility and 
contributed to the MSZP's sweeping victory over the Hungarian 
Democratic Forum (MDF) and the other right-of-center government 
parties. Published in the 3 June daily NEPSZABADSAG and entitled 
"Was the Government's Downfall Caused by Its Own Television?", 
the organization's study is based on a detailed analysis of 
1,322 news items and commentaries in the 1 April-8 May period, 
as well as on purported general "tendencies" perceived in the 
media since last September. The Openness Club, a controversial 
organization that frequently criticized the outgoing 
government's media policies during the last four years, was 
founded in 1988 under the sponsorship of Hungarian Socialist 
Workers Party reformer Imre Pozsgay (Budapest Radio, 29 October 
1988) and has been associated not only with former reform 
communists but also with the liberal opposition. Interviewed in 
the liberal daily MAGYAR HIRLAP (4 April 1991), Gabor Halmai--a 
founder of the Club and "legal adviser to the Constitutional 
Court"--urged that regulation of the media should be based on 
the "liberal... Anglo-Saxon model." 
  The study contends that in the preelection campaign, a "gulf 
formed between popular opinion and the mass media." The media at 
first ignored signs of the MSZP's popularity and "miscalculated" 
its political impact, treating the liberal Alliance of Free 
Democrats (SZDSZ), which finished a distant second, as the 
government parties' main opponent and "devoting... just about 
equal time to the MDF and SZDSZ." This show of fairness did not 
extend to the MSZP, the study asserts. In March, the MSZP 
appeared in only half as many news items as the MDF and the 
SZDSZ. By April coverage of the MSZP was expanded, but rather 
than reporting neutrally on the party's rise, the media 
"denigrated" the popularity polls and questioned their 
objectivity, contends the Openness Club. Moreover, although in 
that month the number of news items devoted to the socialists 
increased, only about half them presented the socialists' own 
views, while the other half focused on criticism of the MSZP by 
its "adversaries." MSZP politicians were also denied publicity 
commensurate with their party's prominence. According to the 
study, MSZP chairman Gyula Horn was only fourth among party 
leaders in the time he was given to "express himself in his own 
words," coming after not only Prime Minister Peter Boross but 
also after Viktor Orban, whose party barely made it into 
parliament, and after Janos Palotas, whose party failed to gain 
entry. 
  The Openness Club's study describes several programs in 
detail. Analyzing 20 programs of the Hungarian Television series 
"A Nap" (The Day), the Openness Club asserts that except in the 
case of two programs with neutral themes, the series failed to 
present "an objective and balanced" report on clashing political 
opinions. "Instead, the programs showed an unequivocal 
commitment to the political views of the governing coalition" 
and "a marked hostility toward the views of the opposition, 
above all those of the MSZP." Some of the programs were an 
outlet for the government's "success propaganda," focusing on 
the economic achievements of the past four years, while others 
were "arranged to create the impression of a left-wing threat" 
from the MSZP. In an attempt to highlight this alleged threat, 
the Openness Club asserts, on the eve of the election Hungarian 
Television resorted to further "incredible manipulation" and 
broadcast a series of films that tried to create the impression 
of "continuity" between the activities of the MSZP--a successor 
of the reformist wing of the Communist Party--and the worst 
abuses of the Stalinist and Kadarist periods. Such 
"disinformation" was self-defeating, the Openness Club suggests, 
because the "uncertainty" and "fear" it inspired in viewers 
turned them against the government-dominated media and 
ultimately against the government parties. 

