BFN 

<F P=106> [First of three installments of an interview with </F>
Subcommander Marcos, of the Zapatist National Liberation Army, 
by Epigmenio Ibarra in the Lacandona jungle; date not given; 
first four paragraphs are LA JORNADA introduction] 
  [Text] If in the course of the coming two months there is 
not a real democratic opening, Mexico will face an imminent 
general war, Subcommander Marcos warned in an interview. "What 
we are doing is opening a waiting period and appealing to 
civilian society, to its most representative sectors, to stage a 
civil mobilization, virtually as the last call to initiate a 
peaceful transition to democracy." 
  For the Zapatist leader, the "government's myopia" does not 
allow it to see that "there are armed groups in several parts of 
the republic" which are growing. He says that one way or 
another, the outbreak of what would be a civil war is imminent, 
"not a war between two armies, but a war among many armies." He 
added that the only way to stop it is to provide a truly 
democratic opening, which "is still possible today." 
  Subcommander Marcos affirmed that the historic 
responsibility 
for this war falls on the government for having refused to face 
this political crisis by providing the possibility of having a 
peaceful transition to democracy. 
  The following is the first of a three-part interview from 
the 
Lacandona Jungle: 
  [Ibarra] Subcommander, you rejected the government's 
proposals. What remains to be done now? 
  [Marcos] What we are doing is reviewing what happened after 
the dialogue, respecting the government's decision to provide a 
democratic opening, and to fulfill the EZLN's [Zapatist National 
Liberation Army] demands for justice. What we did was to engage 
in consultations and establish contacts with other social 
groups, which insisted that the EZLN's demands were not being 
fulfilled in the rest of the country or in the rest of the State 
of Chiapas. 
  What we are doing is opening a new waiting period and 
appealing to civilian society, to its most representative 
sectors, to conduct a civil mobilization, virtually as the last 
opportunity or the last call to initiate a peaceful transition 
to democracy. What we envision and what the government's myopia 
does not allow it to see is that the problem of refusing to 
permit the transition to democracy is not an EZLN problem. What 
I mean is that the government was betting that if it did not 
wipe out the EZLN, it would sign a peace agreement and this 
would eliminate the possibility of war. We know, however, that 
there are armed groups in several parts of the republic, which 
the political climate is causing to grow and which one way or 
another will lead to an outbreak. The only way to stop this is 
to yield before that happens and to provide a truly democratic 
opening. 
  [Ibarra] According to you, we are facing an imminent general 
war in Mexico? 
  [Marcos] Definitely. What we think is that an effort 
beforehand toward a peaceful transition is still possible, or at 
least a transition through the electoral path in August. If we 
insist on that, if society is mobilized sufficiently, although 
there is hardly enough calendar time from now till 21 August, if 
the mobilization is given, it could be very intense in historic 
terms. What we are trying to make the nation understand is that 
an imminent war, following the failure of a peaceful path toward 
democracy, does not depend on us. Other groups will rise up. 
There is not going to be any control. It will be what is 
called a civil war, not a war between two armies, but a war 
among many armies. It will become impossible to speak to 
anyone. There will be no mediators and this will create 
problems for everyone, for all the belligerent parties. 
  [Ibarra] Are you not, however, contributing to this outbreak 
with your no? 
  [Marcos] No, what we are doing is what we did on 1 January, 
warn the people of a situation. When we say no, we are again 
revealing the masquerade that prevails in this country, which 
would have been consolidated had we accepted the peace 
agreement. Efforts were made to make the people, including 
foreigners, believe that the problem had been resolved. Then 
the people would be surprised again by the outbreak of a civil 
war. What we are doing is maintaining the role we have had, 
alerting the people to what could happen in this country and not 
saying it. [sentence as published] 
  [Ibarra] We are not talking about a simple rejection. You 
have said no, and at the same time, you raise your demands; you 
demand President Salinas' resignation and even threaten him with 
a political trial. Is that correct? 
  [Marcos] Yes. We insist that history has again confirmed the 
justness of our demands. At the beginning, in January, when we 
demanded President Salinas' resignation, people thought we were 
crazy, but now they realize that what would be crazy would be 
letting him stay in power. All the subsequent incidents 
confirmed that no one is sitting in Los Pinos; there is no 
control over the country; there is a de facto ungovernability; 
and the figure of the federal executive branch is just that, a 
figure. One way or another many forces are loose within the 
group in power which, as a result of their internal struggle, 
are dragging the rest of the country with them. That is what we 
mean when we insist on the need for a transition government. 
There should be an agreement among those powerful groups to give 
the power to those who really should have it, in other words, to 
the people. 
  Those who, in January, believed we were crazy, in March, 
have 
realized that the others are the ones who are crazy. The 
federal executive branch's historical responsibility is refusing 
to deal with the situation of political crisis that began in 
January 1994 and is refusing to yield to the democratization 
drive, or at least permitting a regulated transfer, which is 
what a transition government does. Arrogance and disdain, 
however -- how can an Indian tell me I have to leave -- is what 
makes him cling to power, what makes him deceive the nation with 
a dialogue process disguised as negotiation to deceive the stock 
market, investors, and finally the United States and Canada 
because of NAFTA. 
  The lack of control in the rest of the country is also 
reflected in the internal group of power and leads to a series 
of internal adjustments, which causes so many problems. Salinas 
is responsible for that; therefore, he should finally resign and 
leave the presidency. He cannot leave with his hands clean or 
try to make people believe that his hands are clean if they are 
really dirty. Even if he resigns, he must be called to trial to 
explain to the nation why he acted the way he did; why he 
governed the way he did, or why he misgoverned the way he did at 
a crucial time in our country's history. The current federal 
government will be responsible should a civil war begin, with 
all its consequences. 
  [Ibarra] Until now, we have heard about the EZLN's presence 
in Chiapas. In one of your communiques, however, you issued 
orders to forces in the nation and abroad. What does that mean? 
  [Marcos] Well, this case is the same as the masquerade that 
was created in the sense that this was a local state problem to 
say the least, or even worse, reducing it to the four 
municipalities where it started. Anyone who commands a military 
institution, however, knows that no army deploys all its troops 
in its first move. It is clear that the EZLN only sent part of 
its forces into action on 1 January. It must have other forces 
in reserve. Moreover, it is clear that the banner the EZLN 
raises is beginning to receive support from other sectors, other 
groups, even clandestine groups, that in one way or another are 
joining the EZLN's struggle and accepting its military 
direction, both in other parts of the country and in other 
nations. 
  Therefore, we are addressing them to let them know what our 
no means, to let them know that we have not accepted the 
proposed agreements, that we have not surrendered. At the same 
time, to let them know that we have left a space open to permit 
the organization of civilian society or to let them express 
their discontent through peaceful means. On the other hand, we 
again addressed the nation to insist that trying to reduce the 
problem to the State of Chiapas is deceitful. We want to stress 
once again that we have a national problem here, a problem of 
national war, which is now facing three possibilities: the path 
of a peaceful or political solution, of transition to democracy; 
second, a regular war between regular armies, which is why the 
EZLN insists on its recognition as a belligerent force; and 
third, which would be the worst solution, a civil war, with many 
heads or without any head, with many forces fighting among 
themselves, without any clear division between each one, between 
one contender and another. We are warning the nation about that 
possibility. We are pointing out a reality: that we are a 
national army, that we exist throughout the nation, and that we 
can carry out military operations throughout the national 
territory and in some other places abroad. 
  [Ibarra] Do you think you stand a chance of victory even 
though you have only a few weapons? 
  [Marcos] In military terms, there are three variables: land, 
climate, and morale. A well-equipped, well-armed, and 
well-trained army that has problems with climate and morale can 
be defeated by an ill-equipped army that has the advantage in 
terms of land, climate, and morale. The way the Zapatist Army 
has been growing -- they may deceive themselves into thinking it 
has only occurred in this state -- shows a line of military 
progression. The EZLN is growing and establishing itself in the 
natural surroundings of its troops. That means the EZLN has 
already gone through what would be the acclimatization period 
for any regular army, and troops are joining the EZLN in its own 
territory. We do not think we stand a chance of defeating the 
federal Army militarily, but we do believe we can resist an 
all-out offensive for a long time, and that includes all the 
known military options, from the surgical strike to razing the 
civilian population. One way or another, the government -- and 
foreign countries as well -- must realize that if war begins, a 
regular war between two perfectly defined armies at best, they 
must be prepared to wage a lengthy war lasting many years, where 
the land and climate will be major factors in favor of the EZLN. 
Whether they like it or not, the federal Army will have to act 
as an occupation army. 
  [Ibarra] Are there any options to war? 
  [Marcos] The only option would be for society to stage a 
mobilization prior to the elections. Then the cost estimates 
done by government and Pentagon computers would show it is more 
expensive to insist on holding onto power for another six-year 
term through Zedillo or any other person than for Salinas and 
the neoliberal group to keep themselves in power. [sentence as 
published] This would create another government option and 
provide a waiting period to meet the demands of justice, if 
fulfilled, and democracy, or at least give a clear sign of 
democracy. 
  The only way to avoid war is to mobilize the people before 
21 
August and pass the democratic test on 21 or 22 August, when the 
electoral process is decided. That is the only possibility we 
see. With that knowledge, we could have kept our mouths shut. 
We could have waited for what we saw in the underground world 
with which we are in contact. 
  This country's underground, in which we find ourselves, is 
not small; it is very large. It extends throughout the national 
territory. We could have done that and said: Well, we know we 
have the strength and the moral authority, and we are already 
spread throughout the country. We could have waited for this to 
blow up and capitalize on it according to our best interests. 
When the EZLN says NO, it is assuming its historic duty or its 
commitment to the nation to warn it once again that this is 
going to happen and something needs to be done. The advantage 
is that now, we are warning them before the war breaks out so 
there will not be a reoccurence of the January events. Then we 
would have to say we knew what was going to happen and did 
nothing to avoid it. Now you know what is going to happen and 
you can prevent it by doing the only thing possible; that is, 
forcing the government to withdraw and install a transition 
administration. 

