Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, March 11 (CTK) -- Outgoing premier 
Vladimir Meciar devoted a large part of his parting speech to a 
run-down of his cabinet's merits in bringing about Slovak 
independence. 
  He said that after the 1992 elections, his government took 
the reins of a country which found itself in a state of total 
collapse. He stressed that although the Czech side prepared for 
the split, the Slovak political and legislative leadership at 
the time did nothing of the sort. 
  After the 1992 elections, the government had to find a 
formula for a six-month coexistence of the two unitary republics 
within the federation, achieve a democratically-led split and 
create a new model of coexistence with the independent Czech 
Republic, he said. 
  "It has never been our intention to set up an iron-curtain 
frontier between our republics. We have always wanted and 
worked for cooperation," Meciar said, pointing out, however, 
that there were certain conflicts in the course of the division 
in the military and economic sectors. At the same time, he 
praised the accommodating approach of Czech Premier Vaclav Klaus 
as one enabling solutions to be found rapidly. 
  After the split, Slovakia he said inherited high 
unemployment 
and a large foreign debt, with the economic performance down 
over 30 per cent on 1992, and went on to deny his government's 
responsibility for the facts. 
  "We have solved 95 per cent of the federal property 
division, 
but you can criticize me for what's left," he said. 
  The government had to adopt immediate changes in the tax 
system and budgeting, pass many new laws and prepare currency 
separation, Meciar said. 
  "The cabinet's work schedule was punishing," he said in 
recognition of the cabinet members' efforts. Reflecting on the 
allegations that he exerted too much control, he said he had 
never had real power, but only what he called an infinite 
responsibility for the running of institutions which were only 
set up after Slovakia was founded. He said he gradually handed 
the responsibility over to them. 
  The birth of Slovakia took place amid favorable 
international 
but poor economic conditions, he said, defining the latter as 
the recession, loss of eastern markets and total lack of funds. 
He stressed that arms manufacturing has been willfully 
suspended and pointed out that it was being revived in the Czech 
Republic. 
  After the split, Slovakia managed to avoid all of the 
envisaged complications. It created its own currency in a 
fortnight, opened up foreign loan negotiations and has all but 
implemented the banking system. The rules of order, discipline 
and the law has taken root, he said, adding that foreign 
investors are showing signs of growing interest in the country 
and that transformation of agriculture is under way. "Can you 
tell us who else has achieved that?" Meciar asked, adding, "We 
did." 
  He also recalled government attempts at tapping Far Eastern 
markets. Describing the attempts as an unfinished process, he 
warned against their dismissal. 
  He pointed out that parliamentary political strife might 
result in slower transformation, delayed loans and pressure for 
more restrictive social measures. 
  "I feel the need to inform you about all this. You cannot 
destroy the continuity. There is a risk that in the second half 
of the year the social agreement may come at an end in 
Slovakia," Meciar warned. 

