CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by Jiangxi Governor Wu Guanzheng (0702 1351 2973): </F>
"Government Work Report Delivered at the Second Session of the 
Eighth Jiangxi Provincial People's Congress on 25 February 1994"] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] This year [1994] will be a 
crucial one in pushing forward with system reform to establish a 
socialist market economy, as well as an important one for 
focusing our energies on building our infrastructures faster to 
push Jiangxi's economy as quickly as possible to new heights. 
We must certainly take Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on 
building socialism with distinct Chinese characteristics and the 
Party's basic line as our guides, as well as fully implementing 
the spirit of the 14th CPC Congress and the Third Plenary 
Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, by speeding up our 
pace of building a socialist market-economy system, opening up 
wider to the outside world, and tightening and improving our 
macroeconomic regulation and control, in order to maintain the 
sustained, rapid, and sound development of our national economy, 
preserve political stability, and promote the establishment of 
our spiritual civilization and overall social progress. 
  In 1994, premised on improving our economic efficiency, 
adjusting our economic structure, and pushing ahead with 
technical advances, we will strive to continue a provincial 
economic growth rate that is higher than the national average. 
Our key national economic and social development missions are: 
GNP growth of 12 percent over 1993, striving for 14 percent; 
GVIAO [Gross Value of Industrial and Agricultural Output] growth 
of 18 percent, with agricultural growth of 5 percent and 
industrial growth of 23 percent; local revenue growth of 12 
percent, striving for 14 percent; average peasant net income 
growth of 100 yuan, striving for 130 yuan; a birthrate 
controlled within the state-assigned planned target. Everyone 
at all levels throughout Jiangxi must grasp well the relations 
among reform, development, and stability. While economic 
development is the focus of all our work and the grounds for 
social stability and long-range national security, with reform 
and opening being a powerful motivation for economic 
development, preserving social stability is an indispensable 
condition for economic development and smooth reform progress. 
We need a strong sense of historical responsibility and a high 
degree of epochal urgency, to seize opportunities, advance with 
the tide, and push our national economy to new heights within a 
few years. 
<H5>  I. On Earnestly Implementing the "CPC Central Committee </H5>
Resolution on Certain Issues Involved in Building a Socialist 
Market-Economy System," by Losing No Time in Pushing Forward 
With Reform 
  We will implement the resolution of the Third Plenary 
Session 
of the 14th CPC Central Committee, by doing a good job of 
combining priority breakthroughs with overall advances, and 
striving to make greater progress in areas, such as building a 
modern enterprise system, developing [key production] factor 
markets, and converting government functions. 
  1. In line with uniform national plans, we will push ahead 
actively with tax revenue, banking, and investment system 
reforms. We will practice a tax-sharing fiscal system, reforming 
and improving our tax system, and reforming our profit 
distribution system for state enterprises. We will gradually 
establish risk liability for corporate investment and bank 
credit. We will evolve financing mechanisms to guide public 
fund orientation toward infrastructures, basic industries, and 
priority production and circulation enterprises. In line with 
national banking reform, we will continue to rectify our 
financial order, by reorganizing rural and urban cooperative 
banks, developing and improving rural cooperative foundations 
and large enterprise-group financial corporations, and speeding 
up capital financing. 
  2. Focused on converting state enterprise operating forces, 
we will explore the establishment of a modern enterprise system 
with distinct property rights, clear rights and liabilities, 
government administration separate from business management, and 
scientific management. We will do a better job of running state 
enterprises, particularly large- and medium-sized ones, by 
speeding up our pace of "one experiment and two applications." 
We will make substantive progress in 1994 in areas, such as 
corporate experiments, "state ownership but private operation" 
of small state enterprises, and a shareholding cooperative 
system for urban collective enterprises and township 
enterprises. Meanwhile, we will organize large trans-regional, 
industrial, and ownership-system enterprise groups, speeding up 
the development of our individual, private, and foreign-invested 
economies. We will conscientiously lighten enterprise burdens, 
tightening state-assets management, and preventing assets 
erosion. 
  3. Focused on factor markets, we will develop and cultivate 
a market system. We will better rationalize our price 
relations, developing and standardizing all commodity markets, 
speeding up our pace of production-factor marketization, and 
actively developing markets, such as money, labor, technology, 
construction, and information. We will set up an experimental 
property rights [equity] transaction center, promoting optimum 
enterprise organization. We will vigorously develop and improve 
our bond and currency markets, standardizing financing 
activities, such as stocks, bonds, fundraising, and lending. We 
will actively adopt various job forms, speeding up our evolution 
of a new jobs order. We will practice a land-sale system with 
compensation and limited terms, developing and standardizing our 
real estate market. We will develop a uniform, open, 
competitive, and orderly market system. 
  4. We will conscientiously convert government functions, 
continuing to tighten and improve macroeconomic regulation and 
control, and doing a good job of overall coordination of 
economic operations. We will reform in 1994 provincial 
(municipal) and county (municipal and district) government 
organs, speeding up our conversion of government 
business-management-sector functions, reducing specialized 
economic departments, and enhancing the overall coordination 
capability of comprehensive economic departments. 
  In reforms, such as rural, regional, housing, and social 
security system, we also need to experiment boldly and intensify 
steadily. Our rural shareholding cooperative system in 
particular needs promotion in an orderly way on a broader scale. 
<H5>  II. Further Developing Our Productive Forces Distribution, </H5>
by Focusing Our Energies on Building Better Infrastructures, 
Such as Power, Transportation, Communications, and Water 
Conservancy 
  We will seize the favorable opportunity of the national 
opening and development along the Chang Jiang [Yangtze River] 
and construction of the Beijing-Kowloon railway, backing and 
strengthening our might in the region along the Zhejiang-Jiangxi 
railway, speeding up development of our northern region, 
particularly the Nanchang-Jiujiang industrial corridor and the 
Nanchang-Jiujiang-Jingdezhen triangle, reinforcing development 
in the region along the Beijing-Kowloon railway line, and 
striving by the end of the century to basically evolve a 
networked productive-forces distribution order along the Chang 
Jiang and the Zhejiang-Jiangxi and Beijing-Kowloon railways. 
In the Nanchang-Jiujiang industrial corridor, based on an 
effort to essentially make it the first region in Jiangxi to 
achieve modernization in three decades, we will further speed up 
development, striving in 1994 for GVIAO growth of 20 percent, 
and a real use of foreign investment exceeding $300 million. 
We will accelerate our upgrading of cities and enterprises 
along the Zhejiang-Jiangxi and Anhui-Jiangxi railway lines, 
giving all large and midsize cities along these lines one or two 
obviously superior industries, so that the area can become 
Jiangxi's main east-west productive-forces layout. We will 
emphasize the opening and development of cities, such as 
Ganzhou, Ji'an, and Fuzhou, arranging in a planned way several 
large- and medium-sized construction projects, to speed up the 
development of our productive-forces distribution from north to 
south. 
  In recent years, the provincial government has put great 
effort into infrastructure construction, achieving marked 
successes. We will continue in 1994 to amass funds for building 
infrastructures, such as power, transportation, 
communications, and water conservancy. In addition to 
emphasizing a number of ongoing large- and medium-sized 
construction projects, such as seven power plants, five 
railways, three airports, five national highway upgradings, 
2,500 km of fiberoptic cable microwave communications arteries, 
and the overall control of Poyang Hu [lake], we will start 10 
new large projects in 1994. These are the Fengcheng thermal 
power plant, the third phase of the Jiujiang power plant, the 
second widening of the Nanchang-Jiujiang expressway, the linking 
of the bridge over the Chang Jiang at Jiujiang to the 
Nanchang-Jiujiang highway, an expressway from Gaofang Mountain 
to Wenjia [port in Fujian], an expressway from Jiujiang to 
Hukou, the Hukou bridge, a new railway station in Nanchang, a 
new airport in Nanchang, and 600,000 computerized telephones. 
These will make 1994 the year of Jiangxi's most priority 
construction starts since the founding of the PRC, with an 
investment of up to 10 billion yuan. The provincial government 
has ordered the pertinent departments, prefectures, and cities 
to emphasize this job, by starting the projects according to 
plans. The provincial party committee and government have also 
decided recently to spend about a decade and invest nearly 10 
billion yuan in building the Nanchang-Zhangshu-Ji'an-Ganzhou 
expressway to Jiangxi's border with Guangdong, to form an 
expressway artery across the whole province linking the Chang 
Jiang in the north to Guangdong, Hong Kong, and Macao in the 
south. This will be a grand cross-century project, with one-time 
planning, construction in sections, and the construction of the 
first section from Nanchang to Zhangshu to start in 1995. The 
construction of this priority project will greatly improve 
Jiangxi's looks, sharply upgrade Jiangxi's investment climate, 
and immensely enhance public confidence and Jiangxi's economic 
development stamina. 
  In order to further develop our productive forces layout, 
and 
speed up our pace of priority construction, we will have to pay 
attention to efficiency, improving and enhancing management, 
maintaining a rational investment scale, and optimizing our 
investment structure. We need to emphasize projects right from 
the early-stage work, providing detailed demonstrations project 
by project, and selecting those with market, efficiency, and 
repayment capabilities. In all project starts, we need to 
practice the enterprise corporate liability system, conserving 
energy, strictly controlling construction costs, and shortening 
building periods. Priority projects need to be organized even 
more meticuously, in a conscientious effort to prevent duplicate 
construction and lax management. Ongoing projects must be 
turned over for use on schedule and per quality specifications, 
with completed ones coming up to operating standards as quickly 
as possible. We need to reward those that are up to operating 
standards and are efficient, while making those that go 
over-schedule correspondingly liable. 
<H5>  III. On Focusing on Recruiting Business and Attracting </H5>
Investment Faster, in an Effort To Open Up Wider to the Outside 
World 
  Further escaping the fetters of our closed and conservative 
ideology, to open up further to the outside world, is a 
strategic mission. We need to speed up our pace, emphasizing 
practical results, using more domestic and foreign funds, 
resources, technology, and markets, and developing an externally 
oriented economy, so that all of Jiangxi can make greater 
advances in opening up to the outside world. 
  We will further expand our channels for the use of foreign 
investment, continuing our all-dimensional introduction of funds 
from north, south, and east, bringing a sharp increase to our 
real use of foreign investment in 1994 over that of 1993. In 
addition to actively winning more foreign government and 
international financial organization loans, efficient projects 
can also make use of international commercial loans. We are 
placing our business recruitment and investment attraction 
priority on attracting direct foreign investment, paying 
attention to winning investments in Jiangxi by large financial 
consortiums and commercial agencies, and encouraging foreign 
firms to set up wholly foreign-owned enterprises. We will 
emphasize the attraction of Taiwanese investment. We will 
carefully organize business recruitment and investment 
attraction activities, striving for greater success in the three 
areas of contracted amount, foreign-invested ratio, and 
individual project size. We will intensify foreign-invested 
project demonstrations, selecting projects that are efficient, 
high-tech, high added-value, high export-earning, large scale, 
and low energy-consumption. Our priorities in the use of foreign 
investment will be to emphasize attraction of funds, 
implementation of related funds, businesses going into operation 
coming up to production standards, improved efficiency, and 
prompt repayment. 
  We will continue to improve our investment climate. In 
addition to building better infrastructures and implementing and 
improving all preferential policies, we need to pay particular 
attention to upgrading our urban planning, municipal 
administration, and urban management. All large and midsize 
cities throughout Jiangxi will make breakthroughs in rectifying 
"dirt, chaos, and flaws," conducting overall improvements of 
transportation order, sanitation and public health, and urban 
appearance. We will act in accord with modern urban needs, by 
expanding new zones and upgrading old ones. We will reinforce 
our environmental protection and pollution prevention, creating 
a clean, comfortable, and fine climate that will help to attract 
foreign investment and enable people to live and work in peace 
and contentment. We will further emphasize port development and 
construction. 
  We will intensify our foreign trade reform, further 
expanding 
foreign trade, and striving for more export earnings. We will 
vigorously develop externally oriented enterprises, striving 
to win more international market share for enterprises and 
products with resource and technology advantages. We will do 
all possible to import new technology, equipment, and materials, 
paying particular attention to importing applicable patents and 
"tricks of the trade." We will expand our foreign economic and 
technical cooperation, doing a good job of project contracting. 
We will expand friendly overseas dealings, intensifying 
cultural exchanges. We will actively develop tourism, 
soliciting more overseas and Hong Kong, Macaon, and Taiwanese 
tourists. And we will tighten our lateral economic links, doing 
a good job of regional cooperation and business coordination. 
<H5>  IV. On Focusing on Higher Peasant Income, Through Better and </H5>
Faster Development of Three-High Agriculture and Township 
Enterprises 
  We will continue to implement the principle of making 
agriculture our foundation, by placing firm emphasis on the 
primacy of agriculture in economic activity. We will make 
vigorous improvement of the rural productive forces, accelerated 
rural economic development, and a steady incease in peasant 
income our basic rural-work starting and stopping points. 
  In line with market needs, we will continue to adjust our 
internal agricultural and rural economic structures, earnestly 
organizing agricultural development of our sixth overall 
strategic campaign. We will emphasize grain production, 
vigorously cultivating and disseminating high-grade rice, 
raising per unit yields, and doing a good job of refining 
conversion. We will actively expand our diversified economy, 
further increasing production in areas, such as cotton, 
oil-bearing crops, sugarcane, and silkworm cocoons. We will 
develop our breeding industry faster, doing a good job of 
specialty aquatic products and livestock raising with local 
advantages, and guiding peasants to make further breakthroughs 
in the livestock, poultry, and aquatic products industries. In 
1994, we will maintain our overall grain output at over 30 
billion jin, strive for a ginned cotton output of 4 million dan, 
achieve double-digit growth in livestock, poultry, and aquatic 
products, and put more energy into developing our forestry, 
fruit, tea, and mulberry industries. As 1994 is one of 
decisive engagement in reforesting barren hills, we need to 
organize carefully, to ensure the implementation of our aim to 
basically eliminate barren hills suited to forestry, by 
emphasizing tree planting and reforestation along both sides of 
key transportation arteries, such as the Beijng-Kowloon railway, 
the Zhejiang-Jiangxi railway, and the Nanchang-Jiujiang 
expressway, as well as in flatland regions, and stopping 
indiscriminate tree cutting. We will do a good job of water and 
soil conservation, to improve our ecology. We will emphasize 
the Sangao [Three-High] agricultural demonstration zone, 
agricultural development projects, development bases, and water 
conservancy works, intensifying the establishment of our second 
group of rural electrification experimental counties, and 
raising our capability to combat natural disasters. 
  We will absolutely and unswervingly develop and improve 
sharply our township enterprises. Premised on improved economic 
efficiency in 1994, we will work for continued and effective 
large-scale growth of township enterprises. We will further 
optimize township enterprise mechanisms, encouraging peasants to 
buy shares with funds, labor, technology and capital goods, and 
urging people from all walks of life to participate in township 
enterprise shareholding, to develop shareholding cooperative 
enterprises. We will speed up our construction of township 
industrial zones, guiding township enterprises to concentrate in 
small cities and towns and, in coordination with our development 
of county economies, form dominant industries with distinct 
local features. Governments at all levels should make 
accelerated development of township enterprises a major focus of 
their economic work, organizing departmental and industrial and 
mining enterprise counterparts to help in the development of 
township enterprises in counties, districts, and townships. We 
will invest more in township enterprises, raising funds through 
diversified means, and establishing a township enterprise 
development fund. We will export more labor, doing a good job 
of building export-earning agriculture and export-commodity 
bases. We will speed up our development of farm-reclamation 
enterprises. 
  We will better implement all policies to stabilize 
agricultural development, making efforts at all levels in 
guidance, support, protection, and adjustment, to fully 
stimulate peasant initiative. We will invest more in 
agriculture. As the agricultural investment amassed and planned 
in 1994 by the state and the province is up somewhat, with farm 
credit, rural collective input, and peasant labor accumulation 
more than in previous years, we need to use these better and 
more efficiently. We will take effective steps to 
conscientiously reduce peasant burdens, firmly cracking down on 
illegal economic activities that cheat and infringe upon 
agriculture. We will mobilize all trades and professions to 
support agriculture, sharply intensifying our establishment of a 
multi-level and -form socialized service system, doing a good 
job of circulation service and credit guidance, and establishing 
a number of production and marketing economic entities that link 
markets and production, to improve peasant market-access 
organization and socialization. We will protect agriculture 
better, by setting up a reserve system and development fund for 
key farm products. We will carry out strict land management, 
emphasizing protection of cultivated land. We will intensify 
development of old and poor areas, using well funds to provide 
work as a form of relief, and implementing well the "1987 
anti-poverty assault plans," to consolidate and develop our 
anti-poverty successes. We will further intensify our family 
planning work, particularly strengthening our rural two-grade 
basic network, to ensure fulfillment of Jiangxi's 
population-control plans. 
<H5>  V. On Focusing on Product Development, Enhanced Management, </H5>
and Technological Upgrading To Run Large- and Medium-sized State 
Enterprises Well, Promoting Rapid and Efficient Growth of 
Industrial Production 
  To maintain both rapid and effective industrial growth, we 
will need to sharply adjust our product mix, developing products 
with brisk market sales and good economic efficiency, to ensure 
that our industrial growth is grounded in market demand. All 
enterprises need to intensify market surveys, emphasizing 
product renewal and exchange, striving to develop new products, 
and emphasizing efficiency of scale, to evolve competitive 
hot-selling products. We will organically combine product 
development with flexible and varied sales-operation tactics, 
boldly using talent that knows operations, is good at strategy, 
and can open up markets, to create a corps of entrepreneurs that 
has ideals and ambitions, dares to pioneer and take risks, and 
is hardworking and law-abiding. 
  We will organically combine the conversion of enterprise 
operating forces with enhanced internal management, thoroughly 
launching the increased output through conservation movement of 
"conversion of forces, emphasis on management, internal 
exercises, and increased efficiency." We will bring the 
initiative of our vast numbers of employees into full play, 
demanding quality and efficiency from management. We will take 
hard-line steps to achieve sound and strict enterprise systems 
for quality, production, finance, cost, and operating 
management, enforcing strict labor discipline. In line with 
average or advanced domestic standards for the same industry, we 
will set forth specific targets for improving quality, speeding 
up sales of overstocked inventories, conserving energy and 
lowering consumption, and turning losses into profits, 
implementing them one by one, to set the best local or unit 
standards for better quality, higher efficiency, more energy 
conservation, and less consumption, and reduce losses to a 
minimum. We are calling in 1994 for Jiangxi's industrial 
production-sales rate to reach 96-97 percent, our energy and 
material use to be down 3-5 percent, and our fund turnover to be 
10-15 days faster. 
  These high minimums and standards will promote enterprise 
technological upgrading. Jiangxi will strive in 1994 to invest 
5 billion yuan in upgrading the technology of state enterprises, 
which will be focused on projects crucial to optimizing product 
mix, cultivating key industries and superior products, and 
saving energy and reducing consumption for higher efficiency. We 
will put priority on speeding up the upgrading of our 
automobile, metallurgy, machinery, electronics, industrial 
chemicals, food, and building materials industries, supporting 
the development of our pharmaceuticals, ceramics, silk, and 
tobacco industries. Our 40 priority technological upgrading 
projects throughout Jiangxi must be speeded up and put into 
standard operation on schedule. And all prefectures, cities, and 
departments must also emphasize enterprise technological 
upgrading, so that our industrial growth is grounded in 
technological progress. 
<H5>  VI. On Intensifying Circulation Reform, Further Opening Up </H5>
Markets, and Stimulating Circulation, To Promote the Formation 
of a New Market-Circulation System and Operating Forces 
  To develop a socialist market economy, we will have to 
intensify our market development, developing new circulation 
industries, and continuing to make efforts in the three areas of 
intensifying circulation reform, enhancing circulation 
management, and going all out to develop our individual and 
private economies. 
  We will continue to emphasize the "four deregulations" and 
"state ownership but private operation" for state-owned 
commerce, as well as commercial enterprise reform. We will 
actively explore paths of organizational and structural 
adjustment in the field of circulation, forming a group of key 
enterprises with strong might and market competitiveness, to 
bring the dominant role of state-owned circulation enterprises 
into full play. We will speed up our pace of upgrading 
circulation enterprises to shareholding, focusing on developing 
limited liability companies with corporate shareholding, and 
striving to turn one or two limited liability companies into 
listed ones. We will actively explore forms, such as mergers, 
property rights transfers, auctions, and bankruptcies, to 
further stimulate small circulation enterprises. We will 
speed up our wholesale-enterprise reform, establishing at key 
commodity production and marketing sites or distribution centers 
a group of wholesale markets for farm products, manufactured 
consumer goods, and capital goods. We will develop commodity 
futures trading in a step by step way. 
  We will develop large-scale markets, stimulating large-scale 
circulation, and developing large-scale trade. We will 
organize various forms of sales promotions, doing a good job of 
getting manufactured goods to the rural areas, expanding border 
trade, and developing domestic, particularly southwestern and 
northwestern, markets, to expand the market coverage rate of our 
province's products. We will better establish mostly 
market-formed pricing mechanisms, maintaining relative overall 
price stability. We will emphasize the "food basket" project 
and farm and sideline product purchasing, doing a good job of 
non-staple food supply. All circulation enterprises should 
invigorate their operations and raise their efficiency. 
State-commerce losses must be sharply reduced in 1994, with 
grain enterprises strictly controlling new losses, as well as 
gradually digesting accounts that have accumulated over the 
years. We will tighten our market regulation and control 
capability, instituting a graded reserves system for key 
commodities. We will enhance and improve our market management 
and oversight, doing a good job of opening circulation-facility 
construction and our warehouse industry to the public, focused 
on promoting production development, improving our market 
system, and making life easier for our residents, we will 
vigorously develop tertiary industries. 
  We will make faster development of our individual and 
private 
economies our key economic-work mission. In all areas suited to 
individual and private economic development, we will lift 
industrial restrictions, deregulating operating limits, and 
giving free rein to expand. Particularly in areas with lower 
levels of circulation and economic development, we need to pay 
even more attention to the development of the individual and 
private economies. We will firmly crack down on the production 
and sale of fake and shoddy commodities, continuing to clear out 
and rectify customs barriers, and breaking down market barriers, 
to ensure free goods circulation. [passage omitted] 

