BFN 

<F P=106> [By Reporters Fan Xinzhu (5400 2956 4554) and Si Hanke (0674 </F>
3352 4430): "Conscientiously Resolve Difficulties, Carry Forward 
Property Rights Reform"] 
  [Text] The reform of the property rights system of 
state-owned small-sized enterprises has been comprehensively 
carried forward throughout Heilongjiang, and the situation is 
good. This is what the reporters were informed at the forum on 
the property rights reform of Heilongjiang's state-owned 
small-sized enterprises, which concluded in Suihua on 9 June. 
Vice Governor Cong Fukui attended and addressed the forum. 
  According to the introduction, the reform of the property 
rights system has been carried out in an all-round way among the 
state-owned small-sized enterprises in our province. By the end 
of March this year, 1,208 out of the 2,954 state-owned 
small-sized enterprises in our province had carried out property 
rights system reform, accounting for 41 percent. Of them, 104 
became shareholding enterprises; 157, shareholding cooperative 
enterprises; 53, enterprises transformed with advanced 
technology and funds from abroad; 303, enterprises managed on a 
leasing basis; 109, enterprises with multiple systems; 113, 
enterprises with contracted assets; 103, enterprises closed down 
and suspended; 47, bankrupt enterprises; 29, enterprises selling 
assets, 126, enterprises separating ownership from management 
right, and 64, enterprises other than the above. The reform has 
attained the results of strengthening the enterprises' vigor, 
stabilizing the society, maintaining and increasing the value of 
state-owned assets, and alleviating enterprises' contradiction 
in the shortage of funds. It not only brought about direct 
economic efficiency but also created a good start for further 
developing the property rights reform. 
  Cong Fukui requested at the forum: In the future work of 
property rights reform, we should emancipate our minds, have the 
courage to make a breakthrough, and practice boldly. In 
reforming property rights, we should particularly resolve all 
difficulties. He said: Transforming mechanism, increasing 
vigor, improving reform, enhancing strength, unloading the 
burden, decreasing the pressure, and promoting the development 
of enterprises are the aims of enterprise property rights reform 
as well as the difficulties that need to be conscientiously 
resolved. 
  Much importance should be attached to transforming 
mechanisms, strengthening management, and solving the problems 
of deficient vigor. Enterprises which implement property rights 
reform should operate with a new management mechanism. 
Therefore, in property rights reform, we should conscientiously 
carry out the two "regulations"; grasp the work of transforming 
enterprise management mechanism; grasp the work of adjusting 
enterprises' organizational structure; grasp the work of 
building a modern enterprise management system and strengthening 
enterprises' management; and especially establish the company 
constitution, do business in accordance with rules, manage 
strictly, enforce discipline strictly, etc... 
  We should pay attention to strengthening technological 
transformation to increase the reserve strength and resolve 
enterprises' problems of deficient strength. 
  The enterprises which implement property rights reform 
should 
lay particular emphasis on using stock-holder' funds in 
technological transformation to strengthen enterprises' 
competition ability. 
  We should lay stress on transforming government functions, 
doing a good job in service, and resolving enterprises' problems 
of having too much pressure. 
  The government must strengthen guidance to enterprises, do a 
good job in service, and create a good external environment for 
enterprises to implement property rights reform. The government 
should take the responsibility for social welfare, make 
enterprises gradually turn the function of supporting social 
welfare to the government, and, furthermore, under certain 
conditions, divert and separate personnel to develop production 
and business. 
  Much importance should be attached to perfecting the old-age 
and unemployment insurance systems to eliminate enterprises' 
trouble back at home. 
  In this year, breakthrough should be attained in improving 
the old-age and unemployment insurance systems. The means to 
achieve the breakthrough is to develop real social insurance, 
whose funds should be paid by three parties, namely staff 
members and workers, enterprises, and the state. In the mean 
time, we should step up efforts to explore as well as build a 
unified social insurance institution, which supervises, checks, 
controls, and makes use of the insurance fund. We should 
guarantee the effective operation of the company system and 
prevent change in forms but not in contents and taking the old 
road. Responsibility and right should be clearly defined to 
make the investors enjoy, according to their capital invested, 
the proportioned rights of choosing managerial personnel, being 
benefited from assets, and important policymaking. The rights, 
responsibilities, and benefits of shareholders, the board of 
directors, and managers should be defined scientifically and 
clearly so that they establish a relationship, in which the 
three parties restrict each other, to insure the effective 
operation of the company system. 

