BFN 

  [Text] Yesterday, Defense Minister Humberto Corado Figueroa 
said he was satisfied with the new Armed Forces Organization Law 
approved by the Legislative Assembly. 
  General Corado said, "it was essentially necessary to 
promulgate the new Armed Forces Organization Law" considering 
the changes in the nation's Constitution. The military leader 
explained that the military corps' former Organization Law did 
not agree with the changes and reforms being made to the 
Constitution, "so a new law is important and necessary." 
  According to the defense minister, the new Armed Forces 
Organization Law "authenticates, modernizes, and adapts" the 
military corps to the country's new modern times of peace and 
democracy. The former Organization Law went into effect in 
1961, but because of the country's social changes, new 
legislation was necessary to guide the military's future. 
  Concerning the Compulsory Military Service Law, approved by 
the Legislative Assembly and currently in effect, the defense 
minister said the military is still working on ways to make it 
effective. Corado Figueroa said that for this law to be 
effective, it will be necessary to set up an information system 
which permits access to information which determines which 
citizens are fit for military service. The ages established by 
the Compulsory Military Service Law range from 18 to 30 years. 
  The military leader also said that, for the law to be 
effective, it requires an infrastructure at a nationwide level, 
including recruitment centers to gather the necessary 
information on those citizens who will participate in a draft. 
Corado added that this draft will have exemptions as foreseen 
by the law, although he did not say who would be exempt, as well 
as different forms of military service -- some forms being 
permanent and full-time service with others being part-time and 
on weekends. The first compulsory military service draft has 
been scheduled to take place on 1 December 1994. 

