Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Igor Tsarev and Oleg Zolotov: "The `Chemical </F>
Bomb' Is About To Explode: It Is Easier To Cope With Obstinate 
Scientists, Evidently, Than With Lethal Weapons"] 
  [Text] Last week was marked by a new scandal around the 
"Mirzayanov affair." We would remind our readers that this story 
has already been going on for more than two years. And it 
started with the fact that two doctors of chemical science--Lev 
Fedorov and Vil Mirzayanov, sincerely believing, apparently, in 
democratic changes (the affair took place soon after the failure 
of the August putsch), placed an article in one of the Moscow 
newspapers about the fact that our military is continuing to 
create and test binary chemical weapons. In a year a similar 
article by the same authors appeared in another newspaper. At 
this point the scientists were accused of divulging a state 
secret. Vil Mirzayanov was thrown into Lefortovo prison. An 
investigation began. However, under the pressure of public 
opinion the Ministry of Security nevertheless released the 
professor after 10 days... 
  Time passed. The instituted "Mirzayanov case" vanished. 
There 
was a change in the leadership of the Procuracy General, which 
filed an indictment at that time. Russia signed (one more time) 
a general agreement on chemical disarmament. A new Constitution 
was adopted. But the "Mirzayanov case," as before, is as alive 
as ever. The events of last weak confirmed this. 
  V. MIRZAYANOV: 
  "A closed session of the Moscow city court, which 
occurred in the best traditions of the past, was held on 24 
January. My lawyer declared that the case lacks a special 
purpose program of scientific research in the sphere of chemical 
weapons, the results of which I would allegedly divulge, and 
that on the grounds of Paragraph 3 of Article 15 of the Basic 
Law a citizen cannot be subjected to criminal proceedings on the 
basis of normative acts not published in the open press... We 
requested the assignment of a new examination by experts in 
which independent experts could participate, inasmuch as 
previously it was conducted by specialists of the KGB who 
represented the interests of the military-industrial complex. 
But the court declined this petition. Then I said that I do not 
have a feeling of trust in `the justice being administered,' and 
I refused to answer any further questions." 
  The action developed in the following way. On 25 January two 
militiamen appeared at the apartment of the scientist and 
ordered him to accompany them, explaining this demand by the 
need to deliver Mirzayanov to a court session scheduled for 1030 
the following day. "So, come and get me in the morning," the 
professor said. 
  The scientist was still free Thursday morning. When we 
called 
him at home, his wife--Nuriya Mirzayanova--picked up the phone. 
She said that she was a little sick and that Vil Sultanovich had 
just gone to the pharmacy for medicine... But within an hour we 
were informed that he had been arrested and sent to Sailors' 
Rest. 
  It is difficult to say at this point how this story will 
end. 
But it is already obvious that there are forces that prefer to 
contend with the scientists, who are telling the truth, but not 
with the chemical weapons. It should be recalled here that the 
first treaty in which chemical weapons were acknowledged to be 
illegal was signed as far back as the last century--in 1868. And 
it must be noted that first conference in human history to 
condemn barbaric chemical weapons was conducted specifically at 
the initiative of Russia. If the military seriously wanted to 
get rid of toxic chemical agents, chemical weapons would have 
disappeared from the face of the earth a long time ago. But, as 
before, they continue to exist, continue to be perfected, and 
are becoming more and more dangerous for humanity. 
  FROM THE CHRONICLE OF CHEMICAL WARS: 
  --1915. The Kaiser's Army employed poison gas against 
the French. Within five minutes 180 tonnes of chlorine gas were 
released from 6,000 cylinders. As a result, 15,000 French 
soldiers and officers died in terrible torment. 
  --1949. The Israeli Army employed toxic chemical agents 
against the Egyptians. 
  --1950. The United States used sarin during the war in 
Korea. 
  --1983. The Pentagon preceded the invasion of the 
island of Granada with a chemical attack. American specialists 
even photographed the excruciating death of 2,000 islanders and 
transported their bodies to the United States "for further 
research." It can be assumed that the new binary weapon was 
being tested at that time. 
  In contrast to other countries that are not ashamed of their 
achievements in the sphere of development of this barbarous 
weapon, our state tried to conduct itself more decently, 
emphasizing this in every way to world public opinion. At least 
the statement of Soviet scientists in May 1982 should be 
mentioned: "Adhering strictly to the 1925 Geneva protocol, the 
USSR has never employed chemical weapons anywhere." What was 
said generally corresponded to the truth, but it does not draw 
the entire picture. The Soviet policy of "chemical disarmament" 
had a hidden bottom... 
  --1987. M. Gorbachev declared at the UN that the USSR 
had completely stopped the production of toxic chemical agents. 
At that same time, final work was being conducted in Moscow, at 
the State Union NII [Scientific Research Institute] of Organic 
Chemistry and Technology (GSNIIOKhT), on a new chemical agent 
that surpassed the celebrated VX gas in its sinister 
characteristics. 
  --1991. M. Gorbachev, who became a Nobel laureate due 
to his peacekeeping activity, confers the Lenin Prize in the 
Kremlin on the creator of the Soviet "binary" weapon. Among the 
fathers of this terrible weapon were V. Petrunin, director of 
GSNIIOKhT, and General A. Kuntsevich, deputy chief of the 
Chemical Troops. 
  --1992. The president of the Russian Federation 
declares that Russia supports the agreement with the United 
States on the nonproduction and destruction of chemical weapons. 
But the committee working on problems of chemical weapons 
destruction that was established at that time was headed by... 
the father of the country's "binary" weapon, A. Kuntsevich. It 
is not very surprising that this same "binary" weapon was soon 
undergoing tests at the secret proving ground Ustyurt (near the 
city of Nukus). 
  Against the background of contradictory facts (plus the 
story 
about Professor Mirzayanov), talk about "total chemical 
disarmament" has to be taken with a large dose of skepticism. It 
will be recalled that not one previous international convention 
destroyed chemical weapons. On the contrary, they became even 
more lethal, increasing destructive power thousands of times. 
But as for the planned destruction of toxic chemical agents... 
From time to time in any army, tanks, aircraft, rockets... are 
written off and destroyed. For example, the dismantling and 
salvaging of general purpose munitions (mines, projectiles, 
bombs, torpedoes, etc.) is taking place in Russia as soon as 
their useful life expires. According to some data there are 1.2 
million tonnes of such combat charges at bases and in arsenals 
of the Ministry of Defense. This colossal amount of old junk has 
to be destroyed. But this occurs without any kind of 
hullabaloo--it is an operational process, nothing more. Chemical 
weapons should also be subjected to the same kind of 
destruction. Thus, why make a "worldwide show" of this? Perhaps 
behind the "smoke screen" of appeals and promises to avoid the 
fact that the weapons were to have been destroyed anyway, and it 
would be easier to conceal the true intentions? To get rid of 
the old junk and arm oneself with new toxic chemical agents that 
were not taken into account in convention documents, and so it 
is as if they were not even banned? 
  V. MIRZAYANOV: 
  "Our military generals have been ready for a chemical 
war under conditions of an international ban for a long time. 
They have conducted training at bases and in institutes and 
plants in the event of a surprise visit by international 
monitors. They have prepared the organization of the kind of 
industry in which material was always in operation that could be 
easily transformed into highly toxic chemical agents. You will 
agree: If we are developing, producing, and testing new types of 
chemical agents, but we are not including them in the list 
subject to international monitoring, then this is by no means 
being done from good motives. Rather, this is an attempt to get 
around the convention, which unquestionably contradicts the 
interests of both Russia and its citizens. After all, it is 
assumed at the same time that the other participants in the 
convention will behave in a similar way." 
  Thousands of people, including people of very high rank in 
military uniform, have been put to work on the creation, 
testing, and production of chemical weapons. Is it easy to 
renounce that which has fed you all your life? 
  Our country, which has accumulated thousands and thousands 
of 
tonnes of toxic chemical agents, did not employ them even during 
the Great Patriotic War. But these tonnes have already killed 
more than one life (not enemies--but our own people), they have 
undermined the health of many workers engaged in the production 
of poisons, they have contaminated the area around the plants, 
and they have permanently destroyed the ecology. But is it not 
simpler generally to abandon chemical weapons, even those that 
are super-modern and not yet taken into account in the last 
convention? 
  V. Mirzayanov was arrested. The trial continues. The 
decision 
will become a litmus paper that will reveal once and for all how 
serious the intentions of the Russian military are in renouncing 
chemical weapons. 
  Incidentally, the possibility of arrest now hangs over still 
another chemist--V. Uglev. He is also accused of divulging a 
"state secret." Uglev himself says: "There was nothing secret in 
the article by Mirzayanov and Fedorov, neither chemical formulae 
nor any kind of specific substances that were part of the weapon 
were indicated. However, if the authorities do not take these 
facts into account, then after the next session of the court 
(scheduled for 3 February), I will be forced to name some 
formulae..." 

