CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Afrikan Solovyev and Galina Pechilina: </F>
"Chuvashia Has Decided To Attract Attention With Taxes"] 
  [Text] The representatives of a new class--the 
presidents of subjects of the Russian Federation--are competing 
amongst themselves in their eccentric measures in tax policy. 
Following the lead set by President of Kalmykia Ilyumzhinov, the 
President of Chuvashia, Nikolay Fedorov, also joined in this 
competition. His edict, "On Supplemental Measures for Regulating 
Economic Relations of the Chuvash Republic," was officially sent 
out yesterday. 
  [Begin boxed material] 
<H8>  Main innovations in Chuvash taxes </H8>
  A three-year tax moratorium for new producer enterprises, 
except those which have been reorganized; Reduction of the tax 
on bank profits to 10 percent; A tax (10-50 percent) on wages 
exceeding the minimum wage; A 20 percent fine for cash 
accounting. 
  [End boxed material] 
  Since it is difficult to think of anything principally new 
in 
tax benefits, Nikolay Fedorov is resorting to a rather 
traditional measure--a three-year tax moratorium granted to all 
firms registered after 1 May which operate in the production 
sphere. This moratorium does not extend to banks and insurance 
companies instituted after 1 May. However, the present 
30-percent rate of republic tax on profits is reduced to 10 
percent. In the opinion of the developers of this edict, such 
benefits are expected to attract investments to the republic's 
economy and to stimulate development of the financial 
infrastructure (in Chuvashia today there are only 10 commercial 
banks, with a total charter capital of 6.2 billion rubles (R)). 
  Then again, the edict also introduces a number of rather 
original limitational measures. Thus, enterprises and 
organizations which direct a large portion of their earned 
capital toward wages will suffer from the new republic tax, 
which will be collected on the sum by which the expenditures for 
paying the labor wage of one worker exceeds the minimum wage 
level. The rate of this tax will comprise from 10 to 50 percent. 
This innovation, according to the intent of its authors, should 
act upon the banks, monopoly enterprises in agricultural 
processing and other structures where the level of the average 
wage sharply exceeds the minimum. 
  The repeal of benefits on the profits tax for firms which 
make their investments outside the limits of the republic is 
aimed at facilitating the creation of the republic's own 
production base. (Today approximately 40 percent of the builders 
of Chuvashia work on the side). Moreover, those enterprises 
which try to receive payment for products sold and to spend it, 
by-passing the enterprise accounting report, will be subject to 
a fine in the amount of 20 percent of the sum received in cash. 
  The reaction to the edict in the republic was mixed. 
  In the opinion of Chuvashia's Minister of Economics Igor 
Mironov, the announced three-year tax moratorium makes it 
possible to expect the rapid growth of economic activity and the 
influx of investments already in the nearest future. In his 
conversation with our KOMMERSANT-DAILY correspondent, Mironov 
categorically rejected the supposition that the innovations 
would impose a hardship upon the the city and rayon budgets, 
which would suddenly lose part of their tax revenues. First of 
all, he announced, the edict speaks of enterprises and 
organizations which will only now be created. Secondly, the 
republic leadership, which is responsible for its actions, is 
ready to compensate these losses in the future at the expense of 
the republic budget. 
  Then again, such optimism regarding the attraction of 
investments is certainly not indisputable. It is notable that 
the namesake of the Chuvash president, the former minister of 
finance and currently deputy, Boris Fedorov, quite recently 
rejected the affirmations of his involvement in the development 
of Chuvashia's economic policy. 
  The head of the Union of Goods Producers of Chuvashia, 
Vladimir Barsukov, expressed his puzzlement at the fact that the 
tax benefits introduced by the edict will in no way affect 
enterprises which are already in operation. Moreover, he 
announced that the punishment for accounting in cash under 
conditions of non-payments and the market crisis is ineffective, 
and will simply force the enterprises to seek ways around it. 

