Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] London, March 3 (TANJUG) -- An urgent demand by U.N. 
commander for Bosnia-Herzegovina, British General Michael Rose, 
for additional five to seven thousand troops to maintain the 
cease-fire in Bosnia, has caused a rift between the highest 
military officials and cabinet ministers, official sources in 
London said on Thursday [3 March]. 
  The chief of general staff, General Sir Peter Ingle, and the 
air force and navy chiefs have already agreed between themselves 
that Gen. Rose's demand should be met by sending one infantry 
battalion. 
  The decision, however, cannot come into force because 
Defence 
Secretary Malcolm Rifkind and Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd 
were among those who voted against. 
  Hurd and Rifkind pointed out that Britain had already sent 
more than enough of its share of ground troops to Bosnia and 
that the risks were huge of getting involved in a war similar to 
the one in Vietnam. They suggested that some other countries, 
such as Belgium, should give more troops. 
  The final say in the matter rests with Prime Minister John 
Major, who does not want his government to be accused of 
abandoning its best officer, and presently the most successful 
general in Bosnia, in a delicate moment of the Balkan crisis, 
the government sources say. 
  During a recent meeting in New York, Major proposed to U.N. 
Secretary-General Butrus Butrus-Ghali that Italy should send one 
contingent to Bosnia, despite Italy's role in Yugoslavia during 
World War Two. 
  In 1941 Italy occupied a part of former Yugoslavia, 
including 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, and had held it until 1943. 
  Gen. Rose claims that many of his troops work 24 hours a day 
to accomplish the almost impossible task of monitoring the 
cease-fire along the 50-mile long frontline around Sarajevo and 
on the 200-mile one in the mountains of central Bosnia. 
  If the view of British generals prevails, namely that Gen. 
Rose shoud not be let down, London could then send an additional 
1,000 troops, infantry, engineers, a logistic-communication 
group and two more helicopters within four days, British 
military experts said. 

