Term   Plan Revision 
<H4>  PNC Conducts Simulation Test for High Level Waste </H4>

<F P=102> 94FE0274C Tokyo ENERUGI FORAMU in Japanese Nov 93 pp 89-91 </F>
<F P=103> 94FE0274C </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo ENERUGI FORAMU </F>
<F P=105>  Japanese </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Tetsuya Ishikawa, ENERUGI FORAMU] </F>
  [Text] The new Long Term Plan for Atomic Energy Development 
and Utilization, which has undergone several revision hearings 
by the Atomic Energy Commission, makes projections into the 
second half of the 21st century. One of the most important 
issues is forming a government policy on the disposal of 
high-level radioactive wastes as a completion of the nuclear 
power generation cycle. A new facility owned by PNC, the central 
organization in developing this technology, has been completed 
at Tokai Village, Ibaraki Prefecture, and full-fledged testing 
and research began there at the end of October. 
  Called the "Geological Disposal Basic Research Facility," it 
will conduct simulation testing above ground on the deep 
geological disposal of high-level waste. The facility cost about 
&yen;3.2 billion to complete. The site will recreate above 
ground a deep geological environment several hundred meters 
below the surface where we plan to dispose of the waste and 
compile data to corroborate an assurance of safety for several 
thousand years. 
  PNC has already conducted tests and experiments for several 
years on the movement of underground water in bedrock and the 
amount of radioactivity leaching out of vitrified vessels at the 
Tono Mines (sedimentary rock layer) in Gifu Prefecture, at the 
Kamaishi Mines (crystalline schist layer) in Iwate Prefecture 
and at the Radioactive Materials Handling Facility at Tokai 
Village. This data will be compiled on computers at the new 
Geological Disposal Basic Research Facility allowing researchers 
to follow the historical changes over many years in that "world 
of darkness" far below the surface. 
  More specifically, using the latest computer graphics 
technology researchers can display high-level waste underground 
disposal sites on a large screen, can intentionally cause 
trouble such as earthquakes, and visualize the effects. Together 
with the unveiling of this ambitious R&amp;D facility, PNC held 
an 
international workshop for four days until 18 November for 120 
participants including about 20 specialists from the U.S., UK, 
France, Switzerland, Sweden, Canada, and Belgium, and these 
experts held discussions based on the images shown on the large 
screen. 
<H5>  Sealing Effects Learned From Many Years of Research and </H5>
Testing 
  Before introducing the details on this new facility that 
consists of a one-story Testing Wing (floor space about 1500 
m[.sup]2[/]) and a four-story Research Wing (floor space 
about 4500 m[.sup]2[/]), I will briefly discuss the results 
of several years of R&amp;D. 
  The high level liquid waste produced when recycling spent 
fuel will be surrounded by three layers (artificial barriers) 
and buried deep underground. First, the hot soup that contains 
intense radioactivity is melted together with borosilicate 
glass, which can withstand high heat, and solidified in a 
stainless steel cylinder (canister). This is called 
"vitrification," and it forms the first barrier. 
  Next, because this vitrified body will generate heat due to 
radioactive decay, it will be stored and cooled down in an 
above-ground facility for 30-50 years. After that the waste will 
actually be buried deep underground, and at that time it will be 
enclosed in a metal protective container (overpack), which forms 
the second barrier. Finally, it will be packed in a 
shock-absorbing material (bentonite, a type of clay, is a good 
candidate) that will lie between the container and the bedrock 
and form the third barrier. Underground water will not easily 
permeate the bentonite, and it will act as a protective mattress 
against geological pressure from the bedrock and earthquakes. 
Research has revealed the following information. 
  First Barrier 
  Vitrification acts to prevent radioactivity from leaching 
out 
into underground water. The scientific approach that supports 
this makes use of research on similar natural phenomena (natural 
analogs). The basalt glass that came to the surface during 
ancient eruptions on the Izu Peninsula and Mt. Fuji is 
physically and chemically similar to the borosilicate glass used 
in vitrification. 
  The rate of decomposition of this volcanic glass due to 
exposure to underground water over the past 2800 years or so is 
only a few microns per 1000 years, and when we look at its 
surface magnified more than 20,000 times with a scanning 
electron microscope, we see only a very thin voided layer where 
the atoms have escaped. The decomposition rate of borosilicate 
glass has been observed to be about 10 times as fast. (At this 
rate, we can make a simple calculation that radioactivity may 
first escape from a vitrified body between 100,000 to 1,000,000 
years in the future.) 
  An interesting result was obtained in this natural analog 
research quite recently by analyzing basalt glass collected from 
a layer of mudstone at Kamogawa City, Chiba Prefecture. This 
band lay at the bottom of the sea in prehistoric times, but over 
time it was lifted up and became dry land. This basalt glass 
that was collected came from a volcanic eruption several million 
years ago, and perhaps because it was enclosed in mud for such a 
long, long time, its surface showed almost no decomposition 
(voiding) when examined by SEM. 
  Second Barrier 
  For the overpack, the primary candidate is a container made 
of carbon steel. Studies of worst-case estimates show a 
corrosion progression of about 3 cm per 1000 years. The 
protective overpack wall is 30 cm thick, and it acts to resist 
geological pressures, so there is sufficient leeway in terms of 
corrosion. Recently the amount of water leaking from pipes in 
downtown Tokyo due to corrosion has reached a level where it can 
no longer be ignored, but this leakage is due to cracks 
generated by oxidation from oxygen in the soil. On the other 
hand, the environment deep underground is almost "oxygen free," 
and corrosion will not progress as it does on the earth's 
surface. 
  In the future researchers will verify whether the hydrogen 
gas generated in the corrosion reactions will form a protective 
layer on the surface of the overpack and serve as a 
"reinforcement" to keep underground water from penetrating or 
whether it will disperse into the earth's crust. This is one 
question the Testing Wing of the new facility will attempt to 
answer. 
  Third Barrier 
  It has been confirmed that at temperatures of 100C or 
less bentonite shows almost no decomposition and will serve to 
inhibit the movement of radioactivity. During deep underground 
burial this clay will be packed between the underground rock and 
the overpack at thicknesses ranging from several centimeters to 
one meter. Because the total weight of a canister and overpack 
is almost 12 tons, is there a chance it might sink? Analysis has 
already shown that it will sink about 1mm, but this still needs 
to be confirmed. 
  On the other hand, because bentonite is clay, will it turn 
to 
mud when it comes in contact with underground water and be 
stripped away? There is some data that shows it will not strip 
away unless the underground water is flowing fast at a large 
volume. Answering these questions will be another issue 
addressed by the Testing Wing of the new facility. 
<H5>  Making a Model With Data From Repetitive Testing </H5>
  Aside from these future issues, if we look at PNC's 
achievements over many years of testing and experiments, we 
reach the conclusion that the lifetime of the three barrier 
layers (artificial barriers) will surpass the 1000 years or so 
needed to reduce the level of radioactivity in high level waste. 
The Radioactive Waste Policy Expert Subcommittee of the Atomic 
Energy Commission checked this out and on 21 July this year 
pronounced the results "generally valid." The subcommittee 
pointed out that expansion and consolidation of data, and 
improvement of artificial barrier reliability should form the 
main thrust of future research. In response, various tests were 
begun at the end of October at the new facility. Researchers 
will work on deep underground geology based on new data and a 
"disposal model" that can make scientific predictions far into 
the future. 
  Estimating above ground the behavior of the "world of 
darkness" several hundred meters below and predicting what will 
occur over the next several thousand years are concepts 
difficult to grasp for the majority of people in their everyday 
lives. It is possible, however, to make predictions using 
scientific methods. By using our new knowledge about the 
performance of the materials that comprise the triple layer of 
artificial barriers, our previous knowledge from earth science 
about natural barriers in underground rock, and natural analog 
research that has told us the basalt glass collected at Kamogawa 
City, Chiba Prefecture, suffered almost no decomposition over 
several million years, we can assemble a "disposal model" and 
predict events far, far into the future where we ourselves 
cannot go. 
  Right now the R&amp;D methods for high level waste disposal 
are 
having a positive effect in other fields. For example, a 
symposium under the title "Long Term Corrosion Prediction and 
Countermeasures" was held this year in May at the annual 
convention of the Corrosion and Anti-Oxidation Society 
[literal], and representatives from PNC reported their results. 
In the past, the design concepts for structures such as bridges 
stretched less than 100 years into the future, but now the idea 
of "utilizing deep underground principles" has caught on, and it 
will be necessary to design structures that will last more than 
100 years, or even 1000 years into the future. 
  "Improving artificial barrier reliability" was one goal 
suggested by the Atomic Energy Commission's Expert Subcommittee. 
The Geological Disposal Basic Research Facility will compile 
data to build a more scientific "disposal model," and over time 
that model will get closer and closer to reality. 
<H5>  Visualization of Test Data and Report in Seven Years </H5>
  The Testing Wing is a large, open area like a school gym 
where various kinds of testing equipment are installed. The wing 
has a 2.8 ton overhead crane to handle real boulders. The main 
equipment includes the following devices. To analyze the 
movement of underground water in various layers of porous rock 
such as sedimentary rock, mudstone, sand/gravel rock, etc., 
there is a Porous Medium Hydrological Testing Apparatus that 
uses colored water. Granite (crystalline rock) originally 
contains very fine fissures, and because it is a candidate layer 
of bedrock for geological disposal, researchers will bring in 
granite blocks, add pressure to simulate the geological pressure 
environment at 500-1000 meters underground, and use the Fissured 
Medium Hydrological Testing Apparatus to analyze the movement of 
underground water in granite. There is also a Hydrogen Gas 
Behavior Testing Apparatus to follow the movement of hydrogen 
gas generated in the corrosion reactions noted above. The wing 
also has an Underground Water Property Forming Process Testing 
Apparatus to analyze what conditions determine the properties of 
water deep underground. Finally, there is the Cushioning 
Material Outflow Testing Apparatus to determine how much 
bentonite will be stripped away by underground water. 
  In the room next door there is the Chemical Equilibrium 
Reaction Testing Apparatus that will be used to recreate above 
ground the environment of bedrock in geological disposal sites 
several hundred meters underground. It immediately captures your 
imagination. It has a row of hermetically sealed steel boxes 
that contain oxygen and carbon dioxide at less than 0.1 ppm to 
create an almost completely "oxygen free" environment. 
Researchers use built-in gloves to introduce the materials that 
comprise the three barriers--borosilicate glass, carbon steel, 
and bentonite--and simulated underground water into the boxes. 
The device then performs detailed analysis of changes due to 
chemical reactions between the water and the materials. 
  The data from this Testing Wing plus the test data from the 
Tono Mines, Kamaishi Mines, etc., is sent to the Computer and 
Data Department on the third floor of the neighboring Research 
Wing. There the data is input into high performance computers 
and compiled in databases. A "disposal model" can be built by 
processing these various kinds of data on the computer. 
Recently, the data has been processed with computer graphic 
technology that is used in various fields to visualize the 
results. The results can be displayed on a giant 110-inch screen 
at the podium in the 120 seat conference room located on the 
fourth floor of this same Research Wing. 
  The electric power industry, which has the "producer's 
responsibility" to dispose of high level waste, has begun 
preparations for setting up a disposal implementation 
organization by the year 2000. This disposal implementation 
organization will be responsible for the design and construction 
of the actual disposal sites, but PNC will provide the technical 
support. Therefore, PNC is creating a more scientific "disposal 
model" based on the data obtained at the new facility over the 
upcoming seven years. By the year 2000 PNC will submit a report 
to the Atomic Energy Commission entitled "A Quantitative 
Evaluation of Artificial Barriers." 

