BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Valentin Karabashev, deputy prime minister </F>
and minister of trade, by Reni Neshkova; place and date not 
given: "Such Privatization Could Create Greater Chaos Than One 
We Already Have"] 
  [Text] [Neshkova] Mr. Karabashev, you do not deny the 
fact that mass privatization is an instrument of 
denationalization. What is the difference between our model and 
what happens in the Czech Republic, for example? 
  [Karabashev] The difference is that in the Czech Republic 
and Poland there is a clear scheme according to which the 
so-called mass privatization is being implemented, while what 
happens in Bulgaria under the same name has no mechanism vested 
in a law. 
  It is not clear, or at least I have not heard any of those 
who intend to implement the privatization, explaining what 
precisely will happen from the legal, economic, and technical 
points of view. 
  [Neshkova] You have been accused of trying to impose the 
Polish model, while the Czech model is more applicable to our 
conditions. 
  [Karabashev] This is a totally invented dispute. It is not 
very important whether the Polish or the Czech ideas will 
prevail under Bulgarian conditions. It is much more important to 
create an attitude among the Bulgarian people that is conducive 
to privatization, while taking into consideration the state of 
the privatization objects and the existing miserable economic 
situation. That is especially important, because it is 
well-known that the Bulgarians do not demonstrate a great 
interest in the subject. 
  [Neshkova] Perhaps, because they do not know what they stand 
to gain? 
  [Karabashev] It is a different question whether they are 
going to gain something. However, one cannot and should not 
require a special knowledge from them. They must only have 
confidence in what is taking place. They must participate in 
the privatization in such a manner that they could gain at least 
a small but guaranteed income. Why otherwise should they take 
part in the privatization if they are not convinced that this is 
in their interest? However, in order to achieve this there 
should have been structures that could mediate between the 
citizens and the enterprises that will be denationalized. 
Unfortunately, there are no such structures. In principle, 
certain investment funds are being mentioned, but it is not 
clear whether they will be created by the state, as I proposed, 
or whether they should be private, which also is possible. This 
is the situation in the Czech Republic. However, both 
alternatives do not exist in the current project. 
  [Neshkova] What will the state gain from the mass 
privatization of its enterprises? 
  [Karabashev] Personally, I am fed up answering that question 
and arguing the subject. The manner in which it is intended to 
carry out the denationalization offers absolutely no clarity on 
the subject, and in addition, I do not know the cabinet's 
intentions. From what I hear on this subject I can say that I 
never supported such mass privatization. In principle, it could 
only be a supplementing scheme. One cannot implement the most 
important things within a very brief period of time, in an 
attempt to achieve privatization's goal -- the emergence of real 
owners and economic figures. Perhaps it could have been 
achieved rapidly if our enterprises were not in such a pitiful 
state. 
  [Neshkova] Actually, what is the state of those 500 
enterprises which have been listed, and which will be offered 
for mass privatization? 
  [Karabashev] More than six months ago Lyuben Berov 
commissioned the Privatization Agency to prepare the list. 
Naturally, since then their state is not the same as it was at 
the time the list was prepared. Everyone could guess what 
happened to them since then. The list should be reviewed and 
updated in accordance with the privatization procedures that 
were introduced and newly demonstrated market interest. 
However, obviously someone has not been doing his job. 
  [Neshkova] Who? 
  [Karabashev] He who deals with privatization at the moment. 
I have no idea who he is. 
  [Neshkova] Will mass privatization contribute to 
establishing normal market relations? 
  [Karabashev] At present there are market relations -- at 
least to a certain degree. However, that only applies to the 
sphere of free price forming. The mass privatization should 
create free economic agents, who could act normally in the 
market. However, I have the feeling that the existing 
privatization variant will create an even greater chaos than the 
one we already have, and will not bring us closer to our goal. 
We will rather find ourselves further away from the goal we set 
for ourselves at the outset of this complex and difficult 
enterprise. 

