BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by John Vickers] </F>
  [Excerpts] January 1 saw the long-overdue implementation of 
the island's new Copyright Law, the main aim of which was to end 
once and for all the booming sales and rental of pirated video 
films, music tapes and computer software. [passage omitted] 
  According to figures from the Cyprus Federation Against 
Copyright Theft [CYFACT], the police have not been inactive 
since January, having raided a total of 36 premises on receiving 
information that pirated material was on sale or for rent. 
  Only three weeks ago a video club in Xylotymbou village was 
raided and a total of 4,642 tapes were seized, together with 27 
video recorders and 3 amplifiers which were being used for 
copying. 
  CYFACT's legal adviser, Akhilleas Dimitradhis, said this 
week 
that five months after the implementation of the new copyright 
law, certain changes are obvious to all: "We've seen a dramatic 
decline in pirated products being offered for sale. The 
souvenir shops and supermarkets which had given Cyprus such a 
bad reputation internationally appear to have taken the law 
seriously and have stopped selling illegal copies of films. In 
the case of the video clubs, a number of them have conformed to 
the provisions of the law, but there are still a few which are 
stubbornly refusing to do away with their pirated stock. It is 
here that we are hoping that the police will vigorously enforce 
the law." 
  Asked to suggest ways in which the situation could be 
improved, Dimitriadhis noted that "other than better 
enforcement", the government's promised anti-piracy sticker 
guaranteeing a product's authenticity had still not 
materialised, whilst the question of classification and 
censorship of video films still remains to be addressed. 
  It is estimated that only a third of the video clubs that 
flourished in the 1980's are still in business today. Although 
original videotapes are now being imported for sale and rental 
(some 3,500 titles are now officially on release in Cyprus, the 
official video release date in Greece applying here too), 
business has been hit, ironically, by the rebirth of the cinema 
and the growing number of TV channels available. 
  Stricter regulations have put a stop to the huge export 
business in pirated films, and the sales of blank tapes which 
reached almost 3.5 million in 1991 were down to 874,000 last 
year. 
  This year figure is likely to be considerably lower. It is, 
of course, in the interest of the film companies that the video 
clubs and sales outlets remain in business, since the officially 
sanctioned home video market is a large and lucrative one, but 
they are determined to stamp out once and for all the blatant 
theft of their property. [passage omitted] 

