BFN 

<F P=106> [Ennio Caretto editorial: "First Test With Clinton"] </F>
  [Text] The European Parliament's controversial "no" to 
neofascist ministers has not yet been echoed in the American 
media. But it has reopened last month's debate in the 
administration, following the Italian elections and after U.S. 
diplomat Douglas Jones' accusation directed against Germany: 
("They do not want to confront their own past"). This debate, 
since relegated to the sidelines, can be resumed as follows: 
What position should the United States take if the neofascist 
parties enter government in Europe? And in particular: What 
attitude should it take if this were to happen in Italy? 
  The question merits an urgent answer. Clinton will arrive in 
Italy on 2 June, Republic Day; on 3 June, he will commemorate 
the American landing at Anzio and Nettuno, and on 4 June the 
liberation of Rome. Clinton will be the first foreign head of 
state to meet Silvio Berlusconi, the (highly probable) new 
Italian prime minister. And it is almost certain that the 
meeting between the President and Berlusconi will be preceded by 
a trip to Washington by the (probable) new Italian Foreign 
Minister Antonio Martino. 
  And that is not all: Clinton will be back in Italy on 6 July 
for the G-7 meeting in Naples. On these meetings will depend, 
in part, the outcome of the current debate within the U.S. 
Administration. 
  The United States will be attentively following the 
President's double visit. The Americans make no secret of their 
fear of a return of fascism in West Europe, which they see as a 
shore of their own democracy. Last April the NEW YORK TIMES 
criticized "the ascent of the neofascist party in Italy," 
defining Mussolini as a "cardboard Caesar," and reminding 
Italians that the Duce left behind an inheritance of "military 
defeat and political chaos." 
  Two days ago, Susan Zuccotti, a lecturer in contemporary 
European history at Barnard College, reminded people of the 
Fascists' collaboration in the holocaust, warning that "it is 
hardly surprising that Jews, and not only they, are alarmed at 
the rebirth of the extreme right." 
  In America, the influence of public opinion on governments 
(Republican and Democrat alike) is pretty strong, as 
demonstrated by Clinton's second thoughts on Haiti, Somalia, and 
Bosnia. Through the influential Jewish intelligentsia, public 
opinion is beginning to demand that the Department of State 
formally express its reservation on neo-fascist parties' 
participation in government in Europe. A participation -- it is 
feared -- which could even portend autarchic and racist policies. 
<H5>  Domestic Affairs </H5>
  More wary than the European Parliament, the U.S. 
Administration wishes to maintain its doctrine of 
"noninterference" in European domestic affairs. With respect to 
Italy, professed support of the Berlusconi government would, on 
principle, rule out political hostility toward its allies. But 
Clinton cannot neglect the demands of his own electorate. 
  With all due distinctions, the debate in the United States 
on 
the recrudescence of fascism in Europe reminds one of the terms 
in which the debate on communist expansion was couched at the 
end of the war. The question which the administration is asking 
is if, and when, it will have to come out with a doctrine of 
containment of fascism, just as half a century ago it enunciated 
a doctrine of the containment of communism. 
  For the time being, Clinton prefers to stick to symbols. The 
significance of his pilgrimage to the World War II battlefields, 
culminating with the 6 June anniversary of the Normandy 
landings, is clear. And it would a good idea for Europeans to 
take note of that symbolic meaning: It will be a celebration of 
democratic and anti-Nazi values. In this sense, if Italy fails 
to come up to expectations, the American Administration could 
feel itself constrained to make its voice heard. The latter 
sees in the neofascist temptations throughout Europe, from 
France to Russia, not only a factor of destabilization, but also 
a possible motive for collision between authoritarian and 
democratic market regimes. Five months ago White House Security 
Advisor Anthony Lake proclaimed America's faith in European 
democracy's "solid kernel": France, Germany, and Britain. Next 
June Clinton wishes to reaffirm this. 
<H5>  Limited Circulation Memorandum </H5>
  But already on the eve of the Italian elections the question 
of containing fascism was touched on in a limited-circulation 
memorandum issued by the State Department. Thus the U.S. 
Administration's present attitude is not a sign of neutrality 
but an implicit call to West Europe to engage in the solemn task 
of pushing back extremists (from both right and left). 
  It is unlikely that, in the coming months, America will 
allow 
itself to become involved in European political battles, neither 
publicly nor in the undercover manner of the Cold War. For the 
moment the opinion still prevails that the crisis in Europe -- 
and in Italy -- is the first sign of a new assertion of 
democracy. And that the Berlusconi experiment is worthy of 
respect. But on another point America has clear ideas: The 
return of fascism in Europe would constitute a danger for its 
own national security as well. And on this point, it could not 
remain indifferent. 

