CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "It Will Be a Difficult Task To Overcome </F>
Difficulties and Rebuild Economic Success"] 
  [Text] Economic development is not a smooth and steady 
process, but rather one in which various difficulties and 
problems are encountered regularly and need timely resolution. 
In the course of economic development, as domestic and 
external climates change and subjective and objective factors 
clash, new problems and difficulties may arise at any time 
which, if not dealt with properly and carefully, will often 
cause economic growth to stagnate or decline. 
  While Taiwan's economic development over the last four-plus 
decades has certainly created a world-acknowledged miracle, an 
examination of this process leaves a profound impression about 
how hard it was to achieve. In this four-plus decades, we have 
encountered so many difficulties, bottlenecks, and problems, so 
that it was only by relying on the efforts of all throughout 
Taiwan to overcome the extreme hardships and difficulties that 
we were able to turn a rugged path into a smooth one, moving 
from plowing to harvesting, and having today's success. 
  When we began our active development in the 1950s, except 
for 
an abundant workforce, Taiwan had little else. Not only were we 
short on resources and money, but our technology was backward 
and our markets were narrow. But under such adverse conditions, 
our government rewarded savings, rectified its finances, 
attracted foreign investment, utilized foreign aid, readopted 
regulations to reward investment, and vigorously expanded export 
trade. Finally, by the 1960s, Taiwan's rapid economic growth, 
sharp expansion of foreign trade, and conversion of a 
longstanding trade deficit into a longstanding surplus, had 
brought increased worldwide respect for Taiwan's economic 
development, with Taiwan being cited as one of the "four Asian 
dragons." 
  But after the first world oil crisis in 1973, domestic and 
external shocks came in unending waves. Domestically, our 
capital construction was severely inadequate, with our labor 
shortage blocking further growth of our manufacturing industry. 
Externally, the sharp rise in oil prices caused worldwide 
stagnant growth and the development of trade protectionism. If 
Taiwan's economic development had not been smoothly adjusted at 
that time, our economy could very possibly have stagnated. 
Fortunately, our government made an overall adjustment of its 
economic policy at that time, on one hand going all out to push 
forward with 10 construction projects, not only relying on this 
to reinforce our public infrastructures, but also hoping that 
the increased public investment would stimulate expanded private 
investment. Meanwhile, it set forth a new development goal, 
emphasizing development of technology- and capital-intensive 
industries to accelerate our economic upgrading. With this 
government policy guidance and all-out private support, Taiwan's 
economic development finally rose to new heights, entering a 
smooth path, and moving to a higher development level, to turn 
Taiwan into a genuine rising industrialized nation. 
  Due to our successful economic development conversion, not 
only did our break in diplomatic relations with the U.S. not 
have a severe impact on our economy, but since the 1980s, our 
government's revision of its economic development goals, or 
promotion of liberalization and internationalization, and the 
gradual opening of contacts across the Taiwan strait, with 
Taiwan not only expanding trade relations with all countries in 
the Asia-Paciic region, but also establishing indirect trade 
relations with the mainland, have also brought a change to the 
economic situation of the whole Asia-Pacific region. Taiwan has 
undoubtedly played a crucial role in this change, which will 
make us a key player in future economic cooperation in the 
Asia-pacific region. 
  Of course, along with this change in economic situation, we 
have certainly experienced new economic problems and 
difficulties. 
  1. Domestically, due to population growth, urban expansion, 
and industrial development, the demand for industrial, 
construction, and fallow land has grown daily, with the 
unchanged land supply causing skyrocketing real estate prices 
and land speculation, and the national housing shortage causing 
discontent among the homeless. The difficulty in finding 
industrial land has lowered industrialists' investment 
aspirations. Labor-intensive industries in particular, have been 
forced to move abroad for their very existence, seeking a second 
spring overseas. 
  2. Due to rising incomes and improvements in consumer goods, 
the public has not only acquired a higher awareness of 
environmental protection, but also has made higher demands on 
our social welfare system in areas, such as national insurance, 
annuities, and old-age pensions. Of course, as a modern nation, 
a social welfare system is an indispensable qualification. 
  3. As our economy has advanced and our production increased, 
our public infrastructures have become inadequate. Our 
freeways, express-delivery system, parking lots, port and 
airport facilities, and public transportation are all unable to 
meet current needs. 
  4. Our government's need to reinforce our public facilities 
and expand our social welfare system requires enormous spending. 
But as revenues have not grown correspondingly, we have 
experienced heavy financial pressures, with an ever-growing 
financial burden and fiscal deficits growing yearly, leaving our 
responsible fiscal sector sighing about the difficulties! 
  5. Internationally, the Uruguay round of GATT negotiations 
was concluded in Geneva on 15 December 1993, with a final 
agreement having been reached. Meanwhile, the World Trade 
Organization (WTO) will be established on 1 January 1995, and at 
the latest by 1 July. Unless Taiwan can join the GATT before the 
end of 1994, we will be unable to become a founding member of 
the WTO, meaning that we will be unable to enjoy the benefits to 
be granted by that organization to its members. 
  As Executive Yuan Economics Council Director Hsiao 
Wan-ch'ang 
[5618 8001 7022] pointed out in a report to the KMT Standing 
Committee on 6 April 1994, Taiwan's economy is now at a 
long-range development turning point, in which we have a fine 
opportunity to reach new heights and develop a new order, to 
become a star of the 21st century; while similarly, due to the 
abovementioned five factors, unless we can appropriately 
overcome them, facing the possibility of landing in an economic 
stagnation crisis. So what are we to do? Let us see if we can 
make the wise choice, by making the great effort to overcome the 
difficulties, and through striving to rebuild our economic 
success. 
  We highly endorse the future work priorities set forth by 
Director Hsiao in his report, such as joining the GATT, planning 
to become the working center of the Asia-Pacific region, 
implementing our infrastructure plans, planning housing 
construction, planning and reorganizing our national annuity 
system, reassessing our land resources distribution rationality 
and water supply usage, reforming our government's fiscal 
system, and raising our administrative efficiency. Some of 
these priorities are merely goals awaiting our efforts, while 
others are particular jobs that are in urgent need of 
completion. The basic crux of our land and housing problem is 
that our land problem must be solved. This is not merely to 
acquire abundant industrial and housing construction space, but 
more so to eliminate land speculation, so that land benefits are 
enjoyed by the whole society, not monopolized by the few. In 
planning national annuities, we need to act in coordination with 
reform of our fiscal system, by acting gradually, orderly, and 
in line with our capabilities. Instead of giving the government 
a too large fiscal burden, we need to consider the principle of 
equality and justice. In public construction, we need to link 
this to higher administrative efficiency, eliminating waste, 
raising project quality, and preventing interference by special 
privilege. 
  But even more importantly, in order to achieve our goals of 
joining the GATT and planning to become the working center of 
the Asia-Pacific region, matters, such as how to stimulate 
domestic investment aspirations, upgrade our technology, adjust 
our industrial structure, expand our foreign trade markets, and 
protect our domestic ecology, are steps that directly involve 
raising productivity and speeding up our economic upgrading, 
requiring even more attention and active promotion. With 
conscientious efforts in these areas, we will be more able to 
reach new heights and rebuild our economic success. 

