BFN 

  [Text] Tomorrow sees the start of an important political 
week. We will see the new parliament's first steps and the first 
moves toward the formation of a new government. We will also 
see the formation of the parliamentary political groupings and 
at the same time, we will also surely see the first contacts 
aimed at increasing a government majority that could come under 
pressure in the Senate. Mario De Scalzi reports: 
  [Begin De Scalzi recording] Now that the speakers of the 
Chamber of Deputies and the Senate have been installed -- even 
at the price of an exhausting fight with the opposition parties 
-- the Freedom Alliance is now getting ready for the next round. 
Now it is the government's turn, but there is still caution 
concerning the time and modality of its formation. Silvio 
Berlusconi is asking for time in order to, as he puts it, get a 
good team together. He makes no secret of the fact that he 
would like to hold his hand out to Mino Martinazzoli's and Mario 
Segni's Italian Popular Party, even if the signals coming out of 
the party headquarters are not encouraging. 
  As a sign of peace, Pierferdinando Casini [from the 
Christian 
Democratic Center] is proposing to offer the former Christian 
Democrats the chairmanship of certain parliamentary committees, 
which would have otherwise gone to the Freedom Alliance. 
  Umberto Bossi has called a meeting of the Northern League's 
Federal Committee for tomorrow, and it was for this reason, he 
said, that government negotiations could not start before 
Tuesday. Gianfranco Fini is remaining calm, and he has given the 
go-ahead to the candidacy of Silvio Berlusconi for the post of 
prime minister. 
  Of course, President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro will have the last 
word, and as yet there is no word concerning when the 
appointment of the new prime minister will be made. However, it 
cannot be ruled out that the time limits for the formation of 
the new government could be conditioned by the date of 25 April 
[Liberation Day], which the National Alliance proposes to be 
celebrated as a day of national reconciliation, but which for 
the radical left remains the celebaration of the victory of the 
resistance over the fascists. [end recording] 

