BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, April 27 (KCNA) -- Functions took place 
in different countries in celebration of the birthday of the 
great leader President Kim Il-song. 
  A meeting was held in Kathmandu, Nepal, on the occasion. 
  The chairman of the Nepal-Korea Friendship Association, 
Manik 
Lal Shrestha, addressing the meeting, said: 
  "President Kim Il-song is a great leader recognized by the 
world. 
  "He liberated the Korean nation from imperialist oppression 
and has built socialism of chuche, thereby providing the people 
with a happy earthly paradise, and has performed shining feats 
for the development of the world revolutionary movement. 
  "President Kim Il-song is a great thinker and theoretician 
who founded the chuche idea." 
  Ex-prime minister of Nepal Kirti Nidhi Bista said: 
  "President Kim Il-song gives the first consideration to the 
people and respects them. This cannot be expected from anyone 
but a true leader of the people who devotes himself to them. 
  "As Korea is guided by the great leader, it has become a 
dignified and powerful country". 
  Celebration meetings were held in Kim Chong-il Street, 
Corriverton, Guyana, at the Pikine City Hall of Senegal and the 
building of the Metropolitan Federation of Residents and Urban 
Peoples in Lima, Peru, the Chuche School of Madagascar, the 
Damascus regional command of the Syrian People's Army and the 
Quneitra Provincial House of Culture in Syria. 
  On the occasion of April 15, Korean film shows and photo 
exhibitions, friendship gatherings, round-table conversations 
and other functions took place in Nigeria, Ghana, Zaire, Mali, 
Thailand, Shenyang of China, on the Cuba-Korea friendship farm, 
at the Dar-es-Salaam Commercial College of Tanzania, the all 
India Indo-Korean Friendship Association, the Indian Youth Group 
for the Study of Works of Comrade Kim Il-song, the Central 
Agricultural Institute of Poland, the Socialist Party of Peru, 
the Danish Workers' Party, Common Cause, the Communist Party 
(M-L) of Denmark and the Mornaigui House of Culture in Tunisia. 

