Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By unidentified staff commentator: "Further Emancipate the </F>
Mind"] 
  [Text] The year of 1994 is a year for tackling key aspects 
of China's reform, as well as a decisive year for Shanghai to 
"bring about great changes in three years." The Second Plenary 
Session of the Sixth Shanghai Municipal CPC Committee held 
before the New Year sounded a clarion call to quicken reform and 
development, and make efforts to create new prospects for 
Shanghai's work, under the guidance of the theory of building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics. To create new 
prospects, all party members must further emancipate their 
minds. This is the prerequisite for opening up new prospects. 
  Emancipating the mind is the prerequisite for developing our 
undertakings. During the past 15 years, it was precisely 
because we followed the ideological line of "emancipating the 
mind and seeking truth from facts" that we were able to travel 
on the bumpy but successful road of exploration. Since the 
beginning of the 1990's, Shanghai has enjoyed sustained, rapid, 
and healthy economic development, and its urban outlook has 
undergone changes with each passing day. This is basically 
because Comrade Xiaoping's talks in Shanghai and in the south 
have greatly emancipated our minds. There are no limits to 
emancipating the mind. From the viewpoint of epistemology, 
human beings continuously deepen their ideology and knowledge in 
the course of practice; therefore, the process of emancipating 
the mind should be a continuous one. Especially when faced with 
such profound social changes as brought about by reform, opening 
up, and modernization, we cannot emancipate our minds, renew our 
concepts, and achieve a leap in the cognitive process in only 
one move. Practice has made it clear to us that only when we 
reach a new level in emancipating our minds, can we create new 
prospects for reform and development. Without the continuous 
emancipation of the mind, the incessant development of 
undertakings is impossible. Remaining where we are and confining 
ourselves within the narrow bounds of our experience because of 
the thinking that "we have done almost everything to emancipate 
our minds" will only bring about backwardness. 
  To further emancipate the mind is a demand put forward to us 
by the situation. In the New Year, Shanghai should aim even 
higher in economic development, and the key to this lies in 
developing new ways of thinking on reform and opening up. 
Shanghai must make grand plans for scoring major achievements, 
and the key lies in showing foresight and operating from a 
strategically advantageous position. To this end, we need to 
further emancipate our minds, seek truth from facts, persist in 
proceeding from reality, accommodate changes in the situation, 
seize the opportunities of the times, catch up with the world's 
development, and eliminate metaphysics arising from dogmatism 
and the narrow boundaries of experience. In this new year, in 
particular, the focus of tackling key aspects of reform is 
shifting from destruction to construction, from individual 
projects to package reform, from shallow microeconomic activity 
to profound macroeconomic activity, and from simply "delegating 
powers and allowing enterprises to retain profits" to 
readjusting interests. To Shanghai, a city that wants to be the 
first to establish socialist market economic operating 
mechanisms, this shift of focus provides both an impetus and a 
driving force. It also compels Shanghai, where the planned 
economy has historically been the most complete, to further 
transform its ways of thinking, to further change its norms of 
conduct, and to further adjust the structure of interests. It 
also requires us not only to liberate ourselves from the old 
system and outdated ideas, but also to get rid of our 
superficial understanding of the market economy and nostalgia 
for certain interest structures formed in the course of reform 
in the past. In a word, only when leading cadres at all levels 
further emancipate their minds can they take the initiative in 
seizing opportunities, taking on challenges, and standing in the 
forefront of reform and opening up. 
  To further emancipate our minds, we must oppose arrogance 
and 
shatter complacency. We should be modest and prudent, and 
continue to make progress. In recent years, Shanghai has scored 
certain achievements in its work. Achievements are both burdens 
and tests. Faced with these achievements, we must remain 
level-headed and should never forget how these achievements were 
attained and become complacent. To oppose arrogance, we must 
shatter complacency. Some comrades have become arrogant because 
they tend to be complacent. They do compare themselves with 
others, but they use the wrong yardstick. They always compare 
with others vertically, are content with comparing among 
themselves, and feel complacent after comparing present and past 
achievements. We should not be content with comparing our 
achievements vertically. We must compare our work with the 
demands of the CPC Central Committee, the State Council, and 
Comrade Xiaoping and other revolutionaries of the older 
generation. We should compare Shanghai with fraternal provinces 
and municipalities, and live up to the expectations of people 
across the municipality. As a leader of opening up to the 
outside world, Shanghai should compare itself with the advanced 
international standards and with the international status of 
other metropolises. After comparing with others in this way, we 
will be able to determine where we lag behind others and where 
we feel inadequate. We should do all we can to catch up and 
surpass others to create new prospects. 
  To further emancipate the minds, it is necessary to persist 
in promoting Shanghai's reform, opening up, and modernization 
drive to a high standard and high level. To attain such a high 
standard and high level, we cannot be satisfied with the 
existing scale and state; we must play the role as "a leader of 
the Chang Jiang valley" and "a financial, trade, and shipping 
center" to serve the whole country, face the world, and 
participate in international competition. The emphasis of 
enterprise reorganization in Shanghai must be laid on the 
organization and establishment of large groups in order to 
innovate enterprise system and join international competition. 
The goal of cultivating markets in Shanghai should be the 
construction of large markets, which should be standardized and 
systematized in line with international practice at a faster 
pace. Shanghai's markets should be constructed to meet the 
needs of the 21st century and break new paths in accordance with 
the criteria of international metropolises. As for the 
renovation of Shanghai's central area, efforts must be 
concentrated in primarily making plans and well constructing the 
central commercial district to meet the standards for an 
international economic, banking, and trading center, so that 
Shanghai will become a center where thousands of merchants 
gather in droves. In short, Shanghai must have a higher level 
in economic development and its municipal construction must have 
a higher standard. Shanghai must advance ahead of others one 
step further and one level higher in reform and opening up. The 
key to upholding a high standard and high level lies in 
maintaining a high ideological level -- this requires us to 
further emancipate our minds, foster lofty ideas, set high 
goals, overcome the influence of the "small workshop, kids 
stuff, and small abacus" thinking stemming from the practice of 
a unified planned economy and closing the country to 
international intercourses for a long time in history, so that 
we can open up a new page with high standard and high level. 
  To further emancipate the minds, it is necessary to overcome 
the word "fear" and work creatively. Presently, the initiative 
and creativity of cadres are more important than anything else 
if Shanghai is to open up a new page in its work, come up with 
new ideas in economic development, and take the lead in reform 
and opening up. The demonstration of initiative and creativity 
means, as Comrade Deng Xiaoping put it, "it requires courage to 
overcome the fear" as well as "further emancipating the minds, 
be bolder, and accelerating the pace." Some of our comrades 
have enough staidness and some to spare, but are lacking in 
initiative. Why? It is fear -- fear of taking risks, fear of 
being the "first one," fear of making mistakes in the course of 
groping, and fear of losing some vested interests in the course 
of reform. If we are afraid of this, afraid of that, how can we 
take the lead in establishing an operating mechanism of 
socialist market economy in Shanghai? We are now in the process 
of changing from a planned economy to a socialist market 
economy, and we should be brave in reforming and eradicating the 
things in the old system which have been proven by practice to 
be unsuitable or will hinder economic development. Because the 
new system of the socialist market economy is an unprecedented 
innovation and there is no existing experience to copy from, we 
need to be even braver in practicing and innovating, as well as 
bringing out the initiative and creativity of cadres. We 
should, in the final analysis, adhere to the criterion of 
"conducive to three causes" [conducive to developing the 
productive forces of our socialist society, increasing the 
overall strength of our socialist country, and improving the 
people's living standards] proposed by Comrade Xiaoping and 
judge the success and failure of all exploration, as well as the 
rights and wrongs of all experiments according to this 
criterion. We should be bold in blazing new trails and trying 
new things. If we are sure of something, we should be bold to 
do it; if we are not so sure, we should allow experiments, which 
should be continued if they are proven right or corrected if 
wrong. Cadres at all levels should have such a daring and 
courage and party organizations at all levels should 
unswervingly adhere to the criterion of "conducive to three 
causes" to protect and bring out the initiative and creativity 
of cadres. It is not easy to inspire cadres' initiative, but it 
is easy to dampen it. Therefore, we should support cadres in 
blazing new trails and trying new things, keeping in mind that 
there is no need to be afraid of making mistakes and that if 
they do make mistakes, it will be all right if they correct 
them. We should allow errors in groping for reform, but we do 
not permit inaction, no daring, and no exploration. To cadres 
who are courageous to try and innovate and have made some 
achievements in opening up a new prospect, we should still 
support and protect them with full enthusiasm even if they have 
made mistakes, provided that they mean to serve the interests of 
the people and seek no personal gains. Only by firmly taking 
the criterion of "conducive to three causes" as a yardstick for 
judging success and failure as well as rights and wrongs, and 
doubling our affection and support for cadres willing to take 
the responsibility and daring to break new paths can we make 
initiative and creativity common practice in the ranks of cadres. 
  China's reofrm will enter a new stage of development in 1994 
-- a year of crucial importance to Shanghai. Shanghainese are 
shouldering a glorious mission and Shanghai's leading cadres at 
various levels are undertaking heavy responsibilities. Let us 
lead all citizens to achieve the goal of "bringing about a great 
change in three years" with the brand-new spirit and appearance 
of emancipating the minds, having courage in forging ahead, 
taking the interests of the whole into account, changing work 
style, forming close ties with the masses, working diligently, 
and assuming a practical attitude! 

