CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Talbott's Tilt Towards India"] </F>
  [Text] The U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott's 
talks with Indian Foreign Minister Dinesh Singh and his 
conversation with the news reporters at the airport before 
leaving for Pakistan indicate that the United States is leaning 
towards India. The United States will not make any decision 
against India over issues such as Kashmir, nuclear program, and 
sale of F-16s to Pakistan. The U.S. deputy secretary of state 
has explicitly assured India that if Pakistan did not stop its 
nuclear program, it will not be given F-16 fighter planes. 
Connecting the nuclear program with the F-16 sale is totally 
inappropriate. Refusing to supply these planes after the deal 
was agreed upon and money paid is pure dishonesty and a drastic 
action. Pakistan had expressed willingness to cancel the deal 
and accept the money paid in advance if the United States did 
not want to sell these fighter planes. However, the United 
States in its arrogance as a superpower is not willing to return 
this money. The U.S. secretary of state has said that the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons is endangering world peace, and 
steps must be taken to stop their spread. Pakistan also supports 
stopping proliferation of nuclear weapons, however, it is 
important to roll back India's nuclear program for this purpose. 
Ideally, India should be asked first to stop nuclear experiments 
and making nuclear weapons because it is way ahead in the 
nuclear field. Pakistan does not even have the capability to use 
nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. The question of making 
nuclear weapons does not even arise. the United States knows all 
this, but still is putting the whole pressure on Pakistan. It 
supports India over the Kashmir issue in addition to the nuclear 
program. 
  The U.S. comment that it considers Kashmir a disputed issue 
between India and Pakistan is not enough. Even India 
acknowledges that and the whole world is aware of it. India and 
Pakistan have fought several wars over the Kashmir issue, and 
the tension between the two countries is increasing now. The two 
countries can start another war over Kashmir. Therefore, to 
ensure peace in South Asia, it is important to resolve the 
Kashmir issue first. The United States insists that this issue 
be resolved according to Shimla accord instead of following the 
UN resolutions. Thus, Mr. Strobe Talbott has supported the 
Indian stand and said that the two countries should resolve this 
issue according to the Shimla accord. If this issue could be 
resolved according to the so-called Shimla accord, it would have 
been resolved a long time ago, and there would be no need to 
bring the United States into it. The real solution of the 
Kashmir problem is to get the Kashmiri people their right to 
self-determination so that they can decide with whom to merge. 
  As a superpower and a champion of world peace, the United 
States has the moral and political responsibility to try to 
resolve the Kashmir issue according to the UN resolutions. This 
is the only fair and peaceful resolution of the Kashmir issue. 
The people of Pakistan and Kashmir will not accept any other 
alternative. The Kashmiris now sense that the United States and 
the United Nations have no interest in resolving this issue, 
therefore, they have started their struggle to get rid of the 
Indian occupancy, and will continue it until they have won their 
freedom. 

