CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Lieutenant Colonel George Toroiman, head of </F>
the Directorate for Weapons, Explosives, and Toxic Substances, 
by Luiza Cristina; place and date not given: "Public Order Can 
Be Ensured by Existing Laws"] 
  [Text] It could be that the name of the Directorate of 
Weapons, Explosives and Toxic Substances might say too little 
or, to the other extreme, might say too much to us. The exposing 
and punishing of persons who illegally possess, manufacture, or 
bring weapons into the country, the confiscation of the weapons, 
and the issuance of permits to carry guns are activities under 
the jurisdiction of this directorate. In 1993 some 1,813 weapons 
of different types and calibers were confiscated, along with 
72,062 bullets. The border police confiscated 209 weapons and 
8,833 bullets. Last year, according to the records of the 
directorate, 50,000 persons possessed weapons legally. Some 
13,561 of these people lost the right to carry weapons, either 
because of changes in their behavior (after they received the 
permit) or because of their failure to use or keep the weapons 
properly which resulted in accidents. 
  [Cristina] First, I would like you to describe the activity 
of the Directorate for Weapons, Explosives, and Toxic Substances. 
  [Toroiman] Our directorate is concerned with ensuring that 
laws on weapons and ammunition are respected and with meting out 
punishment for violations. Regulations on weapons and ammunition 
are stipulated in Decree No. 368/1971. Therefore, we are first 
involved in ensuring that regulations on weapons and ammunition 
are observed. 
  [Cristina] What is involved in this first objective of the 
activity of the directorate? 
  [Toroiman] We must say, first of all, that a person can 
possess a weapon on the basis of a permit issued by our 
directorate. Hunting weapons can be possessed only by members of 
the General Association of Amateur Hunters and Fishermen. Two 
attempts were made to establish some phantom associations which 
claimed: "We are independent." They did not even have the name 
of an athletic association in their title. I do not know and I 
cannot imagine what they were thinking about. Do they think that 
they are professional hunters and that this is the Siberian 
taiga? 
  [Cristina] What are the other categories of weapons and who 
can possess them? 
  [Toroiman] Rifles are another category of weapons. They are 
possessed by marksmen who, in addition to these weapons, can 
also possess other types of weapons, either those which are 
received for various sports competitions or those which are 
purchased for personal use. The possession of these weapons is 
legal and the possessors present proof that they are marksmen or 
have permits to possess weapons for competitions. There are also 
panoply weapons which are part of weapons collections. Persons 
who have such collections have to satisfy the legal requirements 
for possessing such weapons. One thing should be said at the 
very beginning: Weapons are very dangerous and a person who 
wants to possess one must exhibit irreproachable behavior. You 
cannot give a weapon to a person who has spent several years in 
prison for robbery. That is the way it must be! Or to a perosn 
who causes a scandal in the apartment building, beats his wife, 
or who knows what. 
  Another category of weapons is that of weapons used for 
personal defense and security. They can be possessed by persons 
who exercise state authority or some other important public 
activity. A person who wants to possess a weapon might be a 
senator, but if it is determined that he is in no danger of 
being attacked, then there is no reason why he should carry a 
weapon. The last category of weapons consists of those possessed 
by juridical persons, such as theaters, movie theaters, the 
State Circus, as well as weapons for guarding economic units 
(enterprises, private companies). In this area, the economic 
units send a request to the police and then the guard plan for 
the unit is discussed. The police specialist in the guard 
systems makes a decision in regard to the guard posts which 
require the weapons. Then the persons serving as guards who will 
be carrying the service weapons will be notified. The weapons 
will be rented from the police for 28,000 lei a year -- a rather 
small sum. 
  [Cristina] Where does the ammunition for these weapons come 
from? 
  [Toroiman] Also from us. At cost, of course. Returning to 
the 
objectives of our directorate, we can also include the 
authorization of a person to bear arms and the periodic 
examination of the person's behavior. If any negative aspects 
should appear, then the authorization can be withdrawn 
automatically. Let me stress the fact that the identification of 
persons illegally possessing weapons and ammunition occupies 
first place in our activity. The vast majority of those who 
possess weapons illegally are involved in poaching. Others have 
murder in mind. 
  [Cristina] Are there any other categories of weapons? 
  [Toroiman] Those remaining from the interwar period. They 
are 
found by the people under different circumstances. 
  We are concerned with preventing and combatting the illegal 
importation of weapons into the country, by Romanians or 
foreigners. The customs organs are a great help to us in 
exposing people who bring weapons into the country illegally. 
They are the first and also the last ones to carry out 
inspections. 
  [Cristina] The disadvantage of this inspection is that it is 
carried out at random. 
  [Toroiman] This is true, and violators profit from this fact 
when they pass through crowded border control points where the 
probability that they will be apprehended is much smaller. 
  [Cristina] So the exposure of the violators depends upon the 
mettle of the border guard? 
  [Toroiman] On the mettle of the border guard and the 
utilization of different techniques at the border points. Strict 
inspections are carried out at the Otopeni and Kogalniceanu 
airports. Each piece of baggage goes through an X-ray apparatus 
which provides a clear image of the contents. 
  [Cristina] How many weapons does the Directorate of Weapons, 
Explosives, and Toxic Substances have? 
  [Toroiman] Each officer has a pistol. Just like each 
military 
man in the country. 
  [Cristina] During the 1989 events, weapons were taken from 
the headquarters of the police. How many were taken? 
  [Toroiman] The total number of weapons taken is 1,897, if we 
take into account the weapons taken in June 1990, when the 
police headquarters of the capital was attacked. 
  [Cristina] How many weapons have remained in the possession 
of the population? 
  [Toroiman] Some 356. If they do not hand them over, out of 
fear that they will be interrogated or whatever else is on their 
minds, we would be happy to find them thrown over the fence into 
the yard of the police department. We do not care any more about 
the persons who had the weapons. We just want them to hand them 
over so we can recover them. 
  [Cristina] Are there any weapons trafficking networks 
operating on the territory of Romania? 
  [Toroiman] No. So far we have not run into this. 
  [Cristina] Does the current legislation help the directorate 
in its activity of stopping violations of the law? 
  [Toroiman] In my personal opinion, the penalties are not 
severe enough to prevent illegal manifestations. Authority in 
the field of law and order can be ensured by severe legal 
requirements. 
  [Cristina] How many people work in the Directorate of 
Weapons, Explosives, and Toxic Substances? 
  [Toroiman] Each county police department has a weapons 
office. We are not few in number, nor are we an army. 
  [Cristina] What do you want the most in the future? 
  [Toroiman] More severe penalties and a stricter system for 
authorizing the possession of weapons. If we think about it, as 
long as the state has organs which ensure law and order, why 
would the people need to possess firearms? The people can defend 
themselves by alarm systems. Weapons in the possession of the 
people create a state of fantastic danger. I assure you that 
youth, especially, would get firearms if they could. At any 
rate, we are not in the situation of having guns in our homes. 
It would be good for citizens to closely collaborate with the 
police -- in the best meaning of the word. They should help us 
to do our work. And I would also like the law which we proposed 
and introduced in Parliament to be passed as quickly as possible. 

