Language: <F P=105> Lithuanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Here is Audrius Baciulis reporting from Seimas. 
  [Baciulis] The meeting of Andrzey Zakrzewski, envoy of the 
Polish President and secretary of state at the presidential 
office, and the Polish delegation headed by him with President 
Algirdas Brazauskas was planned for 45 minutes, however, the 
diplomats spent more than an hour at the president's office. 
  Andrzey Zakrzewski told the journalists that the discussion 
was about the signing of the Lithuanian-Polish interstate 
treaty, and about coming closer to this objective. 
  However, the state secretary said, we do not define friendly 
relations between the states and nations by treaties alone. 
What is important is that even without this treaty, 
Lithuanian-Polish relations today are already good. 
  When asked whether the declaration would be signed together 
with the treaty, Andrzey Zakrzewski answered that he had no 
powers to decide this. He said that he had proposed several new 
formulations of several articles of the treaty to the Lithuanian 
side which had been prepared by the new Polish foreign minister. 
  Iwo Buszatski, deputy foreign minister, stressed that 
although the minister of foreign affairs in Poland was new, 
Polish foreign policy remained unchanged, if only perhaps some 
matters were being dealt with more speedily. We must not think 
that a breakthrough in the process of negotiations can be 
reached in several hours of negotiations, Andrzey Zakrzewski 
said. However, he said, common thinking was demonstrated by both 
sides aspiring to sign the treaty as soon as possible. He 
admitted that during the talks with Algirdas Brazauskas historic 
issues were touched upon as well, and here he immediately quoted 
Lech Walesa' words saying that the history must not (?suppress) 
the future. According to Andrzey Zakrzewski, this formula was 
regarded rather favorably by the Lithuanian side. 
  Immediately after the meeting the envoy of the Polish 
president will inform Lech Walesa about the results of the 
meeting. He also confirmed that the invitation for the 
Lithuanian negotiation delegation to come to Warsaw was still 
valid and that it will be given a warm welcome there. He said 
that this also applied to the Lithuanian president if he wished 
to visit Warsaw. This is Audrius Baciulis from Seimas. 

