CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Norway's DAGBLADET Reports: Nordic </F>
Countries Will Follow Suit in EU Referenda"] 
  [Text] Oslo -- Finns, Swedes, and Norwegians's views on EU 
membership will be influenced by the order in which the 
referenda are held and their results. A decision to join the 
European Union [EU] made in two of the Nordic countries will 
increase the number of supporters in the third applicant country 
and vice versa. 
  This is maintained in a report published Tuesday [7 June] in 
the Norwegian daily DAGBLADET. The paper interviewed 2,500 
Nordic nationals in May. A thousand of them were interviewed in 
both Norway and Sweden, and 500 in Finland. 
  Especially opponents of EU membership suspect that the 
so-called domino effect will happen with the Nordic referendum 
on the EU. The dominoes will all fall in the direction in which 
the first domino to be knocked over falls. 
  The newspaper's opinion poll indicates that, if two Nordic 
countries vote for membership, a majority of the citizens of the 
third Nordic country will also support membership. In this kind 
of situation fully 86 percent of the Finns and 64 percent of the 
Swedes would vote for the EU. 
  According to the poll, even a slim majority (52 percent) of 
the Norwegians would rather vote for membership than leave 
Norway alone outside of the EU. 
  If, however, two of the Nordic countries were to vote 
against 
joining the EU, the third would also stay out of it. In such a 
situation 44 percent of the citizens would vote for the EU in 
Finland, 40 percent in Sweden, and 24 percent in Norway. 
  As regards the Finnish poll in particular, a fairly high 
margin for error, which is 4.5 percentage points as concerns, 
for example, the last-mentioned question, lowers the reliability 
of the poll. This means that from 39 to 48.5 percent of the 
Finns who voted would say no to the EU following a negative 
stand on the EU in Sweden and Norway. 
<H5>  Example Set by Norway Would Increase Number of Opponents </H5>
  EU critics demanded that the referenda be held on the same 
day, but they have ended up scheduling them at different times 
in the Nordic countries. The Finns, who most strongly support 
the EU are to vote first, on 16 October. Norway, where 
opposition to the EU is greatest, will be voting last, on 28 
November. 
  If Norway were to vote first, according to the poll, a 
majority in all three countries would vote against the EU. 

