Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tianjin, January 22 (XINHUA) -- The rural township 
industry in Tianjin picked up in 1993, with a total production 
output value of 54 billion yuan, a sizzling 35 percent rise from 
the previous year. 
  The rural sector in the city earned nearly four billion 
yuan, 
up 38 percent over 1992. The output value of the township 
enterprises was about 85 percent of the total for all rural 
households. 
  The development of Tianjin's rural sector has derived from 
the advantages of its coastal area around the Beijing and 
Tianjin urban districts. 
  Both rural productivity and industrial earnings have taken 
the lead in the whole township industrial sector of the country. 
  There are now 42 township companies whose annual output goes 
beyond 100 million yuan; and the total annual output value in 14 
different industrial sections each surpasses one billion yuan, 
including the ferrous metals, machinery, chemicals and textile 
industries. 
  The city has also set up 43 township business groups over 
the 
past few years. 
  Most of these rural enterprises have now entered the market 
by adopting a joint stock system. There are more than 630 such 
companies that carried out the stock system by the end of last 
year, according to a recent survey conducted by a governmental 
department. 
  Also, the flow of foreign investment into the rural areas 
has 
breathed life into the township enterprises. 
  In 1993, the municipal government approved the building of 
885 new joint ventures, with over 400 million U.S. dollars 
flowing in. 
  About 1,280 township companies earned 5.1 billion yuan 
through exports alone. 
  With the rise of the service industry, the city also earned 
800 million yuan last year, a 90 percent rise from the previous 
year, and broke ground in developing its commerce, food, 
transportation, real estate, and tourism. 
  It also channeled a large sum of money toward boosting the 
development of the new and high-tech industry, and more than 
5,000 farmers took part in various training classes last year. 

