BFN 

  [Text] The critics of the Russian president's decree on 
combating crime view some of its provisions abstractly, apart 
from the goals pursued by the document, the first deputy chief 
of the Interior Ministry's department for combating organized 
crime, Gennadiy Chebotarev, told Interfax. 
  For instance, the provision concerning the lifting of such 
obstacles, as banking or commercial secrets, will be applied 
only toward criminal groups, said Chebotarev. "The decree does 
not stipulate that from now on there will be no banking or 
commercial secrets at all," he noted. 
  According to Chebotarev, "false advice notes whose worth 
exceeds one billion dollars continue to circulate in the 
country." "Over two thousand such notes were issued in Dagestan 
alone; about 700 figure-head firms led by nonexistent people 
were established there," he said. "Such machinations must be 
stopped promptly, and provisions of the presidential decree will 
be used in precisely that direction." 
  The decree might contribute to enhancing the endeavors to 
protect the population in real terms, Chebotarev said. "Measures 
designed to combat crime, in particular inspections of cars, 
will inconvenience people, but such actions are necessary, since 
a vast stream of weapons flows into Russia from abroad," he said. 
  "Arms from Estonia, from Tajikistan, from the North Caucasus 
and from Trans-Caucasus are spreading across the country, and in 
these conditions such simple measures of precaution, as 
inspections of cars and trucks, present nothing new," Chebotarev 
pointed out. 
  He dismissed the possibility that, granted the opportunity 
to 
detain those suspected of having committed crimes for 30 days, 
the police will abuse its power. "The decree stipulates that 
for the prosecuting authorities to get involved: sufficient 
evidence proving the given person's involvement in organized 
crime will have to be submitted to the prosecutors in order to 
get their warrant," Chebotarev said. 
  To carry out the decree the law-enforcement agencies will 
analyse the data concerning gangs acting in Russia and take 
steps to expose them. "At present we are aware of more than 
5,000 criminal groups acting throughout Russia," Chebotarev said. 
  "They have the opportunity to give up their criminal 
activity, of course, and I think that the preventive importance 
of the decree is also great," Interfax's interviewee said. 

