BFN 

  [Text] Strong elements of the Greek Government have drawn 
up an action plan for disengagement from the so-called 
confidence-building measures in case the United Nations insists 
on continuing to try to implement them despite the continuing 
negative stance of the Turkish side. 
  According to our information from an extremely well-informed 
and reliable source in Athens, the Greek Government expects to 
see attempts to implement the collapse of the 
confidence-building measures. However, if the United Nations, 
the British, and Americans promote alternative scenarios to 
implement the confidence-building measures, the Greek side will 
move to disavow them. 
  According to our information, Greece has already drawn up a 
specific action plan to disengage from the confidence-building 
measures that will be implemented in coordination with the 
Cyprus Government. 
  It should be noted that the U.S. President knows about the 
Greek Government's objections to and reservations about the 
confidence-building measures, and was informed by Greek Prime 
Minister Andreas Papandreou of his intentions in this regard 
during their meeting last month in Washington. 
  According to our information from Athens, during the last 
few 
days the Greek Government has informed President Glavkos 
Kliridhis that it wants to see the confidence-building measures 
collapse, and that it intends to work to formulate a new policy 
on the Cyprus issue with a new orientation. 
  In Athens we also learned that the Greek Government will 
proceed with the establishment of a National Security Council, 
which will take over the formulation of policy and strategy on 
the Cyprus issue. A representative of the Cyprus Government 
might participate in the proposed National Security Council in 
order to have firm cooperation between Athens and Nicosia at the 
policy level. 
  In view of this, it is understood that the Greek Government 
does not favor the convening of a pannational conference on the 
Cyprus issue, at least for the now. 

