BFN 

  [Excerpt] Buenos Aires, 22 May (NA) -- Economy Minister 
Domingo Cavallo denied any intention of resigning over the 
dispute in the cabinet over the project to create a security 
super secretariat. He added: "If they are part of the 
government, those responsible for creating this terrible climate 
over the project must leave." 
  Cavallo said there is "a media conspiracy to stain the image 
of the Economy Ministry, and particularly the president." 
  Cavallo said: "I did not resign or even think about doing 
so." He added: "I am not scared as easily, particularly by press 
campaigns, as [former Interior Minister] Gustavo Beliz." 
  These remarks follow the cabinet crisis and bitter arguments 
between Cavallo and Interior Minister Carlos Ruckauf during a 
meeting in La Rioja on 20 May. Cavallo said the campaign began 
"when the press announced that the creation of the security 
secretariat and the appointment of Julian Licastro were my idea." 
  Cavallo said the conflict "has deeply hurt the government," 
adding that "those responsible for creating a wrong image of the 
project should leave." 
  The minister added: "The president had the idea of creating 
the secretariat. I told him I supported the idea but the 
proposal was not mine." 
  Cavallo told Buenos Aires newspapers that the fact that "the 
press campaign coincided with outrageous raids on the Economy 
Ministry, searching for papers that had been delivered to the 
court," was "intriguing." 
  Cavallo said the conflict affected him "marginally." He 
added 
that the campaign sought "to limit the president's prerogatives, 
while portraying the Economy Ministry as repressive, or 
something like that." 
  The minister observed: "No one, not even Cavallo or Bauza, 
imposes ideas or names on the president. Neither does the 
president go to work with a new minister the day after his 
appointment." 
  He added: "Those behind the campaign do not know the 
president." 
  Cavallo said: "President Menem's idea is very simple. He 
wants to divide the Interior Ministry in two. One section will 
handle political conflicts and the other will take care of 
security." 
  Cavallo said the first section "will require a lot of public 
coverage, press and television appearances, and dialogues with 
political leaders. This activity requires of a special type of 
person, like Ruckauf." 
  He said: "The president said we must separate politics from 
security." Referring to the interior minister, Cavallo said: 
"When Ruckauf talks about security, the surveys show us losing 
points." 
  He said: "Interior ministers all have that problem because 
the issue of security annoys them." 
  Cavallo said: "There are no legal problems, as the media 
mentioned." He thus referred to reports that the project to 
unify the Coast Guard, the National Border Police, and the 
police in a single body violated the 1991 Security Law. [passage 
omitted] 

