Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Sergey Bunin report: "Catch Fish, But Stick to the Quotas. </F>
Testimony of Commander in Chief of Russian Border Troops A. 
Nikolayev"] 
  [Text] Tokyo, 4 Feb -- A videotape shown to us at the 
Russian Embassy in Tokyo concerned events of 21-22 January. On 
that day our territorial waters in the region of the South 
Kurils were subjected to wholesale invasion by Japanese 
fishermen, and a statement ensued from the Russian Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs. 
  The "pirates" -- and there is no other word for them -- 
crossed the notional border from three directions at once, 
having first built up a cruising speed of 40-45 knots (almost 90 
km per hour!). Cutting through the waves, they plowed in 
disorderly fashion through the narrow waters of the strait 
separating the island of Kunashir from Japan's Hokkaido. A 
border troops helicopter, approaching each of the fishing 
schooners in turn, recorded the numbers and names of the vessels 
-- NK2-20234, NK-218355, NK-18021, NK2-22134..., Kosio-maru, 
Tayio-maru, Nogisinko-maru.... These are just a few of the data 
I managed to note down. The camera also recorded the spasmodic 
attempts of some of the crew to conceal the numbers in makeshift 
fashion with sheets of some kind. The "haul" was respectable -- 
in two days Russian border troops recorded 130 incidents of the 
insolent procession of Japanese schooners under the helicopter 
patrol, which was carrying out duty aerial patrol of the border 
waters. 
  "There is every basis to believe that this was a planned, 
political action" -- this was the comment on the filmed events 
by the commander in chief of the Russian Border Troops himself, 
Colonel General Nikolayev, who assembled Russian journalists, 
including myself, in the embassy to view the video and discuss 
the results of the recently completed trilateral forum of 
Russia, Japan, and the United States on maintaining security in 
the northern Pacific. "How otherwise do we explain the fact 
that there were virtually no other violations either before or 
after these events in January? You could hardly call this a 
coincidence. The Japanese authorities could not be unaware of 
this -- the border troops pinpointed three ships of the Japanese 
Defense Agency at sea, calmly observing what was happening not 
far from their own territorial waters. Will we pass this 
material to the relevant Japanese organs? So far no one has 
asked us to do so. But if an official request is received, 
there are no problems." 
  No such request, evidently, will be received. The Japanese 
side, whatever officials say by way of justification, knows full 
well about all the violations. Following the strongly worded 
statement from the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Tokyo 
finally set up an investigation into the protest. So far only 
something indistinct along the lines of "We have not confirmed 
such incidents" has been heard. 
  To all our protests the Japanese stubbornly repeat: But we 
want to fish. No problem! There exists an agreed quota -- 
fish, and good luck to you! We are not against economic 
activity in these waters. But when, disregarding Russia's 
national interests, the violation of borders and quotas 
continues, we will act on the basis of the law on the state 
border -- in full accordance with and to the full extent of 
international law. And that includes the use of weapons. 
  "The incident involving the detention of two fishing 
schooners at the end of last year is only an episode blown up 
out of all proportion by the Japanese newspapers," Nikolayev 
said. "But altogether 1993 was marked by an unprecedented 
upsurge in piratical activity -- 7,000 violations by Japanese 
fisherman of the Russian border in this region." 
  Have these incidents been specifically examined with the 
Japanese departments during visits to Tokyo? This is not yet 
being disclosed. 
  "I can say only one thing," the commander in chief stated in 
conclusion. "This is a sensitive issue for the Japanese. The 
main think is, that, in my opinion, they have ascertained for 
themselves that the Border Troops will continue their official 
combat activity in these waters. The Border Troops now have 
sufficient fuel. They are also sufficiently equipped with video 
equipment. The Japanese are law-abiding people, and must 
finally understand that we will not condone smuggling, the 
poaching of fish resources, or the violation of borders -- no 
one has given them carte blanche for that. We have offered them 
cooperation -- in that case it would be possible to avoid many 
questions and conflicts." 

