BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Samuel Blixen] </F>
  [Excerpts] Approximately a month ago, the interior minister 
installed an Anti-Mafia Unit to try--through intelligence 
work--to break up the connection between police officers and 
Uruguayan criminal organizations. These organizations are part 
of international mafia networks dedicated to white slave trading 
and drug trafficking. 
  The classified information being handled by the Interior 
Ministry reveals that mafia infiltration into various domestic 
circles has affected an alarming number of middle- and 
high-ranking police officers. 
  There are numerous indications that organizations dedicated 
to the white slave trade and drug trafficking have developed 
support structures at the neighborhood level and in sports and 
recreational organizations. 
  But these mafias have not enrolled only police officers. 
Police, congressional, and judicial documents indicate that the 
mafias have also ensured the complicity of sports entrepreneurs, 
professional sportsmen, and people in the entertainment 
business. The reports even included the name of one deputy. 
  The evidence of the degree of development and impunity of 
these criminal organizations with international connections has 
alarmed people at the highest levels. It is believed that these 
mafias are trying to create social support bases such as those 
in Brazil, Bolivia, and Colombia. In these countries drug 
traffickers control entire neighborhoods, as well as entire 
lines of productive activities. 
  National mafias combine violence, coercion, and corruption 
to 
protect an impunity system that has been characterized as 
"shameless." 
  In this respect, the "total inefficiency" of the police 
organizations responsible for the repression of the white slave 
trade in trying to stem the constant "export of prostitutes" is 
considered a key factor in the growing power garnered by 
Uruguayan mafias. 
  Some legislators think that the absolute impunity enjoyed by 
"pimps and dealers" ["fiolos"], their intermediaries, and 
contacts with organizations managing the international criminal 
trade constitutes a threat to institutional powers. 
  The creation of the Anti-Mafia Unit is the consequence of 
the 
fear and concern expressed in political circles over the 
increasing levels of corruption provoked by these organizations. 
The considerable international economic power of these groups 
is derived from criminal activity considered to be an 
international "scourge." 
  The information collected during the investigation of some 
concrete cases has confirmed that in Uruguay there is an 
interaction between drug trafficking, the white slave trade, and 
contraband. 
  BRECHA learned that the Anti-Mafia Unit has begun to process 
information from various sources, and has launched an 
investigation into the origin of capital that permits some 
individuals to enjoy a lifestyle not in accordance with their 
"official" incomes. [passage omitted] 
<H5>  War on Mafias </H5>
  The official inability to act, the reiteration of classified 
reports, and the need to face the power of the mafias has forced 
the Human Rights Committee to take the initiative to coordinate 
efforts in this area. It was estimated that the situation was 
extremely serious and out of control at the beginning of March. 
Committee members held several meetings with Interior Minister 
Raul Iturria and Interior Under Secretary Juan Luis Storace to 
demand an effective offensive against criminal structures and 
the police protection they enjoy. 
  The decision to create the Anti-Mafia Unit was the result of 
these closed-door meetings. There was a tacit agreement between 
the ministry and the committee not to hinder the investigations, 
no matter who is involved. 
  The unit is made up by three high-ranking officials whose 
backgrounds have assured and satisfied the legislators. The 
unit will be directly subordinated to the interior minister. 
One high-ranking official will operate in the administrative 
field, a second will be responsible for international relations, 
and the third will move in the field of police intelligence. 
(BRECHA will omit the names of these officials and the names of 
individuals suspected of involvement in illegal activates, 
witnesses, and those who denounced the illegal acts, for obvious 
reasons and so as not to hinder the investigations under way.) 
  At first it was said that the government decision might 
imply 
an action similar to the "Clean Hands Operation" now under way 
in Italy. That was allegedly the initial idea, but Minister 
Iturria decided to keep a low profile. The minister told BRECHA 
that despite the existence of elements implicating police 
offices with the mafias, "it is difficult to obtain proof 
through administrative investigations." Besides, the minister 
intends to act cautiously "in order not to affect the entire 
police institution, which is indispensable to any 
administration." Officially, Minister Iturria prefers to face 
the offensive against organized crime with a "reorganization" 
that will place the investigation and repression of the 
so-called "international crimes" under his portfolio's 
jurisdiction. An expression of that reorganization is the 
decision to move the intelligence, narcotics, and Interpol 
departments from under the jurisdiction of the Montevideo Police 
Department. 
  Other officials think the Interior Ministry will not be able 
to destroy the mafia organizations without an in-depth attack 
against police corruption. "Otherwise those involved in the 
white slave trade and drug trafficking will continue to act with 
impunity," a deputy told BRECHA. The deputy said he was willing 
to wait a reasonable time for results before proposing other 
measures. 

