Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "ACIR Radio News" newscast] </F>
  [Text] Luis Donaldo Colosio Murrieta, presidential 
candidate for the Institutional Revolutionary Party [PRI], has 
received support from PRI legislators in the Senate and the 
Chamber of Deputies, as well as from the representatives to the 
Assembly of the Federal District. Colosio said in a speech that 
the PRI's road in becoming a more autonomous party does not mean 
that war has to be declared on the government, as some may be 
asking for or as some have interpreted. Colosio made the 
statement in clear reference to the speech he delivered on the 
occasion of the 65th anniversary of the PRI, which gathered the 
entire PRI family under the Monument to the Revolution here in 
Mexico City on Sunday morning. 
  Among many other important things, Colosio said in a speech 
that limits need to be placed on presidential government 
[presidencialismo] and that he fully supports change. He said 
he fully supports making deep changes in matters of democracy 
and that he believes the PRI should be separated from the 
government itself. Luis Donaldo Colosio said: If we want to 
exist as a party -- referring to the PRI -- our political 
initiative should serve as the main engine to keep us moving 
ahead by way of arguments and reason. 
  Speaking to PRI legislators and assembly members, Luis 
Donaldo Colosio said the decision to make his party more 
independent from the government is not a declaration of war but, 
rather, a way of guaranteeing that the party will remain a 
viable organization in terms of electoral competition. Speaking 
to PRI candidates, Colosio asked them to join him in embracing 
this change. He said they should not fear debate and the 
confrontation of ideas or electoral competition. He said the 
government will not give us victory in the 21 August elections. 
  [Begin Colosio recording] What does this autonomy of which I 
spoke about on Sunday and today mean? It does not mean 
declaring war on the government, like some would like or some 
have interpreted -- of course not. What we want with the 
government is a political dialogue, just as we want a dialogue 
with other political parties. We want a clear differentiation of 
what will be the government's role and what will be the role of 
the political party to which we belong. [end recording] 
  Luis Donaldo Colosio said the government must guarantee 
impartiality, objectivity, and firmness in applying the law, but 
the PRI has to work toward becoming closer to society and 
becoming a social leader. He said political competition is 
needed to put an end to self-indulgence, comfort, and conformity. 
  Speaking to the people's representatives headed by Senator 
Emilio Gonzalez Parra, Deputy Maria de los Angeles Moreno, and 
Assembly member Juan Jose Osorio Palacios, he asked them to 
work, sacrifice, and be willing to change. This is the only way 
to gain the people's trust. Colosio also reminded them that 
they had emerged from an election, the 1991 elections, in which 
certain beliefs were discarded, such as that the PRI could never 
win when there is high voter turnout. 
  Luis Donaldo Colosio delivered a clear message to the 
deputies and senators. He asked them to spread the word on 
their legislative actions and to show that the legislative 
branch has fulfilled its promises with Mexico. 
  At the end of the meeting, PRI senators and assembly members 
gave their support to Luis Donaldo Colosio in the 21 August 
presidential elections. During the gathering at the central 
esplanade at the PRI's National Executive Committee Building, 
the deputies and senators gave their solidarity and support to 
the PRI candidate. 

