BFN 

  [Text] Melbourne, June 1 (XINHUA) -- Both Chinese and 
Australian trade officials have today expressed their 
satisfaction with the sound development of bilateral economic 
and trade links at the China Trade and Investment Forum '94. 
  The forum, the largest ever held in Australia, was opened in 
Melbourne, the second largest city in Australia, today. 
  Australian Trade Minister Bob McMullan said that the forum 
"signifies the great progress and development in economic ties 
between Australia and China in recent years." 
  He pointed out that the strength of such economic and trade 
links "is the result of some hard work by our governments and 
business." 
  McMullan said that the export-oriented sector of Australia's 
economy has "enjoyed the benefits of linking into China's 
economic development." 
  The trade minister also announced that he will lead a 
business delegation to China next September to continue to 
facilitate high- level contacts. 
  He also said that Australia will open four Austrade (the 
Australian Trade Commission) trade and investment offices in 
China and Australia has already had trade offices in Hangzhou, 
Shanghai and Guangzhou. "Australia-China trade and investment 
relations stand at the threshold of a significant mutually 
beneficial expansion," McMullan said. 
  He stressed that the Australian Government "is committed to 
providing even greater impetus for the bilateral trade 
relationship." 
  Gu Yongjiang, vice-minister of China's Ministry for Foreign 
Trade and Economic Cooperation, brief the forum on the deepening 
of China's economic reforms and opening to the outside world. 
  Gu led a Chinese delegation, consisting of more than 100 
businessmen from China's 20 provinces and cities, who have 
brought with them over 500 projects, valued at seven billion 
U.S. dollars. 
  He said that beginning from this year, the Chinese 
Government 
has implemented a series of significant reform measures in the 
fields of fiscal and taxation system, banking, investment, 
foreign exchange and foreign trade. "This shows that the 
reform of China's economic system has entered into an important 
phase of overall progress with breakthrough in key sectors," Gu 
added. On the Sino-Australian economic and trade links, the 
vice- minister said that the two countries have had a long 
history of economic and trade cooperation. 
  The two-way trade between the two countries reached a record 
high of three billion U.S. dollars last year, representing an 
increase of 29 percent over the previous year, according to 
China's official figures. 
  He said that by the end of last year, China has had approved 
1,310 projects involving Australian investment, with a total 
contracted value amounting to 1.25 billion U.S. dollars. 
  Australia has become the 9th largest foreign investor in 
China. 
  Talking of the prospect for future Sino-Australian economic 
and trade ties, Gu said that a sound development will be the 
only trend for Sino-Australian economic and trade relations. 
  He cited four reasons to support the view: 
  -- The two economies have a strong complementarity; 
  -- Both the Chinese and Australian Governments attach great 
importance to the promotion of the bilateral economic and trade 
ties; 
  -- Both countries are working for readjusting their economic 
development strategy at the moment; and 
  -- The experience from past trade contacts and investment 
projects will serve as a good guide to future success in the 
bilateral trade and economic ties. 
  Gu pointed out that the Asia-Pacific region is a region that 
"enjoys the most dynamic economic growth and the 21st century 
will no doubt belong to the Asia-Pacific region." 
  "China and Australia should join hands and cooperate more 
closely to maker greater contributions to the prosperity of the 
region," he said. 
  The forum will last for two days in Melbourne and will then 
be moved to Australia's largest city of Sydney next week. 

