BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Aura Lila Moreno] </F>
  [Text] General Humberto Ortega has charged that extreme 
right-wing sectors are waging a "terrorist campaign of lies" 
against the draft Military Code he presented before the National 
Assembly. The Assembly will be discussing the draft next week, 
before the consultation process with all sectors of Nicaraguan 
society. 
  "We are facing a battle," Gen. Ortega exclaimed before 500 
officers, who were receiving their military promotions. Present 
for the event were members of the Military Council of the Army, 
Navy, and Air Force diplomatic attaches, National Police 
commanders, and Government Minister Frank Cesar. 
  During the promotion ceremony, which took place under a 
heavy 
rainfall at the Alejandro Davila Bolanos Military Hospital, Gen. 
Ortega addressed the military modernization process. He also 
spoke out against the "destabilization campaign, which is being 
promoted by conservative and reactionary currents," against the 
debate over the Military Code at the Assembly. 
  The commander in chief of the Sandinist People's Army [EPS] 
argued that "attacking the Army, in the irresponsible way some 
sectors are now doing, can only promote instability and violent 
confrontation among Nicaraguans." He reaffirmed that the armed 
organization is facing a "campaign of terrorism and lies." 
  The EPS, considered the youngest military in Latin America, 
will celebrate its 15th anniversary in September. According to 
Ortega, there would have been no election in 1990 and "President 
Violeta Barrios de Chamorro would never have won the presidency" 
if it were not for the EPS. 
  "With the Somozist Guard there would have been no election, 
as there had been no elections for over 40 years of Somozist 
domination. With a counterrevolutionary army there would never 
have been a Violeta Barrios," Ortega stated, and he added that 
there would be no process of broad political liberties, "despite 
the extremes that process sometimes allows." 
  The military leader said he is convinced that with a 
Somozist 
Guard or a counterrevolutionary army there would be no space for 
any Sandinist, Social Christian, Independent Liberal, or 
Conservative who did not submit to the kind of oppression and 
domination "that we knew during the 40 years of the National 
Guard and capitalism, and their conservative and reactionary 
line of thought. It is that way of thinking that is 
irresponsibly causing the destabilization campaign of today." 
  About the "talk-a-thon" sponsored by a local extremist radio 
station, Ortega said we can attack an institution that is the 
"spearhead of an effort to strengthen the democratic system," 
but we cannot sponsor a talk-a-thon to condemn the vandals, 
kidnappers, and bandits that terrorize the peasants and scare 
investors away." 
  The military leader assured that "the army is under attack 
simply because it is not the army of the recalcitrants -- the 
reactionary political forces -- who have not even read the law 
we sent to the National Assembly for approval." 
  For Ortega, those who are staging the campaign against the 
military organization and the Military Code do not care if the 
Army is a factor for stability or not, nor if it has respect for 
civilian authority. On that line, he asked several questions 
about some of the charges being made against the EPS. 
  "How many times has any of our officers tried to meddle in 
the government's decisions? How many times has any of our units 
meddled in any political activity of the civilian authority or 
at the National Assembly? How often has the high command tried 
to intervene in party politics? What Army resource -- large, 
medium, or small -- has tried to compete with the private sector? 
  Ortega, consequently, stated that the promoters of the 
"terrorist campaign" do not want the army "simply because it is 
not a Somozist or counterrevolutionary army that follows a 
reactionary line of thought," not because it is or is not 
efficient. 
  Ortega believes "it is truly irresponsible to ignite an 
already explosive situation." He stressed that "today, more 
than ever before, the members of the armed institution must be 
aware not to surrender to provocation." 
  The high military commander underscored that "united, more 
than ever before, we will march on with the weapons that history 
legitimately placed in our hands by way of the 1979 revolution; 
with the weapons we will legitimately hold as of today, by way 
of the Military Code." He concluded, saying: "With or without 
the law, the Army will continue to exist." 

