CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Industry Minister Liliana Canale Novella; </F>
place and date not given: "Government Seeks Outward-Looking 
Economic Model"] 
  [Text] The Ministry of Industry, Tourism, Integration, and 
International Trade Negotiations [MITINCI] is a complex 
portfolio that spans diverse areas of the country's economic 
activity, all of them keys to national development. To these 
must be added the fundamental task performed by Prom-Peru at the 
international level. Responsible for all these sectors is 
Minister Liliana Canale Novella. In an interview granted to EL 
COMERCIO, she provides details of her ministry's policy, and 
particularly those related to industrial development during the 
past few years, the outlook with respect to tourism, our 
position with respect to the Andean Pact, how the country should 
approach the new 21st century economy of blocs, and Peruvian 
efforts to improve its image abroad. 
  Following is a summary of EL COMERCIO's dialogue with 
Minister Canale. 
  [EL COMERCIO] Minister Canale, now that you are at the head 
of MITINCI, what will be your policy lines? 
  [Canale] We shall continue along the line begun by Jorge 
Camet, toward liberalization of the market and the attainment of 
other conditions such as the elimination of excessive regulation 
and complex red tape, which make it difficult to speed up 
investments in the productive sector. 
  [EL COMERCIO] Regarding a sector as important as small 
business, what will be your policy? 
  [Canale] In this regard, we shall make information readily 
available to these small-business and microbusiness sectors. We 
shall also play a promotional role in support of the work being 
done by Prom-Peru to promote investments, tourism, and exports. 
  [EL COMERCIO] Speaking of national industry, what has been 
the development of this subsector since 1990? 
  [Canale] I believe there have been advances in everything 
concerning regulation and liberalization of the market. Since 
the beginning of the reforms of the state structure, the indices 
have been very promising, especially in the manufacturing 
sector, whose growth rate has attained 9.3 percent. For the time 
being we want to at least maintain a similar rate for this year. 
  [EL COMERCIO] And what about tourism? 
  [Canale] Tourism from abroad attained a growth rate of 
almost 
30 percent in 1993. Domestic tourism, supported by FOPTUR 
[Tourism Promotion Fund] is exhibiting a growth that in the 
initial months of this year has already reached 20 percent, 
despite the fact that January and February are very low months. 
  [EL COMERCIO] What other aspects will your ministry develop, 
especially with regard to exports? 
  [Canale] The export sector will be given special status as 
regards support and improvement of the system of temporary 
imports. 
  [EL COMERCIO] Do you envision improved conditions for 
investment? 
  [Canale] As for the industrial sector, we shall have a 
sizable influx of foreign investments in local industries. This 
will enable us to create favorable conditions for the coming 
years. 
  [EL COMERCIO] Many are wondering what the purpose of a 
Ministry of Industry is in a free market.... 
  [Canale] We have been playing an important role. For 
example, 
we have facilitated the liberalizing of the economy at all 
times. We are supporting an outward-looking economic model. This 
involves not only the macroeconomic environment, but also the 
creation of sectorial conditions that will favor a rapid 
technology transfer, thus enabling us to create neutral 
competitive conditions that in turn will help our exporters to 
compete on an equal footing with exporters anywhere in the world. 
<H5>  Negotiations and the Andean Pact </H5>
  [EL COMERCIO] Are we approaching the time when a decision 
will have to be made with respect to the Andean Pact? What is 
Peru's proposal? 
  [Canale] For obvious reasons of negotiation, Peru's proposal 
will be revealed when it is presented to the ministers of the 
Andean Group. But there is an important principle. We want 
balanced trade among the partners in the GRAN [Andean Regional 
Group]. Therefore, our proposal will seek mechanisms to 
facilitate harmonization of the macroeconomic policies that 
today are distorting trade. 
  [EL COMERCIO] Will it seek equality of conditions in 
regional 
trade.... 
  [Canale] Our proposal will seek to expand trade channels, do 
away with distortions and inequalities, and advance the policy 
of macroeconomic and commercial standardization. 
  [EL COMERCIO] But what basic building blocks might this 
proposal contain? 
  [Canale] The proposal contemplates a rise in the level of 
trade with the other Andean partners. As a basic principle, we 
do not want to rigidly support a process of integration that may 
bring into play issues that go beyond that of the free-trade 
zone. 
  [EL COMERCIO] But is Peru in a position to become a 
full-fledged member of the GRAN? 
  [Canale] The issue of a joint schedule of customs duties on 
imports from abroad has not yet been resolved, and--except for 
Peru--the countries that favor this approach have not yet 
reached full agreement on it. In any case, it is an overall 
issue that encompasses the GRAN as a whole, and not the Peruvian 
position alone. I think it would be very helpful if the press 
would aid in creating awareness of the fundamental and worldwide 
economic principle involved. The question is not whether Peru is 
or is not in a given position. We need to understand that we can 
all grow together if we all struggle together, to homogenize our 
macroeconomic policies. 
  [EL COMERCIO] The essence of the issue with the GRAN is the 
flat 15 percent customs rate. Will this level be reached in 1995? 
  [Canale] It is one of Peru's goals. But the when and how is 
entirely the responsibility of the MEF [Ministry of Economy and 
Finance], which handles customs tariff policy. However, within 
the government's policy, our goal remains a flat customs rate. 
Consideration must also be given to something that in any case 
is positive. One sees the flat customs issue and forgets that 
provision is also included for knocked-down machinery imports, 
for example, on a partial payments basis. 
  [EL COMERCIO] We have become part of a bloc-oriented trade 
policy or "economy of blocs." How does Peru fit into this new 
context of economic and trade relations, with respect, for 
example, to the Free Trade Agreement? 
  [Canale] What is occurring is a rather attractive 
hemispheric 
integration. I believe that globalizing the international 
markets creates important advantages for all countries. And we 
are hoping to develop the genuinely competitive advantages. 
Achievement of a hemispheric bloc will depend on the progress 
made by each country. It is an issue that as yet has not been 
negotiated. 
  [EL COMERCIO] We came out of the GATT negotiations in good 
shape.... 
  [Canale] The Uruguay Round package has yet to pass the test 
of formal acceptance by the Congress; but we the executive 
branch are in agreement with what has been negotiated. Our 
position was studied and agreed to by the country's businessmen. 
Approximately 98 percent of the products being traded are 
already being subjected to the 15 percent tariff. When one joins 
the GATT one negotiates the consolidation of certain customs 
duties and determines a ceiling. Ours is 30 percent. This means 
that we cannot go beyond that ceiling. Our customs duty may 
actually be 15 percent, but it is normal in GATT to always keep 
a reserve, a margin for negotiation. In no case, however, shall 
we go beyond 30 percent. This rate does not affect the farm 
products that are subject to surtaxes. 
  [EL COMERCIO] What can you tell us regarding the forthcoming 
bilateral agreements? 
  [Canale] We shall begin talks with Mexico to work out 
agreements on complementary economic relations, with a view to 
liberalizing trade in some sectors. In an initial meeting we 
shall define everything relative to the general lines of those 
agreements and the concomitant regulatory framework. We shall 
also draft a viable trade agreement. In all of this, much will 
depend on the comprehensiveness of application of the regulatory 
framework. We must consider all aspects of taxation, 
liberalization of transport, and everything related to our 
agenda for the reciprocal development. This gives you an idea of 
the scope of the forthcoming negotiations. 
  [EL COMERCIO] And about the bilateral agreement that has 
been 
signed with Brazil? 
  [Canale] The agreement signed with Brazil on 31 December is 
in the process of formalization as regards marketing; but it 
goes much deeper. As regards Brazil and Argentina, the 
possibilities of expanding the list of products having favored 
tariff treatment has been reduced by Mercosur [Common Market of 
the South] guidelines, such as evaluation of joint external 
customs duties and harmonization of macroeconomic management 
policies. These are factors that the presidents watch 
rigorously. The expansion of lists with those countries cannot 
be very extensive; but we have had talks aimed at incorporating 
some products between now and May that can be of interest from 
an export viewpoint. We are hopeful that negotiations with Chile 
can be concluded during the first half of this year. In any 
event, they will have to do with the development of 
complementary economic relations. 
<H5>  Pending Review </H5>
  [EL COMERCIO] Nevertheless, there are other agreements that 
have already been signed and are currently under review.... 
  [Canale] We have a request by the Cuban Government to expand 
our limited-trade agreement. It is an agreement we signed many 
years ago within the framework of the ALADI [Latin American 
Integration Association]. We will review the items having 
favored tariff treatment. We are also working on extension of 
the time limit on Andean tariff preferences within the European 
market that were granted to countries affected by terrorism or 
drug trafficking. We are conducting a support and justification 
action together with the benefiting countries, aimed at 
extending the benefit of zero customs. We also have preferential 
zero tariff treatment in the American market for a large group 
of products such as leathers and footwear. 
  [EL COMERCIO] A question that is a must when speaking of 
integration and international trade, and that is the talk of 
many analysts: Will we be able to join Mercosur in the very near 
future? 
  [Canale] Our agreements with Brazil and Argentina are 
bilateral approaches within the framework of ALADI. We are 
thinking in terms of a process of hemispheric integration. We 
must gradually adjust the mechanisms that will gradually bring 
about this integration among countries with such dissimilar 
productive structures and such different trade policies, 
bringing these countries together in pursuit of the development 
of parallel trading and a harmonization of commercial policies. 
Our country's particular interest is to further the process of 
liberalization. 
  [EL COMERCIO] As regards tourism, there has been talk of 
investments totaling some $100 million.... 
  [Canale] Investments totaling $100 million have been 
arranged. A sizable group of foreign investors is interested in 
expanding the hotel infrastructure, besides participating in the 
Entur-Peru privatization process. There is interest in the 
exportable offer of adventure-type tourism. This is a very 
positive year, which therefore calls for investment in 
infrastructure and services. We are supporting this effort 
through Foptur. 
  [EL COMERCIO] A part of your work will be related to 
Prom-Peru. Will there be a change of promotion strategy? 
  [Canale] We shall continue actively supporting the projects 
already under way in all areas, such as exports and investments. 
We shall become involved in promotion aimed at attracting 
investments. We are planning a second visit to the European 
countries, because the first was very successful; and we will be 
resuming implementation of our work program. Our missions will 
be participated in by ministers of state and businessmen, or 
businessmen alone. Within 15 days, we are expecting visits by a 
group of businessmen from the United Kingdom, and another group 
from Japan. These visits are not necessarily being organized by 
Prom-Peru; but Prom-Peru is providing the necessary support for 
them. 

