BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, June 8 KYODO -- Japan will delete a phrase in 
an official statement that it does not regard the use of nuclear 
weapons as a violation of international law, Foreign Minister 
Koji Kakizawa said Wednesday. 
  Kakizawa, taking back an earlier position, said the 
government will revise the statement to "the use of nuclear arms 
is not consistent with the spirit of humanitarianism existing at 
the basis of international law because of its power of 
destruction, killing and wounding." 
  Kakizawa made the comment at a session of the House of 
Representatives Budget Committee. 
  The ruling coalition on Monday endorsed the previous 
phrasing 
which was complied by the Foreign Ministry and was scheduled to 
be submitted to the International Court of Justice. 
  The government had maintained there were treaties banning 
the 
use of gas and chemical weapons but no treaty in existence 
banning the use of nuclear arms. 
  However, after the government's view was publicized on 
Monday, opposition parties and some cabinet ministers criticized 
the statement. 
  Management and Coordination Agency chief Koshiro Ishida said 
Tuesday, "It is regrettable to say the use of nuclear weapons 
does not violate international law." Environment Agency chief 
Toshiko Hamayotsu said the use of nuclear arms violates spirit 
of international law. Both Ishida and Hamayotsu belong to the 
Buddhist-backed Komeito [Clean Government Party]. 
  A-bomb victims in Nagasaki and Hiroshima also raised 
objection to the government's standing on the issue. 
  At Wednesday's session of the committee, legislators from 
the opposition Liberal Democratic Party, Social Democratic Party 
and Japanese Communist Party criticized the statement saying it 
is not proper for Japan, the sole country to have experienced 
the wrath of atomic bombs, to recognize the use of nuclear arms. 
  Japan maintains three antinuclear principles -- not to make, 
possess or harbor nuclear weapons on its territory. 
  The Hague-based international court called on nations 
concerned to submit a document on the issue after the World 
Health Organization (WHO) asked it in May to decide whether or 
not staging nuclear warfare violates international law. 

