Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Kamil Bayalinov article under the "KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA </F>
Investigation" rubric: "Syringes in the Veins of Central Asia. 
Drugs Mafia Already Controls Part of Local Administrative 
Apparatus. What Will Happen Tomorrow?"] 
  [Text] During the long, tedious journey lasting several 
hours, the child wrapped in a pique quilt did not utter a sound. 
This alerted the suspicions of the passengers traveling with the 
mother clutching her child firmly to her breast. At the next 
stop, in the middle of the mountain ravine linking Issyk-Kul to 
the Chuya Valley, people mentioned this to the militia patrol 
lazily watching the rare passing cars. 
  "Citizen, come here please!" 
  The child turned out to be dead. Several kilograms of opium 
in a cellophane packet were found in its little stomach sewn 
with the usual unbleached threads. 
  This incident occurred in the late sixties, when Soviet 
Kirghizia [Kyrgyzstan] was one of the world's main suppliers of 
raw opium used for narcotics.... 
  In 1973, under pressure from the United Nations, the USSR 
Council of Ministers adopted the decision to destroy Kirghizia's 
[Kyrgyzstan's] poppy plantations, and the laurels of "narcotics 
champion" in the region passed to Afghanistan. In their search 
for money to buy weapons and food, the eternally warring Afghans 
all became involved in the lucrative drugs business to a man. 
Caravans loaded with opium travelled to Pakistan and from 
there, via Iran, to Europe and America. According to data 
supplied by the UN International Narcotics Control Committee, 
Afghanistan supplied the black market with as much as 200 tonnes 
of opium per year. 
  "What are the results of the three-year civil war in 
Afghanistan? With the Soviet troops' departure, Afghanistan has 
become an even more fragmented state with a large number of 
appanage princes. The size of their principalities depends on 
the number of their antitank grenade launchers, Kalashnikov 
rifles, tanks, and other weapons intended to defend the opium 
poppy plantations against competitors and rivals." (Taken from 
Kyrgyz Defense Ministry Main Intelligence Directorate documents). 
  There was the scent of big money in the fresh mountain air: 
Every dollar invested in the drugs business yielded a net profit 
of $12,000! The "golden crescent"--the not easily accessible 
region at the point where the borders of Afghanistan, Pakistan, 
and Iran meet--prospered for many years, and the battle against 
the drug pushers was unsuccessful. 
  Only the Iranian Islamic revolution really "finished off" 
the 
drug pushers. Dealers and the men on the caravan trail had 
their heads cut off, were impaled, or were shot without any 
warning. The threat worked, especially as the guardians of the 
Islamic revolution did not rely solely on punitive measures, but 
built thick concrete walls on the routes taken by the drugs 
caravans through the narrow, virtually inaccessible ravines. 
The black market in drugs withdrew into itself, swelling up 
with the increased stocks of raw opium. Afghanistan began to 
work for its own consumption, occasionally shooting through 
individual consignments of drugs to China, Pakistan, and 
Tajikistan. But then the political and economic chaos in 
Tajikistan smashed the last barrier, and opium poured into the 
CIS at the speed of a spring flood. 
  "Opium is brought into Almaty and Bishkek by people from 
other cities, dragging their `camels' with them, that is, their 
wives or lovers. As a `bribe,' they try to `flog' the opium 
wholesale, without entering into any unnecessary discussions. 
Sometimes they are ripped off by zealous middlemen--Chechens and 
gypsies, who prefer to earn their living that way. None of them 
are `hooked' themselves. That is left to the small fry--the 
dealers whose job it is to parcel the product into one-gram 
polythene packets. One such dose costs $10-12. 
  "That is how 10-12 `bucks' disappear each day. The following 
morning it starts all over again." (The statements cited above 
and further below are revelations by Dr. Nazaraliyev's "opium" 
patients, who have either been cured or are undergoing treatment 
at his clinic). 
  The Osh-Khorog route is the only road linking mountainous 
Tajikistan to the "outside world." Thus, southern Kyrgyzstan is 
gradually becoming the main transit base of the world drug 
trade. Raw opium is "stashed" in the wheels of heavy freight 
vehicles or hidden (after first being sealed in polythene) in 
gasoline and fuel tanks. It is possible that the latest 
technology is also used: The opium is dissolved in gasoline and 
the neat product is subsequently separated out--admittedly with 
some weight loss. Last year, Kyrgyz task forces reduced drug 
pushers' income by more than 100 kg. Considering that, 
according to the statistics, only 10 percent of drug dealers are 
caught, the remaining 90 percent successfully convey their 
commodity to the points of sale. At least 900 kg of expensive 
narcotics passed through Kyrgyzstan in 1993. But how much 
really passed through? Apparently no one knows. 
  In winter, the Osh-Khorog route comes to a standstill. As a 
rule, during this period consignments of "dope" are concentrated 
in Tajikistan's Gorno-Badakhshan region, and sometimes they are 
refined into top-grade heroin. According to the current 
information of a well-known department, a Pamir Tajik known by 
the nickname.... At this point, however, security officers 
warned me: 
  "If you give out his name, at best your correspondents' 
office will be blown up one night. He can reach you wherever 
you are." 
  Generally speaking, people involved in the battle with the 
drugs business try to avoid "sharp corners." First, it could 
hamper the success of a forthcoming operation and, second, the 
drugs trade network extends right up to the top.... 
  So, this Tajik controls a substantial proportion of the 
heroin trade in Tajikistan. He has his own armed detachment, 
raw material suppliers, and laboratories. In winter, 
intermediaries find dealers, study supply routes, and bribe 
customs officials, border guards, and militiamen. Considering 
state employees' official salary, a certain amount of risk could 
bring them prosperity for many years, if not for the rest of 
their lives. 
  Opium does not linger long in Kyrgyzstan's Osh Oblast. Some 
of it is taken through a "chink" in the Tian Shan Mountains to 
Bishkek in northern Kyrgyzstan, and from there to Almaty. 
Sometimes a consignment is carried by pilots, who exploit their 
contacts in the militia. A State Motor Vehicle Inspection 
Administration checkpoint recently confiscated 1.6 kg of opium 
from a local pilot near Osh Airport. 
  "If you inject yourself with drugs once, you inject yourself 
again. It is very hard to cope with the withdrawal symptoms. 
After a month, the needle will no longer go into the veins of 
your arms. That leaves the veins of your neck. But they also 
close over, trying to escape the needle. Then you move on to 
the veins of your legs and groin. Your sexual organ is your 
last hope. You have had it after that." 
  The opium route could only be closed by closing the 
Osh-Khorog road and simultaneously building a dam on the River 
Pyandzh. Kitted out with inflated inner tubes, death-defying 
drug pushers frequently swim across. But even this would not 
guarantee success. A militiaman would have to be posted in 
every mountain ravine. Plus someone to check that he is not 
bribed or murdered. A helicopter would have to be "hung" over 
every mountain pass, and everyone and everything in the area 
would have to be doused in lead and napalm. That would do the 
trick. 
  The Americans try to solve these problems peacefully, 
although it is true that they do not disdain to use punitive 
measures. The episode with Noriega is an example. The United 
States still pays substantial compensation to the peasants of 
Bolivia, Peru, and Colombia to ensure that they do not grow 
coca, from which cocaine is synthesized. The thrifty Americans 
initiated these payments for good reason. Once they took a 
false step: They terminated the payments and used the money to 
destroy the coca plantations. The response was swift. The 
Peruvians rose against the "gringos," virtually flying the flag 
of Fidel Castro. 
  So it is with the Pamirs. No punitive measures will succeed 
when nine out of 10 citizens can barely make ends meet and when 
every adult male sleeps with a gun at his side to protect 
himself against enemies.... 
  The only solution is to throw all forces and resources into 
compensating the people of the Pamirs in exchange for a pledge 
to give up the drugs business. Kyrgyzstan cannot cope with this 
alone. It will require the efforts of all the CIS countries, 
drawn into the "golden triangle" by the will of fate, and of 
Russia in particular. 
  If we wait a few years, it will be impossible to deal with 
the drugs mafia. It already controls part of the Kyrgyz (not to 
mention the Tajik) administrative apparatus. Tomorrow, in 
elections to a professional parliament, when the fate of every 
candidate will depend directly on the thickness of his wallet, 
the mafia could simply take over the legislative body. What 
cannot be bought with money can be bought with very big money. 
  Drug addiction, even addiction to opium, is curable. Dr. 
Nazaraliyev's drugs center is an example. However, we should 
tackle the essence of this social phenomenon, rather than the 
consequences. 
  For the moment, more often than not we try to catch the 
small 
fry: the dealers, the carriers, and the hapless drug addicts 
themselves. This creates the appearance of activity. Although 
even that is something. 
  Would you agree? 

