BFN 

<F P=106> [Weekly news conference by President Fidel V. Ramos with </F>
domestic and foreign correspondents at Malacanang Palace in 
Manila -- live] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] [Ramos] On the question of the 
East Timor Conference, I affirm once more that the Philippine 
Government has acted -- as it will always act -- in accordance 
with the national interest. 
  Being geographic neighbors and ASEAN partners, the 
Philippines and Indonesia share certain long-term interests as I 
have said before. Among those interests is the maintenance of 
the peace and stability of our region and the pursuit of further 
regional development. These are essential for us to realize our 
hopes for the continued progress and prosperity of all our 
peoples. Respect for one another's territorial integrity; 
noninterference in one another's internal affairs, and the ASEAN 
practice of quiet, bilateral, and regional dialogue are the 
tried and tested tools that have helped us maintain the 
stability that we now enjoy in Southeast Asia. 
  In this context, therefore, let our discussions on this 
question with Indonesia take their course in the ASEAN way. 
  The Philippines and Indonesia have many other common 
objectives to pursue and we should do so, keeping our long-term 
interests in mind. [passage omitted] 
  I also would like to reiterate our previous statement in 
regard to our attachment of great importance to the ARF -- the 
ASEAN Regional Forum -- which is scheduled to meet on 25 July in 
Bangkok. Right now, the senior officials of ASEAN are meeting 
preparatory to the ministerial meeting. 
  The ARF is a key initiative and an unprecedented forum for 
it 
brings together practically all the countries in the region for 
the first time -- even those outside ASEAN -- to discuss 
regional security items of common concern in the Asia-Pacific 
region. The ASEAN countries plus Australia, Canada, China, the 
European Union, Korea, Japan, Laos, New Zealand, Papua New 
Guinea, Russia, United States, and Vietnam are all ARF 
participants. 
  The Philippines has been one of the leading advocates 
promoting greater regional security dialogue. And since the end 
of the Cold War, the Philippines has believed that the countries 
of the region must take advantage of the new opportunities to 
jointly talk about security issues that in the past had been 
treated in a less comprehensive manner. 
  In the meeting currently being held in Bangkok, we have 
called on our fellow ASEAN partners to move the forum into a 
much more closely coordinated body. 
  On the U.S. grant of MFN status to China, which according to 
reports is at the point of decision making, we have this 
statement: We would like to reiterate the established position 
of the Philippine Government supporting the continued grant of 
most favored nation or MFN status to China. China is now a 
major trading nation, of increasingly important significance not 
just to the United States but to all countries of the 
Asia-Pacific region including the Philippines. At the same 
time, in line with this economic modernization policy, Beijing 
has shown greater openness toward the regional economy -- 
reflecting that China, too, needs its friends abroad for its 
continued growth and prosperity. This is an extremely positive 
development that benefits the Asia-Pacific region as a whole. 
  The Philippines, as do many other countries, does not 
believe 
in linking trade with nontrade or political issues. We believe 
trade and economic issues should be separated from nontrade and 
political issues such as human rights. Otherwise, there is the 
danger that strong countries might impose all manner of 
political conditionalities on the smaller members of the global 
trading community. This is a situation we would want to avoid 
where such conditionalities might easily be used as new forms of 
protectionism. 
  I would like to emphasize that because there is an editorial 
in one of our leading newspapers today -- I will not show the 
masthead anymore, please do your own research -- castigating the 
president and the government for issuing that first statement a 
few days ago as if we have nothing to do in that issue. Well, I 
explained in this statement that a prosperous China is good for 
the development of the entire Asia-Pacific region, including our 
own. But better than that, a prosperous and stable China is to 
our own national interest as well as to the mutual regional 
interest of everyone in the region. [passage omitted] 

