BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Wisner Before the Event"] </F>
  [Text] The U.S. ambassador-designate to India Frank Wisner 
is likely to be an impediment to constructive bilateral 
dealings. The least that is required of a man holding this 
office is that he should seem to be free from any bias against 
the country to which he is assigned. Wisner has failed this 
test even before the U.S. Senate's approval of his appointment. 
At tbe Senate's confirmation hearing, his explanation of why, 
in his view India did not qualify for permanent membership of 
the Security Council has inevitably given rise to serious 
misgivings in this country. According to him India's inclusion 
would "undermine the cohesion" of tbe world body. This defies 
logic. Worse, Wisner's notion of how the Security Council 
functions seems to be cock-eyed. What precisely does he mean by 
"cohesion"? Surely, it could not be anything like a unanimity 
of opinion about issues before the world. This has never been 
the case. In fact the Council was always an arena for two rival 
camps. If they did not manage to break it up, the reason was 
the existence of the right of veto conferred on the five 
permanent members, the U.S., the USSR, UK, France and China. 
  The end of the cold war means that the Council is no longer 
divided into the old rival camps. Yet, sharp differences on 
crucial world issues will persist. Cohesion, as the term is 
commonly understood, is irrelevant here. It could make sense if 
India had suddenly landed on this planet from outer space. 
Since that is not so, how can its membership be deemed to 
threaten the Security Council's cohesion? Frank Wisner perhaps 
believes that economic or military power should be the sole 
qualification for entry into the Security Council. If so, he 
has forgotten that when China became its member it was perhaps 
less developed industrially than India. Its membership derived 
entirely from the fact that it was a prominent member of the 
wartime alliance against the German-Japanese combine. 
  A plausible explanation of Wisner's obvious faux pas in his 
reply to a point-blank question on suggestions of India's 
membership lies in his close association with the Pentagon, as 
Under-Secretary for Defence. And it is Pentagon more than any 
other wing of the U.S. administration which Pakistan has 
manipulated to its advantage over the past four decades. Wisner 
thus cannot but be fully and sympathetically alive to Pakistani 
concerns. Since these have turned into an incurable anti-Indian 
paranoia, it would be natural if the first thing that Wisner 
almost instinctively remembered while replying to the question 
about possible Indian entry into the Security Council was 
Pakistan's opposition to it. Short of making a direct reference 
to this, he only blurted out that thing about "cohesion". By 
this reckoning, Wisner would have been an ideal U.S. envoy in 
Islamabad. 

