Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a roundup of recent 
environmental reports monitored from media in FBIS Abidjan 
Bureau and EAU coverage areas from 3 February to 17 March. 
<H5>  Ghana </H5>
  Accra GHANAIAN TIMES in English reports in its 3 February 
edition that "The Ministry of Environment and the Greater Accra 
regional administration" on 2 February "ordered the stone 
breakers of Achimota Forest area near Accra to cease their 
operations within 24 hours or face prosecution." This order 
follows a previous one issued in May asking the stone breakers 
to move from the area by October and to go to another site at 
Pokuase but the order was not complied with. Environment 
Minister Christine Amoako-Nuamah, who gave the order, said the 
Achimota Forest stone breakers' activities were "causing a 
serious environmental problem to the people living around the 
Achimota and Legon areas." 
  Accra DAILY GRAPHIC in English reports in its 9 February 
edition that, according to studies conducted by the University 
of Science and Technology, the River Subin, which flows through 
Kumasi and its environs, is "almost dead." "High levels of 
environmental pollution and irresponsible management practices 
by the Kumasi Metropolitan Authority and communities along the 
river" threaten the Subin as well as the Kentikrono, Wewe, 
Susan, and Aboabo Rivers. Mrs. Esi Awuah, environmental 
biologist at the university, says the oxygen levels in these 
rivers are depleting to such an extent that they are "gradually 
losing their ability to contain higher forms of life." Mrs. 
Awuah stated most industries near Atonsu, where the rivers join 
together in a valley, "do not have waste treatment plants and 
poison control units" and therefore discharge "untreated 
chemicals of a toxic nature" into the confluence. The 
communities along the river have long practiced the "dumping of 
night soil" and some have even constructed "places of 
convenience" directly over the water. Her research has shown 
that the Subin could restore itself in 32 days "if proper 
environmental and sanitary measures are adopted." 
  Accra Ghana Broadcasting Corporation Radio Network in 
English 
at 1300 GMT on 3 March reports that the program officer of the 
Environmental Protection Council, Mr. K. O. Omare, has cautioned 
that if proper controls and incentive mechanisms are not put in 
place for industrial development in Ghana, "environmental 
pollution would assume alarming proportions in the near future." 
He said efforts so far made toward control or prevention of the 
adverse effects of industry have been "largely inadequate." Mr. 
Omare gave the warning at a symposium organized to mark 
Environmental Day at the Buy Ghana-Export Ghana '94 Fair in 
Accra. Our reporter, who was present at the symposium, adds 
that there is a "growing concern in the country about industrial 
waste and pollution, health and safety hazards to workers, and 
public health problems due to adverse environmental changes and 
the misapplication of hazardous chemicals." A UN Industrial 
Development Organization study carried out in 1984 on industrial 
pollution reported that for the zone between Cote d'Ivoire and 
Benin, including Ghana, industrial pollutants are produced 
mainly by the textile industry, whose waste contains 30 percent 
of four polluting substances. Manufacturers of food products 
contribute 25 percent, while petroleum refining and handling 
produce 20 percent of industrial waste. Mineral exploitation 
and processing are also responsible for about 10 percent of the 
waste. 
<H5>  Guinea </H5>
  Conakry Radiodiffusion Nationale de la Republique de Guinea 
in French at 0645 GMT on 17 March reports that at its recent 
session the Council of Ministers decided to stop deforestation 
and stressed "the need to preserve forest resources as well as 
state land reserves." It adds that at a time when environmental 
protection organizations are warning against global warming and 
stressing the need to preserve trees and forests, Guineans 
irresponsibly set the country's forests and vegetation on fire. 
By doing so they leave "the countryside to the mercy of sand, 
wind, and erosion, in short, desert encroachment." The 
government has launched a campaign to save these forests and 
protect the nation's interests. Therefore, as far as the Koukou 
forest in Kindia is concerned the 1949 demarcation will be 
respected. People living in the area will be evacuated before 
30 March and all land allocations and occupation made within the 
limits of nonprotected zones and state lands reserves have been 
declared null and void in all prefectures. As President Lansana 
Conte recently said: We must preserve our riches. The forest is 
the source of our great wealth. 
<H5>  Nigeria </H5>
  Lagos Radio Nigeria Network in English at 0600 GMT on 1 
March 
reports that the Edo State administrator, Lieutenant Colonel 
Muhammed Onuka, has undertaken an inspection tour of the 
erosion- ravaged areas of Benin-City. At the Iwaseta-Orin road 
square, the administrator said that if the flood in the area was 
controlled, the road could serve as a by-pass to the state 
capital. Col. Onuka directed the state environment task force 
to produce a comprehensive report on the erosion-devastated 
areas of the state for necessary action. 
<H5>  Tanzania </H5>
  Dar es Salaam Radio Tanzania External Service in English at 
1600 GMT on 15 March reports the government plans "to carry out 
a study to determine the number of hotels that can be built in 
the national parks without threatening wild game and the 
environment." The prime minister and first vice president, John 
Malecela, told the president of the International Union for the 
Conservation of Nature, IUCN, Mr. J. Hare, that the study would 
cover all the national parks. The prime minister said Tanzania 
"would welcome foreign assistance in carrying out the study" and 
the IUCN showed interest in assisting in the study. 
  Honorable Malecela said poaching was a very serious problem 
in the national parks as poachers were using increasingly 
sophisticated weapons. He said the poachers, mostly from 
war-torn Somalia, were using machine guns and were very ruthless 
in their methods. He said Tanzania was forced to use its 
limited resources to deal with this problem. The prime minister 
said drought in northern Tanzania had seriously affected wild 
animals and thousands had died. Mr. Hare said the IUCN would 
open an office in Dar es Salaam. 

