BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Unions on Government Labor Market </F>
Proposals"] 
  [Text] (ANSA) Rome, June 9 -- The decision by the 
government yesterday to delay approval of a decree setting new 
rules for the labor market met with approval from the three 
major trade unions Thursday [9 June] but union officials warned 
they would not give ground on some measures now under study. 
  Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, said CISL [Italian 
Confederation of Trade Unions] union leader Sergio D'Antoni, 
"showed wisdom" in deciding to meet the three union federations 
before putting the final touches on the jobs decree; "he 
acknowledged the role of the unions, which have good arguments 
to make." 
  But the head of the CGIL [Italian General Confederation of 
Labor] federation, Bruno Trentin, said that Berlusconi's was "an 
electoral move" because "it would have been dangerous to face 
disagreement from the unions at this time. I think the 
government must take our observations into account." 
  Another CGIL official, Guglielmo Epifani, warned that 
Berlusconi "must say clearly whether he intends to take our 
requests into consideration or whether his (meeting unions) is 
purely a courtesy." 
  Trentin and other CGIL officials were all unanimous in 
rejecting the government's plan that would allow companies to 
pay lower wages to youths at their first job and long-term 
unemployed, saying that this would do away with the "equal work 
equal pay" principle and eliminate job security for thousands of 
workers. 
  D'Antoni also labelled the plan draft as presented by Labor 
Minister Clemente Mastella "a mess." 
  The plan for the first time would allow the creation of 
temporary workers' agencies. 
  Epifani said the unions do not challenge the principle of a 
flexible work force but that the same workers will have 
different wage brackets and rights: "It is unacceptable in a 
civil country, it will create conflicts in the work place and 
will undermine the negotiating rights of the unions, young 
workers will be permanently blackmailed." 
  In substance, he concluded, "we will have a more precarious 
and less qualified labor force, exactly the opposite of what we 
need." 

