BFN 

  [Text] "The Crimean and USSR referendums of 20 January and 
17 March 1991, public opinion surveys in the republic and the 
spring elections to the Supreme Soviet of Crimea this year... 
The fervor of the patriotic movement of Crimeans have 
demonstrated beyond doubt the irreversible desire to return to 
the bosom of their age-old homeland -- Russia." The above 
statements are contained in the drafts of addresses seen by 
deputies of the Crimean Supreme Soviet today to the Ukrainian 
parliament and Russian State Duma. 
  The draft address to the Ukrainian parliament, adopted at 
its 
first reading, states that "the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet would 
be making a gesture of profound wisdom if it stated on behalf of 
Ukraine, a brethren nation, that the transfer of Crimea to 
Ukraine by Russia in 1954 without the consent of its citizens 
was unjust and an illegal voluntarist act by irresponsible 
individuals." 
  The draft says the Crimean people should have the right to 
decide to which country it should be joined. For its part, the 
Crimean Supreme Soviet is prepared to adopt the necessary 
resolution and hold a nationwide referendum on the issue, 
monitored by Ukraine and the United Nations. The question would 
be worded in the appropriate manner and bear the signature of 
the Supreme Soviet of Crimea. 
  The draft address to Russia's State Duma contains an appeal 
to "finally... Approve and bring to life the Russian Supreme 
Soviet's resolution of 21 May, 1992, on a legal assessment of 
the decision by the RSFSR authorities in 1954 to alter the 
status of Crimea." 
  In accordance with section two of the resolution, the 
Crimean 
Supreme Soviet is prepared to adopt the necessary resolution and 
hold a nationwide referendum on the issue with an appropriately 
worded question. 
  "The Supreme Soviet of Crimea is counting on decisive 
decisions being made jointly with the state Duma on the speedy 
and final definition of Russian federal status for Crimea," the 
draft reads. 

