BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Juan Carlos Santoyo in San Cristobal de las </F>
Casas, Chiapas; from the "ACIR Radio News" newscast] 
  [Excerpt] We have something important to report. We have 
obtained a communique from the Clandestine Indian Revolutionary 
Committee-General Command, Zapatist National Liberation Army 
[EZLN]. As usual, communiques get to us a bit late. This one 
is dated yesterday, 10 April 1994 and reads: 
  To the rank and file which support the EZLN. To the Zapatist 
regular and irregular fighters in all the EZLN corps. 
  Companions. Today, 10 April 1994, marks the 75th anniversary 
of General Emiliano Zapata's murder and the 100th day of our 
just struggle against this bad government. 
  Just as in 1919, the Zapatists must shed blood to pay for 
our 
demands to obtain land and freedom. Just as in 1919 the supreme 
government kills us to make us pay for our rebellion. Just as 
in 1919 the land is not for those who work it. Just as in 1919 
weapons are the only option the government leaves to those of us 
who do not have land. That is why we have taken up arms. That 
is why our companions have been killed during the 100 days of 
our war. That is why we pay homage today to the heroes and 
martyrs of the Zapatist struggle, to the people who always die 
and who will always live with us. 
  It is for this reason we repeat today we will not surrender 
or give up our weapons. There will be no peace until we can 
achieve a just and deserving one. We will not abandon the 
struggle until people throughout Mexico have democracy, freedom, 
justice, independence, decent housing, well-paying jobs, land, 
good nourishment, health, and education. Until such conditions 
are met, our armed measures will continue, and our flag will 
continue to fly in the Mexican mountains. 
  Salutations, Zapatist brothers. Death to the government. 
Viva the EZLN. 
  The communique, as is customary, is signed by Subcommander 
Marcos. 
  We have received this communique from colleagues who were 
allowed to go to the area in the jungle where the EZLN is 
stationed. We note the EZLN is only allowing a few reporters to 
enter the area it controls; access is very limited. Only a few 
media sources are allowed to enter. [passage omitted] 

