Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Misa Brkic: "Bureaucrats' Resistance Movement"] </F>
  [Text] "Pure nonsense!" Dragoslav Avramovic, creator of 
the super dinar, has repeated this characteristic sentence so 
often over the last 10 days that it has become proverbial. 
  Judging by the public acceptance and trust that the new 
dinar 
is enjoying, by the increase of the country's hard currency 
reserves by 19 million German marks [DM] (which accounts for 
almost 10 percent of the total reserves), and by the shockingly 
successful reduction of the inflation rate, the head of the 
rescue team of the Yugoslav economy should not have any reason 
to be too upset because (as he admitted himself) his trick has 
been successful so far. Avramovic's inborn optimism and his 
good manners are, however, overshadowed by the question of how 
theory can be transformed into practice. 
  For some of the measures that the Serbian and the Federal 
Government have put forward under the title of implementation of 
Avramovic's program, he finds only words of praise. These 
measures include higher prices for electricity and postal 
services, the introduction of a 1-percent tax on financial 
transactions, 1.5 million percent interest on bank accounts 
overdrafts, taxes on companies ranging from DM100 to DM10,000, 
receipts confirming the origin of the super dinars when they are 
changed into German marks in banks, and the decision to make it 
compulsory to exchange 30 dinars when crossing the border.... 
  All the decisions have several characteristics in common -- 
they prescribe, order, or prohibit certain things. They were 
signed by either Serbian Prime Minister Sainovic or FRY Prime 
Minister Kontic, and caused horror and panic in public. They 
forced Mr. Avramovic to go to the first telephone and call "the 
highest office in Serbia in charge of these matters" and ask 
them for intervention because this "nonsense" does not have 
anything to do with the original program approved by the 
"highest office in Serbia" on 5 December 1993. Against his 
wishes, Mr. Avramovic has been forcefully transformed into 
someone who has to watch over his program 24 hours a day in 
order to defend its original innocence. 
  From that point of view, the author of the program is 
becoming like the hero of Yugoslav mythology who was not 
successful in constructing the castle of Skadar on the Bojana 
River. Everything the hero built during the day some evil 
nymphs destroyed during the night. Yugoslav industrialists 
gathered in the Federal Chamber of Commerce the other day and 
correctly remarked that the program stated one thing, but that a 
completely different one was coming out under the hammer of the 
Serbian and federal administration. 
  If these observations are correct, and there is no reason 
why 
we should distrust the author of the program and economists who 
have been meticulously following all these events, it can now -- 
two weeks after the program was introduced -- be forecast with a 
high degree of probability where the points of resistance will 
be and which social, economic, and political lobbies could form 
"the resistance movement" against the latest economic reforms in 
Yugoslavia. Mr. Avramovic has indicated the "ambushes" himself: 
In several public speeches he has pointed the finger at the 
bureaucracy. It must be said that when he acted as a pragmatic 
politician he partly excused the state officials who, in their 
wish to make the program work successfully, made certain 
mistakes. However, when he acted as a former cold-blooded and 
merciless employee of the World Bank, he did not spare the 
Yugoslav bureaucrats. 
  Avramovic called the 50-year-old genetic code of the 
bureaucracy -- formed by prescription, prohibition, and central 
supervision of all economic processes -- a disaster, the logic 
of which could consume the program as fuel for retaining 
positions and interests within the ruling system. Based on the 
two-week experience, it could be concluded that the highest 
positions in this bureaucratic pyramid are occupied by people 
whose electronic eyes simply cannot recognize the creative 
handwriting of the retired World Bank expert. 
  I do not think that there is an organized conspiracy here; I 
think there is only the smell of the inherited decay that causes 
mental incompetence in some employees. That is why I believe 
that all those well-intentioned critics were right who warned 
that the "experienced personnel" from the old structures, who 
caused the collapse of the Yugoslav economy last year, could not 
change into bureaucrats of "a new generation" who should carry 
out the process of economic recovery. Simply because it is not 
enough to support the new economic view verbally; it is 
necessary to comprehend what a market economy means and what a 
economical and effective state must have. It must be repeated 
that several such programs failed because of this dual nature of 
bureaucratic structures. Mr. Avramovic is for this reason 
trying to get support for the fight against "the bureaucrats' 
resistance movement." 
  From some of the present announcements it can be seen that 
it 
will not be an easy task because the bureaucracy is already 
showing every intention of rescuing giant socialist companies, 
of directing investment, and of propagating state enterprise as 
a successful economic model. Unfortunately, there is no room in 
this model for Avramovic's free dinar, which has to care for 
itself. For that reason the initial success of the program must 
be relativized; we must remain optimistic and wait for some time 
to see the results. 

