Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Rafael Medina Cruz] </F>
  [Text] Fewer than 48 hours after having regained his 
freedom, and at the request of the United States Embassy in 
Mexico, Federal Judicial Police [PJF] agents recaptured the 
Spanish drug trafficker, Jose Luis Sierra Rodriguez, a Cali 
Cartel member, in Mexico City. He could be turned over to U.S. 
authorities within the next few days, to be tried for crimes 
against health and for the laundering of money originating in 
narcotics sales. 
  The PGR [Office of the Attorney General of the Republic] 
stressed: "Sierra Rodriguez's capture, based on a provisional 
arrest warrant for extradition purposes, represents a highly 
significant achievement in the battle against the drug traffic. 
This is particularly true because information has been inferred 
from this subject's statements making it possible to capture 10 
members of his organization in Ecuador, as well as several drug 
dealers in the United States." 
  It added that the Spaniard, whose criminal organization is 
headed by the Colombian, Antonio Bermudez and operates in 
Mexico, as well as in Colombia, Ecuador, and the neighboring 
country to the north, was first apprehended in Cancun, Quintana 
Roo. Although over a ton of cocaine base was seized from him in 
that town, a Campeche State federal judge released him two days 
later. 
  The PGR explained that on 18 December of last year, Sierra 
Rodriguez and four other persons, including these two 
Colombians, were captured in Cancun because of their connections 
with the smuggling of narcotics (cocaine) into the country. 
Although there was evidence attesting to the Spaniard's presumed 
guilt, the second district court of criminal proceedings in 
Campeche State freed him. 
  Indicating that Sierra Rodriguez must answer for crimes 
against health, money laundering, and violation of the General 
Law on Population in our country, the PGR noted that he is 
wanted by the U.S. authorities, accused of crimes of drug 
trafficking and laundering funds from the marketing of drugs. He 
was using the name Luis Cohen for those purposes. 
  The PGR added: "When the foregoing information was 
confirmed, 
the U.S. Embassy in Mexico requested this subject's extradition 
through official channels. As a result, the pertinent order for 
his provisional arrest for extradition purposes was sought from 
the Eighth District Court of Criminal Proceedings in the Federal 
District. It was granted and implemented by the Federal Judicial 
Police," under orders from Commander Adrian Carrera Fuentes. 
  On the same occasion, the institution emphasized that the 
capture of the Spaniard and the other members of Antonio 
Bermudez's ring by personnel from the PJF operational 
directorate, headed by Commander Victor Patino Esquivel, is one 
of the most severe blows dealt to the international drug 
traffic. It indicated that its battle against this social cancer 
will have to be intensified. 

