BFN 

<F P=106> [By Javier Rodriguez] </F>
  [Text] Havana, 18 May (PL) -- PRENSA LATINA learned today 
that a delegation of Colombian businessmen, which just completed 
a visit to Cuba, has discussed the possibility of investing in 
Cuba in the areas of production and services with local 
authorities. 
  A Ministry of Foreign Investment and Economic Cooperation 
(MIECE) source confirmed to PRENSA LATINA that Camilo Penalosa, 
Colombian deputy minister of economic development, headed this 
delegation. 
  The Colombian businessmen identified investment 
opportunities 
in the areas of tourism, the sugar and pharmaceutical 
industries, biotechnology, agricultural sector, and basic 
industry, among others. 
  The visitors initially received ample information during a 
plenary session, which was offered by MIECE representatives, the 
Ministry of Foreign Trade, and the Chamber of Commerce of Cuba, 
in which they discussed the ideas presented by the delegation on 
possible joint ventures. 
  The delegation also learned about current legislation on 
foreign investment in Cuba and about preparations for the future 
approval of a law for mutual promotion and protection of this 
kind of business resulting from the development of economic 
links. 
  Members of this business group joined the Cuba '94 Tourism 
Convention which is currently being held at the well-known 
Varadero Beach, about 140 km from the capital, because this is 
precisely the area where there already exist more immediate 
possibilities for bilateral cooperation. 
  Among other activities, the delegation visited the Sugar 
Industry and Finance Ministries and the facilities of the 
pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries. There, they were 
briefed on the country's production efforts and the use of their 
installed capacities. 
  When consulted by PRENSA LATINA, Roberto Rivas, the MIECE 
director for America, described the visit as another step in the 
process of identifying possibilities for joint work and 
expansion of existing links between the two Latin American 
countries. 
  Deputy Minister Penalosa and other businessmen returned to 
their country today, but those who are participating in the 
tourist convention remain on the island. 

