BFN 

<F P=106> [By Annie Thomas] </F>
  [Text] Kigali, June 15 (AFP) -- The guns fell silent in 
Rwanda's capital Kigali on Wednesday [15 June] after rebels and 
the government agreed to a ceasefire, a United Nations spokesman 
said. 
  Rebel artillery pounded central Kigali on Wednesday morning, 
but the fighting ended in the afternoon, UN spokesman Pierre 
Mehu said. 
  Some shells fell near a crowded market, and UN officials 
said 
they feared 60 adolescents had been abducted from a church 
compound and slaughtered Tuesday. 
  Mehu said he did not know whether the ceasefire was being 
respected, but no gunfire had been heard for two hours at 5:45 
p.m. (1545 GMT). 
  "It's been quite a while since there's been such a long 
pause 
in the fighting," Mehu said. 
  An immediate ceasefire was announced by Tunisian President 
Zine El Abidine Ben Ali at the closing session of the 
Organisation of African Unity summit in Tunis on Wednesday. 
  Ben Ali said Rwanda's bloodbath, in which up to half a 
million people have been slaughtered in two-and-a-half months, 
could be halted only through "dialogue and negotiation." 
  A mini-summit on Rwanda held on the sidelines of the meeting 
asked Tanzania to organise negotiations between the two sides on 
implementing peace accords signed in the Tanzanian town of 
Arusha last August. 
  The UN Assistance Mission in Rwanda expressed fears 
Wednesday 
that 60 adolescents had been massacred after being kidnapped on 
Tuesday, presumably by extremist Hutu militiamen, from a Kigali 
church where some 3,000 civilians are sheltering from the 
fighting. 
  "We understand that these people were led away and probably 
executed and buried," UN military spokesman Major Jean-Guy 
Plante said. 
  Militiamen blamed for much of the slaughter in Rwanda 
threatened to kill UN soldiers on Tuesday and prevented them 
from evacuating civilians to safe areas. 
  Mehu meanwhile confirmed that the rebels had captured the 
town of Gitarama where the interim government was formerly based. 
  "Gitarama is in the hands of the RPF," Mehu said. 
  The capture of Gitarama puts all-out victory within the 
rebels' grasp after a two-month offensive, analysts said. 
  Gitarama was the seat of an interim government proclaimed 
after the April 6 death of President Juvenal Habyarimana in a 
suspected rocket attack on his plane. The RPF seized the town 
from army soldiers and militiamen on Sunday. 
  Habyarimana's death rekindled civil war that had halted with 
last year's Arusha accord, triggering ethnic and political 
massacres in which up to half a million people were killed. 
  The outgoing UN special representative to Rwanda on 
Wednesday 
accused rebels and the government of genocide against their own 
people. 
  "The reality is that the RPF and the Rwandan Government have 
prepared for war and not peace and will have to bear their 
responsibility in history for the genocide they are inflicting 
on their own people," Jacques-Roger Booh-Booh said after 
resigning his post. 
  "In this context of widespread hatred and violence, the 
peace 
mission of foreigners and the UN seems out of place and very 
risky," he said. 
  "The solution to the Rwandan drama will come neither from 
abroad nor from the United Nations. After the continuing 
bloodbath, I think it is already too late for the Rwandans to 
extricate their country from the present chaos by themselves," 
he said in a statement issued in Nairobi. 
  He dismissed rebel accusations that he had backed the 
government as an attempt to "find scapegoats to justify an 
insane war which they are pursuing against all good sense." 
  Booh-Booh said he was happy to leave Rwanda, where the 
people 
"do not like each other." 
  UN Secretary-General Butrus Butrus-Ghali has appointed a 
Pakistani diplomat, Mohamad Sharyar Khan, to replace Booh-Booh, 
from Cameroon, whom he praised for his "devotion to peace in 
Rwanda." 
  The UN withdrew all but 470 of its 2,500 peacekeepers from 
Rwanda after bloodletting engulfed the small central African 
country and 10 Belgian soldiers were killed. 
  Relief operations to millions of displaced people have 
ground 
to a halt and imminent famine threatens Rwanda. 
  UN military commander General Romeo Dallaire said earlier 
this week that a ceasefire was essential to getting desperately 
needed food and medicine to the needy. 

