Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by N'omi Levitsky] </F>
  [Excerpt] A decision in principle was made in Jerusalem a 
few days ago to evacuate the settlement of Netzarim. 
  Last night, a senior political source confirmed to YEDI'OT 
AHARONOT that the government intends to evacuate isolated 
settlements in the Gaza Strip. 
  The evacuation will be carried out unrelated to the 
negotiations being conducted with the PLO, and will be 
implemented within two to three months of the execution of the 
Gaza-Jericho First agreement. 
  Netzarim, a small and isolated settlement in the heart of 
the 
Gaza Strip, raises obstacles for those planning the redeployment 
of the IDF [Israel Defense Forces] in the Gaza Strip. The most 
senior security sources advised Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin to 
transplant the settlement inside the Qatif Bloc. Rabin, who 
made a commitment not to evacuate settlements within the 
framework of the negotiations with the PLO, refused to order the 
uprooting at this stage. 
  Senior defense elements made it clear to the prime minister 
that leaving the settlement where it is might in the future 
constitute a security danger and a recipe for needless friction 
with the Palestinians. The elements also warned that there is 
no possibility of defending the settlement. 
  According to the political source who confirmed the report, 
Rabin agreed in principle to evacuate Netzarim at a later stage 
and unlinked to the current negotiations with the PLO. [passage 
omitted] 
  [Tel Aviv IDF Radio in Hebrew at 0600 GMT on 9 January adds 
that Minister Yosi Sarid this morning responded to the report by 
saying that "no such decision was made in Jerusalem, it is 
currently not on the agenda, and especially not during the 
negotiations on implementing the Gaza-Jericho First agreement. 
Nevertheless, it seems that when the issue is brought up in the 
cabinet, and it is due to be raised in the coming months, many 
-- such as Minister Shulamit Aloni -- will support uprooting 
Netzarim." In a recorded passage, Minister Aloni is quoted as 
saying: "There are decisions we have put off making, which I 
think is a mistake. I think Netzarim should have been uprooted, 
there is no justification for it being situated in the heart of 
Gaza if we want to return Gaza." Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres 
also raised the issue in the Knesset Foreign Affairs and Defense 
Committee last week. He said Israel would study the cost of 
defending Jewish settlements in the Gaza Strip located far from 
the Qatif Bloc.] 

