Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Information Minister Jawad al-'Anani by </F>
Samir Hijjawi in Amman; date not given] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] [Hijjawi] His majesty the 
king has dropped the idea of confederation for good. What kind 
of relationship will Jordan have with the self-rule authority, 
especially since control of the bridges will most likely be in 
the hands of the Israelis? 
  [Al-'Anani] Not having a decisive stance on the question of 
confederation has given room for many wrong interpretations, 
especially in the West. Those who have an interest in marring 
the relationship between Jordan and the PLO always take any 
Jordanian decision or stand to mean that Jordan plans to go back 
on the decision of disengagement [of ties to the West Bank]. 
His majesty the king wanted to make this point very clear. We 
have an interest in Jerusalem: We want Jerusalem to be Arab and 
Islamic and we want the holy places to be safeguarded. 
  Jordan did not create this situation. It is the nature of 
the Declaration of Principles that created this situation, 
because the Declaration of Principles has deferred the question 
of Jerusalem until the final phase after five years. We know 
that when Jordan relinquished the geographic jurisdiction in the 
West Bank, including Jerusalem, it wanted the Palestinians to 
take over. But if we are going to have a vacuum for five years 
regarding the question of Jerusalem, then this means that the 
holy places, under Israeli measures and court rulings, will be 
subject to control by Israel, as there is no one to claim these 
places on behalf of the Arabs and Muslims. Therefore, his 
majesty explained that this position has to do with Islamic Arab 
interests in Jerusalem, and is not meant to circumvent the 
disengagement decision. 
  [Hijjawi] So there is no going back on the decision of 
disengagement? 
  [Al-'Anani] There is no going back on the disengagement 
decision. There are various views being aired, which we cannot 
control in a country that has freedom of expression. It is 
better to have a constant relationship between Jordan and 
Palestine. We do not want this to be a good framework for bad 
intentions. We do not want something that looks good but 
induces suffering from within. Therefore we have to show 
concern. Showing political concern is not done through goodwill 
alone, but by being extremely careful, intelligent, and using 
one's mind. When we speak about the issue of Jerusalem, we do 
not want the PLO to take this as a Jordanian attempt to 
circumvent the disengagement decision. 
  If there are fears that there will be a confederation in the 
future, we say no. This, however, does not mean that there can 
be no confederation at the choice of the two peoples in the 
future, as part of Arab unity or as part of relations between 
the two countries. This question will be discussed at the 
appropriate time by a decision from the people's base. We 
should remember that there have been more than 500 attempts at 
unity, cooperation, coordination, and integration since World 
War II. Most, or all, of them have failed, because they stemmed 
from political decisions and not from decisions at the grass 
roots. Therefore, his majesty wants to say that this question 
is unthinkable now, and that it will not be discussed now 
because it is not one of Jordan's priorities. The first 
priority is the restoration of the territory and achieving the 
Palestinian people's legitimate rights to self-determination on 
their national soil. I think his majesty was very clear in this 
regard. 
  [Hijjawi] Why do you think the Palestinian side is 
dragging its feet over the signing of the economic agreement 
with Jordan? 
  [Al-'Anani] I do not think they are dragging their feet. It 
is a question of the PLO wanting first to wrap up an agreement 
on Israeli withdrawal and the Gaza-Jericho accord before moving 
to deal with Jordan. On that score, Jordan, however, does not 
necessarily see eye to eye with the PLO. Jordan sees a greater 
need for Arab coordination, which, it argues must be given 
precedence over negotiations with the Israelis. Arabs, Jordan's 
argument runs, must coordinate their policies toward Israel. 
From our standpoint, we do not think an Arab party should give 
preference to coordination with Israel over that with fellow 
Arabs. We have informed our brothers that their negotiations 
with Israel are bound to affect us directly. Hence the need for 
them to coordinate with us. As an important player in this 
equation and at this crucial state, there can be no disregarding 
our interests. We are pressing for coordination in the best 
interests of our two countries. We are speaking from 
experience. We should not lose sight of the importance that 
must be attached to the right order of priorities. Let us first 
coordinate among ourselves as Arabs and then approach Israel 
with a united negotiating strategy. 
  [Hijjawi] There is a memorandum of understanding and nine 
protocols between the Jordanians and Israelis. 
  [Al-'Anani] No, there are no protocols in existence. There 
is an agenda made up of items addressing particular topics. 
There are no protocols or annexes or agreements. Other than 
the items on the joint agenda, there is nothing. 
  [Hijjawi] In light of the recent events, will the opening 
of Jordanian bank branches in the West Bank and Gaza Strip be 
frozen? 
  [Al-'Anani] A decision will be made at the appropriate time, 
and I do not want to judge things prematurely. We presume that 
the banks should be reopened in the West Bank, and that this 
plan should pass through legal channels, so Jordan will endorse 
it. We are eager to do so. 
  [Hijjawi] Have you been acquainted with what is agreed on in 
the Paris economic meetings between the Palestinian and Israeli 
sides? 
  [Al-'Anani] We are little acquainted with these meetings. 
Thus, we stress the need for coordination. A call for 
coordination should stem from the need for consultation and 
acquainting others with what is happening. This is so because 
what is taking place in Paris will have a profound effect on us. 
  [Hijjawi] How will you deal with the results of the Paris 
negotiations? 
  [Al-'Anani] We do not know what these results will be, so I 
cannot tell how we will deal with them. However, we can deal 
with such results through coordination. For this reason, we 
call for coordination. 
  [Hijjawi] Why does the Palestinian side refrain from 
coordinating with the Jordanian side? 
  [Al-'Anani] It is not a matter of refraining but of 
interpretations concerning the priorities. 
  [Hijjawi] To what extent will the Central Bank of Jordan 
control the Jordanian currency that will remain in circulation 
in the self-rule areas? 
  [Al-'Anani] We should recall that the Jordanian dinar is 
currently available in the West Bank thanks to the open-bridges 
policies and also because our kinsfolk in the West Bank and Gaza 
Strip prefer to deal with the Jordanian dinar than with other 
currencies, particularly the Israeli shekel. Thus, the 
existence of bank channels will make Jordan more capable of 
organizing the currency affairs by organizing and supervising 
the work of such banks. 
  [Hijjawi] What are the possible threats to the Jordanian 
dinar? 
  [Al-'Anani] The Jordanian currency is at risk due to Israeli 
measures whether banks are there or not. We learned that 
immediately after the [1967] occupation, Israel sold Jordanian 
dinars in the market, and Jordan had to purchase these dinars in 
hard currency. Moreover, Israel tried to counterfeit the 
Jordanian currency, but we changed that currency. However, 
preserving the Jordanian dinar in the territories should be done 
through an institutional coordination with clear features. This 
can probably be accomplished through the Jordanian banks. 
  [Hijjawi] Your Excellency the Minister: What points were 
discussed during 'Arafat's recent visit to Jordan? 
  [Al-'Anani] Cordial and frank talks were held between His 
Majesty King Husayn and President 'Arafat. Coordination and 
joint action was emphasized. Also stressed was the fact that 
coordination, which we used to talk about, should be 
crystallized within a clear and consistent framework. It was 
also emphasized that all issues should be clearly and frankly 
discussed in an atmosphere of complete trust. I believe that 
these were the pivotal points of discussions. 
  [Hijjawi] But his majesty's recent speech clearly indicates 
that the meeting was not fruitful? 
  [Al-'Anani] I do not think that it reads that way. As I said 
at the beginning, his majesty's speech was devoted to 
highlighting the importance of coordination between the two 
sides, that there is no time left for any delay in this 
coordination. 
  [Hijjawi] It seems that, on the other side, there is 
flirtation going on between the government and the ten 
Palestinian factions [based in Damascus]. Perhaps this is 
indicated by George Habash's recent statements that viewpoints 
are now closer. Do you consider that this is a Jordanian 
gesture to the other side of the PLO that Jordan can play the 
Palestinian opposition card? 
  [Al-'Anani] Jordan never plays cards in the Palestinian 
problem. Jordan wants the PLO to be strong, capable of assuming 
its serious responsibilities under the shadow of negotiations 
and in view of the difficult tasks inherent in its decisions. 
We want all the Palestinian factions to be united. We want 
their differences to be confined to them, without affecting the 
Palestinian unity of ranks or reducing their ability to 
negotiate in the best way possible. 
  Our door in Jordan is open to whoever wants to come to us. 
We would welcome him even if his opinion is different from 
ours. I do not think we will be intolerant. However, the basic 
problem is that whenever a decision is made, we are confronted 
by allegations that we want this or that, or are playing that. 
It is well-known that Jordan does not play political or 
nonpolitical cards. Jordan behaves reasonably and objectively 
within its principles. It believes in the need to reach a just 
and comprehensive and just peace that will first and foremost 
serve the Palestinian interests and solve the Palestinian 
problem because without such a solution to this problem, which 
is the crux of the Arab-Israeli dispute, there will be no 
peaceful solution. As for Dr. Habash's visit, the man has 
visited Jordan several times in the past. To give the visit 
special interpretations at this time is simply trying to be too 
clever in analyzing. 
  [Hijjawi] Some say that if Syria signs an agreement with the 
Israeli side, the Palestinian factions would find a political 
center for themselves in Jordan. What do you say to that? 
  [Al-'Anani] These are mere speculations and interpretations 
that serve only non-Arab interests. Jordan is very clear. It 
wants the PLO to be capable of confronting the challenges. 
Jordan does not use cards. I have no answer to your question 
except the one I gave to your previous question. [passage 
omitted] 

