Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By JORDAN TIMES staff reporter Nirmin Murad] </F>
  [Text] Amman--French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said 
Sunday [13 February] his country hoped that the "legal status" 
of the Holy City of Jerusalem would be discussed during the 
interim period of Palestinian autonomy rather than fina status 
negotiations. 
  "We have a responsibility towards the holy places (in 
Jerusalem) historically," Mr. Juppe told a press conference 
Sunday, adding that "we hope that the legal status of Jerusalem 
can be discussed during the interim period" and not in final 
status talks. 
  Middle East peace negotiations were accepted by Israel back 
in 1991 on the condition that the issue of Jerusalem be deferred 
till final-status talks despite repeated efforts by Palestinians 
and other Arab parties to resolve the issue of the Holy City 
along other territories occupied by Israel in 1967. 
  Palestinians have grudgingly accepted the delay in 
negotiations over Jerusalem until final status talks but have 
repeatedly said that they would not accept a final settlement 
without Jerusalem. 
  Israel "annexed" east Jerusalem immediately after the 1967 
war and claimed the city as its "eternal capital." 
  His Majesty King Husayn who severed legal and administrative 
ties with the Israeli-occupied West Bank in 1988, has maintained 
Awqaf (religious) links with the Holy city for fear of creating 
a "sovereignty vacuum" during interim talks. 
  Mr. Juppe, in his remarks to the press before leaving Amman 
to the Nabatean city of Petra on a private visit Sunday, 
welcomed last week's Israel-Palestine Liberation Oranisation 
(PLO) accord on security arrangements for Palestinian self-rule. 
  But he said that Israel must stick to a timetable on 
withdrawal and transfer of power provided for in the 
Palestinian-Israeli autonomy agreement signed in Washington in 
September. 
  "It is true the (security) accord did not solve all problems 
but it is a positive step in the process," Mr. Juppe said at the 
end of a 24-hour visit to Jordan, part of a Middle East tour 
that was to take him to Israel later on Sunday and to Gaza on 
Tuesday. 
  "But most importantly, the timetable has to be respected in 
order not to upset the process and strengthen the opponents of 
peace," he said. 
  On Jordanian-French bilateral relations, Mr. Juppe said that 
he had a dual purpose in visiting Jordan for the second time in 
four months. 
  "One purpose is to reiterate my country's commitment to the 
peace process which we have supported enthusiastically since its 
first days," Mr. Juppe said. 
  "I also wanted to underline the warm relations between our 
two countries," he added. 
  Mr. Juppe said he met with Prime Minister 'Abd-al-Salam 
al-Majali Sunday morning as well as the ministers of finance, 
planning and trade and industry. 
  He was also received by King Husayn Saturday. "We attach 
great importance to His Majesty's balanced and moderate vision," 
Mr. Juppe said. 
  He reiterated France's backing for Jordan's efforts to 
reschedule its foreign debts, adding that France would help the 
Kingdom in debt rescheduling talks with the Paris Club of 
official Western creditors which will be held in Paris in March. 
  He added that his country would also study the possibility 
of 
transferring part of the Kingdom's $900 million debt to France 
"into investment projects." 
  Mr. Juppe also said France had renewed an 83 million franc 
($14 million) financial protocol for Jordan as part of efforts 
to help Amman cope with its economic problems. 
  Mr. Juppe also said his country would consider easing 
inspections of al-'Aqabah-bound ships to help reduce the 
negative impact on Jordan of the international sanctions against 
Iraq. 
  He said France was ready to examine in "an open and 
constructive manner ways of easing inspections of ships, while 
maintaining their effectiveness, so that the Jordanian economy 
is hurt less." 
  The minister rejected an Israeli Television report that 
France had lifted its self-imposed restrictions on arms sales to 
Israel. 
  "We have not taken such a decision, but we hope military 
cooperation with Israel will be reviewed," he said. 
  Mr. Juppe said French Defence Minister Francois Leotard is 
also expected to visit Israel soon. 
  On Bosnia, Mr. Juppe also said Paris was not considering an 
immediate evacuation of its diplomats from war-torn Sarajevo 
with Western air strikes threatened if the siege of the city is 
not lifted. 
  "It is imperative that we remain patient," he said. "We will 
take all necessary measures as the situation warrants, but it is 
important that the NATO decision be implemented as soon as 
possible. 
  The North Atlantic Treaty Organisation has set a Feb. 20 
deadline for the warring factions in Sarajevo to place heavy 
weapons under U.N. control or move them away from the city. 
  [Amman AL-RA'Y in Arabic on 14 February on page 22 publishes 
a similar report on Juppe's news conference with the following 
addition "Regarding the Iraq embargo, Juppe said all that France 
wants is Iraq's implementation of Security Council resolutions, 
pointing out that France has no premediated intentions to 
perpetuate the embargo. Juppe wondered whether has Iraq 
implemented all Security Council resolutions particularly the 
resolution related to borders between the two countries and the 
resolution on the sovereignty of Kuwait?"] 

