BFN 

<F P=106> [By Debbie Kio] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, April 14 (CNA) -- Taiwan is embarking on a 
comprehensive war against trade in endangered species products, 
particularly rhino horn and tiger parts, an official with the 
Council of Agriculture [COA] said Thursday [14 April]. 
  The announcement comes on the heels of the US announcement 
Monday that it was hitting Taiwan with trade sanctions because 
of its unsatisfactory efforts to stop such trade. 
  Li Chin-lung, secretary-general of the COA, a cabinet-level 
organization directly in charge of carrying out Taiwan's 
conservation policies, said that to win the war, Taiwan will 
first have to carry out four major tasks requested of it in 
March by the Convention on International Trade in Endangered 
Species (CITES). 
  The four tasks include consolidating stocks of endangered 
species products, reinforcing marking of the products, 
accelerating the passage of a revised wildlife protection law, 
and tightening the crackdown on the trade, Li said. 
  Li said cracking down on the trade in rhino horn and tiger 
parts will be given top priority, and added that it would take 
from three to six years to fully comply with the CITES request. 
  Li made the pledge after a meeting between COA officials and 
officials from the Ministries of Finance, Economic Affairs, 
Justice, Education, and the Department of Health, all of which 
are expected to back the COA's action plan. 
  At the Executive Yuan, meanwhile, COA Chairman Sun 
Ming-hsien 
said a new conservation strategy would be mapped out within 
seven days. He also announced that a national wildlife 
conservation and plant protection conference will be held in 
mid-July. 
  Additionally, Sun said, another 130 conservation police will 
be added to the conservation army around the island, and more 
wildlife protection units will be established under central, 
provincial, and county governments. 
  COA efforts will also include strengthening conservation 
education programs and promoting information and personnel 
exchanges with Asian countries in conservation education, Sun 
said. 

