BFN 

  [Text] Guangzhou, April 18 (CNS) -- Swindling cases in 
foreign exchange swapping are now on the rise in Guangdong 
Province, arousing the concern of the local police. Statistics 
show that the provincial authorities have investigated 20 such 
cases involving over RMB [Renminbi] 100 million. 
  Swindlers included ethnic Chinese of foreign nationalities, 
Hong Kong businessmen, Mainland peasants and some elements of 
unknown identity. Some offenders under the pretext of being 
foreign businessmen usually take advantage of weakness shown by 
some enterprises which rush to make use of foreign exchange or 
to get foreign exchange swapped at a lower price. They win the 
confidence of entity and thereby commit fraud. 
  Traders say that offenders often draw bad cheques which in 
one case in Shaoguan last August amounted to RMB 4.94 million. 
Another illegal practice was employed in a case involving RMB 
10.75 million worth of money orders which were deliberately 
changed in an illegal way. Increasingly fraud cases committed 
in the process of swapping foreign exchange are attributed to 
several reasons. First, demand for foreign exchange has been 
great in recent years because of a sharp growth in the import of 
material, leading to a brisk foreign exchange swap market. Some 
profit-minded persons want to reap benefits from such a boom, 
resulting in swindling. 
  Second, awareness is weak in preventing business entities 
falling prey to such fraud, offering swindlers a good chance to 
capitalize on the carelessness shown by entities. A case of 
this kind involved the loss of RMB 15 million. 
  Third, the green light has been given to criminals by 
financial departments. Some banks act from self-interest and in 
violation of relevant regulations by easily giving out vast sums 
of cash without observing restrictions on the withdrawal of cash. 
  The Guangdong police hold that with further opening to the 
outside world, such swindling cases will increase and new tricks 
appear. The police have called for serious attention to be 
given by the various entities especially financial departments 
to prevent such crime and strengthen the awareness of 
prevention. Reporting to the police should be made immediately 
when fraud takes place. 

