Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by correspondent Nikolay Bulavintsev: "Elections in </F>
the Regions: `Federation Council' on a Local Scale"] 
  [Text] Penza--Right after Tula Oblast, another--Penza 
Oblast--has elected its legislative assembly. One hundred and 
eighty-six persons contended for 45 deputy seats in 37 electoral 
districts. But one peculiarity immediately struck the eye as 
soon as the newly fledged candidates for deputy were registered: 
The managers of the executive branch or their deputies decided 
to run for the local duma in all the rayons and the oblast 
center. 
  However, in a professional sense, the list of candidates 
looked rather uniform. Immediately after the managers of the 
executive branch there were doctors, plant directors, and 
teachers on the list. But there were practically no workers. And 
on the eve of the elections it was possible without any risk to 
assume that in the election results the majority of the seats in 
the representative organ of Penza Oblast would belong to 
managers of the executive branch. 
  These elections had one more peculiarity. Of the seven 
doctors who ran for a seat in the oblast duma, all were elected. 
This "100 percent coincidence" is explained by the fact that 
people no longer associate their hopes with any kind of specific 
political party, but they are seeking faith and support in those 
who can help them specifically in the resolution of vitally 
important questions. 
  That people cannot be swayed by loud phrases or conniving 
slogans is also indicated by the fact that only 43 percent of 
the total number of voters took part in the elections to the 
legislative assembly of Penza Oblast, and little more than 30 
percent in the oblast center. Many Penza residents gave a simple 
and clear reason for refusing to vote: "We are fed up! We are 
voting for the fourth time in a year, but life is not changing 
for the better..." 
  The deputies of the oblast duma should think seriously about 
these words and figures. 

