BFN 

<F P=106> [Colin Brown and David McKittrick Report: "Cabinet Plans </F>
Response to Sinn Fein"] 
  [Text] The Prime Minister and senior Cabinet ministers last 
night decided to reply tomorrow to the IRA demands for 
clarification of the Downing Street declaration, as the killing 
in Ulster continued yesterday with two Catholic workmen shot 
dead. 
  Ministers said the Government would publish a "commentary" 
on 
the declaration. They insisted that it would not amount to a 
clarification, but it would put pressure on the IRA to enter the 
peace process. A statement is expected in the Commons by Sir 
Patrick Mayhew, the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland. 
  Meanwhile, two Catholic building workers were gunned down as 
they sat having their lunch on a building site in the Protestant 
North Queen Street area of Belfast. In the attack, claimed by 
the Ulster Volunteer Force [UVF], the gunmen opened fire with an 
automatic weapon, killing the two men almost instantly. A third 
man escaped with cuts. 
  The RUC [Royal Ulster Constabulary] later made arrests and 
recovered firearms. A police officer condemned the killings as 
blatantly sectarian. The two men, both commuters from rural 
areas, were easy targets working in a strongly loyalist area. 
One was a 44-year-old father of five, the other was 24 with one 
child. Friends denied UVF claims that they were active 
republicans. SDLP [Social Democratic Labour Party] councillor 
Ignatius Fox said: "Neither of the two was involved in anything. 
They were trying to rear their families and do a day's work." 
The Cabinet committee on Northern Ireland is due to continue 
the work today on the response to a series of questions 
submitted by Gerry Adams, the president of Sinn Fein. The aim 
is to answer the questions in a "dead-pan" manner, without 
shifting the joint position that Sinn Fein can only enter the 
talks process after renouncing violence. 
  "An end to violence is the bottom line. We are not getting 
involved in negotiations," one ministerial source said. Ulster 
Unionists have been assured that it will be a "one-off" exercise. 
  Mr Adams said yesterday he was disturbed and concerned at 
reports that the Government's answers to Sinn Fein's questions 
would not amount to clarification of the Downing Street 
declaration. 
  Mr Adams claimed there was growing concern among 
nationalists 
that the Government "may squander yet another opportunity to 
advance the peace process." He called for "comprehensive, 
unambiguous and honest" responses. 
  Neither London nor Dublin believes that the Government's 
responses stand any change of bringing about a cessation of IRA 
violence. The prevailing Northern Ireland Office view is that 
Mr Adams has painted himself into a corner and cannot deliver 
the republican movement. 

