Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, Jan. 29 KYODO -- The joint committee of both 
houses of the Diet approved Saturday [29 January] the compromise 
over political reform reached between Prime Minister Morihiro 
Hosokawa and main opposition Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) 
leader Yohei Kono. The joint Diet panel resumed deliberations 
on the final day of the current extraordinary Diet session. 
  It agreed that the government's original bills be put to a 
floor vote once again, but did not set a date for the 
implementation of the legislation at plenary sessions of the 
House of Representatives and the House of Councillors in line 
with the agreement between Hosokawa and Kono. 
  The electoral and political reform bills will be revised at 
the start of the next regular Diet session, which convenes 
Monday, incorporating amendment demands from the LDP, according 
to the agreement. 
  Hosokawa and Kono signed a 10-point agreement on the final 
shape of the four-bill package at a news conference after 
last-gasp negotiations over the package from Friday night to 
early Saturday. 
  Hosokawa had staked his political future on enactment by 
Saturday of necessary measures to revamp Japan's political 
system through electoral changes and tighter curbs on campaign 
funding. The agreement calls for replacing the present 511 
multiseat constituencies for the lower house with a mix of 300 
single-seat constituencies and 200 proportional representation 
seats. 
  The accord also provides one fund-raising group for each 
politician to receive donations from businesses and 
organizations. 
  "We agreed to resolve this issue in this manner in 
consideration of the state and the people," Hosokawa said at the 
joint news conference with Kono. 
  "I am filled with deep emotion," Hosokawa said about the way 
legislation had been concluded. 
  Kono, who signed the accord after Hosokawa, said they 
confirmed that the two are responsible for tackling 
international and domestic challenges now that the conclusion of 
the debate on long-delayed political reform is assured. 
  "We could not have reached the agreement without the spirit 
of concession," he said. "I am happy that we reached the 
accord." 
  Hosokawa noted that he had to make some painful decisions 
against the largest force in the coalition, the Social 
Democratic Party (SDP), in his talks with Kono. 
  While acknowledging that the revision amounts to a retreat 
from the government's original package, the premier noted the 
amended legislation would make the flow of corporate and 
organizational donations to individual politicians "more 
transparent, at least than under the current law." 
  The SDP had demanded that individual legislators be 
prohibited from receiving such money, which is seen as a root 
cause of rampant graft in Japanese politics. 
  Asked if the joint appearance before the press with his 
political archrival Kono will affect the framework of the ruling 
coalition, Hosokawa said, "Honestly, I cannot make any 
prediction." 
  Kono said a number of national challenges, including the 
bilateral trade talks with the United States and the sluggish 
economy, are critical to the quality of life in Japan, and he 
expressed the LDP's readiness to supply the coalition government 
with its expertise and manpower. 
  The LDP held the reins of government for 38 years until last 
August, when Hosokawa's coalition knocked the party from power. 
  Hosokawa said he and Kono concurred that there are numerous 
issues that cannot be resolved without making a "political 
truce" between the two factions. 

