BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Cvijetin Milivojevic: "Is Karadzic Milosevic's </F>
Rival?"] 
  [Text] If it is the political elimination of Slobodan 
Milosevic to which Bill Clinton referred while speaking about 
necessary changes in Serbia, the Serbian opposition should 
really be concerned about its chances to win in the possible 
early elections. So-called well-informed circles have connected 
the attitude of the U.S. President with the alleged statement by 
a high official of the government in Pale, who, according to the 
same source, said that it would best if Milosevic withdrew and 
gave up the function to a politician like, for instance, Zoran 
Djindjic or Vojislav Kostunica. 
  With these speculations about possible "castling" in the 
leadership of the greatest of all Serbian states the proposal 
made by the cochairman of the London conference on former 
Yugoslavia, namely Lord David Owen, could easily fit in as well, 
since he asked [former FRY President] Dobrica Cosic in a way to 
return to public (political) life, for that would give an 
impetus to the peace process. 
  Until now, the Serbian opposition has, as a rule, clung to 
any unfavorable remark by the West addressed to the current 
president, seeking in it indirect support of the great world 
powers for its own political attitudes. This time, however, the 
greatest part of the opposition has passed over in silence 
Clinton's position on lifting the international blockade against 
the FRY. Moreover, the chairman of the Democratic Party has 
demanded from the ruling parties in Serbia and Montenegro that 
the key positions in the federal state be occupied by the most 
powerful among the Montenegrin and Serbian socialists, which 
also suggests Milosevic's moving in the Palace of Federation. 
  However, even more indicative is the statement made by 
Radovan Karadzic, whom the nationalistic part of the Serbian and 
Montenegrin opposition considers to be Milosevic's only serious 
rival in some imaginary all-Serbian elections. Last weekend the 
leader of the Bosnian Serbs diplomatically said that nobody 
would deny any opportunity to Milosevic even to formally become 
the leader of all Serbian states. The chairman of the Serbian 
Democratic Party [SDS] of the Serbian states is obviously 
realistic in estimating his own chances in a political match 
against Milosevic, but the very fact that the state-run 
television ignored Karadzic's performances in Subotica and Novi 
Sad speaks enough for how bothersome a riddle Karadzic is for 
the Serbian socialists. 
  Undoubtedly, Karadzic's efforts are aimed at long term 
effects. In the international public he is presenting himself as 
a peacemaker, imitating Milosevic's turn toward peace, and just 
like the president of Serbia, whenever he negotiates a strategic 
withdrawal or unpopular surrender of territories in Bosnia, he 
pushes his aides in the focus of attention. 
  On the inter-Serbian plane the president of the republic of 
Srpska mobilizes the nationalistic opposition bloc that, under 
the deceitful disguise of the SDS, is spreading more and more, 
annihilating the monopoly of the Socialist Party of Serbia 
[SPS]. The socialists have also felt this danger, and therefore 
they are announcing the foundation of the SPS of all the Serbian 
states, which could take place as early as on the holiday of 
Vidovdan [28 June]. Karadzic's party platform (SDS as a 
tranquilizing and stabilizing force whose only ideology is the 
welfare of the Serbian people and all those who remain to live 
in the Serbian states) appears attractive, all the more since 
for the most part it is Djindjic's and Kostunica's democrats, 
Serbian populists, and even Seselj's Radicals who are standing 
behind Karadzic. Besides, Milosevic's currently strongest rival 
is more popular among the church representatives and other 
national institutions as well. 
  This trench warfare, garnished with exchanges of smiles and 
also with the obvious lack of emotions despite benevolent, "too 
strong words" on the part of Karadzic, will probably last until 
a political settlement for Bosnia is signed. No doubt that as 
soon as that happens Milosevic will be offered by many sides 
what for the time being is openly proposed only by Djindjic, but 
it is also certain that some charismatic prime minister of a 
unified Serbian state (the first candidate would precisely be 
Karadzic) would be constantly undermining the position of the 
president of such a state. 
  Now it is Milosevic's turn to act, and he will probably 
weigh 
up until the last moment whether it is better for him to make a 
start in the possible all-Serbian state from the position of the 
indisputable president of Serbia, or from a less secure position 
of the head of the FRY. Therefore, the changes in Serbia 
mentioned by Clinton may refer in the first place to a possible 
revision of competences of the federation and those of the 
republics. According to the criteria of the majority of Serbs, 
Milosevic has done his job. Now it is executive bodies, 
cartographers, and even less soldiers who are on the move, and 
when speaking of giving up certain territories in Bosnia, for 
instance, Milosevic cannot exert any decisive influence on the 
matter any more, even if he would genuinely want to. And such a 
half-ceremonial position in the current situation perfectly 
suits Milosevic the politician, just as a break. 

