Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Georgetown, Guyana, 1 Feb, CANA -- Guyana's 
president, Dr. Cheddi Jagan, has stated his government's 
commitment to good environmental development and respecting the 
rights of indigenous people. 
  Jagan was responding to an "open letter" and press statement 
circulated here last week by the Amerindian Peoples Association, 
which is linked to the Guyana Human Rights Association. 
  The "open letter" to the just-concluded World Bank Advisory 
Group meeting in Guyana bore the names of representatives of 
several regional and international organisations. It urged a 
freezing of aid to the country. 
  It said that this became important as new logging 
concessions, likely to be granted by the government, could 
affect the "Wai Wai" Amerindian tribe. 
  However, the meeting of the Caribbean Group for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (CGECD) apparently ignored the 
letter. 
  It concluded with firm commitments of 320 million US dollars 
in new economic aid for Guyana for the 1994-96 period, some 70 
US dollars million in excess of what was originally anticipated. 
  President Jagan said: "Aid donors and the governments 
providing aid to Guyana are quite aware of our policies and will 
not be side-tracked by anti-national groups and elements." 
  He told CANA it was "sad that well-meaning regional and 
international organisations that signed the "open letter" in 
good faith, did not seek to first better inform themselves about 
our policies". 
  "They would have found how much they were being misled by 
people here with their own negative agendas about our plans and 
commitment on environmental issues as well as ensuring the 
rights of the indigenous people," he added. 
  Jagan said that "very shortly" his government, which has a 
Ministry of Amerindian Affairs, would be organising a special 
conference of Amerindian representatives to deal with "the 
misrepresentations and mischief being promoted by those with 
their own selfish and opportunistic agendas." 
  He described the APA as "a front group for well-known 
opponents of this government", saying it was "not really 
representative of the broad mass of indigenous peoples." 
  The president also attacked the opposition People's National 
Congress, which had also called last week on the World Bank 
meeting to withhold any aid for the government unless it agrees 
to steer clear of the Marxist/Leninist ideology and end racial 
alleged discrimination. 
  Jagan said the PNC was "anti-national", engaging in what he 
termed "baseless accusations designed to undermine the best 
interest of Guyana." 

