BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chris Dobson and Billy Wong Wai-yuk] </F>
  [Text] Yellow Bird, the underground movement responsible 
for helping hundreds of political activists escape from China, 
is still operating -- five years after it was formed in the 
bloody wake of the crackdown on pro-democracy students in 
Tiananmen Square. One of the latest people to be helped by the 
secret organisation is a Shenzhen judge who fled after he 
complained openly about corruption and persecution by the 
judiciary in the Special Economic Zone (SEZ). 
  Mr Zhang, who did not want to give his full name, is the 
first senior judicial figure to cross the border in several 
years. Although he made his own way out of China and is not a 
pro-democracy supporter, Mr Zhang was helped when he first 
crossed the border by the Yellow Bird underground movement. 
Once in Hong Kong he made contact with the same Yellow Bird 
officials who, in 1989, helped Tiananmen Square organisers such 
as Wuerkaixi and Chai Ling flee abroad in the tense weeks after 
the June 4 crackdown. 
  Although the organisation had scaled down its operation, 
officials were still able to put Mr Zhang in a safe house. He 
is now on his way to another country. Yellow Bird is currently 
looking after six activists who are in Hong Kong awaiting asylum 
in a third country. 
  Using a system of mainland sympathisers, who operated at 
great personal risk, the movement managed to slip some of the 
most wanted student leaders out of the country. It has never 
revealed its methods in case further problems in China meant the 
"railroad" would be put into full use again. "After five years, 
I think all Chinese people in Hong Kong are still thinking about 
Tiananmen Square," one of the organisers said. "I think they 
are very concerned about what will happen, because in three 
years we are united." 
  He said the number of dissidents leaving China has dropped 
over the last year, and that many were being encouraged to stay. 
"After five years, many people still want to come out, but we 
advise them to stay . . . we need them inside to bring about a 
new kind of China." Since Yellow Bird was formed, it has helped 
500 dissidents flee from the mainland. And it supports people 
like Mr Zhang, who was wanted in every province for trying to 
expose high level corruption and for escaping from an education 
centre although he had never been convicted of a crime. 
  "I did not intend to link my personal ordeal with politics 
at 
first, but what I experienced during this period made me 
understand the fundamental problem is the system of the 
country," Mr Zhang said. During a seven-month stay in an 
"education centre" on the other side of the Lowu border fence, 
Mr Zhang documented unconvicted "prisoners" making rice noodles 
for export to the United States in filthy conditions. 
  His comments on the abuse of power in the legal system in 
Shenzhen has given the first real insight into an otherwise 
closed part of the society. "China has laws, but no one wants 
to carry them out," Mr Zhang said. "I went to Shenzhen because 
it is an open place with good prospects. My decision was not 
wrong. Shenzhen is a good place, and there are a lot of chances 
but it is the people inside it who are corrupt who disappoint 
me." 
  Mr Zhang's problems began in 1990 when he tried to divorce 
his wife who did not want the separation. He now believes she 
had formed some sort of relationship with a senior court 
official. Soon afterwards, he said, the official "lost face" 
when Mr Zhang saw him and his wife in the official's car outside 
the Shenzhen Middle People's Court. 
  Three days later the official, who Mr Zhang said was a 
powerful man, had him "unlawfully detained" for three days in a 
room at the court building. "Twenty-five days later they held 
me again for three days. They had no right to arrest me and 
were abusing their power," he said. 
  But his real problems began in 1992, after a court clerk 
allegedly found that the senior court official had accepted a 
bribe -- said to have been paid in US dollars--during a 
multi-million fraud trial involving a Shenzhen company. Mr 
Zhang, who was first employed as a judge by Shenzhen city in 
1988 handling mid-level commercial cases, said the manager of 
the company later left China for Singapore. "I then wrote to a 
lot of the upper level judges and to the central authorities, 
including Li Peng, complaining about the case but I never 
received any response," he said. In all, Mr Zhang wrote about 
300 letters over the next two years to senior government 
officials asking for help and seeking an investigation into his 
detention. 
  But in April last year he was grabbed by Public Security 
Bureau (PSB) officers at his house and taken to the Shenzhen 
Labour Education Centre on Shang Bu Bei Road. As soon as he 
arrived he was punched and kicked by five members of staff, a 
beating he believed seriously damaged some internal organs. All 
of his attempts to have an appeal heard went unanswered. 
"Finally a judge from the Guangdong High Court came to see me 
and promised to help," Mr Zhang said. "But then he said I was 
making a lot of trouble between government departments and that 
I had a light sentence at the moment, but if I continued I would 
get a longer one. 
  "On September 1 last year, because I kept writing letters, 
the chief judge and three sub-chief judges came to see me to 
sort out the problem peacefully." They told Mr Zhang if he did 
not agree to sign a "contract" binding him to stop pursuing the 
matter, he would be held in solitary confinement normally 
reserved for violent criminals. 
  When he again refused to comply, he said guards at the 
centre 
started going through his possessions and he found himself given 
harder tasks and told to work longer hours. During his seven 
months at the centre he saw inmates blinded and made deaf by 
beatings. He also witnessed young inmates making rice noodles 
for export to the US in rooms where hygiene conditions were 
"dreadful". 
  Then, last November, he had an accident while working on the 
printing press when one eye was flooded with ink. "The 
authorities allowed me to go out for treatment and when I got to 
the Shenzhen People's Armed Police Hospital, I fled. 
  "The same night I bought a plane ticket to Beijing and went 
to the US Embassy, but I couldn't get in because of the army 
guards outside." 
  He said he kept trying to hand over his evidence but was 
followed, and every time he made a telephone call the line was 
tapped. Earlier this year he slipped into Hong Kong using a 
false name while part of a seven-day tour of the territory. 

