Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Turkish Foreign Minister Hikmet Cetin by </F>
AL-'ARABI correspondent Ghunaym 'Abduh; place and date not given] 
  [Text] ['Abduh] Your Excellency, you have emphasized that 
the fast-breaking developments in the Middle East dictate that 
Turkey play an active role in the region. In your view, what 
are the dimensions of this role? 
  [Cetin] No doubt the agreement between Israel and the 
Palestinians ushers in a new era in the Middle East. We are 
actively participating on all tracks of the multilateral 
negotiations. We are also contributing to the international 
efforts to back the peace process. We have already declared 
that we are ready to offer effective aid in every technical and 
financial area. At the Washington conference, we pledged to 
offer $2 million in the form of a donation and $50 million in 
aid. In this context we want to exchange views with Egypt, 
Israel, Tunisia, and the Palestinian leaders in east Jerusalem. 
  ['Abduh] Despite Turkey's support for the 
Palestinian-Israeli 
Declaration of Principles, several studies have noted that 
Turkey might try to obstruct this agreement should its role be 
marginalized. 
  [Cetin] We constantly seek to promote cooperation and 
dialogue with the region's countries. Turkey will place no 
obstacles in the way of peace. 
  ['Abduh] Allow me to move to the issue of water, which 
experts expect to be the source of wars in the next century. 
You accused Syria of using terrorism to serve its water 
interests. Does this mean that Turkey intends to use water as a 
weapon to confront its neighbors? 
  [Cetin] We have repeatedly asserted through high-ranking 
officials that Turkey is committed to the 1987 agreement on 
water. Under this agreement, Syria is entitled to 500 cubic 
meters [per second] of the Euphrates River water. We do not 
intend to harm the interests of our neighbors, Syria's included. 
We admit that our relations with Syria have not reached the 
required level. One of the most important factors obstructing 
cooperation is Syria's leniency regarding terrorist activities 
on its territory that target Turkish security. Despite this, we 
will continue to do all we can to establish bilateral and 
multifaceted relations with Syria. 
  ['Abduh] The volume of losses Turkey has sustained through 
the sanctions against Iraq since it invaded Kuwait total $20 
million [as published]. Do you support lifting the sanctions on 
Iraq or are you content to demand compensation? 
  [Cetin] Our policy pursued both tracks. We are consulting 
with our allies to compensate us for our sacrifices. Three 
years of sanctions on Iraq have caused Turkey $20 billion in 
economic losses. And we lose $500,000 daily through the closure 
of the Iraqi-Turkish oil pipeline. The oil embargo has caused 
us economic, social, and political harm, although we know that 
the imposed sanctions are certainly not intended to harm Turkey. 
We have constantly encouraged Iraq to comply fully with the UN 
Security Council resolutions. We hope that Iraq's latest 
acceptance of Security Council Resolution 715 will create a more 
suitable and positive atmosphere toward lifting or alleviating 
the sanctions on Iraq. 
  ['Abduh] What is the Turkish idea for achieving security in 
the Gulf? 
  [Cetin] Turkey attaches great importance to peace, security, 
and stability in the Gulf. We believe that maintaining peace in 
the Gulf is primarily the responsibility of the region's 
countries, which should seek to solve their problems through 
bilateral and collective dialogue. Also, increasing the volume 
of trade and economic exchange and joint projects may contribute 
to achieving peace and security. Turkey put forward its views 
within the framework of the Islamic Conference Organization 
activities and, as it has done before, Turkey will contribute 
effectively to Gulf security. 
  ['Abduh] Do you consider the growth of Iran's military 
power a threat? 
  [Cetin] Despite various reports on rebuilding the Iranian 
Armed Forces, we understand Iranian officials' assertions to 
"us" that they seek to make up for their heavy military losses 
in the war with Iraq. We believe that if any country in the 
region possesses arms for aggressive purposes and as an attempt 
to change the balance of power, this will not help to maintain 
durable peace and stability. 
  ['Abduh] There was initially a competition between Turkey 
and 
Iran over the new Islamic republics in Central Asia. But Turkey 
has recently been trying to include Iran in arrangements 
concerning that region. 
  [Cetin] Turkey attaches great importance to its relations 
with the new Islamic republics in Central Asia; we are bound by 
deep historical and cultural ties. We compete with no country 
for those republics and Turkey is doing its best to help them 
boost their independence and overcome their economic 
difficulties. Iran, as a neighboring country, also seems eager 
to promote its relations with those countries, especially 
opening new markets for them through Iranian territory. And the 
Central Asian republics have recently joined the Economic 
Cooperation Organization, of which Turkey is a founding member, 
together with Iran and Pakistan. 
  It is important for us that relations with those republics 
are based on international principles, especially 
noninterference in internal affairs. 
  ['Abduh] UN Secretary General Dr. Butrus Butrus-Ghali has 
stressed that no negotiated settlement of the Cyprus problem can 
be achieved without the leaders of the two communities paying 
some political price. What price does the Turkish Government 
believe the Greek Cypriots must pay? 
  [Cetin] The Cyprus problem is a complicated political issue. 
We are asking for a just and realistic solution based on mutual 
recognition and free negotiations. When the Greek Cypriots 
become ready to demonstrate the required political will to share 
power with the Turkish Cypriots, a solution will undoubtedly be 
possible. 
  ['Abduh] Butrus-Ghali has asked Turkey to reduce its forces 
in Cyprus to their 1982 level as a first phase in a full 
withdrawal. What is your position? 
  [Cetin] Turkey has repeatedly said that its forces will 
implement a one-time withdrawal after a just settlement has been 
achieved. We still adhere to this position. 
  ['Abduh] Turkey does not want to know the internal reasons 
or 
motives of the Kurdish problem. It does not want to listen 
directly to the Kurds or their proposals for a solution. 
Indeed, Turkey is searching for a solution to the problem 
beyond its border, making threats against neighboring countries. 
What is your comment? 
  [Cetin] The Turkish Government realizes that the essence of 
the Workers Party of Kurdistan [PKK] terrorism stems from 
Turkish territory. But it is fueled by the party's branches 
outside Turkey, which extend into neighboring countries and some 
European capitals, where the party has representation offices. 
We are always eager to discuss this subject during all our 
meetings with our neighbors and European allies. 
  I am glad we convinced the allies. This was manifest in 
Germany's recent strict measures against the party. PKK offices 
in Germany and other parts of Europe have been closed. An 
inclination to cooperate has also emerged from the governments 
of Syria and Iran and from Kurdish leaders in northern Iraq. 
  In its handling of PKK terrorism, Turkish policy is based on 
suppressing it and rapidly implementing immense investment 
projects in southeast Turkey to improve public services and 
standards of living, hoping to achieve tangible results soon. 
The parliament-- approximately 25 percent of the members of 
which are Kurds--the press and the media and the various 
academies are involved in a broad dialogue on the proposed or 
possible solutions to the problem of backwardness in southeast 
Turkey to end PKK terrorism. 
  ['Abduh] Some human rights organizations have accused the 
Turkish security forces of burning down and destroying (1,000) 
villages in southeast Turkey and of carrying out arrests and 
torture. What about the Kurdish man's rights? 
  [Cetin] The allegation that (1,000) villages in southeast 
Turkey were burned down and destroyed is a deliberate distortion 
of the facts. The truth is that the security forces asked 
inhabitants living on the outskirts of villages to move further 
out or to towns where the people can be protected against PKK 
terrorism. 
  Turkey has made substantial progress in human rights in the 
past few years. There might be individual violations once in a 
while but the awareness of human rights is growing daily among 
the citizens in our country. No excesses are being tolerated. 
  Another important point is that the UN machinery has not 
accused Turkey of violating human rights. Turkey's human rights 
record must be assessed in light of the forceful terrorist 
campaign the PKK troops are launching. Egypt can easily 
understand this. 
  ['Abduh] The deputy chairman of the Islamic Welfare Party in 
Turkey has stated that the West is using its protection of Iraqi 
Kurds to back the PKK and fight the Islamic tide in Turkey. As 
an example, he mentioned the U.S. ambassador's visit to 
southeast Turkey in an effort to surround the Islamists in 
Turkey. 
  [Cetin] The American ambassador's visit aimed to achieve 
nothing of this sort. Since the beginning, U.S. policy has 
firmly opposed terrorism and the PKK. This was announced on 
various levels. The visit had nothing to do with an alleged 
fight against the Islamic tide. 
  ['Abduh] Prime Minister Tansu Ciller has recently affirmed 
that Turkey will not relinquish secularism in any circumstances. 
How are you going to deal with the growing fundamentalist tide 
in Turkey? 
  [Cetin] Secularism is one of the basic principles on which 
Turkish democracy is built. It provides freedom of expression. 
Expressing religious views has always been one of the features 
of political life in Turkey. This expression has always 
occupied a complementary position. Fundamentalism is excessive 
religious fanaticism that seeks to overthrow secularist 
democracy. 
  Secularism does not deny Islam. And it is not a call to 
isolate Islam from national life. Conservative religious trends 
are not new to Turkey. Since the seventies, religion has been 
part of political life, although not a major part. 

