BFN 

<F P=106> [Mariano Guindal and Mar Diaz-Varela report: "UGT </F>
Dissociates Itself From Strategy of Confrontation Advocated by 
Workers Commissions"] 
  [Text] Madrid -- New UGT [General Workers Union] Secretary 
General Candido Mendez yesterday showed significant differences 
from Workers Commissions Secretary General Antonio Gutierrez' 
increasingly radical line. The divergence in the two trade 
unions' political stances has also begun to manifest itself at 
the trade union level. Thus the UGT has dissociated itself from 
the strike called by Workers Commissions on Spanish National 
Railroads for 10 June and has distanced itself in the cases of 
Seat and Santana Motor. 
  Addressing the Workers Commissions Confederal Committee -- 
the top body between congresses -- Antonio Gutierrez demanded 
Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez' resignation or the calling of an 
early general election. In his opinion, Gonzalez' resignation 
is the only measure that could facilitate a real left-wing 
government to regain citizens' confidence. He also announced 
again major mobilizations to promote collective bargaining. 
  With respect to the European elections, he called for voting 
for United Left, through the exclusion of the other political 
parties. At the previous Confederal Council meeting, Gutierrez 
announced that he would call on the workers to punish 
electorally the Spanish Socialist Workers Party, the People's 
Party, Convergence and Union, and the Basque Nationalist Party 
for having supported the labor reform and for having come out 
against the 27 January general strike. 
  The trade union leader described the first signs of economic 
recovery "foolish triumphalism that has emerged over the past 
few days." In his opinion, "the official propaganda deeming the 
recession to be over has a very weak basis." 
  Nor did employers' organization chairman Jose Maria Cuevas, 
whom he accused of "political opportunism and irresponsibility 
with respect to the grave economic crisis," escape his harsh 
diatribe. He also criticized the government for not having 
prevented Banco Santander President Emilio Botin from acquiring 
Banesto, "without having first clarified his responsibilities in 
resounding tax scandals such as the single premiums" (he was 
referring to the assignation of credits case). 
  On the other hand, the new UGT leader, following the meeting 
with the new consultative body comprising all the leaders of 
associations and federations, tried to depoliticize his line in 
order to focus it on the trade union field. Candido Mendez 
announced that at the next meeting with the employers' 
organization, 6 June, he will submit three specific proposals -- 
promoting the ongoing vocational training agreements, increasing 
arbitration in labor disputes, and replacing the labor 
ordinances. In addition, he will call for a boost for collective 
bargaining. 
  Mendez stated that his trade union "will not enter into 
dynamics of a personal nature, and will not demand Felipe 
Gonzalez' resignation, since we trust in the democratic 
institutions' functioning and believe that this kind of 
assertion only contributes to their loss of prestige and lack of 
trust in them." 
  He stated that the UGT "will not demand an early election; 
rather, we will continue to demand that the course of economic 
policy change, and this entails a change in the parliamentary 
support currently forming the majority." 
  With respect to the corruption cases that have disturbed 
political life over the past few weeks, Mendez called for 
"respect for the institutions," and emphasized that it was the 
democratic system that made it possible to learn of and punish 
those corruption cases. "Those who criticize the institutions," 
he added, "are not praising the democratic system." 
  On the other hand, Gutierrez asserted that "the succession 
of 
scandals is above all a matter of a democratic deficit and the 
immunity of certain state bodies, which have not been 
sufficiently democratized at the top or in their ways of 
working." In his opinion, "what is happening is the 
government's responsibility." 
  With respect to voting advice for the European elections, 
the 
UGT leader again showed himself at a considerable distance from 
the Workers Commission leader. Mendez stated that his trade 
union "does not advise voting for or against any political 
party, out of respect for its members' independence and 
diversity." As he explained, "not even the most severe 
criticism of the labor reform is a reason for punishing the 
parties that supported it, since it is a domestic issue, and it 
is Europe's future that is being settled in the elections." 
  With respect to social consultation, the disagreement 
between 
the two leaders is noteworthy. In Gutierrez' opinion, "the 
current government's staying on is pernicious for the country. 
It is an exhausted government, incapable of regaining citizens' 
confidence, a source of constant discredit, and a stimulus for 
the advance of the conventional right represented by the 
People's Party." 
  On the other hand, in Candido Mendez' opinion, it is 
essential to restore dialogue and a pact, not only with the 
government but also with the employers' organization. Both 
leaders acknowledged that there has been a demobilization of the 
trade unions. 

