Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Paul Stober] </F>
  [Text] The MAIL &amp; GUARDIAN is this week able to print 
the 
details of a court case the government has kept hidden for five 
years, revealing that President F.W. de Klerk was not telling 
the full truth when he revealed South Africa's nuclear weapons 
programme last year. 
  The court records of the trial of Brigadier Johann Blaauw in 
1989 show that De Klerk's statement to parliament contained 
three direct lies about South Africa's collaboration with other 
countries in the nuclear programme. It also indicates that he 
underplayed the extent of the programme when he told of the 
existence of no more than six crude atomic bombs. The record 
also puts on display the level of corruption in the government 
in the 1980's, allowing former minister of mines Fanie Botha, a 
perpetual insolvent, to sit in parliament and the cabinet and 
even serve as leader of the House. Judge J. Friedman said that 
in order to hide his state of affairs Botha was "prepared to 
commit perjury, fraud and deceit; he was prepared to become 
involved in political chicanery of the most despicable kind ... 
he was prepared to lie to the prosecutor ... he was prepared to 
lie deliberately under oath ... no reliance can be placed on his 
evidence." 
  Botha was later jailed for one year. Transcripts of the 
trial confirm South Africa and Israel collaborated on the 
development of nuclear weapons -- and prove De Klerk lied on 
three counts: 
  -- He stated South Africa had not acquired nuclear weapons 
technology or material from another country. 
  -- He stated that South Africa had never provided material 
to 
another country. 
  -- He stated that South Africa had never co-operated with 
another country in this regard. 
  The September 1989 Supreme Court judgment, in the "in 
camera" 
case of former South African Air Force [SAAF] Brigadier Blaauw, 
reveals startling details of South African-Israeli swaps of 
nuclear weapon technology and material and extensive 
collaboration between the two. Until now reporting on the 
judgment has been banned under the Nuclear Energy Act and the 
Criminal Procedure Act. As recently as last week, the 
government tried to block the story threatening the SUNDAY TIMES 
with an interdict if it printed it. 
  In October 1987, Blaauw was charged with attempting to 
extort 
mining concessions from Botha, by threatening to reveal that he 
was financially bankrupt. During the trail it emerged that 
Blaauw had in fact shored up Botha's finances with the help of 
the Israelis and brokered many of the key nuclear deals between 
South Africa and Israel. Blaauw was found not guilty on all 
charges. 
  After his retirement from the SAAF in 1975, Blaauw acted as 
a 
go- between for Israel and South Africa on military matters. In 
1976, he was approached by a member of an Israeli council 
involved in the clandestine purchase of nuclear materials and 
asked to obtain South African "yellow cake" for Israel. Yellow 
cake is an uranium oxide which, when enriched, can be used for 
the production of nuclear weapons. 
  Blaauw got agreement for the sale of 50 [metric] tons of 
yellow cake from the then prime minister B.J. Vorster, and the 
former head of the Bureau of State security, Hendrik van den 
Bergh, despite resistance from the then minister of mines, Piet 
Koornhof. Koornhof was replaced by Botha who was instructed to 
ensure the deal went through. Blaauw arranged a tour of Israeli 
military installations for Botha and the Israelis quickly struck 
up a good relationship with Botha. 
  Said the judgment: "Blaauw testified that there was, at that 
stage, a high degree of confidence developing between the South 
African and Israeli governments which involved the exchange of 
military technology, joint aeronautic ventures and the supply of 
`knowhow' by Israel to South Africa in regard to the manufacture 
of weaponry." 
  After the yellow cake deal went through, Blaauw was asked by 
Van den Bergh to see if Israel would supply tritium to South 
Africa. Tritium boosts the explosion of a nuclear bomb. The 
Israelis agreed to supply 30g of tritium to South Africa -- 
enough for 12 atomic bombs. In exchange, South Africa delivered 
two more consignments of yellow cake, of 50 [metric] tons and 
500 [metric] tons, to Israel. 
  Details of the transactions are recorded in CRITICAL MASS, a 
recently published book by William Burrows and Robert Windrem, 
which investigates the proliferation of nuclear weapons among 
developing countries. While the deals were going through, Botha 
slid into bankruptcy and his political career was threatened by 
a R[rand]1.7-million overdraft he owed Volkskas. But help was 
at hand. 
  Said the judgment: "The Israelis were interested in keeping 
Botha in the portfolio of mines because the yellow cake 
transactions had not yet fully materialised. There was every 
possibility of Botha becoming the minister of defence and they 
would have preferred Botha to hold that portfolio." 
  The Israelis gave Blaauw $1-million -- then worth R800,000 
-- 
as a "gift for what I had done for them." With the money, 
Blaauw gave Botha cash transfusions and kept him financially and 
politically alive. Blaauw and Botha fell out after Botha failed 
to deliver valuable mining concessions promised to Blaauw as a 
reward for his services to South Africa's nuclear programme, in 
July 1979. 
  In court, Botha alleged Blaauw attempted to force him to 
hand 
over the concessions by threatening to reveal details of Botha's 
illegal attempts to get evidence of corruption from his rivals 
in the struggle for the leadership of the National Party, after 
the fall of Vorster in 1979. 
  In his speech to parliament in March last year, when he 
announced he had ordered the dismantling of South Africa's 
nuclear arsenal, De Klerk baldly stated: "I wish to emphasise 
that at no time did South Africa acquire nuclear weapons 
technology or materials from another country, nor has it 
provided any to any other country, or co-operated with another 
country in this regard." 
  When confronted with the court records by the international 
London based magazine, AFRICA CONFIDENTIAL, which first broke 
the story, the office of the state president replied: "South 
Africa did not acquire nuclear weapons technology from another 
country. Although tritium many be used in initiators of nuclear 
explosive devices, (although not in the devices produced by 
South Africa) it has many other commercial uses. South Africa 
has been active in the commercial exploitation of tritium for 
some time and has procured this material from various sources in 
the past." 
  Despite De Klerk's 1993 announcement, details of South 
Africa's nuclear programme remain shrouded in secrecy. Said ANC 
[African National Congress] science and technology head Roger 
Jardine: "They are prepared to give a tour of the complex but 
have never given details of the programme. A senior official 
once offered to tell me everything -- but only if I signed the 
Official Secrets Act." 

