Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Report on MPS [Ministry of Railways] Collegium meeting and </F>
selector conference by N. Davydov: "The Railroads' Financial 
Condition Is Nearly Critical"] 
  [Text] The economic situation in railroad transportation in 
the January-March period is cause for alarm. A program for 
stabilizing the sector's work was outlined at the expanded 
collegium in December. It was based on optimistic government 
forecasts which predicted the production decline would be about 
5 percent in the first quarter. And railroad employees handled 
their transactions accordingly. 
  However, in the first 2 months of this year, the volume of 
freight shipped dropped by 21.2 percent compared with the same 
period in 1993. And the reserves which should have been put into 
use in such a situation essentially were not even defined 
clearly enough. The most important economic levers such as 
marketing, advertising, differentiated rates, contracts with 
clients, and so forth turned out to be very poorly adapted. 
Although they could have at least reduced the harmful effect of 
the plummeting decline in shipment volumes. 
  As Minister of Railways G.M. Fadeyev emphasized in his 
statements at the collegium, the sector's financial 
condition is nearly critical. For the first time in recent 
years, the January results were unprofitable. We are just 
about to sum up the February results, but it can already be said 
that losses of about 150 billion rubles [R] are expected. It is 
precisely for this reason that it has become necessary to 
discuss the situation at a special collegium session and to 
define the tasks for each administration in the ministry in 
order to reduce operating expenditures and look for additional 
incomes. 
  The report by Deputy Minister I.S. Besedin contained a 
detailed analysis of the losses which caused credit indebtedness 
to increase by R800 billion and debit indebtedness to increase 
by R400 billion by mid-March. In his opinion, the wage increase 
and the disparity between the operating work force and the work 
being performed are responsible for the largest proportion of 
costs. According to data from the VNIIZhT [All-Russian Railroad 
Transport Scientific Research Institute], there are about 
103,000 unneeded employees in the sector, mostly in the 
Locomotives and Railcars administrations. 
  The speaker noted that a problem of no less importance is 
the 
unwarranted failure to accept shipments in the transport plan. 
Some 25 million metric tons of freight were not included in the 
plans of the Moscow, Kemerovo, Southeastern, Northern, and other 
railroads in the January-March period. Although there are 40 
million metric tons of finished products remaining at 
enterprises. This attests to the fact that the railroads are not 
working with clients satisfactorily. 
  The report contained convincing data that the operating 
rolling stock--locomotives and railcars--far exceeds the number 
needed for the reduced transport volumes. In a number of 
regions, there is an unreasonable "race" of railcars, and many 
classification yards are making use of less than 50 percent of 
their capacities. As a whole, the losses attributable to 
inefficiency amount to about R400 billion. 
  There is no denying that after the report and the minister's 
address, many administration managers turned out to be in an 
unenviable position. After all, they were not required to give 
an account of the work performed, but to make specific proposals 
on how to make up for the January-February losses in March. That 
is, there should be measures to produce a result by tomorrow. 
  If the statements made by managers of the Locomotives, 
Railcars, Passenger, and Lines main administrations are viewed 
from this high standard, none of their suggestions will produce 
an immediate tangible return. Neither reducing the volume of 
locomotive and railcar repair, putting them in extended 
retirement, making more efficient use of passenger rolling 
stock, or extending the range of use of old materials in the 
track superstructure will produce the needed gain in such a 
brief period of time. 
  However, there were no "discoveries" in most of the other 
speeches, either. Acknowledgment that unneeded locomotives and 
railcars are being operated in the system (and these are huge 
material losses) was accompanied by the statement that some time 
is needed "to work out standards and guidelines and to find jobs 
for the people being dismissed." Proposals were made to toughen 
responsibility for exceeding the wage fund, to adjust wages for 
inefficient lines, to aim the bonus system not at fulfillment of 
volume indicators, but at increasing transport operations, and 
so forth. But once again, a considerable amount of time is 
needed to realize all this. 
  Perhaps what is hampering us most is the habit of depending 
on broad support, always counting on the state's help, said V.F. 
Pryadko, chief of the Finances Administration. But under the 
current conditions, it is time to say farewell to this and other 
things. The principal indicator of any enterprise now is its 
solvency. And for us to stop operating at a loss, we have to 
save R75 billion in all administrations during March. 
  However, it is very hard to accomplish this. Shippers' 
indebtedness for transportation service has already reached R1.7 
trillion. And this is with the payments of R900 billion since 
the beginning of the year. But problems with wage payments 
continue to be unresolved in a number of regions, since only 
one-third of the earnings are in cash. 
  Nearly everyone who spoke at the collegium touched upon the 
problem of settlements with railroad administrations of the CIS 
member states in one way or another. It was suggested that, 
inasmuch as Russia exports much more than it imports, it should 
switch to international principles in railcar use: the owner of 
a railcar should pay to operate on foreign territory. Otherwise, 
they say, we will always be in debt. Of course, the crossing 
points must be properly maintained for this. Generally speaking, 
we must seek to ship as much as possible in Russian territory, 
in spite of the circuitous routes. 
  I. A. Shinkevich, chairman of the trade union central 
committee, also expressed serious concern about the situation 
that has developed. In his opinion, many of the managers in 
local areas assume that it is up to the Ministry of Railways to 
find a way out of the crisis, and they are not doing anything 
themselves. Although the main questions--the work force and 
wages--are within their competence. 
  No one has a clear idea of what reserves exist. 
  As we see, most of the questions discussed in the collegium 
related to the interests of the entire system, and it was 
completely logical to hold a selector conference on the 
following day in order to quickly bring the collegium's decree 
to the attention of the managers of railroads and divisions and 
to exchange ideas on the most important problems of the day. 
  For those gathered in offices of the railroads and 
divisions, 
the speech by First Deputy Minister O.A. Moshenko certainly 
conveyed, in concentrated form, the sector leaders' 
preoccupation with the financial and economic situation that has 
taken shape. The top-priority task for every railroad and every 
enterprise is to bring expenditures into conformity with the 
existing transportation volumes. There are many things hampering 
this work, he said, and the impression is sometimes created that 
operations work is falling outside individual managers' field of 
vision. Quite a few examples were cited to confirm this. 
  In the stabilization program outlined by the December 
collegium, it was planned to increase locomotive productivity by 
2.8 percent, but it decreased by more than 4 percent. It was a 
similar picture with railcar productivity, their empty runs, and 
a number of other indicators. 
  Th first deputy minister called upon railroad managers to 
make corrections in their plans outlined in December in 
conformity with this collegium's decree. And first of all, to 
take a good look at the dead end sidings and inefficient routes 
to see whether it is time to close them in some places. A no 
less important reserve is the consolidation of divisions. The 
October Railroad put forward this initiative. But the employment 
program should be into effect completely, as outlined by the 
December collegium. 
  Judging by the statements made in the selector conference of 
managers of the Northern, Moscow, and Gorkiy railroads, the 
local areas are no less concerned about the situation that has 
developed and they are also trying to overcome the negative 
trends. There were also interesting approaches in resolving 
individual problems. V.M. Predybaylov, chief of the Northern 
Railroad, does not believe that all the unprofitable sidings and 
inefficient routes should be stopped, since they can be put into 
the category of approach lines in some places. 
  "It is unclear why the Gorkiy Railroad must hold its 
refrigerated railcar fleet in reserve," said the chief of the 
railroad, O.Kh. Sharadze. "When units come in from other areas, 
we are forced to unload them as quickly as possible. Clients 
would like to lease them, but there haven't been any here." 
  Incidentally, when the communications link was disconnected, 
one of the persons present noted: "It would be well worth while 
for Sharadze to read a little. He has had all the information 
needed on his desk since morning--a full picture of the 
railroad's operation." One automatically wondered whether that 
was why the Gorkiy Railroad was cited more than once in the 
collegium and the selector conference as a negative example with 
respect to operating or financial indicators. 
  This was only the beginning of the large amount of work to 
be 
done to bring Russia's railroad transport out of the extremely 
difficult situation. Tomorrow, 16 March, managers of the 
Transbaykal Railroad will come to Moscow. The next day, 
representatives of the October Railroad will come, and so forth. 
Together with the administration managers, the ministry will 
examine the situation on each railroad and work out 
recommendations for its specific conditions. Only after this 
will they be assured that the steps worked out jointly will 
produce the desired effect. 

