BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by the News Research and Commentary Group] </F>
  [Text] Although Redha Malek's stepping down as Algerian 
prime minister and Mokdad Sifi's replacing him is considered a 
sign of the volatile political situation there, the change could 
find a solution to the prevailing crisis. 
  Political analysts believe a dichotomy of views exists 
within 
the Algerian ruling party. The first, which is headed by former 
Prime Minister Redha Malek, believes in the ruthless suppression 
of Islamists, that their elimination from the country's 
political scene can end the Algerian political crisis, and that 
with financial assistance from the West, the unbridled economic 
crisis can be reined in. 
  The second group--and it is not yet clear whether Mokdad 
Sifi 
belongs to this group--contends that Islamism is a 
sociopolitical reality in Algeria with an extensive popular 
base. The acceptance of this reality can be a preamble to every 
measure to solve the Algerian political crisis. 
  Protagonists of the second view consider a security 
crackdown 
on the trend of Islamism as futile and advocate that 
negotiations with the Islamic Salvation Front [FIS], delegation 
of power to the FIS, and FIS involvement would give the 
government a better popular base. This would also guarantee a 
solution to the multifaceted crisis in the country. 
  This group has a similar stance to the first group regarding 
Western financial assistance to solve the country's economic 
crisis. The domination of the former coupist council by the 
first group and the current government appointed by it has 
generated the impression that every Algerian prime minister 
belongs to the first group, that is, those who contribute to the 
concept of suppressing Islamic movements. But the performance 
of the subsequent government, which merely worsened the social, 
political, and economic crisis in Algeria, eroded this 
impression and confirmed its ineptitude. 
  The resulting situation paved the way for the second group 
to 
come to power, that is, those who believe in a political 
solution, not force, to resolve the multifaceted Algerian 
crisis. New Algerian Prime Minister Mokdad Sifi's stressing the 
need for extensive efforts to foster national solidarity is 
perhaps a sign that the new prime minister has different views 
from those of his predecessors. 
  What is certain is that raising the level of national 
solidarity in Algeria--a prerequisite for resolving the 
country's crisis--can only be achieved by displaying goodwill 
and adopting an amicable path before the Islamists, not by 
denying political realities. 

