Language: <F P=105> Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] In his Work Report to the Sixth Hubei Provincial 
CPC Congress, Comrade Guan Guangfu, [provincial party committee 
secretary], spelled out in no uncertain terms a series of 
strategic goals and principal tasks for Hubei in the nineties. 
  Comrade Guan Guangfu stated: We will fulfill a great 
historical mission over the next five to seven years. Since 
Hubei should have a socialist market economic structure 
basically built and a comparatively well-off living standard 
realized by the turn of the century, the newly elected Hubei 
Provincial CPC Committee should exert its utmost to 
comprehensively deepen reform, this being undoubtedly a tough 
struggle; take a decisive step forward toward building a new 
economic structure; successfully withstand such rigorous 
challenges as sharp domestic and international market 
competition; concentrate on raising economic efficiency; strive 
to maintain a sustained, rapid, and healthy provincial national 
economic growth; work hard to have the provincial gross national 
product quadrupled ahead of time by 1997; make unreserved 
efforts to lay a solid foundation for achieving a comparatively 
well-off living standard; further improve the province's 
comprehensive economic strength, quality, and efficiency; and 
further press ahead with the province's social development. 
  Comrade Guan Guangfu pointed out in his Work Report: Hubei 
will continually face the following 11 basic tasks in terms of 
economic and social growth in the nineties: 
  1. To maintain average annual gross national product growth 
at or above 9.2 percent; 
  2. To push economic growth onto three new stages through 
three periods; 
  3. To fulfill the tasks laid down in the province's eighth 
five- year plan by 1994, one year ahead of schedule; 
  4. To have gross national product quadrupled by 1997, three 
years ahead of schedule; 
  5. To raise gross national product to more than 200 billion 
yuan on the basis of constant prices recorded in 1990; 
  6. To expeditiously increase total rural social output 
value, total industrial output value, and total tertiary 
industrial output value; 
  7. To raise the technical level of principal trades and 
professions to the nation's advanced technical level; 
  8. To considerably improve comprehensive scientific and 
technological strength; 
  9. To have nine-year compulsory education basically 
implemented, juvenile illiteracy basically eradicated, and the 
quality of labor comprehensively improved across the province; 
  10. To have afforestation stepped up and the ecological 
environment improved across the province; 
  11. To have the per capita net income of peasants raised to 
1,400 yuan, poverty eradicated in all poverty-stricken areas, 
and the annual increase in per capita net subsistence income 
among urban residents raised to or above 6 percent. 

