CSO 

  [Text] Due to its promotion of technology for the advanced 
re-use of energy and resources, the Japanese steel industry is 
known as a representative recycling industry. Having to handle 
as much as 50 million tons of by-products annually, the industry 
has been involved from the earliest stages in the technological 
development of methods capable of transforming these products 
into reusable resources. Slag, for example, was formerly 
disposed of as land fill. But today 100 percent of blast furnace 
slag is usefully recycled, mostly as an ingredient of cement, 
while more than 75 percent of BOF and electric furnace slag is 
recycled. The Japan Iron and Steel Federation has recently 
released the current recycling situation of the Japanese steel 
industry. 
  Slag consists of two types: blast furnace slag, which is a 
by-product of the ironmaking process wherein iron ore is reduced 
to make iron, and steelmaking slag -- basic-oxygen furnace (BOF) 
slag and electric furnace slag -- which is a by-product of the 
process whereby pig iron is refined to steel. Blast furnace slag 
is produced at a rate of about 320 kg for every ton of pig iron. 
Within the ironmaking process, slag inevitably results from the 
need to use limestone for extracting all impurities, such as 
silica and alumina, from the iron ore. As for steelmaking slag, 
on the other hand, for every ton of crude steel produced there 
are about 134 kg of BOF slag and 120 kg of electric furnace 
slag, respectively. At current levels of iron and steel 
production in Japan, about 30 million tons of blast furnace slag 
and 13 million tons of steelmaking plant slag are created, for a 
huge annual total exceeding 43 million tons. 
<H5>  100 Percent Recycling of Blast Furnace Slag </H5>
  The history of blast furnace slag recycling goes back to the 
early 1900s. At that time, slag was already being used in cement 
and road-building materials, but real efforts by the Japanese 
steel industry in this area began with the formation in 1976 of 
the Slag Recycling Committee by the Japan Iron and Steel 
Federation. As a result, in 1990, 100 percent of blast furnace 
slag was recycled as a reusable resource. This came about with 
the consolidation of industry efforts, as in the aforementioned 
committee, and with the established evaluation of blast furnace 
slag as a water-hardenable material. 
  Particularly, granulated slag is in great demand as an 
excellent raw material for cement, with 56.5 percent going into 
cement production in 1990. As a result, the granulating ratio of 
blast furnace slag has risen sharply in recent years. 
Subsequently as a material for road and railway use (road 
construction and aggregate for concrete), it commands 23 percent. 
  Blast furnace cement in particular has a suppressing effect 
on the alkali-aggregate reactions that cause deterioration in 
concrete structures. Furthermore, it is drawing attention with 
regard to the global environment because, compared to 
conventional cements (Portland cement), the manufacturing 
process requires 50 percent less energy. 
<H5>  Steelmaking Slag </H5>
  Of all disposable BOF slag, effective reuse is made of 88 
percent or 8.90 million tons, for electric furnace slag the 
total is 75 percent or 2.40 million tons. Compared to 1980 when 
only one-fourth of all BOF slag and one-half of all electric 
furnace slag was used simply for land reclamation, there has 
been steady progress in the effective reuse of slag. 
  Most applications are in roads and railways, harbor 
construction, and foundation improvement, although some usage is 
even occurring in fertilizers and soil improvement. Although the 
use of steelmaking slag as a roadbed material can cause a 
phenomenon known as expansion cracking, this can be corrected 
with the proper preparatory processing. 
  In addition to its use as aggregate for cement and roads, 
slag is also employed in calcium silicate fertilizers and 
fertilizers containing phosphates and minerals. It is also made 
into sintered paving tiles and is used to improve water quality 
and ground soil. Moreover, as rock wool it is finding 
broad-ranging use in many types of building materials. 
<H5>  93 Percent Recycling of Dust </H5>
  Because iron ore is melted and hot metal is refined at high 
temperatures, the steel industry has a multitude of dust 
collectors in place. Dust is captured in these collectors at a 
rate of about 5 million tons per year. A look at the reuse of 
this dust shows that since it has considerable iron content, 
almost all (60 percent) of it is returned to the sintering 
machines as an ironmaking raw material. 
<H5>  Reduced Sludge Production </H5>
  The steel industry uses massive amounts of water for cooling 
and cleaning. Because the water used to clean mill rolls and 
finished steel products accumulates iron- and oil-laden grime, 
it must be treated. The water treatment facilities used for this 
purpose extract about 700,000 tons per year (dry base) of 
various types of sludge. 
  The recycling of these sludges lags behind that of slag and 
dust, with just under 30 percent being used as sintering 
material in order to recover the iron contained therein. 
  Also, hydrochloric acid is used at the steelworks to clean 
the surfaces of steel sheets, thereby removing iron oxide. From 
the waste hydrochloric acid produced at this time, good quality 
iron oxides are recovered. Recently, since ferrite is utilized 
in the constituent materials of cutting-edge data processing 
equipment, such as AV equipment, magnetic tapes and magnet cores 
for computers, this iron oxide is being used as a raw material 
in ferrite production. 

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-015L-36A>      FIGURE </FIG>


  The Japanese steel industry's recycling technology is 
recognized around the world as the most advanced of its kind. 
The reuse of resources pertains not only to the effective use of 
materials but to environmental preservation as well. The 
Japanese steel industry conducts technical cooperation with the 
understanding that global protection of the environment is well 
served by sharing with the world these technologies as well as 
other already existing, yet superb technologies for energy 
conservation, highly efficient iron- and steelmaking operations 
and waste treatment. 

