Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] PHNOM PENH, Feb 22 (AFP) -- Cambodian Government 
officials confirmed Tuesday that two of its generals had been 
killed, one in action against the Khmer Rouge and the other 
while removing a land mine the guerrilla faction had left behind. 
  General Sung Sothan was killed Friday while trying to 
dispose 
of a mine laid by the guerrillas near their major base at Anlung 
Veng, in northwest Cambodia, which the government seized early 
this month, said Toan Chay, governor of Siem Reap Province and 
commander of the 4th Military Region. Khmer Rouge guerrillas 
killed General Chean Eam the next day in a firefight north of 
Anlung Veng, near the Thai border, as government troops carried 
out mopping-up operations, he told AFP by telephone. The Khmer 
Rouge had reported the deaths earlier, but Toan Chay dismissed 
their claim to have killed an additional four lieutenant 
colonels, 12 other officers and 109 soldiers in fighting over 
the weekend. [passage omitted] 
  A Defence Ministry official said the casualty figures for 
the 
whole Anlung Veng operation so far was 40 government troops dead 
and 178 wounded, adding that the Khmer Rouge lost 128 guerrillas 
with some 139 others wounded. [passage omitted] 
  Co-Premier Prince Norodom Ranariddh also expressed his 
condolences and issued a note of caution. "I would like to 
express my sorrow at the deaths of the generals. This shows that 
although we have captured Anlung Veng we must be careful. We 
need to clean out the whole area," he said. 
  Government officials meanwhile dismissed a Khmer Rouge claim 
to have destroyed four tanks and captured a fifth during recent 
fighting around Anlung Veng. An Information Ministry spokesman 
said the government had not lost any tanks and claimed a picture 
published in a Bangkok newspaper Monday showing a group of Khmer 
Rouge guerrillas standing on top of what was supposed to be the 
captured tank was several years old. [passage omitted] 
  Meanwhile, Prince Ranariddh said the government was still 
prepared to discuss with the Khmer Rouge a peace proposal put 
forward by King Norodom Sihanouk. The king suggested that 
certain "acceptable" members of the Khmer Rouge be given senior 
cabinet posts in return for the radical faction ceasing 
guerrilla activities, opening up its zones, and merging its 
fighters with the government's armed forces. "But up to now I 
have not received any letters or communication from the Khmer 
Rouge," the prince said. "The ball is still in the Khmer 
Rouge's court." 

