BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Presidents Bill Clinton and Francois </F>
Mitterrand by correspondents Christine Ockrent and Patrick 
Poivre d'Arvor at the Elysee Palace in Paris--live; Clinton 
speaks in English with simultaneous translation into French] 
  [Excerpt] [Ockrent] Good evening, President Mitterrand. 
Welcome, President Clinton. You are not of the same 
generation, but yesterday in Normandy you shared the same 
emotions and used the same words to articulate freedom, and the 
sacrifices and efforts that we should make today to avoid war-- 
although war is still being waged in Europe and elsewhere today. 
Do you think, President Clinton, that this means neither Europe 
nor the United States have the determination they had 50 years 
ago. Is the today's Europe disappointing you? 
  [Clinton] No, because I do not think the two situations are 
easily comparable. I think the real question is how Europe is 
today as compared with the end of World War II, or even at the 
end of World War I. I think the answer is that we are doing 
much better than we did after World War I. Well, certainly, 
there are many uncertainties in the world, but no one's security 
seems to be immediately threatened. I see Europe coming 
together politically and economically. In terms of security, I 
see more cooperation with the United States--and economically 
with GATT--and with NATO and the Partnership for Peace. I see 
us working together in dealing with the problem in Bosnia. I 
know the Bosnian conflict has not been resolved, but we have 
made progress, and we are on the verge of a territorial 
settlement. So, I think Europe is on the way to a better 
situation in the 21st century. Have we resolved all the 
problems? No! But I am optimistic, especially after this trip. 
  [Ockrent] President Mitterrand, this is the first time, with 
President Clinton, that a Europe integrated politically or even 
militarily has received such support from the United States. Do 
you think--despite public opinion believing it less and less, as 
opinion polls indicate--that Europe should be integrated 
politically and militarily, or is it too late? 
  [Mitterrand] The United States contributed a lot when Europe 
began its integration. It helped and encouraged the founders of 
this Europe a lot, which was then called the community of six. 
This has now become a union of twelve and is about to become a 
union of 15 or 16. So, it helped us a lot. Then its attention 
was deflected by many problems. One can say it became less 
involved. It is true that a real interest in European 
integration has manifested itself with President Clinton. You 
asked a short while ago whether we were disappointed, when you 
asked President Clinton. As far as I am concerned, I believe 
less in the dissatisfaction of the public.... 
  [Ockrent, interrupting] Despite the opinion polls? 
  [Mitterrand] Yes, despite the opinion polls. Opinion polls 
are indicators and are important. One should take them into 
account, but I think Europe remains a major interest for 
everybody. This will be understood, but should not the 
defenders of Europe understand this first? 
  [Ockrent] Who are you thinking of there? 
  [Mitterrand] I am not thinking of anyone in particular. I am 
not trying to start a polemic. I am just saying that we need a 
lot of energy and persistence. It is difficult to create a 
successful Europe. After World War II, in 1945, we made a lot 
of progress right away with the United Nations. Gradually, with 
the disappearance of the Soviet Union, we have a chance for 
peace; however, we have not done enough yet. There are still a 
lot of problems to be settled. History is a long game of 
patience. 
  [Poivre d'Arvor] I would like to ask President Clinton a 
question--hopefully your problems with the translation be 
resolved quickly. Philippe Seguin, the speaker of the Assembly, 
who welcomed you not long ago, drew a parallel with the 
situation in 1919 when they received your predecessor, Mr. 
Wilson. He said that, as in 1919, everything seems possible 
today, the worst as well as the best. 
  We have just come out of a long period of cold war. Are you 
sure that this is the best that we can hope for, first of all, 
and then do you see any place in Europe where perhaps you might 
imagine asking your boys [preceding word in English] to 
intervene--for example, in Bosnia? 
  [Clinton] Well, I do think the situation is similar to 
1919-- 
not the same, but similar. The difference, however, is that 
Europe did not unite in 1919, and the United States withdrew. 
In 1994, Europe is growing together in terms of the economic, 
political, and security system. The United States is still 
actively engaged in Europe. 
  Are there circumstances under which we might commit American 
troops? Absolutely, there are. We have a commitment to NATO, 
which we are honoring. We have already put our pilots at the 
disposal of NATO in Bosnia and also to enforce the no-fly zone. 
  [Poivre d'Arvor] But could you do more on the ground? 
  [Clinton] We also have troops in Macedonia, at least to 
limit 
the conflict. We will do what is necessary to enforce an 
agreement if one is made, but we decided we should not intervene 
to settle the conflict on one side or the other. If we were to 
do it now, I think we would only create controversy. If we can 
get an agreement between the sides--I think the president and I 
are agreed--the United States is prepared to work with our 
allies, to make sure that the settlement is honored. 
  [Poivre d'Arvor] And you, Mr. Mitterrand, are you 
disappointed by the lukewarmness of the U.S. commitment -- to 
repeat an expression used by Bill Clinton during his election 
campaign two years ago? 
  [Mitterrand] The U.S. commitment for peace, including for 
peace in the former Yugoslavia, is full and complete. 
  You know my position. I do not think this war will be 
resolved by creating another, more general, war. The United 
States will give us powerful help -- along with the Russians and 
all of the countries of the European Union -- not to impose 
conditions, which is not our role, but to stress issues in such 
a way that the belligerents will know that it is in their 
interest to reach conciliation. 
  [Poivre d'Arvor] You both visited together the sites of the 
destruction of the war of 50 years ago. You know what is 
happening in Bosnia now. What ties does France want to develop 
with the United States? Are you ready to commit yourselves more 
to NATO, for example, to returning to the situation as it was 
before General de Gaulle's bomb shell? 
  [Mitterrand] No, that is not necessary. We participate in 
what might be called the political discussions of NATO -- that 
is to say, the alliance that we belong to and to which we are 
loyal. We do not participate in the discussions in the general 
staff, or in the military discussions, because we do not belong 
to the integrated command. 
  [Poivre d'Arvor] And this position will not change? 
  [Mitterrand] No, it will not. Or at least, it will not as 
long as it depends on me. I do not think France will change its 
position on that for a long time. 
  You were saying just now that nothing had changed. I would 
just like to say a couple of words. Just remember that it was 
not so long ago that the world was cut in two, or at least 
Europe was. We had two military pacts facing each other; we had 
the Cold War. All that is behind us. Problems remain, as you 
said, and I will not repeat it. 
  [Ockrent] Among these problems there are some that affect 
our 
country in a special way: I mean Algeria. There were two more 
killings in Algiers this morning. It has been noticed that your 
administration has made several calls recently, Mr. Clinton, to 
the fundamentalists. Do you think that a dialogue should be 
opened with them, perhaps that they should even be allowed 
access to power? 
  [Clinton] Let me make sure I understand your question by 
restating our position. We try to support the current 
government, in working with France to reschedule their debt, for 
example. However, we have also encouraged this government to 
reach out to dissident groups who are not involved in terrorism, 
who disavow terrorism. 
  We have had some very low-level contacts with people who 
themselves have not been involved in terrorism. We do not 
support people using violent means anywhere in the world. We 
hope that the present Algerian Government will be able to 
broaden its base and reach out, and be able to work with those 
who have difficulties, but who have committed themselves to a 
peaceful solution. 
  We are very concerned about the rise of militant 
fundamentalism in the Islamic states. Seventeen of the 22 
Islamic states in the world [as heard] have declining incomes. 
Seventy percent of the Muslims in the world today are young 
people. The potential for explosion is great. We have a great 
stake in promoting governments like the Moroccan Government, for 
example: King Hassan has run a very responsible regime, and 
been helpful in peace in the Middle East and in many other ways. 
We share the concern of [word indistinct] for the potential of 
the situation in Algeria getting out of hand. But what the 
United States wants to do is to stand up against terrorism, and 
against the structure of fundamentalism, and to stand with the 
people of Islam who wish to be full members of the world 
community according to the rules that all civilized people 
should follow. 
  [Poivre d'Arvor] Let us continue with Africa. The Americans 
were involved in great numbers in Somalia. Today, the Somalis 
are no longer dying of hunger, they are well fed. Further 
south, in Rwanda today, hundreds of thousands of people are 
butchering each other. Are the Americans ready to intervene? 
  [Clinton] No, but we are willing to help. We have already 
offered several million dollars. We have discussed with our 
African friends the prospect of an African force, which we will 
help to finance and support with equipment and transportation 
systems. We can help and we should help, but many African 
countries are interested in providing troops. I think this is 
the only thing we can do at the moment. We have troops in Korea 
and Europe. We will perhaps have new commitments in Bosnia if 
we manage to establish peace. We are trying hard to put the UN 
agreement on Haiti back on track. We want to help in Rwanda. 
We are ready to finance and provide the necessary aid if 
African countries provide troops. I don't think so many are 
needed to stop the fighting, if several African countries get 
together. 
  [Ockrent] And France, Mr. President? There has been a lot of 
talk about the support provided by France over a long period of 
time to the Rwandan Government whose situation we are aware of 
today. Could France.... 
  [Mitterrand, interrupting] France gave assistance to Rwanda, 
to the legitimate government of the day. Rebels rose up against 
this government and they had their valid arguments. They are 
winning some victories. It seems today that the Rwandan 
Government -- whose president was assassinated -- has 
practically been defeated. It was us, the French, who organized 
a dialogue between the belligerents and it was us who managed to 
broker an agreement, which is no longer valid today. We were 
thanked by the Rwandan Patriotic Front. 
  [Ockrent] What could be done today? 
  [Mitterrand] I would like to say to Mr. Clinton that I am 
very happy to receive him at the Elysee. I think that the 
countries chosen by the United Nations, that is Ghana, Senegal, 
and others, should be encouraged to provide the 5,500 men 
requested. We have already said that France was ready to 
provide logistical aid and any necessary support so these 
African forces, representing the OAU, will be able to intervene. 
  [Clinton] If I might make one point about that. One of the 
things we learned in Somalia, where we were able to save 
hundreds of thousands of lives, and we lost some of our people, 
mostly in one unfortunate incident, was that even a humanitarian 
mission will inevitably be caught up in the politics of the 
country, unless people are starving and dying because of a 
natural disaster. But if there is politics behind it, and in 
this case it is even more obvious what the political and 
military problems are, I think the United Nations was absolutely 
right to ask African countries to intervene, because they are 
the ones who will be there in the long term, and it is their 
frontiers that have to be respected. 
  France and the United States must support them, but I think 
it is an important test, and if we succeed, then that will be 
much more important for Africa in the long term. 
  [Poivre d'Arvor] Since we are talking about the role of the 
United Nations, in an interview on foreign policy two and half 
years ago, before you were president, you said you were in favor 
of Japan and Germany having a permanent seat in the UN Security 
Council. Do you still agree with this principle? 
  [Clinton] Yes. 
  [Poivre d'Arvor] Doesn't this worry you, Mr. Mitterrand? 
  [Mitterrand] It does not worry me that the Japanese and the 
Germans should join the Security Council as permanent members. 
I simply think that this membership of the highest body of the 
United Nations cannot be reserved for the Japanese and Germans 
alone. Because there is a whole area of the world, the most 
heavily populated part, which is not represented. So, this 
requires a little more general negotiation. But as for the aim 
of Japan and Germany, there is no reason to refuse these 
countries -- which are great powers, and very active ones, which 
play an important role -- the right to be there, with us. 
  We will not feel ourselves diminished if, instead of being 
five we are seven, eight, nine, or 10. But we will have to have 
slightly different procedures. 
  [Ockrent] What do you think of the idea put forward today by 
Jacques Delors, the president of the European Commission, of 
having an economic security council that would help to 
coordinate policies, in particular on the financial markets -- 
we are seeing at the moment the difficulties in short-term 
interest rate policies. Do you think it is a good idea, Mr. 
Mitterrand? Perhaps Mr. Clinton could react straight away. 
  [Mitterrand] I would say it is an interesting idea, because 
it is new, and it comes from a man who has had a lot of 
experience, and is highly competent -- Jacques Delors. I have 
my reservations, because we have to be careful lest the few 
richest countries in the world -- including France -- exercise a 
sort of control over multinationals, and transform themselves 
into a sort of global council Or else the makeup of this new 
body would have to be very carefully studied, so as to maintain 
a balance. 
  [Clinton] I think this recommendation is the result of the 
work Mr. Delors has already done, including problems of growth 
in Europe and job creation, and this is an issue we will tackle 
when the G-7 meets in Naples. I think that many people believe 
that there is a discrepancy between everyday life and what 
happens on financial markets -- the latter may react too much 
before there is even an inflation risk. This is something that 
must be discussed. 
  As for the idea of an economic security council, don't 
forget 
that the UN Security Council aims to solve all the main 
problems, one after the other. What would be the jurisdiction 
of such an economic council? I think that what Mr. Delors is 
doing is the following: He is asking us to tackle a problem for 
which no solution has as yet been suggested, but I am not sure I 
endorse this idea. 
  [Poivre d'Arvor] On an economic level, you Americans have 
spent a lot of energy and a lot of money on the fight against 
communism. Are you ready to make the same kind of effort to 
help the former communist countries recover from their economic 
slump? 
  [Clinton] We are prepared to invest quite a lot in it. We 
have already cut down on defense quite a lot, as much as we can, 
I think. I am discussing this with my Congress and I am asking 
them not to make further cuts in the military budget but to 
increase aid, namely to the former Soviet Union, including 
Russia, Ukraine, and other newly freed countries. A significant 
part of what we must do is to get more investment and more 
exchange with all these new countries, but it is necessary for 
all Western countries to be concerned that what replaces 
communism succeeds, now that communism is gone. We do not want 
something that would be reminiscent of the past: A market 
economy must succeed, and we hope that it will succeed. 
  [Ockrent] In your speech to the National Assembly earlier, 
you highlighted the need to help democracies through their 
access to the market economy. The OECD said today that our 
countries, our developed countries, are far too rigid and that 
this may be one of the reasons for unemployment, which is an 
obsession in France and the United States. Mr. President, do 
you think that our societies are now ready to make sacrifices 
for more flexibility, which may enable us to open our markets 
wider to developing countries, which, in their turn, would buy 
from us? Do you think that this is an idea that the French 
public -- as well as the U.S. public -- is ready to listen to? 
  [Mitterrand] I would answer you easily if I was sure that I 
understood your question properly. After all, what does 
flexibility mean? I hear many people say that flexibility is 
needed. What is flexibility? If it only means asking for cuts 
in wages, getting rid of the arsenal of social laws protecting 
workers, then it should not be done. This is why I do not think 
it is wise to want to solve the crisis by making workers and 
those earning low or medium wages poorer than they were. Their 
situation is not that good to begin with. I would like to 
understand what you mean by flexibility. 
  [Ockrent] Mr. Clinton is perhaps able to tell us something 
about that. 
  [Clinton] First of all, let me say that there is no simple 
answer to your question. The United States may have a more 
flexible labor market than most European countries because, for 
instance, unemployment benefit is lower and income supplement is 
not as high. We may have a more open economy and perhaps less 
unemployment, but we pay the price for this. Our unemployment 
rate is quite low, but the growth or our wages has been very low 
over the last 20 years and inequality -- the gap between the 
poorest and the middle class -- is getting wider. This is not a 
good thing for a democracy. 
  What I hope we can do, through G-7 and perhaps the 
OECD....[pauses] is to see what all of us can do to solve this 
problem and see how we can make the best of employment while 
respecting the rights of the middle classes. It will be 
necessary for these issues, as well as the issues about the 
environment, to be dealt with together. This is not only about 
investment by our countries and the buying of our products but 
this is also about the increase of payment in their countries. 
  [Mitterrand] One cannot always talk about the economic 
aspect 
of things and omit the social aspect. Of course, I agree with 
all the measures that may make it possible for the economy to 
grow, but at the same time it is necessary to take social 
measures. I am very happy to see that we are currently making 
progress with the United States of America. The discussion that 
has taken place, which should enable us, in the framework of 
GATT for instance, to have a social clause and which could 
already lead to a ban on child labor, a ban on prison labor, the 
authorization -- the encouragement even -- to organize union so 
that it is not harassed or banned. All this means progress. It 
is only a start, a timid one, at an international level, within 
GATT, but it is already very good, and curiously, it is the 
United States, Mr. Bill Clinton, and the France of today that 
are at the forefront of this struggle. 
  [Ockrent] Unfortunately, you have not set an example. 
  [Mitterrand] No, we are currently holding talks. No, you 
should not say that, not at all. I am fighting within the 
European Community, which has become the European Union -- and I 
am not the only one -- for this Union, these 12 countries, to 
adopt social legislation. It was unbearable to think that we 
are always trying to develop the economy and that no guarantees 
are given to the most humble people. [passage omitted] 

