Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Eric Zemmour: "Majority: Deniau (Probably) Head </F>
of List"] 
  [Text] A four-part plan for two parties, and a few taboos. 
In the European plan which the RPR [Rally for the Republic] and 
UDF [Union for French Democracy] unanimously adopted yesterday, 
some words are prohibited: Maastricht is one of them, but also 
federal and single currency. It is the RPR which had these 
reservations but it did not find it difficult to persuade its 
UDF partner. The campaign on the Maastricht Treaty was recalled 
and the threat of Philippe de Villiers' [anti-Maastricht] list 
is taken very seriously, especially in the Republican Party. 
  Of course, fundamentally the situation is still the same: 
The Maastricht Treaty, even rechristened "Treaty on Union," has 
been adopted by the French people. It it therefore binding on 
everybody, particularly with the single- currency objective 
which lies at the heart of it. At the UDF yesterday, some 
people still expressed surprise at the change in an RPR which 
accepts without flinching an expression such as: "The 
strengthening of economic union will precede the full 
implementation of monetary union which establishes the 
transition to the third stage in 1997 or 1999." 
  The same rapid agreement was reached with regard to 
combating 
the Brussels Commission's encroachments on the rights of hunters 
or placing a series of safeguards on the implementation of the 
Schengen accord -- the establishment of a reliable computer 
system, the coordination of immigration control policies, and 
the harmonization of legislation on illegal drugs. 
  Similarly, a European trade policy could not ruin the 
edifice. Having given unanimous approval to the conclusion of 
the GATT agreement by the Balladur government, the RPR and UDF 
would have looked ridiculous if they had allowed disagreements 
on this subject to appear. They therefore developed a balanced 
concept of "free trade" which does not mean "laxness and 
indifference." A perusal of the document even reveals a 
discreet but deliberate tribute from Giscard to Juppe on "the 
favorable conclusion of the GATT negotiations." 
  This had all been settled back on 8 February, the date of 
the 
last meeting between the RPR and UDF delegations. Two subjects 
remained to be discussed in the last two negotiating sessions: 
military affairs and institutional matters. The RPR finally 
obtained its 100,000-strong European intervention force while 
the UDF gained acceptance for the idea, so dear to Giscard, of a 
president of the European Council appointed by the Council for 
five years. 
  Everybody was in agreement on the need for strict controls 
on 
the Brussels Commission, first by the Parliament and also by the 
Council. On 8 February, Giscard had sovereignly decreed: "The 
Commission is a general secretariat." One last minor difference 
then separated the RPR and UDF negotiators: The latter wanted 
the Council, like parliament, to be able to censure the 
Commission. But this very parliamentary expression was too 
reminiscent of a federal-style system in which the Commission, 
the de facto executive power, is subject to the control of a 
lower house -- the Parliament -- and an upper house, a kind of 
Senate of the federated states -- the Council. On this point 
too, refraining once again from any provocation of public 
opinion and the electorate, the UDF accepted the more neutral 
expression of "ending the Commission's mandate." 
  "Europe is back in the Union," UDF spokesman Jean-Pierre 
Raffarin said with satisfaction yesterday. The die was cast 
from the moment when Giscard and Chirac decided not to expose 
their differences to the public and to Edouard Balladur, their 
common enemy. All that remains now is to find somebody to head 
the list. Some people in the RPR have not entirely given up 
Alain Juppe as a candidate. However, it seems that Jacques 
Chirac is ready to concede the position as head of list to the 
UDF once again. Speaking on the France 2 news program yesterday 
evening, Giscard barely concealed the fact that he already had 
Chirac's agreement: "I think that our partners are very open on 
this subject." The UDF would therefore have to choose between 
Jean-Francois Deniau and Dominique Baudis, which it would do at 
its meeting on 30 March in order to spare the joint National 
Council meeting on 7 April the torments of choice and division. 
In these circumstances, it is difficult to imagine the head of 
list being other than Jean-Francois Deniau, the Republican Party 
candidate, although some people in the RPR and UDF are already 
demanding "an effective head of list." 

