BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, April 12 April (CTK) -- "Slovakia has 
found itself at a crossroads. It is important at such a moment 
to say the truth and to give things their proper names, 
otherwise we will lose our orientation," Slovak Premier Jozef 
Moravcik said today, submitting his cabinet's programme to 
parliament. 
  Moravcik declared his belief in the ideals of the November 
1989 revolution. "Values should exist in politics which are 
above political parties. These are values on which the majority 
of Slovak people were united at the end of 1989 -- the 
protection of citizens' rights and freedoms and a democratic 
country," he said. 
  Moravcik said there was no need to invent new paths for 
Slovakia which could only harm its interests. He pointed to the 
danger of opening the question of borders and spoke in favor of 
confirmation of the current borders with all Slovakia's 
neighbors, including Hungary. 
  Moravcik said that the collapse of the Movement for a 
Democratic Slovakia (HZDS) had a wider background. The HZDS at 
the time of the 1992 parliamentary elections and the HZDS now 
were two different entities, Moravcik said. Key figures had 
left the movement who formed it at its very beginning, and it 
had also lost a considerable part of its voters, he added. He 
ascribed the responsibility for the current political crisis in 
Slovakia and for the necessity of calling early elections to the 
HZDS and the Slovak National Party (SNS), the HZDS's former 
government coalition partner. 
  "We often hear from the HZDS that only this movement is 
capable of forming a functioning government and that only its 
chairman Vladimir Meciar is capable of managing public affairs. 
We should be very vigilant towards such voices. We have our 
own experiences from the period when one party declared itself 
an exceptional one. Stalin and Brezhnev, for example, were also 
convinced that nobody could replace them," Moravcik said. 
  The responsibility for Slovakia's future would be borne by 
all who were living and who decided to live in this country no 
matter how they assessed the appearance of an independent state. 
"Independence for us is a chance to prove our own strength and 
to demonstrate our vitality. At the same time it is also a 
responsibility towards future generations. If we do not 
understand that we should stop dividing ourselves into those 
faithful and more faithful to Slovakia then we will lose our 
republic," Moravcik said. 
  The creation of the government coalition was the only way 
out 
of the current crisis. However, a permanent solution would only 
be brought by new elections. The submitted government programme 
was an alternative which could ensure such a solution, Moravcik 
said. 
  Voting on confidence in Moravcik's government is expected in 
Parliament on Wednesday [13 April]. 

