CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Pauline Seymour: "FNM: Bahamas Will Not Be Haven </F>
for Those in Drug Trade"] 
  [Text] Works Minister Frank Watson told Parliament April 13 
that the FNM government will not give comfort to persons 
involved in drug smuggling, money laundering or any activities 
related to the drug trade. 
  Mr Watson was debating the Extradition Bill, which passed 
the 
House Wednesday, April 13. 
  Mr Watson said one of the most serious indictments to be 
levelled at the previous PLP administration was its acquiescence 
in the level of disrespect and disregard by citizens for the 
law, rules and regulations of Bahamian society. 
  The PLP administration, for whatever reason, failed to 
uphold 
the laws and regulations of the Bahamas in an extremely 
permissive atmosphere where disrespect for law is rampant and 
widespread, said Mr Watson. 
  In the mid-1980s the country reached the point where there 
were leaders who could not distinguish between right and wrong. 
  Today, Mr Watson said, the Bahamas, which was once a safe 
and 
tranquil society, is reaping a storm of discontent, much of 
which has its roots in more than a decade of permissiveness. 
  "Well," Mr Watson said, "no society can long survive in an 
atmosphere where rules of human conduct are more often observed 
in the breach thereof." 
  Social advancement and economic growth can only occur when 
conditions are conducive to their development, he said. 
  "There must be tranquillity. There must be order, and rules 
for the conduct of human affairs must be observed by and 
enforced among all citizens in a fair and impartial manner," Mr 
Watson said. 
  Mr Watson said government must take the lead in reversing 
the 
permissiveness. The Extradition Bill, he said, is necessary to 
give effect to the terms of the extradition treaty between the 
United States and the Bahamas. 
  The FNM government, he said, is not breaking new ground 
through the Extradition Bill. The treaty, he said, was 
negotiated long before the FNM came to office. The party's duty, 
he said, is to keep a commitment that the PLP government made to 
the United States. 
  Mr Watson said the measures contained in the Bill are not 
inconsistent with the FNM's philosophy. Over the years the FNM 
has made it clear that it will not give comfort to those who 
engage in drug smuggling, money laundering or are in any way 
connected with the drug trade. 
  Every individual against whom extradition is sought must 
have 
his case heard in a Bahamian court of law, Mr Watson said. The 
court must find, based on the evidence presented, that the 
individual has a case to answer, as is the procedure under the 
Bahamas system. 
  "The treaty state," he said, "must satisfy the Bahamian 
court 
that they are in possession of information against the accused 
which would constitute a crime in the Bahamas before the order 
may be issued." 
  If there is any mistake or a sell out of Bahamians, Mr 
Watson 
said, then the sell out was perpetrated by the former PLP 
administration when it entered into the extradition treaty with 
the United States. 
  The PLP, he said, entered into the treaty in 1990 and should 
have made its terms public a long time ago. 
  "This country has paid and continues to pay a heavy price 
for 
reneging on agreements freely entered into by the previous 
administration," Mr Watson said. 
  No one else will suffer because the government did not take 
appropriate measures to stamp out drug trafficking or any of the 
related activities or to honour an agreement, Mr Watson said. 
  He reminded Parliament of headlines such as "Nation For 
Sale" 
(THE MIAMI HERALD) and "Paradise Lost" (SUNDAY TIMES of London), 
which were published in 1984. 
  Mr Watson said the United States government did not trust 
the 
PLP administration. 
  Although the treaty was negotiated in 1990, he said, no 
effort was made to implement the provisions and it could not be 
effected without enabling legislation. 
  In addition, he said, in one court alone there are scores of 
appeals pending against prison sentences imposed by magistrates 
in drug-related cases dating back to 1989. However, the appeals 
cannot be heard because the transcripts are not available. 
  As a result, Mr Watson said, dozens of drug smugglers walk 
the streets as free men. 

