BFN 

<F P=106> [Hans-Werner Loose report: "Criticism of Hashish Release"] </F>
  [Text] Bonn -- The decision of the FRG Constitutional 
Court in Karlsruhe no longer to make the use of small amounts of 
hashish and marijuana a punishable offense has given rise to 
harsh reactions from politicians and society. Above all, 
politicians of the Christian Democratic Union [CDU] and the 
Christian Social Union [CSU] criticized the decision. Doctors 
and criminal police officers also fear that the wrong 
conclusions might be drawn from the decision. Approval came 
from the Social Democratic Party of Germany [SPD]. 
  State Secretary Eduard Lintner (CSU), drug commissioner of 
the Federal Government, sees "a danger that the state will 
suffer a setback in the struggle against drugs." The Karlsruhe 
ruling is "a wrong signal and a hard blow to all our efforts for 
prevention, which I have to overcome," Lintner told DIE WELT. 
  Angela Merkel (CDU), minister of women and youth, fears 
"that 
young people now think that hashish is permitted and believe it 
is not any more harmful than a filter cigarette." Mrs. Merkel 
told DIE WELT: "Hashish and marijuana are and remain entrance 
drugs, whose danger is played down far too often." 
  Karsten Vilmar, president of the Federal Doctors' Chamber, 
warned against drawing the wrong conclusion from the ruling. It 
might give rise to the impression that hashish is harmless and 
therefore be made generally available. 
  Eckart Fiedler, manager of the Association of Employees' 
Health Insurance Companies, fears "cost increases, which we have 
to pass on to the 27 million people insured with us." Fiedler 
told DIE WELT that the ruling "runs counter to the 
responsibility to promote health and undermines our efforts." 
He demands "to continue the massive struggle against entrance 
drugs." 
  The Federation of German Criminal Police Officers (BDK) 
think 
that "the path embarked upon here" leads "in the end to the 
complete release of all drugs and the addiction of broad strata 
of the population, in particular young people." Says the BDK: 
"If all problems with which the rule-of-law state is unable to 
cope were dealt with in this way, break-ins would soon have to 
be exempt from punishment, too." 
  In contrast, Kurt Weidmann, parliamentary manager of the 
Hesse SPD Landtag groups, said that the decision of Karlsruhe is 
an "important contribution and courageous step toward 
decriminalization." 
  The Federal Office of Criminal Investigations [BKA] in 
Wiesbaden does not see a change, even though statistics indicate 
this trend: 1,738 drug deaths in 1993 -- 361 fewer than in 
1992; 14,346 first consumers of hard drugs -- 1,296 fewer than 
in 1992; 1,095 kg of heroin seized -- 143 kg less than in 1992; 
11,352 kg of cannabis products seized -- 814 kg less than in 
1992. However, the trend this year is going upward again. 
  Because of the high figure of unknown incidents, the BKA is 
certain: "Drugs are available on the German drug market in 
sufficient quantities." 
  The drug experts in Wiesbaden know: "Small-scale smuggling 
from the Netherlands to Germany continues unabated." The fast 
trains from The Hague via Venlo to Duisburg or the Eurocity 
train "Piet Mondrian" from Amsteradam via Emmerich to Cologne 
have long been called "Hashish Express." Last year 620 kg of 
hashish and 56 kg of marijuana were seized at the Dutch-German 
border. Cannabis can be bought legally for 10 gilders per gram 
in any of the 1,365 "coffeeshops," which have an annual turnover 
of 600 million marks. 
  The Justice Ministry in The Hague welcomes the ruling of the 
German Constitutional Court: "We are in favor of coordinating 
the policy of the various countries as much as possible." 

