BFN 

<F P=106> [Report from Potosi] </F>
  [Text] The Potosi Civic Committee has decreed mourning at 
the departmental level and suspended all activities in view of 
the death of another peasant. After an exhaustive debate, the 
Potosi Civic Committee board last night decided to demand that 
the government investigates the violent incidents against 
peasants. They also demand that legislators summon the Justice 
and Peace Committee, and that the congressional human rights 
committee send representatives to Potosi to investigate the 
killings of two peasants. Moreover, people fear the fate of 11 
peasants who have been reported missing. 
  In view of this, mourning has been decreed at the 
departmental level and all activities have been suspended. The 
Civic Committee also summoned all citizens to attend the funeral 
procession today at 1600 at the general cemetery. 
  Peasant leaders also reported that peasants will march on 
the 
city. Cristobal Quiri, leader of the Potosi branch of General 
Trade Union Confederation of Bolivian Peasant Workers [CSUTCB], 
reported that peasants marching on the city will be arriving 
today at 1000 to demand the release of those arrested and to 
clarify the situation of the missing. 
  Francisco Cruz was one of those reported missing. He was 
found dead at the local morgue. The police found his body in a 
garbage dump in (Pacla-Pacla). Cruz's body shows signs of 
torture. Francisco Cruz was a member of a journalist union in 
his capacity as reporter [words indistinct]. In view of this, 
journalists have asked officials to perform an autopsy which 
will be performed today at 0800 at the general cemetery. 
Journalists will later stage a demonstration to protest over 
the constant harassments to which they are subjected at the hand 
of government repressive organizations, seeking to involve them 
in terrorism and rebellion. 
  The police found an unidentified body at a garbage dump. An 
anonymous call placed through the 110 telephone number reported 
the presence of an unidentified male body at a garbage dump. 
The forensic doctor determined the man died from alcohol 
intoxication. 
  Potosi Police Commander Colonel Roberto Foronda Franco said: 
  [Begin recording] [Forondo Franco] (?The body was not 
removed 
today) but on 1 May. At the time Forensic Doctor Ramiro Ruiz 
established that an unidentified male, about 35 years old, had 
died of alcoholic intoxication (?after he had) fallen off a 
cliff. It is presumed the man died about three days ago, that 
is, on 29 April. 
  After the local settlers informed the police, the police 
precinct sent [words indistinct] and the forensic doctor went to 
the site to remove the body. 
  [Unidentified reporter] What was the precise location of 
this 
incident? 
  [Forondo Franco] First of all I must specify that this 
[words 
indistinct] 72 hours before the police intervention. The body 
was removed from a large city garbage dump, about 5 km (?from 
the city) at a place called (Pacla Pacla) [words indistinct]. 
[end recording] 
  According to CSUTCB leaders, the unidentified body is that 
of 
Francisco Cruz. 

