Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] The transitional government and National 
Assembly, which were enlarged to include the Rwanda Patriotic 
Front [RPF], whose establishment was expected to have taken 
place yesterday, are yet to be set up. Once again, the head of 
state, Major General Juvenal Habyarimana, arrived at the 
National Development Council building, only to note the absence 
of the RPF, as well as the Social Democratic Party, and of the 
two prime ministers. 
  Those who attended the ceremony included the UN secretary 
general's special representative to Rwanda, Dr. Jacques-Roger 
Booh Booh, General Romeo Dallaire, the commander of the UN 
Assistance Mission to Rwanda, the diplomatic corps in Kigali, 
and other representatives. It was a return to 5 January, and 
the head of state can only regret this. Here is President 
Juvenal Habyarimana: 
  [Begin Habyarimana recording] Excellencies, Ladies and 
Gentlemen, may I ask you to stand and observe a minute of 
silence in memory of the late Felicien Gatabazi and Martin 
Bucyana [CDR chairman]. 
  I had invited you to this ceremony for the establishment of 
the two remaining transitional institutions, namely the 
Transitional National Assembly and the broad-based transitional 
government. I had thought the situation was ripe for conclusion 
following consultations and discussions which have been 
continuing since 5 January, as well as all the long meetings 
which have been held. But I note, just like you, that 
unfortunately we are still at the [word indistinct] of 5 
January. I cannot establish a broad-based transitional 
government when the prime minister who would lead it is absent. 
  Somebody wanted to joke -- he thought he was joking. He 
said: Honestly, it is a strange situation in Rwanda--to have two 
prime ministers for a government that no longer functions and 
another for a government that has not yet arrived. That is the 
situation, and it is lasting too long. I can only agree, and at 
the same time thank those who responded to the call. The 
ceremony was in fact scheduled to take place yesterday afternoon. 
  After the consultations I have just mentioned, and after the 
meeting I had with the prime minister-designate two days ago, it 
had appeared that the ceremony would take place yesterday 
afternoon. But with the death of the late Gatabazi, we had to 
postpone it until this morning at 1000. And at 0800, I was told 
that the prime minister had asked that the ceremony be postponed 
(?by) 14 hours, which I accepted. So that is the situation. 
[passage omitted] 
  For my part, I do not see, after all these consultations and 
discussions, what I can do. Those with better brains than ours 
can give us further suggestions. But I believe everyone has 
contributed their goodwill. 
  So, since the media are here, I take this opportunity also 
to 
launch an appeal to the Rwandan population not to lose hope, to 
remain committed to peace, which they have always sought and 
abided by, which was disrupted by unfortunate chance, but which 
the Rwandan people still yearn for. 
  Let all the events we have gone through, the disasters we 
have talked about, be a lesson for us to remain united, despite 
the various parties to which we belong, despite the various 
regions we are from, and despite our ethnic affiliations. We 
are all and we all remain Rwandans, all equal, with equal 
rights. [passage omitted] [end recording]. 

