Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the press review] </F>
  [Text] AL-BA'TH says: The resulting grief from the loss of 
great individuals is equal to their greatness. For a father who 
has lost a son and a president who is leading a people who are 
his children, there are no limits to the tragedy of the 
unexpected death of Major Basil al-Asad. 
  After stating that the homeland has lost one of the most 
brilliant knights of the Arabs and the future, AL-BA'TH 
continues: Because of this tragedy, Hafiz al-Asad, faces one 
test as a man and another as a leader. He must overcome this 
tragedy so it will not turn into a test for the entire nation. 
Only tall trees are hit by strong winds. It is the fate of 
trees to live standing, to die standing, and to remain tall. 
  AL-BA'TH continues: When one stands before the grieving 
father to console him, he is consoled by the wisdom of a leader 
who yields to God's will. Perhaps in his deep grief, the whole 
world becomes unimportant in the eyes of President al-Asad. 
Yet, the whole world greatly appreciates his noble sadness and 
determination to move the region, which has offered the dearest 
sacrifices in the conflict, from the tragedies of the past and 
the present to a just, comprehensive settlement and future 
stability and prosperity. 
  AL-BA'TH continues: In the Geneva summit, leader al-Asad 
gained something indispensable for the Arab future. In 
Damascus, he lost something indispensable. In both cases, he is 
the man who has been acknowledged by the president of the 
strongest state in the world as the key to the settlement 
process and the Middle East future. 
  AL-BA'TH concludes: The [Middle East] issue is too great to 
be overshadowed by tragedies. President al-Asad is leading a 
crucial Arab battle. He has grabbed a historic opportunity to 
restore Arab rights as necessitated by pan-Arab constants in an 
age of tremendous international changes. He is deeply saddened, 
but he does not stop working wisely and firmly. Enduring his 
grave wound, he seeks to heal Arab wounds. 

