Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Riga, Mar 12, BNS -- Natural gas will cost 77.5 U.S. 
dollars per 1,000 cubic meters this year, according to the gas 
supply contract between the Latvijas Gaze (Latvian Gas) and 
Russia's Gazprom gas consortiums. 
  In Lithuania and Estonia gas prices are lower than in Latvia 
because the two have agreed to form joint ventures with Gazprom, 
Latvijas Gaze Director Adrians Davis told reporters Friday [11 
March]. Latvijas Gaze has, so far, created no mergers with any 
other countries. 
  Latvijas Gaze and Gazprom leadership concluded a contract 
March 5 on gas supplies to Latvia in 1994 and discussed a 
long-term contract that could regulate gas supplies for 10 or 15 
years. 
  The long-term contract could be signed at the end of the 
year 
because its preparation requires much work, Davis said. If it 
is signed, Latvia will be able to plan its economy more 
effectively. 
  Davis said that the underground gas container at Incukalns 
was a strategically important energetics object as the security 
guarantor of the country's gas provision. 
  Latvia could start earning on the container in two years in 
anticipation of soaring gas consumption in Europe because of the 
planned closure of many coal mines. The container could be used 
to store gas before it is sent Europe, Davis said. 
  The Baltics themselves are able to pump Russian gas directly 
in view of the reduction of consumption from 10 billion cubic 
meters in 1991 to 4 billion cubic meters in 1993. 
  Currently, Gazprom stands the sole gas supplier to Latvia 
but 
the Baltic country also contemplates a chance to buy Norwegian 
gas, Davis noted. 
  Commenting on gas purchases from Turkmenistan where it costs 
51 dollar for 1,000 cubic meters, Davis said the transportation 
expenses would increase the price to around 100 dollars for 
1,000 cubic meters. This is the main reason why Turkmenistan 
cannot enter into the European market which is dominated by 
Russia and Norway. 

