BFN 

  [Text] Recently, Gu Jinchi, secretary of the provincial 
party committee, has pointed out that the organs directly under 
the provincial authorities should take the lead in valuing and 
supporting the construction of "project hope" and should 
understand and resolve, from the high plane of strategy, the 
problem concerning the schooling of dropouts in poverty-stricken 
areas, by having their eyes on the future and on the improvement 
of the quality of all nationalities. Gu Jinchi also took the 
lead in contributing 300 yuan to the project. 
  Recently, Xu Wencai, secretary general of the provincial 
party committee, called on the general office of the provincial 
party committee to take the lead in contributing money for 
promoting the building of "project hope" among the organs 
directly under the provincial authorities and even all over the 
province. A few days ago, Cui Wenxin, director of the general 
office of the provincial party committee, convened a meeting of 
cadres at or above the section level of the general office to 
conduct mobilization for this work. It was stressed at the 
meeting that the CPC Central Committee and the provincial party 
committee were attaching great importance on the "hope project" 
and on the efforts of resolving the problem concerning the 
schooling of the children who discontinued their studies in 
poverty-stricken areas. The meeting called on the vast numbers 
of party members, cadres, staff, and workers to voluntarily 
contribute money for building the "hope project." Through this 
activity, the spirit of selfless dedication and the spirit of 
happily helping others have been carried forward, the sense of 
being responsible for society has been enhanced among the vast 
numbers of party members, cadres, staff, and workers, and the 
office's building of spiritual civilization has been promoted. 
In as short as 10-odd days, a total of 50,174 yuan has been 
donated by 896 comrades of the general office and by some units. 
  Among the leaders taking the lead in contributing money were 
Gu Jinchi, secretary of the provincial party committee; Wang 
Huaiyuan, deputy secretary of the provincial party committee; Xu 
Wencai, standing committee member and secretary general of the 
provincial party committee; and Guo Feng, Dai Suli, Li Huang, Hu 
Yimin. Ge Xifan, Chen Yiguang, Liu Yiyun, Zhu Chuan, and Luo 
Dingfeng, veteran comrades of the province. 
  On 29 March, the general office of the provincial party 
committee presented the donated money to the Chaoyang city 
office in charge of project hope. The Chaoyang city party 
committee has decided to build a hope primary school in Shangzhi 
Village in Chaoyang County's Wanglungou Township, the hometown 
of Revolutionary Martyr Zhao Shangzhi. 

