Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article, under the rubric: "Official </F>
Department": "Naval Press Center Statement"] 
  [Text] The Naval Press Center has been authorized to 
disseminate the following statement as a result of articles in 
the mass media on radioactive waste dumping problems: 
  The decision on radioactive waste dumping at sea from naval 
facilities was made at the end of the 1950's, based on the 
results of a series of scientific investigations and while 
considering the practices of the majority of "nuclear" countries 
that existed at that time. The organization of dumping wastes at 
sea stipulated the reduction to a minimum of the possible 
unfavorable impact of the wastes on the population as a whole 
and on the critical group of the population who reside in 
coastal areas. During the resolution of organized issues of 
waste dumping at sea, a policy was also conducted toward the 
reduction of the possible unfavorable impact of the wastes on 
the environment. Dumping standards had a significant hygienic 
reserve and took into account the accumulation of radionuclides 
by aquatic life and their entry into the human organism as food. 
Permissible concentrations of man-made radionuclides in seawater 
were adopted that were 1-2 orders of magnitude lower than 
permissible concentrations for drinking water. Based upon the 
results of a number of expeditionary studies of the radioactive 
situation in waste dump areas, the actual concentrations of 
radionuclides in seawater turned out to be lower than the 
permissible levels by 2-3 orders of magnitude. They also did not 
detect any radioactive contamination of aquatic life. 
  The practice of dumping wastes at sea was the only possible 
step that supports the vital activities of ships with nuclear 
power plants in view of the absence of effective processes for 
reprocessing radioactive wastes. France and Great Britain adhere 
to a similar practice for dealing with radioactive wastes until 
the present time. 
  Since 1991, the Navy has ceased dumping solid radioactive 
wastes at sea. The dumping of liquid wastes has been reduced to 
the lowest possible level. 
  Based upon the results of radiation-hygienic and 
radioecological research of solid and liquid radioactive waste 
dumping areas that have been conducted by the Navy and also by a 
number of scientific research institutions (RAN GEOKhI [Russian 
Academy of Sciences Institute of Geochemistry and Analytical 
Chemistry imeni V.I. Vernadskiy] and "Tayfun" NPO [Scientific 
Production Association]) during the period from 1967 to 1992, no 
cases were detected of dangerous radioactive contamination of 
the sea environment both directly in the dumping areas and also 
in the water areas adjacent to them. The levels of radioactive 
contamination of the seas of the North and the Far East do not 
indicate any dangerous increase of the content of radionuclides 
in seawater. Specifically, the concentrations of Strontium-90 in 
the surface waters of the Barents Sea, the Sea of Japan, and the 
Pacific Ocean (the coastal waters of Eastern Kamchatka) total 
1.6x10[.sup]-11[/] Ki/l [Curies per liter], 
1.0x10[.sup]-11[/] Curies per liter, and 
0.9x10[.sup]-11[/] Curies per liter, respectively, which is 
four times lower than the concentration of Strontium-90 in the 
surface waters of the Baltic Sea (4.4x10[.sup]-11[/] Curies 
per liter). 
  At the international conference of experts on the assessment 
of the existing and potential consequences of dumping 
radioactive wastes in Arctic waters that took place in Oslo in 
February 1993 in which the representatives of 12 countries and 
also IAEA [International Atomic Energy Agency] experts 
participated, based on the materials examined, they arrived at 
the conclusion that there is inadequate evidence of a dangerous 
impact of sources of radioactive contamination on the maritime 
environment of the Arctic Seas at the present time, except for 
the entry of radioactive wastes from Western European spent 
nuclear fuel reprocessing plants and global fallout of the 
products of nuclear detonations. 
  An expeditionary study of waste dumping areas in the Karsk 
Sea was conducted on the "Kovrayskiy" OIS [Experimental Research 
Ship] to assess the impact of radioactive wastes on the naval 
environment during the period from 16 August through 10 
September 1993. The expedition's work was conducted by experts 
of Russian Federation profile scientific-research institutes 
("Radiyevyy Institute" NPO and "Kurchatovskiy Institute" RNTs) 
and of a number of Russian Federation Ministry of Defense 
institutions. At the present time, the initial processing of 
samples is being conducted and an express-report has been 
prepared based upon the expedition's results. The amount of 
research accomplished permits us to arrive at the conclusion 
that the radioecological situation in the areas studied is 
without anomalies and can be characterized as normal. There have 
been no cases detected of radionuclides leaking into the 
environment from dumped containers. The yield of gamma radiation 
doses on the surface of the water area, on land surrounding the 
bays and on the ground does not exceed background levels and is 
4-12 microroentgens per hour. Concentrations of Cesium-137 in 
seawater do not exceed the sensitivity of instrument measurement 
methods (2x10[.sup]-12[/] Curies per liter). An international 
expedition that operated on the "Akademik Mstislav Keldysh" NIS 
[Scientific Research Ship] obtained similar results. Final data 
on the content of radionuclides in seawater, algae, ground and 
sea organisms will be reported after radiochemical and 
spectrometric research has been conducted in the laboratories of 
the institutes that participated in the expeditionary research. 
  Two international expeditions (Russian-Norwegian -- on the 
"Viktor Buynitskiy" NIS and on the Jigofs [Transliterated] 
project -- on the "Dmitriy Mendeleyev" NIS) are continuing the 
study of the radioecological situation in the Northern Seas. 
Expedition work will be concluded at the end of October 1993. 
The final results of the radioecological research can be 
obtained after processing, under laboratory conditions, of the 
samples of the environment that were taken and also after the 
comparison, summarization and analysis of the data obtained 
during the course of the study of maritime areas which will 
require a certain amount of time. 
  It seems to be advisable to note that this problem, being 
universal, can be resolved only at the state level within the 
framework of the realization of a purposeful Russian Federation 
State Program for dealing with radioactive wastes and spent 
nuclear materials and for writing them off and dumping them. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Morskoy sbornik", 1993. 

