Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Excerpts from book by Ex-Governor of Jammu-Kashmir Jagmohan </F>
reprinted in SUNDAY as "Refugees at Home"] 
  [Text] The indifference with which the problems of the 
Kashmiri Pandit community during the last five years have been 
viewed by the public in general and the government in 
particular, is an indication of the poor state of health of our 
society. Apart from the low level of response to human pain and 
suffering, other sections of the public have shown little 
awareness of similar fate visiting them, in one form or the 
other, if "indifference of the bystanders" persists and 
callousness continues to dominate the national ethos. "If today, 
your anguish is not mine, tomorrow my anguish will not be yours." 
<H5>  The History </H5>
  The Kashmiri Pandits are a community which invites envy at 
their achievement as well as sorrow at their plight now. In one 
way, its members have played a dominant role in ruling India 
after August 1947. In another way, the community has been 
hounded by a deep sense of insecurity in the Valley. In one way, 
again, it has been a well-knit community, and, in another way, 
hopelessly divided and leaderless. The community's long history 
has been one of triumphs and tragedies -- steady and silent 
triumphs and tumultuous and terrible tragedies. Like Kashmir's 
weather, the bright, sunny, cool and crisp days have been 
punctuated by floods and famines and of grey and depressing 
clouds. 
<H5>  Who Are the Kashmiri Pandits? </H5>
  About 5,000 years ago, there existed a highly-developed 
community, with a "profound spiritual culture", along the banks 
of the river Saraswati, which, according to the Vedas, was the 
Mother of Rivers. The Rig Veda (II, 41.16) speaks of it as "the 
best mother, the best river, the best goddess". 
  Recent researches, particularly of Dr V. S. Wakankar, 
conducted with sophisticated instruments such as multi-spectoral 
scanner have clearly established that Saraswati was not a 
mythological river. It actually existed and flowed from the 
foothills of the Himalayas, through what is now Thar desert to 
the Rann of Kutch near the Arabian Sea. It dried up because its 
main tributary, Sutlej, changed its course, approximately at a 
right angle, consequent to geological changes. 
  After the drying up of the Saraswati, the community, which 
lived on the banks, dispersed. A section of this community 
comprising Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaisyas, moved towards the 
mountains and finally settled in the Kashmir Valley. Amongst the 
settlers, the Brahmins soon acquired a pre-eminent position, 
largely because of their great learning in mathematics, 
philosophy, astrology and law. In course of time, they came to 
be known as the Kashmiri Pandits. 
<H5>  Contribution </H5>
  The mother tongue of the Kashmiri Pandits was Sanskrit, and 
they made the Valley a great nursery of Hindu culture. Many 
schools of thought were developed, including the celebrated 
Trikka philosophy, popularly called Kashmir Saivism. The 
tradition of guru-sishwa (teacher-disciple) was 
firmly established. Every student had to learn at least four 
Vedas, six Angas, besides astrology, music and the sciences. All 
this has justifiably given the Valley the name of Saradapeeth -- 
the seat of Sarada, the Goddess of Learning. 
  The kings of Kashmir and those of the other parts of north 
India had strong links and were motivated by the same type of 
cultural and political aspirations. Gonanda, the first known 
king of Kashmir, was a relation and a friend of Jarasandha, king 
of Magadha. He was followed by 44 kings. Thereafter, Asoka 
(272-232 BC) extended his control over Kashmir. Three centuries 
later, the Kushans established their rule. 
  They were followed by a number of Hindu kings, including 
Abhimanyu, Vibhishana and Indrajit. Their names, which are 
familiar to the readers of Ramayana, suggest close 
affinity between Kashmir and other parts of India. Lalitaditya 
(721-761), who built the famous temple of Martanda, in honour of 
the Sun God, and who could be compared to Napoleon in his 
military skill; Avantivarman (855-883), who was a great patron 
of men of letters and the founder of Avantipur; and Jaya Simha 
(1127-1155), who effectuated a "great renaissance", were the 
three outstanding kings whose contribution to Indian culture, 
religion, philosophy, art and architecture is truly remarkable. 
They were admirably served by the Kashmiri Pandits. It has 
appropriately been remarked that "ancient India has nothing more 
worthy of its early civilisation than the grand ruins of 
Kashmir". 
<H5>  The Elites </H5>
  The Kashmiri Pandits constituted a powerful elite group 
during the reigns of Hindu kings. Their material needs were 
mostly met by the royal families and establishments. Such was 
their influence on society that, by resorting to collective 
fasting, they could virtually force the monarch to concede their 
demands, reasonable or unreasonable. 
<H5>  Vicissitudes </H5>
  In the early 14th century, with the conversion of the then 
ruler, Rinchana, Muslim rule commenced. As Aurel Stein has 
noted, "Islam made its headway in Kashmir, not by forcible 
conquest but by gradual conversion." But coercive methods were 
often employed and crass fanaticism was not unknown. 
  The Pandit community underwent its most tragic phase during 
the regime of Sultan Sikander (1389-1413), who came to be known 
as "But-Shikan", destroyer of idols. "There was no city, no 
town, no village, no wood, where the temples of gods remained 
unbroken." 
  The Sultan even tried to pull down the famous temple of 
Martand. A relentless campaign for conversion to Islam was 
launched, under the charge of the Sultan's chief minister, Malik 
Saif-ud-Din, who, ironically, was himself a Kashmiri Brahmin 
before his conversion. As Ferishta recorded, "Many Brahmins, 
rather than abandon their religion or their country, poisoned 
themselves; some emigrated from their native homes, while a few 
escaped the evil of banishment by becoming Mohammedans." 
  Rajtarangini of Jonaraja portrayed the same tragic 
reality in these words: "The Brahmins fled. The difficult 
terrains through which they passed, the scanty food they ate, 
the painful illnesses and the torments they suffered during 
their lifetime removed the fear of hell from their minds. Only 
11 Pandit families were left." 
  Maybe the number 11 is only symbolically true; but the fact 
remains that at the end of Sultan Sikander's rule, the Kashmiri 
Brahmins were reduced to a microscopic minority. Sikander's 
policy was continued by his son, Sultan Ali Shah. He, too, 
remained under the influence of chief minister Saif-ud-Din. 
  The next Sultan, Zain-ul-Abidin (1420-1470 AD), turned out 
to 
be the most benevolent ruler that Kashmir has known. It has been 
correctly remarked that "history can give few examples where the 
policy was so completely reversed by the successor. Where 
Sikander destroyed, Zain-ul-Abidin restored; where the former 
banished, the latter recalled." Zain-ul-Abidin's reign, 
following that of Sikander and Ali Shah, was, in the words of 
historian Srivara, "like the cooling sandal paste after the heat 
of summer in a desert had departed". 
  In the end of the 15th century, under the influence of 
Shams-ud-Din Iraqi, the Kashmiri Brahmins were once again 
persecuted. The 15th century, thus, turned out to be one of the 
most fateful periods in the history of Kashmiri Pandits. Before 
this century, the community was intact and divided into 199 
exogamous gotras, the members of which claimed 
descent from the rishi whose name the 
gotra bore. to these gotras were now added 
the distinction between the Kashmiri Pandits who withstood the 
persecution and stayed in the Valley and those who migrated and 
later returned. The former were known as Malmasis and the 
latter, Bhanmasis. 
  By the time the Mughal rule commenced in Kashmir, the 
Pandits 
had regained their position. They identified themselves with 
Mughal manners and modes of administration. Their proficiency in 
Persian, the court language, proved a great asset. The Pandits 
became the backbone of the structure of governance at the middle 
level. Their prestige in society was also enhanced by Emperor 
Akbar's visit to the Martand Temple and offering a cow, with 
garlands of gold and jewels, as a gift. From the insignificant 
figure of 11, their number also increased. Their number was 
estimated by Abul Fazal to be 2,000 during Akbar's regime. 
  During Aurangzeb's long reign of 49 years, Kashmir saw 14 
governors. they generally ruled well. But one of them, Iftikar 
Khan (1671-1675), persecuted the Brahmins, and they approached 
the ninth Sikh Guru, Tegh Bahadur. They complained: "We suffer 
great atrocities, sacred threads (janeus) are 
forcibly taken off our persons. Cows are killed. 
Janeus, a maund-and-a-quarter in weight, are snapped 
in a single day." The Guru consoled them and said, "Go tell the 
Mughal rulers that if they converted Tegh Bahadur they would all 
voluntarily accept Islam." This infuriated the Imperial Court 
and led to the Guru's martyrdom. And the Sikh faith and history 
took a new turn. 
  After Aurangzeb's death, the Mughal empire began to crumble 
and the Afghans established their hegemony over Kashmir. The 
last Afghan governor, Jabbar Khan, persecuted the Pandits 
relentlessly. A Pandit nobleman, Birbal Dhar, unable to see any 
longer the Kashmiris being tormented and tortured, approached 
Maharaja Ranjit Singh for help and provided him with valuable 
information about the strength and deployment of Jabbar Khan's 
forces. Ranjit Singh had earlier made two unsuccessful attempts 
to capture Kashmir, once in 1812 and again in 1814. This time, 
success greeted Ranjit Singh. The Sikh forces, under the able 
command of Misser Dewan Chand, defeated Jabbar Khan at Shopiyan 
on 15 July, 1819, and triumphantly marched into the capital the 
next day. 
  The Sikh rule in Kashmir lasted only 27 years (1819-1846). 
It 
was followed by about 100 years of Dogra rule, when the British 
had a decisive say in all important matters. 
<H5>  Migration </H5>
  Over the years, a sizeable number of Kashmiri Pandits 
migrated to different parts of northern India. The migration was 
sometimes sizeable, and at other times in trickles, depending 
upon the persecution or discrimination at home and opportunities 
elsewhere. 
<H5>  Adaptation </H5>
  In regard to these migrants, Dhanvanthi Rama Rau, in her 
memoirs, An Inheritance, observes: "They were obliged 
to alter their dress from the loose robes and distinctive 
headcovering of Kashmiris to the Hindu saris for women and 
pyjamas and long coats for men, or to the trousers and tunics 
dictated by the Muslim Mughal Court. However, they continued to 
cling to their names and the customs, rites and ceremonies that 
belonged to their community." 
  The Kashmiri Pandits who migrated were somewhat different 
from the Brahmins of northern India. While the latter were 
highly conservative, strictly vegetarian, the Kashmiri Pandits 
were meat-eaters, scholarly, well-versed in Persian, and both 
adaptive and traditional. 
<H5>  The Present Tragedy </H5>
  Whatever be the vicissitudes of Kashmiri Pandits' history 
and 
whatever unkind quirks their fate might have brought to them in 
the past, all these pale into insignificance when compared to 
what has been happening to them since the middle of 1989. As a 
part of overall framework of terrorism and subversion in 
Kashmir, practically the entire community, totalling about 
250,000, was made to flee the Valley. The strategy adopted was 
to "kill one and frighten 1,000". 
<H5>  Canard </H5>
  When viewed in all its dimensions, the current phase of the 
Kashmiri Pandits' misfortune is the most calamitous. The grim 
tragedy is compounded by the equally grim irony that one of the 
most intelligent, subtle, versatile and proud community of the 
country is being virtually reduced to extinction in free India. 
The Pandits are suffering not under the fanatic zeal of medieval 
Sultans like Sikander or under the tyrannical regimes of the 
Afghan governors, but they are suffering under the supposedly 
secular rulers of independent India. What's worse, some 
politicians and their apologists, whose shallowness is matched 
only by their obstinacy to suppress documented facts and 
contemporary records, have been spreading the canard that I 
encouraged the migration of the Kashmiri Pandits from the Valley. 
  To bring out the truth about the so-called induced migration 
and also to delineate the chilling face of Kashmiri terrorism, I 
can do no better than quote from a letter of H. N. Jattu, 
president of the All-India Kashmiri Pandit Conference, which was 
published last year in local newspapers and a leading daily of 
Chandigarh. It reads, inter alia, as follows: 
  "It is wholly incorrect that I and other Kashmiri Pandits 
migrated from the Valley at the instance of Shri Jagmohan. The 
truth is exactly the opposite. Shri Jagmohan, in fact, did his 
level best to stop migration which had begun much earlier, when 
in broad daylight and on busy streets, eminent and innocent 
leaders of the Pandit community were being brutally murdered and 
the CM [chief minister], Dr Farooq Abdullah, was taking no 
action whatsoever or apprehending any culprit. Politician Tikka 
Lal Taploo was shot dead on 14 September, 1989, N. K. Ganjoo, a 
judge, was murdered on 4 November of that year and journalist P. 
N. Bhatt was killed on 28 December, 1989. 
  "The terror-stricken Pandit community, in a memorandum dated 
16 January, 1990, to the then Governor, General (Retd.) K. V. 
Krishna Rao, brought out the total ineffectiveness of the state 
government. 
  "When Kashmiri Pandits were being killed on the pretext that 
they were 'informers' and agents of the central government, I 
and some members of the All-India Kashmiri Pandit Conference 
discussed the alarming situation. After the meeting, I issued a 
press note on 21 February, 1990, which was published in the 
newspapers the following day. In this note, I had appealed to 
the militants not to kill Kashmiri Pandits by labelling them as 
informers, and if they had suspicion on any Pandit, they should 
bring it to the notice of our organisation. 
  "On 28 February, my young and energetic secretary, Ashok 
Kazi, of the All-India Kashmiri Pandit Conference, was done to 
death in the most inhuman and savage manner. He was bleeding 
profusely and crying, `End my agony by shooting me', but the 
murderers enacted a sort of death-dance around him and hurled 
all types of abuses on Pandits. All this happened on a busy 
thoroughfare. But no one came to his rescue. It was only the 
distant siren of a police van that made the killers to pump 
bullets into Ashok Kazi's body and finish him and disappear. 
  "On the same evening, I was abused over the telephone in the 
most filthy and unprintable language. Referring to Ashok Kazi's 
torturous killing, the caller said: 'Have you now got our reply 
to the press note? You dog, you will meet worse fate than Ashok 
Kazi.' From that day onwards, members of my community came to 
the conclusion that we were hoping against hope and must leave 
the Valley immediately to save our lives and the honour of our 
womenfolk. And the migration accelerated. 
  "On the other hand, Governor Jagmohan, who took over on 19 
January, 1990, tried very hard to persuade us not to leave. He 
fervently appealed to the Kashmiri Pandits, who had already 
migrated, to return to the Valley. He even offered to set up 
four temporary camps for them at Srinagar, Anantnag, Baramulla 
and Kupwara. This would be evident from his press note of 7 
March, 1990, which was widely published at that time. 
  "A number of other energetic steps which have now become a 
part of history were taken by Shri Jagmohan to retrieve a 
hopeless situation. At great personal risk, he visited the 
police stations in thickly-populated areas where the police 
machinery had totally broken down. To instill confidence in the 
highly demoralised Kashmiri Pandit community, he even went to 
the house of young Satish Tikka in Habbakadal, a congested and 
terrorist-infected locality. 
  "He consoled the old parents of Satish, who was brutally 
murdered after being called out in the street by his erstwhile 
friends. The Union home minister acknowledged all this when he 
said in Parliament on 25 April, 1990: `Jagmohan had to function 
in a vacuum, in a situation where there was no respect for law 
or authority of the state government. He braved terrorists, 
instilled courage in government officials who had almost given 
up the situation as a lost case. It is very unfair for anyone to 
criticise Jagmohan for what he has done for the country.' 
  "When an all-party committee, headed by deputy prime 
minister 
Devi Lal visited Srinagar, myself and Shri J. N. Sapru met him 
and the Union law minister Shri Dinesh Goswami, at Centaur 
Hotel, where the party was staying. We apprised them of our 
horrible plight -- how we are living under continuous fear of 
death, how threats and hysterical slogans of 
Nizam-e-Mustafa, etc. were blared simultaneously from 
hundreds of loudspeakers installed on the mosques, how hit lists 
were being displayed on the notice boards and how our womenfolk 
were being dishonoured. We also met Shri Rajiv Gandhi and spoke 
to him on similar lines. 
  "The waiters of the hotel, most of whom had turned 
collaborators of the militants on account of internal 
subversion, were listening. The director-general of police and 
the additional director-general (CID) came to know that the 
waiters had informed the militant leaders about what transpired 
at the aforesaid meetings. We were already on the hit list and 
they decided to intensify their efforts to get us immediately, 
so that punishment for speaking about their atrocities were 
carried out speedily. The director-general of police and the 
additional director-general thought that there was no effective 
way of saving our lives except to shift us to Jammu till 
conditions improved for our safe return. 
  "In the meanwhile, treacherous and brutal killings of 
innocent Kashmiri Pandits continued in the Valley. Those killed 
included prominent persons like engineer B. K. Ganjoo, poet 
Sarvanand Premi and his young son, Virender Kaul, professor K. 
L. Ganjoo and his wife and a teacher, C. L. Pandita. Press 
notices were prominently put out in widely-read dailies of 
Srinagar, namely, AFTAB and ALSAFA, requiring Kashmiri Pandits 
to leave within 48 hours, failing which they would run the risk 
of being exterminated. Photocopies of these notices have been 
printed by Shri Jagmohan in his well-known book, My Frozen 
Turbulence in Kashmir." 
  In the face of the above hard evidence, which remains 
unrebutted till date, could there by any doubt about the 
intentional falsehood coined about the migration of the Kashmiri 
Pandits from the Valley? 
<H5>  Wayward and Infirm State </H5>
  I am confident that, had I not been stabbed in the back by 
the most repugnant lies spoken in contemporary history, like 
those in regard to the Kashmiri Pandits, I would have built, 
during my second tenure, the same bonds of love and affection 
with both Hindus and Muslims, through selfless service and a 
clear and consistent policy of fairness, firmness and 
fearlessness, as I was able to do during my first tenure (April 
1984-June 1989). 
  Those who have any doubt about this proposition should go 
through the reports of reputed national dailies of early May 
1990. By that time, the corner had been decisively turned. The 
militants were on the run. The people had themselves started 
erasing pro-Pakistan and pro-aazadi slogans from the 
walls of public buildings and private houses. The capital, with 
thousands of government employees, including Kashmiri Pandits, 
had been shifted to Srinagar without a scratch on any head. 
Unfortunately, the wayward nature of the Indian state once again 
came into play and all the advantages secured were wantonly 
thrown away. 
  It speaks volumes about the infirmities of the Union 
government that it has created about 250,000 refugees in its own 
country, and that it is not their human rights violations, but 
those of the terrorists, that are usually discussed at the 
national and international fora. 
  Most of the Kashmiri migrants are staying on scanty relief, 
in miserable camps in Jammu, Nagrota, Udhampur and other cities. 
The children go to badly-maintained schools with hardly any 
furniture. The women have to cook in the open, even under the 
scorching sun or heavy rainfall. 
  That, during the last four years, none of the Prime 
Ministers 
-- V. P. Singh, Chandra Shekhar and Narasimha Rao -- have felt 
the prick of conscience to visit any of these camps shows how 
compassion has completely dried up in the minds of the Indian 
rulers. For them, politics is everything, justice and truth 
nothing. 
  It goes to the credit of the Kashmiri Pandit community that, 
even in such indifferent environment, it has not lost heart. Its 
various associations have been voicing their grievances 
vigorously and trying to get across the barriers of government 
apathy. A recent example of this phenomenon was the World 
Kashmiri Pandit Conference, organised in New Delhi, on 27 and 28 
December, 1993, by Panun Kashmir, an organisation which is 
dominated by the youths. 
<H5>  National Concern </H5>
  While it should be left to the community and its various 
organisations to sort out their differences on the blueprint for 
the future -- whether they want a separate Union Territory 
within the Valley or they want to go back with honour and 
dignity, with terrorism and subversion totally exterminated -- 
it is the duty of the government in particular and the Indian 
public in general, to stand by the community and relieve it of 
its distress in the shortest possible time. Its pain should be 
felt as national pain and its anguish as national anguish. We 
must all remember that "the only thing necessary for the triumph 
of evil is for good men to do nothing." 
[Box, p 62] 
<H5>  The Strangest Night </H5>
  I went on working in the secretariat and returned to Raj 
Bhavan late in the evening of 20 January, 1990. The night that 
followed was the strangest night that I have ever lived. Hardly 
I had gone to bed when the two telephones at my bedside started 
ringing, almost continuously. At the other end, there were 
voices of alarm, of concern, of fright, sometimes muted voices 
of men too terror-stricken to speak. 
  "Tonight is our last night," moaned one voice. "By morning, 
we -- all Kashmiri Pandits -- would be butchered," said another 
voice. "Send us aeroplanes; take us out of the Valley; evacuate 
us at night if you do not want to see our corpses in the 
morning," pleaded another. "Our womenfolk, our sisters, our 
mothers, would be abducted, and we menfolk slaughtered," 
shrieked yet another voice. 
  Some callers told me that they would just hold on to their 
telephones so that I could hear the terrible slogans and 
exhortations that were emanating from hundreds of loudspeakers 
fitted on the mosques. The noises, they said, were deafening and 
it appeared that a number of recorded tapes were being 
simultaneously played at a very loud pitch, causing horrible 
effects in resonance and permeating the atmosphere with terror 
and fear of imminent death. 
  What was it all about? How is it that such a large number of 
loudspeakers had been installed and the same calls were being 
made from them? How was this technique of arousing mass frenzy 
acquired? Who had masterminded this well-knit organisation? And 
how was it that such a build-up remained unnoticed? Was it a 
case of default or connivance or both? 
  (Extracted from Jagmohan's book, My Frozen Turbulence 
in Kashmir) 
[Box, pp 64, 65] 
<H5>  A Treacherous Murder </H5>
  On 2 February, 1990, Satish Tikoo, a young Kashmiri Pandit, 
was murdered near his house in Habbakadal. He was a social 
worker, an activist, who helped the people of his community 
secure redressal of their grievances. He was equally popular 
amongst the Hindu and Muslim youths of the locality. 
  Early in the morning, two Muslim youths, whom he apparently 
knew, called at his residence. His sister responded to the call. 
Sensing something sinister, she told the visitors that Satish 
was not at home. They went away, but lurked around the adjacent 
lanes. After a while, Tikoo came out of his room. His sister 
mentioned to him about the youths who had come to see him. He 
got a bit annoyed, and reprimanded his sister for being too 
suspicious. He could not imagine that someone had planned to 
kill him. 
  He stepped out of the house and peeped into the adjoining 
lanes and by-lanes. In a moment, a dreadful pistol shot was 
heard. The family rushed out. They found Tikoo in a pool of 
blood, motionless. 
  The brutal murder of Satish Tikoo was another blow to the 
already shattered morale of the Kashmiri Pandit community, This 
was bound to accelerate the pace of their migration which had 
been going on since the assassination of N. K. Ganju, Tikka Lal 
Taploo and P. N. Bhatt. 
  To generate some confidence in the community and to offer 
condolences to the bereaved family, I decided to visit Tikoo's 
house the following day. Accordingly, on the evening of 3 
February, I went to Habbakadal, an old and congested locality in 
the interior of the city. By that time, the curfew relaxation 
period was over. Except for the long row of our vehicles, 
nothing was to be seen on the streets. The afternoon rain 
appeared to have soaked the houses with depression. The few 
windows that were open were without even the usual dim light. 
The dark clouds overhead completed the picture of gloom. 
  "It is very unwise on our part," said a companion officer, 
"to move out like this in narrow lanes. A well-planned grenade 
attack can finish us all." I nodded in agreement. But my mind 
was elsewhere -- the slush and muck on the road; the threatening 
clouds above; the mute and dingy houses by the side of the road, 
and the overpowering silence all around. 
  The house of Tikoo was like a shattered nest. Everything lay 
scattered. I sat on the ground with the family members. An old 
lamp had been lit. It pierced the darkness only around me. 
Satish's father narrated the tragedy in a low, halting, voice. I 
thought it was unnecessary. The grim atmosphere around told the 
tale more vividly. 
  As I was about to leave, all the friends and relations of 
the 
family gathered there, demanded with one voice that they should 
be settled permanently outside the Valley. Satish's uncle, who 
was a bit vociferous and assertive, insisted that I should go 
upstairs and see the family deity. I agreed. 
  A calm majestic figure was soon visible. It looked so 
imposing even in the darkness. The man, his voice quivering with 
emotion, said: "Here we have lived for centuries under the 
benign grace of this deity. This house, this street, this lane 
and this by-lane, where we have lived since our birth, we can 
leave, but not this deity. You must provide us with suitable 
accommodation." I remained silent. This, I thought, was not the 
occasion to discuss such demands. With tears in their eyes, the 
family members thanked me and the accompanying officers. We were 
all moved by the sad plight of the family. 
  Looking at the compact and enmeshed houses, and the by-lanes 
which acted like fine threads of a well-knit fabric, I wondered 
how these families, who had all their gods and goddesses here, 
and had deep roots in the soil, could leave and settle in 
distant and unfamiliar lands. Sometimes life if unaccountably 
cruel. and we human beings have, perhaps no option but to suffer 
-- suffer in silence, or wail. 
  On 22 March, 1990, B. K. Ganjoo, a telecom engineer living 
in 
a Muslim-dominated locality in Srinagar incurred the wrath of 
the terrorists in the Valley. He had been warned by his 
neighbours that his name was on the hit-list, so when the 
terrorists burst into his house looking for him, he hid in a 
drum used to store rice. Not finding him in the room the 
terrorists riddled the drum -- and his body -- with bullets. 
After that, they asked his wife to cook the rice and feed it to 
the family. 
  A few days earlier, 30-year-old Navin Saproo, a central 
government employee, was returning home from office when 
terrorists sprayed him with bullets. A woman passer-by pleaded 
with them to spare him, but they pushed her aside and danced 
around the man who lay writhing in pain. As the sorrowing 
relatives took away Saproo's body, the terrorists followed them 
in a truck, right up to the cremation ground, singing and 
dancing till the body was reduced to ashes. 
  The stories abound. "Tum kehte ho kagaz dekhi, main 
kehta hoon aankhen dekhi (You only talk about what you have 
read, but I talk of what I have seen with my own eyes)," said Dr 
Agni Shekhar, quoting the poet Kabir, at the 1993 World Kashmiri 
Pandit Conference in Delhi. He went on to relate the tales of 
atrocities committed on the Kashmiri Pandits in Kashmir -- of 
which he and three lakh other refugees, scattered in camps in 
Jammu, Amritsar and Delhi, were eyewitnesses -- and there was 
not a dry eye left at the Siri Fort Auditorium. 
  The situation was charged with drama. An elderly man, 
weeping 
inconsolably, had to be ushered out. Noted film actor Anupam 
Kher asked for the lights to be switched on in the dimly-lit 
auditorium. "The Kashmiri Pandits have suffered enough in 
darkness," he intoned, in a voice choked with emotion. 
  "Our stories are as horrifying as those of Bosnia," said Dr 
Agni Shekhar, the convenor of the conference. "It is a case of 
ethnic cleansing, of cultural genocide. These are new terms for 
India, but our tragedy is a unique one." 
  According to Shekhar, more than 1,200 Kashmiri Hindus have 
been killed in the Valley, some 1,600 houses burnt and over 50 
temples destroyed in the last four years. Over three-and-a-half 
lakh Kashmiri Pandits have fled the Valley, most of whom are now 
living in camps. 
  And these refugees are a bitter lot. 
  "It is tragic that we are called 'refugees' in our own 
country," said Sushil Raina, in the camp at Amar Colony in 
Delhi. The camp houses 60 Kashmiri Pandits who sleep, cook and 
live in one large hall. Raina had his own medical store in 
Kashmir. But one day in 1990 he received a death threat. He 
didn't know who had sent him the threat, nor was he interested 
in finding out. Scared for his life, he slunk out of his house 
in the middle of the night. 
  This M.Sc. is now selling meat and chicken in Delhi's INA 
market. The rest of his family -- his parents and sisters -- 
have fled to Bangalore. 
  Vijaya Zutshi, a young mother of two girls, cooks food in 
her 
make-shift kitchen, and matter-of-factly relates her tale -- 
which could be that of any other Kashmiri Hindu family -- "My 
husband ran a courier company in Kashmir. One night, four men 
with guns knocked at our door. My husband jumped the wall and 
ran away. Next day, we all left." 
  The Zutshis are among the more fortunate families: they 
have, 
at least, a corner of the hall in the camp in Delhi's Amar 
Colony to call their own. The single men are not so lucky. They 
have to make do with as much space as their bedrolls occupy. The 
hall resembles a railway platform, except, these people have 
nowhere to go. 
  The camp in Delhi's South Extension is worse, with more than 
250 people crammed into a small hall. The only things these 
people can call their own are the walls of these camps, 
plastered over as they are with newspaper clippings of militant 
deaths in the Valley. 
  But one doesn't really need these to read the writing on the 
wall. Here are men who owned apple orchards and saffron farms 
back in the Valley, forced to steal out of their homes because 
they refused to obey the cry "Kashmir mein rehna hoga, 
Allah-ho-Akbar kehna hoga (If you want to stay in Kashmir, 
you must embrace Islam)." 
  And now, they have to make do with an average income of Rs 
1,200 to Rs 1,500 a month. That is, if the migrants are lucky 
enough to find jobs at all. Otherwise, they have to depend on a 
government dole of Rs 250 per head. Or Rs 1,000 per family, 
irrespective of its size. 
  They have been waiting for nearly four years for the 
government to do something about their lot. "All that we have 
got is indifference and apathy," burst out Ashok Barbazoor 
angrily. Barbazoor worked for 21 years at the Oberoi Hotel in 
Srinagar, and claims he earned nearly Rs 10,000 a month. Now, he 
sits idle. "I burnt Pakistani flags in Jammu, and now I am 
paying the price for my nationalism. All I have to say is 
'Pakistan, zindabad', and I will get my house and 
land back." 
  It's the kind of experience that is at the bottom of all the 
knee-jerk bigotism in the country. "So much hue and cry over one 
mosque being brought down here," sneered Barbazoor. "What about 
all the Hindu temples that were burnt in Kashmir? This 
government wants to show it is a democratic one, and so is 
pandering to the minorities." 
  Alleged S. L. Shakhdar, chairman of the action committee 
group, Kashmir Samiti, "There is discrimination even among the 
refugees here, with the Kashmiri Pandits getting a raw deal. The 
Punjab migrants get a dole of Rs 300 per head. And the Afghani 
refugees get Rs 700 per head, from the Indian government, in 
addition to Rs 800 from the United Nations." 
  "For so long, the government has been saying 'We'll send you 
back,' and doing nothing but mollycoddling the terrorists," said 
one refugee. "Look what happened in Hazratbal. They set the 
militants free in the stealth of the night." "If they can't give 
us back our land," cried another, "we will take guns and fight 
for it." His cry was echoed by the surrounding Kashmiri Pandit 
youths: "Train us to fight and we will solve our own problems." 
  Another solution being advocated is the one for a separate 
homeland for Kashmiri Pandits. This demand comes loudest from 
the Panun Kashmir Group (founded in 1991). Explained its 
chairman, Dr Agni Shekhar, "Panun means 'our'. We are 
asking for our homeland, a place where Pandits will be safe and 
can call their home." 
  Realising the improbability of the militants ever leaving 
the 
Valley, the organisation is asking for a homeland comprising the 
regions of the Valley to the east and north of the river Jhelum. 
  In addition, they want the homeland to be accorded the 
status 
of a Union Territory, under the Constitution of India but minus 
the controversial Article 370, which has been applicable to the 
rest of the state since November 1952. 
  "Panun Kashmir is a translation of our aspirations," said Dr 
Agni Shekhar. Added Dr Ajay Chungroo, spokesman for Panun 
Kashmir, "Over three lakh Kashmiri Pandits were pushed out of 
the Valley. We deserve a home, and by concentrating us in a 
particular part of the Valley, it will be easier for the 
government to protect us as well." 
  Gautam Kaul, DIG Personnel, Central Industrial Security 
Force 
agreed: "The demand for a separate homeland must be seen in its 
totality," he said. "It is the demand of despair. And it would 
not have come if the central government had not ignored the 
entire issue. Having a patch of sterilised area free from 
militants is a simple way of solving the situation." 
  But the migrants in the camps do not take to the idea of a 
separate homeland. "What they are asking for is a division of 
Kashmir. This means that Kashmir is lost to us," said Raina. 
Added Barbazoor, "It is not possible to live in isolation by 
asking for a strip of land. We have to interact both 
professionally and socially with our immediate neighbours. How 
can we exist in a vacuum?" 
  While the Panun Kashmir members shrug off the migrants' 
point 
of view ("They have orchards and property all over the Valley 
and so, don't want to be restricted to a particular area," 
explained one Panun Kashmiri), others, like former Governor of 
Jammu and Kashmir, Girish C. Saxena, concur with their argument 
against a separate homeland. 
  "The idea (of a separate homeland) does not take into 
account 
the realities of the situation," said Saxena. "One can 
understand their frustration and despair, but the foundation of 
the return of the Kashmiri Pandits to the Valley can only be on 
the basis of goodwill and welcome by the majority community in 
the Valley. And this can only be established through government 
negotiations." 
  He went on to caution, "These negotiations take time. Even 
in 
Punjab, thousands of people and industries were displaced, but 
eventually they have all gone back to their own homes." 
  It is ironic that Panun Kashmir, an organisation that claims 
to be voicing their demands, did not take their views into 
account when it asked for a separate homeland. "And what is 
worse, they are spending lakhs of rupees hosting a world 
conference, when they could have distributed the money among the 
refugees," said Barbazoor. (Panun Kashmir claims it is funded by 
its branches in America and Europe, and by various Kashmiri 
Pandits in India as well.) 
  Agni Shekhar rose to his organisation's defence: "It is 
necessary to hold conferences to highlight our problems. Also, 
our organisation is not for meeting day-to-day needs, but has a 
long-term goal." 
  As for the day-to-day needs, "The migrants do have some sort 
of a cushion to fall back on in the form of the camps," said 
Saxena. "True, these can be improved upon, but these people all 
come from an affluent background, and so their expectations are 
much more than what is being provided." 
  The Kashmir Samiti, which manages most of the refugee camps, 
has helped in looking for employment. Out of the 10,000 families 
in the 17 Delhi camps, around 3,000 people are working as sales 
agents, teachers, engineers and even shopkeepers (Delhi's INA 
market is full of Kashmiri migrants-turned-shopkeepers). 
  Vijaya Zutshi's husband works as a school-teacher, earning 
Rs 
3,000 a month. "In Kashmir," she said wistfully, "we had two 
houses. Now we have to make do with his small salary." 
  Some philosophical souls are more than making do. A few 
stray 
lay-abouts are already in evidence. Happy with the government 
dole and whatever part-time employment that comes their way, 
they loiter around the camps, dressed in not-so-old sweaters and 
trousers and talking about the latest Hindi moves. These youths 
have also found their own alternate lifestyles in exile. 
  In the meantime, the government needs to step up its 
rehabilitation programmes. "There should be relaxation of age to 
all dispossessed migrants," pointed out Gautam Kaul, "to 
compensate for two years' loss in education. Let them treat us 
like Scheduled Tribes." 
  This is the other aspect of the mass exodus of the Pandits 
from the Valley: the cultural and social loss to the nation. 
According to Vijay Tikku, Panun Kashmir member, "Modern Kashmir 
owes a lot, particularly in the fields of literature, art and 
dialect -- its very Kashmiriyat -- to the Kashmiri 
Hindus. The Pandits in Kashmir go back over 5,000 years. Our 
language, the Sharda language, is the oldest regional language 
in India." 
  Although the Valley, which accounts for 3,000 square miles 
in 
a state comprising 84,000 square miles, is predominantly 
inhabited by Muslims, there is little difference in the language 
and dress of the Hindus and Muslims residing there. But now the 
Kashmiri Hindus are claiming that since they were the original 
inhabitants of Kashmir, they are responsible for its cultural 
identity. "The Muslims in the Valley have adopted the Sharda 
language. If the Pandits do not return, then the original Sharda 
script will become influenced by Pushto and Afghani dialects," 
laments Kaul. 
  In order to hold on to their Kashmiriyat, the 
migrants have been making paintings, sculptures, writing 
Kashmiri folk songs -- resulting in what they term "art in 
exile". "With these paintings and creative literature, we want 
to tell the rest of India, 'This is the community you have 
killed'," said Agni Shekhar. 
  Four years after the debacle in their lives, the Kashmiri 
Pandits languish in their camps, but not without a desperate bid 
to go home. 
* 

