BFN 

<F P=106> [From the press review] </F>
  [Text] Under the headline "The Bases of the Resumption of 
the Peace Process," AL-BA'TH says: Since the convocation of the 
Madrid conference, Israel has been involved in feverish attempts 
to circumvent the peace process, render it void of any content, 
and divert it from its main target, which is a just, 
comprehensive peace. 
  The paper continues: However, those Israeli efforts ended in 
total failure because of Syria's adherence to a firm pan-Arab 
position insisting on the basic principles of the peace process, 
particularly the relevant UN resolutions, the land-for-peace 
formula, and rejection of any relinquishment of any Arab rights. 
  Stressing the need for Arab coordination, cooperation, and 
integration regarding the peace process, the paper warns against 
separate deals and their results, which obstruct the peace 
process and lead it into a maze that gives Israel a chance to 
undermine the Palestine question and achieve gains at the 
expense of the Arab nation's cause, interests, and pan-Arab 
security. 
  Concluding, AL-BA'TH stresses that any resumption of the 
peace talks requires the United States, as the sponsor of the 
peace process, to play the role that it is supposed to play to 
make that process successful and lead it to its desired 
objectives. 
  Under the headline "The Evil Plans," TISHRIN says: It has 
been revealed that Israel had a role in the explosions which 
took place in Lebanon and which targeted houses of worship and 
cultural, party, and political institutions. Lebanese sources 
have declared that Israel planned and financed these operations 
and supplied all the requirements of implementation. By such 
actions, the Rabin government sought to sabotage Lebanon's 
accord process, return the country to the furnace of the 
sectarian civil war, undermine its national awareness, and 
revive sectarian plans and infighting. Thus, it has been 
categorically proved that the present Israeli government has 
changed nothing in the hostile view toward Lebanon, and that 
like its predecessors, this government seeks to partition 
Lebanon and to see it again immersed in bloodshed and 
destruction. 
  The paper stresses that Israel is still the main threat to 
all Lebanese and that it still covets their land and 
possessions. The paper indicates that Israel's plots against 
the Lebanese are endless, and that Israel will continue its 
occupation of southern Lebanon to strike at any signs of 
relaxation and reconstruction in Lebanon and to inflame 
sectarian and religious infighting in it. 
  The paper says that despite the weakness of UN Security 
Council Resolution 904 condemning the Hebron massacre and 
demanding specific measures to protect the Palestinians, the 
Israeli Government seeks to circumvent this resolution and make 
it devoid of any content. This proves again that the Rabin 
government does not intend to comply with international 
resolutions, especially the ones demanding withdrawal from the 
occupied territories and recognition of the Palestinian rights, 
the paper notes. The paper declares: Israel absolutely refuses 
to give up settlement building and settlements, and it does not 
intend to accept the land-for-peace formula. Israel's role in 
southern Sudan, including sending weapons to rebels, has also 
been exposed. This proves that Israel wants neither welfare nor 
stability for the Arabs. The paper stresses that wherever there 
is tension in any Arab country, there must be Israeli fingers 
and weapons. 
  Concluding, TISHRIN says: What we have said clearly shows 
that Israel never considers peace with the Arabs and real 
coexistence with them. Rather, it raises slogans of peace to 
deceive and mislead Arab public opinion and conceal Zionism's 
aggressive and expansionist objectives. 

