BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "The World Today" program presented by Tim Haynes </F>
-- italicized passages are recorded] 
  [Excerpts] [chanting] [Haynes] Chanting and tear gas at a 
demonstration in Cairo last week. The chants are coming from 
around 2,000 Egyptian lawyers. The tear gas and rubber bullets 
were fired by riot police who were determined to prevent the 
demonstration from taking place. The lawyers were angry at the 
death of one of their number, 'Abd-al-Harith Madani, who died in 
police custody. They say he was tortured to death. The 
Government say he had an asthma attack. Muhammad 'Abd-al-Mun'im 
is a spokesman for President Husni Mubarak: 
  ['Abd-al-Mun'im] First of all, we have to say that the 
lawyers--it's not all the lawyers, it's some group of the 
lawyers in the syndicate, you know. And they are claiming that 
he was killed by getting tortured, he was killed. Then this is 
not true, you know. He got some sort of an asthma attack and he 
died. That's it. 
  [Haynes] Friends of Mr. Madani say he had no history of 
breathing problems. The Egyptian Human Rights Organization also 
has serious doubts about the Government's explanation. Karim 
al-Rawi is its deputy secretary general. 
  [Al-Rawi] On the 26th of April, the State Security 
officers entered the premises of 'Abd-al-Harith Madani and held 
him there and other lawyers in his offices for three hours, and 
then took him away. To the best of our knowledge, the next day 
he was removed to al-Qasr al-'Ayni Hospital, to the prisoners' 
wing, and died shortly afterwards. The Government maintained 
that he died of an asthma attack. But eyewitness accounts of 
the body revealed that there are signs of torture, chain marks 
round the feet which indicate that he must have been suspended 
for several hours, and marks on the back and on the chest 
showing that he had been beaten. 
  [Haynes] The Government has accused Mr. Madani of having 
close ties with the illegal group al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah, a 
fundamentalist organization which wants to establish an Islamic 
state in Egypt. Although Egypt is a Muslim society, it's a 
secular state which doesn't allow any political representation 
by religious groups. Al-Jama'ah has pursued a two-year campaign 
of bombings and shootings against the Egyptian Government. And 
it has also targeted foreign tourists, putting a sizeable dent 
in one of the country's biggest foreign currency earners. So 
what is al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah, and why have its members turned 
to violence? Maha 'Azzam is an associate fellow at the Royal 
United Services Institute [RUSI] in London and she is a writer 
on Middle Eastern affairs. 
  ['Azzam] Al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah, I think, can best be 
described as a political protest group that is dedicated to 
bruising the existing regime. It has opted for the use of 
violence given (obviously?) the situation in which all channels 
for political participation and legitimate political opposition 
have been blocked by the regime, and given what it feels is the 
use of violence against the group by the regime itself. It is 
dedicated to the establishment of a state based on the shari'ah. 
Obviously, it is aware of the economic situation in Egypt and 
what it sees as the corruption at government level and at other 
levels, which it believes ought to be weeded out. And it is 
concerned with issues such as social justice. 
  [Haynes] The Government has taken a hard line in reaction to 
al-Jama'ah, choosing to treat members as terrorists rather than 
Islamic fundamentalists. Muhammad 'Abd-al-Mun'im is President 
Mubarak's spokesman. 
  ['Abd-al-Mun'im] I believe the name is not quite 
correct. You know, they are not fundamentalists; they are not 
Muslims; they are just terrorists. I assure you that many of 
them, you know, don't know the ABC's of Islam. They don't 
recitate [word as heard] anything; they know nothing, you know. 
And this was proven by the investigation. They are not Muslim. 
And incidentally, you know, Islam is the religion of tolerance. 
It has nothing to do with what is happening. Terrorism is 
another thing. So these people are protecting themselves and 
claiming that they are Muslims so that they can win the sympathy 
of the society they are living in. But the actual thing that is 
taking place now is that they have lost all sympathy with the 
society. Nobody likes them. 
  [Haynes] Although a large number of Egyptians do seem to be 
revolted by the use of violence by al-Jama'ah, others are 
reported to have reservations about the level of Government 
response: Detention without trial, persistent allegations of 
torture, capital punishment for those found guilty of terrorism, 
and strong suggestions of a shoot-to-kill policy among the 
police. [passage omitted] 
  President Mubarak has a strong interest in limiting the 
effects of al-Jama'ah's activities. Not only does he want to 
avoid facing a rising tide of Islamic emotion at home, but his 
Government's reputation as a solid, influential, pro-Western 
power in the region is at stake. [passage omitted] 
  Al-Jama'ah is not the only Islamic group which is a thorn 
in the government's side. The Muslim Brotherhood is also an 
illegal organization, but has far more widespread support 
throughout the country, is more moderate, and denounces 
violence. It is therefore seen to pose a greater long-term 
threat to the government. Maha 'Azzam of RUSI: 
  ['Azzam] I think, in terms of the objectives of either 
the al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah or the objectives of other Islamist 
groups that are more moderate, there is a general feeling of 
sympathy throughout Egyptian society for, for instance, 
implementation of the shari'ah, for the greater Islamization of 
Egyptian society, for greater respect for the rule of law, for 
opposition to what is seen as corruption at high levels, for 
closing the gap between the rich and the poor. There are some 
very general aspects to the cry, if you like, of al-Jama'ah 
al-Islamiyah and others more moderate, perhaps, that I think 
echoes the feelings of many in Egyptian society. 
  [Haynes] Egypt faces acute social and economic problems. The 
Government is implementing an economic reform program involving 
a reduction in the size of Egypt's public sector and an 
increased privatization program. So far, there have been 
successes. Inflation is down, foreign exchange reserves and the 
balance of payments are healthy, and the currency is stable. 
But any benefits from these measures haven't been evenly 
distributed. A few rich people have got richer, but the 
majority have yet to see any change. [passage omitted] 
  The main groups, the Muslim Brotherhood and the al-Jama'ah, 
both seek social and political change. Responding to criticism 
of its involvement in the lawyers' protest, the Muslim 
Brotherhood has said it's denounced violence and was not to 
blame for any conflicts. A spokesman went on to point out that 
the lack of response to people's needs, delays in improving 
public works, the loss of human rights, and the lack of 
sufficient guarantees for free elections leads to worry, fear, 
and a deterioration in conditions. The Government has paid lip 
service to the idea of political pluralism, but it's drawn the 
line at including any Islamic parties--a move criticized by both 
Islamists and secular intellectuals as a lost opportunity to 
popularize the Government. So why does the Government exclude 
the religious parties? Maha 'Azzam: 
  ['Azzam]I think the Government's problem is with 
allowing any opposition that would truly question the policies 
of the regime and the Government--whether it had been a 
secular-oriented opposition or an Islamic-oriented 
opposition--that question the very basis and legality of those 
in power or wanted a reform of the Constitution, then the 
Government would have problems with this. 
  [Haynes] Some people feel that Mr. Mubarak's Government is 
becoming increasingly authoritarian and that any move toward 
democratization is unlikely. Some observers have looked at the 
past two years of violence and seen similarities with events in 
Algeria where Islamic fundamentalists have been involved in 
protracted violence in protest at their exclusion from 
Government after winning elections in 1992. But conditions in 
Egypt are different, not least because of Egypt's long history 
of strong central authority. But Karim al-Rawi of the Egyptian 
Human Rights Organization feels Mr. Mubarak is using the current 
violence in Egypt as a means of stifling democracy. 
  [Al-Rawi]The regime has used this present climate of 
violence as an excuse not to democratize any further and to 
maintain control and to accuse anybody who disagrees with it, or 
who asks for accountability, accuses them of being pro-Islamist, 
of being pro-terrorist, and that is the new phrase now that they 
use. So those of us who ask for accountability are being accused 
of being terrorists. And so it's a regime that is entering a 
stage where it brooks no criticism. And that is a very 
disturbing situation. 
  [Haynes] Following further attacks on a tourist train in 
southern Egypt on Friday night and al-Jama'ah's renewed call for 
a holy war last weekend, Mr. Mubarak is left to work out how to 
stop the violence. According to Maha 'Azzam, his current policy 
isn't working. 
  ['Azzam]Mr. Mubarak's policy of treating this problem 
mainly as a security issue and as a terrorist problem, will not 
make the problem go away. As we have seen, it has carried on 
for the past couple of years and has actually got worse. There 
is a clear advantage to opening up the political system, in 
allowing, for instance, the Muslim Brotherhood a say in 
government, in putting an end to emergency laws, and that 
security police tactics of torture and imprisonment without 
trial, and so on, are curtailed. 
  [Haynes] Those who seek change in Egypt have found few signs 
so far that President Mubarak is willing to concede any ground 
to the country's Islamic fundamentalists. Using the argument 
that if he allowed representation for Islamists, he would have 
to include all religions and that religion and politics are and 
should be two separate things, he sticks to the idea of truly 
secular government. But for Maha 'Azzam of the RUSI, his policy 
of excluding these groups from a share of power ignores Egypt's 
problems and points up the need for the very changes he is 
resisting. 
  ['Azzam]There is certainly discontent with the economic 
and social conditions of Egypt today. And I think this has of 
course strengthened the hand of the Islamists. But it isn't 
really a reason for their existence. They are not very much a 
political and cultural phenomenon. And I think therein lies 
their major appeal. They point to the social and economic 
conditions of Egypt and the failure of the regime to respond to 
them as reason why a different kind of regime, and for them, one 
with an Islamic orientation, may be the answer to Egypt's both 
political and economic problems. 

