CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial: ``Accord on Tarapur''] </F>
  [Text] New Delhi has done well to subject the use of 
indigenous fuel for the Tarapur atomic power station to 
international safeguards by involving the International Atomic 
Energy Agency, thereby sending out the message that there is 
nothing unduly secretive about the country's nuclear 
installations. It will be noted that the gesture is voluntary 
and it should make it easier for the Agency to respond. Ever 
since the Americans and then the French stopped the supply of 
enriched uranium for the Tarapur plant, governed by the 30-year 
agreement drawn up in 1963, its continued operation has been 
uncertain because of the non-availability of basic fuel. The 
only way to keep the plant was to substitute mixed-oxide fuel 
(MOX) for the imported uranium, the availability of MOX being 
dependent on plutonium extracted from the plant's spent fuel. 
Washington earlier tried to put a spoke in the wheel by claiming 
ownership of the spent fuel at the plant, but it could not make 
any headway because of New Delhi's determined opposition. The 
decision to put the indigenous fuel under IAEA [International 
Atomic Energy Agency] inspection is one way of showing the world 
that Indian nuclear expertise has come of age, not something 
that can be expected to be warmly welcomed in many parts of the 
World. 
  Indeed, the old game of smearing the Indian nuclear effort 
has once again begun in right earnest as the date for review of 
the nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty comes up. In October last 
year, the CIA is reported to have told a Senate committee that 
India had ``no valid economic case to make for separating 
plutonium or enriching uranium,'' letting the cat out of the bag 
with the lament that ``reprocessing and enrichment would make 
India independent of foreign suppliers of enriched uranium.'' 
More recently, a report was run on the popular U.S. television 
programme ``Sixty Minutes'' which said that the Indian nuclear 
programme was a ``dangerous failure'' which could lead to health 
problems. It quoted a British academic as saying that there was 
no other country ``with as bad a record'' in this field. Such 
comments can be contrasted with the recent statement of the IAEA 
Assistant Director-General for Nuclear Safety that India had 
made substantial progress in implementing the required safety 
standards ``which are comparable to internationally acceptable 
levels.'' The assault on the country's nuclear programme is 
likely to increase and the propaganda will intensify in the 
months ahead and for a variety of reasons. The idea to involve 
the Agency is a good one and the involvement should be extended. 

