Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [A. Brkic report: ``Increased Number of Jaundice </F>
Sufferers''] 
  [Text] We have learned from the appropriate 
epidemiological services that the number of jaundice sufferers 
in Serbia has increased in comparison to the number in previous 
years. The situation is not alarming because the number of 
sufferers is not large, but it is worrying that this disease has 
appeared in schools, so that there is the possibility of it 
spreading through a chain reaction, the epidemiologists say. We 
are talking about Type A infectious hepatitis, an infectious 
intestinal disease, which is also called the dirty hands 
disease. It is caused by a virus and is transferred by dirty 
hands, food, and water. This is stressed by epidemiologist 
Veljko Djerkovic, assistant director for epidemiology and 
microbiology in the city institute for health protection, and 
Dr. Svetislav Zonjic, deputy director of the republican 
institute for health protection. 
<H5>  The Virus is the Culprit </H5>
  According to Djerkovic, jaundice sufferers have been found 
in 
37 schools in Belgrade. Of these, 32 are primary schools and 
five high schools, while the disease has been reported in 
several Belgrade kindergartens. Djerkovic stresses that this 
situation is not alarming at the moment because there are no 
more than five or six sufferers in all these institutions apart 
from two. The problem is that this is an infectious disease 
that spreads through a chain and the financial situation in the 
schools is such that many of them do not have the money to 
maintain the necessary level of hygiene. It is a good thing 
that the winter vacation is approaching. This will probably 
stop this disease spreading, Djerkovic hopes. 
  In comparison to September and October last year, an 
increase 
in other acute infectious diseases, not only hepatitis, has also 
been registered, which was expected. This is because, for 
example, the Type A viral hepatitis (an infectious intestinal 
disease) is a consequence of a reduction in the body's 
resistance, a fall in the quality of food, and worse sanitary 
conditions, as well as a cyclical course, Zonjic and Djerkovic 
explain. 
  That is to say, the aforementioned type of hepatitis has its 
own cycle so that ``a certain rise in the number of sufferers'' 
appears at specific intervals even under normal conditions, 
Zonjic explains. 
  Djerkovic says that in the Belgrade schools in which the 
jaundice has appeared deficiencies have been noticed in hygiene 
and sanitary conditions and the condition of the buildings and 
equipment. The schools have been ordered to solve these 
problems and to take measures to improve general and personal 
hygiene and to carry out a so-called on-going disinfection, that 
is to say, clean and wash all toilets and kitchens and places 
where food is prepared. After that there is a final 
disinfection which, on the order of the city institute for 
health protection, is carried out by the institute for 
disinfection and insect and vermin extermination. 
<H5>  Signs of Infection </H5>
  However, difficulties arise when it comes to what the 
schools 
should do. They have generally not performed their part of the 
task either for personnel or practical reasons, Djerkovic 
explains. Most often for practical reasons because they do not 
have any money. 
  According to Zonjic, there are no precise figures on the 
incidence of jaundice in schools in other towns in Serbia, but 
``there has been a certain increase in this disease in Serbia.'' 
  So that even the layman can detect the Type A viral 
hepatitis 
in time, Djerkovic explains the symptoms thus: nausea, 
vomiting, exhaustion, loss of appetite, and, in the later stage 
of the disease, dark-colored urine and light-colored stool and 
yellowness in the white of the eyes and on the skin. 
  At the same time, Djerkovic warned of the problem of 
trichinosis. He therefore advises everyone who buys pig's meat 
from private traders to first take it for a veterinary 
examination before cooking it. 

