Language: <F P=105> Italian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "The Atlas of Crime And Extortion"] </F>
  [Text] Rome -- A world atlas of criminal organizations is 
currently being prepared. It has been mapped out by the 
Interior Ministry, in cooperation with the Gino Germani Research 
Center and the Luiss independent university, and will be 
completed in June, at the close of a cycle of conferences on the 
subject of "Comparative Analysis of Criminal Systems in the 
Contemporary World." 
  In the course of the first three conferences, Interior 
Ministry and investigation department officials illustrated the 
history, current numbers, interest sectors, and the capacity to 
infiltrate institutions, of the main Mafia organizations 
operating on the Italian territory. 
  Camorra -- Dimensions: 107 clans; 6,000 members; 
approximately 1,000 flankers; 50,000-60,000 people directly 
involved. Characteristics: horizontal, individualistic, 
prevalently urban structure; indifferent to political 
ideologies; maximum territorial control; not very prone to 
strategic alliances. Main activities: extortion, drug dealing 
and peddling (heroin and cocaine), illegal lotteries, cigarette 
smuggling, business activities, public tenders, extortion, truck 
robberies. New directions: drugs, real estate investments, 
joint ventures abroad, interest in the leisure activities 
market, tourism, lawful trading in tobacco products. 
  'Ndrangheta -- Dimensions: approximately 150 criminal 
brotherhoods, comprising more than 5,500 members. 
Characteristics: vertical, family-based structure; marked 
capacity to infiltrate institutions; marked capacity to spread 
also outside the Calabria region (Lombardy, Piedmont, Emilia 
Romagna, Tuscany, Lazio, Aosta Valley). Main activities: 
kidnapping, extortion, drug dealing, real estate investments; 
money-lending and usury, controlling companies. New directions: 
interest in the privatization of some national state-owned 
companies, and companies in the former communist countries. 
Antimafia measures: 12 local councils disbanded. 
  Sacra Corona Unita -- Dimensions: 47 associations, 1,775 
members. Main geographical areas: Brindisi, Taranto, and 
Lecce. Main activities: close cooperation with Cosa Nostra, 
Camorra, and 'Ndrangheta in the drugs and arms sectors. 
Antimafia measures: three local councils disbanded, 13 local 
civil servants removed from office. 
  Cosa Nostra -- Dimensions: 186 Mafia organizations, 5,000 
members, tens of thousands of flankers. Characteristics: 
rigidly vertical and hierarchical structure; network throughout 
the national territory and links with criminal organizations in 
other countries; marked adaptation to work within institutions; 
massive infiltration in politics, as well as in business, the 
liberal professions, the civil service, and local 
administrations. Main activities: international drug dealing, 
construction and building materials sectors, services and 
agricultural sectors, extortion. New directions: drugs, 
operational agreements with gangs in other regions and foreign 
criminal organizations; spreading the "stidde" [local Mafia 
units] (in fighting against the traditional Mafia), stronger 
presence in the business world and in the administrative fabric. 
Antimafia measures: 17 local councils disbanded, and 17 
councilors removed from office. 

