BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "European Election Campaign Unfair, </F>
Opposition Claims"] 
  [Text] (ANSA) Rome, June 1 -- The European Parliament 
election campaign is being waged unfairly because of the 
government's control over mass media and because media watchdog 
authorities are unable to do their job effectively, according to 
a delegation from eight opposition parties who on Wednesday [1 
June] protested to President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro. 
  "Today's newspapers said six million Italians on March 27 
voted according to what they had seen on television," Mario 
Segni of the Pact for Italy said after the meeting, adding that 
the opposition has asked Scalfaro and the head of the media 
watchdog body, Giuseppe Santaniello, to make sure that "the 
violations that took place then do not happen again." 
  Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi's government effectively 
controls the country's six largest television networks and the 
TV election campaign is slanted in favor of Berlusconi's Forza 
Italia and the far-right National Alliance parties, according to 
the opposition. 
  Berlusconi owns the three largest private Fininvest 
channels, 
which are accused of charging exorbitant fees for campaign 
advertising, while debates on the three public TV channels of 
the RAI [Italian Broadcasting Corporation] network have been 
virtually "absent" even though the elections are less than two 
weeks away, the delegates claimed. 
  Santaniello reportedly told the delegation he had no way of 
evaluating coverage by RAI because all the computers at Pavia 
University, which traditionally does the job, have been recently 
debilitated by a virus. The University usually provides 
percentage figures and "positive-negative" coverage ratings for 
individual parties appearing on RAI channels. 
  The opposition also claims that thanks to his ownership of 
Fininvest and simultaneous leadership of Forza Italia "clubs" 
throughout Italy, Berlusconi is getting virtually free 
advertizing on his own TV channels. 
  Carlo Ripa Di Meana, a former European Commissioner for the 
environment who is running in the June 12 elections for the 
Greens, said he was "dissatisfied" with today's meeting with 
Scalfaro and called the measures promised by Santaniello 
"unsatisfactory," also because it is now too late to make much 
difference. 
  Opposition parties also told the president of alleged 
widespread violations of laws that provide each party with space 
for campaign posters, and asked that member of parliament 
Vittorio Sgarbi, who is also chairman of the Cultural Affairs 
Commission, should not be allowed to continue broadcasting his 
daily one-man televised political commentaries on one of the 
Fininvest channels. 
  Scalfaro allegedly promised he would meet with Berlusconi 
today to address the issues raised by the opposition parties. 
  Opposition forces that sent representatives to the meeting 
with Scalfaro were the Left Democrats, Pact for Italy, People's 
Party, Liberals, Greens, Network, Democratic Alliance and Marco 
Pannella, leader of the ticket bearing his own name. 

