BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement by presidential candidate Samuel Lewis Galindo of </F>
the Solidarity Party during the final presidential "debate" 
sponsored by the Latin American Institute of Advanced Study and 
the Media Presidential Debate Committee; place and date not 
given -- recorded] 
  [Text] Compatriots: In barely six days, the electoral 
process, which will decide on Panama's course for the next five 
years, will have concluded. During these past months, you the 
voters have been subjected to an ardent publicity campaign. All 
the media have broadly reported the struggle we have been 
engaged in to lead the government. 
  All of you have massively participated in the electoral 
debates. The rebirth of Panamanian democracy explains the 
media's all-out participation in the electoral process. It is 
regrettable, however, that some media, by offering biased 
information, have not maintained the objectivity they had 
promised to the community or their own code of ethics. They did 
not rise to the occasion in these historic moments. 
  Nevertheless, we, the seven candidates, progressed in our 
campaigns in a climate of broad liberties. We have undoubtedly 
been able to identify the problems the country is currently 
experiencing and the immense responsibility we will have to face 
in the near future. Unemployment, lack of health services, 
education, housing, public security, corruption, the lack of 
true and speedy justice, and environmental contamination are 
problems that have been clearly identified. 
  All the candidates have drawn up specific government plans, 
nevertheless, only one of us will be elected on 8 May to direct 
this nation's destiny. On 8 May, each and every one of us will 
be alone, one moment completely alone with our conscious 
deciding our future, that of our children, and our 
grandchildren. At that time, all the publicity campaigns, all 
the polls, and all the promises will be left behind. We will 
have before us a voting ballot. This nation's presidency will 
depend on the selection each of us makes. 
  I want to reiterate the overwhelming need for what from the 
beginning has been our slogan and the name of our alliance: 
Without a true union of everyone, it will be impossible to solve 
the serious problems we are facing. Without a true national 
consensus, it will not be possible to successfully face the 
future challenges. We strongly believe much more unites us than 
divides us. 
  There is a broad community of interests and goals that unite 
all Panamanians, however, these are not clearly manifested due 
to the pettiness of a few, by created interests, sterile 
disputes, the leaders' intolerance, the insolence and arrogance 
of the powerful. To overcome this situation, we propose to fully 
democratize the state and society. We are going to give the 
poor and anonymous Panamanians who struggle from day to day a 
place in society and new self-esteem. We are going to give the 
community the participation they deserve in the making of 
decisions. We are going to establish an impartial, independent 
justice that will guarantee a democratic social order. 
  In addition to struggling for consensus, we have developed 
in 
the political arena a new style, a style of decency, honesty, 
respect, and tolerance. We are not interested in arbitrary or 
demagogic positions. We reject dirty campaigns and personal 
attacks that weaken those who launch them more than their 
target. Our opposition is directed at the difficulties all 
Panamanians are experiencing that prevent our personal and 
collective achievement. We are not interested in highlighting 
the Panamanians' negative aspects, rather we are interested in 
highlighting the positive to construct a future. 
  To my colleagues in this struggle, Mireya de Gruber, Ruben 
Dario Carles, Ernesto Perez Balladares, Jose Salvador Munoz, 
Ruben Blades, and Eduardo Vallarino, my sincere congratulations. 
I am convinced that all of you -- despite the difference that 
separate us -- have known how to struggle to save Panamanian 
democracy. I invite you, once the election is over, to 
acknowledge with chivalry and generosity the victory of whomever 
is favored by the majority of the votes. I also invite -- 
following our example -- whoever wins to call for a true 
national consensus. Currently, this appears to be a desire that 
can be fulfilled as our initial proposal of national unity has 
been adopted as their own by each of the candidates. To have 
achieved this, fills us with patriotic pride. 
  Panamanians, I ask you for calm reflection before casting 
your vote. Think of who among the seven is better prepared to 
give you and your children an honest future with social peace 
and with hopes that can be achieved. Give me this opportunity 
to serve you. Thank you very much, good evening, and may God 
illuminate us all on 8 May. 

