Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Lanzhou, January 20 (XINHUA) -- By implementing 
several international cooperation programs, Gansu Province has 
remarkably improved its educational level and been praised as an 
example for other backward areas in the world. 
  Recently, the province won a high award conferred by the 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
(UNESCO) for its achievement in promoting local education. 
  Land-locked Gansu Province is one of China's poorest areas. 
Nearly 80 percent of the province survives on government 
subsidies. 
  Backward economy resulted in backward education. In 1987, 
half of the province failed to spread primary education. 
One-fifth of the people between the age of 15 and 45 were 
illiterate. 
  In addition, such problems as poor quality of teachers and 
funds shortages in schools were common in the province. 
  In 1986, Gansu Province took the lead in the country in 
joining UNESCO's "Jip Plan", which is aimed at improving the 
quality of primary education. 
  A year later, the province obtained a 20 million U.S. dollar 
loan earmarked by the World Bank for developing education. This 
was the first educational co-operation program between the bank 
and a Chinese local government. 
  Now, the UNESCO "Jip Plan" has involved over 1,000 primary 
schools and 100,000 students in Gansu and effectively upgraded 
the local primary education. 
  During the past eight years, Gansu Province has established 
relations with many international organizations, including the 
Asian and Pacific regional office of UNESCO, the World Bank, and 
the United Nations Children's Fund. 
  A series of educational programs have been carried out in 
the 
province, covering improvement of primary educational quality, 
spreading education in impoverished areas, education for girls, 
education for illiterates in rural areas, teachers' training, 
family education training, education for handicapped people and 
so on. Many of these programs have been conducted for the first 
time in China. 
  Since 1986, about 80 experts from more than 10 countries and 
international organizations have visited Gansu Province, which 
has also sent its experts to foreign countries. 
  The extensive international exchanges have opened the eyes 
of 
the province's educators, who have managed to improve their 
teaching quality by learning from their foreign counterparts. 
  The cooperation programs also enable the province to enhance 
its poorly-equipped schools. 
  In addition to the loan from the World Bank, local 
government 
allocated another 50 million yuan (5.6 million U.S. dollars) to 
renovate teaching equipment. 
  By now, the province has expanded all its five teachers' 
training schools and installed in another 23 schools modern 
teaching equipment, such as laboratories for audio-visual 
teaching as well as music, computer and language teaching. 
  Some 430 training posts via satellite television have been 
established around the province. More than 400 schools in 46 
poorest counties of the province have been equipped with 
experimental instruments for courses of physics, biology and 
chemistry. 

