Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by David Owen in London and John Barham in Buenos </F>
Aires: "British Offer Over Falklands Oil"] 
  [Text] The British Government has indicated its readiness 
to allow Argentine companies to take part in the development of 
oilfields in the Falkland Islands' territorial waters provided 
they acknowledge that any oil extracted belongs to Britain. 
  Government sources think it unlikely that Argentine 
interests 
will end up operating installations on the islands themselves, 
but believe Argentina's coast could be a logical site for 
support operations. 
  Preliminary results from seismic surveys conducted last year 
around the Falklands suggested the possibility of finding oil 
across a zone 25 percent larger than the North Sea. 
  The disclosure of Britain's position follows a recent 
request 
from Buenos Aires for a meeting of senior foreign ministry 
officials to discuss joint development of oil resources. London 
has yet to agree to this meeting. 
  Reaching an oil accord with the UK is Argentina's next 
important policy objective, but it is unlikely to accept terms 
that implicitly recognise Britain's sovereignty over the 
islands. Buenos Aires has used recent talks on fish to press 
for a role in the development of possible oil and gas reserves. 
British Gas said last year it had discussed joint offshore 
exploration close to the disputed waters with YPF, Argentina's 
state-owned oil company. 
  Some Falkland islanders are said to recognise that 
rapprochement with Argentina would probably be necessary if an 
oil industry were to be developed. 
  Recent developments come against a background of steadily 
improving relations between the two former belligerents. 
  A year ago, Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, became the 
first UK cabinet minister to visit Argentina since the 1982 
Falkland islands conflict. 
  Since then both Mr Domingo Cavallo, Argentina's economy 
minister, and Mr Guido Di Tella, foreign minister, have visited 
Britain. 

