Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kunming, March 23 (XINHUA) -- Southwest China's 
Lancang River and its valley are being developed into a key 
state production base for energy. 
  "The overall development of the Lancang River and its valley 
is the largest project of Yunnan province and requires the 
efforts of several generations," He Zhiqiang, governor of 
Yunnan, said. 
  According to the governor, geological prospecting in the 
area 
started in the 1950s. 
  According to the blueprint, work on the upper reaches of the 
Lancang River, from Deqin County to Yongping County, will focus 
on the development of mineral resources, and work on the middle 
and lower reaches of the river will concentrate on hydroelectric 
power stations. 
  The largest nonferrous metal industrial production base in 
southwest China is scheduled to be located on the upper reaches 
of the river, where lead, zinc, antimony, copper, asbestos, salt 
and marble abound. 
  Eight hydroelectric power stations and two reservoirs will 
be 
built at different altitudes along the river. 
  Upon completion, these power stations will have a total 
installed capacity of 13.7 million kw and generate 70.9 billion 
kwh a year, making the valley the largest energy production base 
in southwest China. 
  In addition, on the lower reaches of the river tourism 
resources will be developed, together with production bases for 
tropical cash crops and research bases for rare plants and 
animals. 
  The Lancang River rises in the Tanggula Range, Qinghai 
Province, and flows through the Tibet Autonomous Region and 
Yunnan to Laos, Myanmar [Burma], Thailand, Cambodia and Vietnam, 
and thence to the sea. After it flows out of China, the river 
is called the Mekong River. 
  The basin of the 1,240-km-long section of the river in 
Yunnan 
covers 91,000 sq km, including eight prefectures in the 
southwest China province. 
  Experts here agree that the hydropower potential amounts to 
26 million kw, including 20.73 million kw available for 
immediate development. 
  As early as in 1988 the Chinese Government listed the 
Lancang 
River and its valley as one of the state's 19 major zones for 
development. 
  Through seven years of effort, the first hydroelectric power 
station -- the Manwan Station, with a combined installed 
capacity of 1.5 million kw able to generate 7.9 billion kwh a 
year -- has been erected on the river. 
  Construction of the second one -- the Dachaoshan Power 
Station with an installed capacity of 1.26 million kw able to 
generate 7.5 billion kwh annually -- is in full swing. It is 
expected to go into operation by the end of this century. 
  Preparations for building the Xiaowan Power Station, with an 
installed capacity of 4.2 million kw able to generate 17.8 
billion kwh annually, is well under way. 
  Located 265 km from Kunming, capital of the province, 
construction of the station will start in 1996 and it will go 
into operation in 2007. 
  The project is being built jointly by Yunnan and Guangdong 
Provinces and two state departments. 
  According to the governor, Yunnan will seek multi-sided 
co-operation in constructing the remaining five power stations. 
  Since 1990 China has co-operated with Laos, Myanmar and 
Thailand in surveying and developing the upper reaches of the 
Mekong River. 

