Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Jan Bazyl Lipszyc: "Independence but No </F>
Arbitrariness; If Prime Minister and President Approve Candidate 
Dariusz Rosati, He Could Begin Work 1 April"] 
  [Text] "The conversation with the prime minister 
concerned economic policies or, to put it in more precise terms, 
it was about a strategy for economic development and terms for 
cooperation." This is what Dariusz Rosati told us on Saturday 
[12 March] after his two-hour meeting with Waldemar Pawlak. 
Rosati is the Democratic Left Alliance's candidate for the post 
of deputy prime minister and finance minister. 
  Professor Rosati presented the prime minister with 
"Principles of Social and Economic Policies," which he has 
written. According to him, it is a precondition for the reforms 
to succeed, that inflation-free economic growth take place, but 
that will only happen if no radical changes are made to current 
economic policies. Positive trends must be strengthened, and 
possibilities for increasing investments and exports must be 
created. That should be implementedj, among others, by widening 
the availability of financial means, but without increasing 
inflation. Principles of action in the economy should also be 
stabilized, and privatization should be accelerated because it 
is a condition for increasing economic efficiency. 
  "Economic growth must be stimulated because the rise in 
inflation has been halted, and it is only by achieving permanent 
growth that one can lead to a decrease in unemployment and to 
increasing standards of living. Everything in the economy must 
be subordinated to measures aimed at increasing economic 
growth," Rosati said. "The increase in economic indicators 
observed in 1993 is very unstable because it was not based on 
investment or exports but only on an increase in individual 
consumption." 
  "We both agreed," Rosati said, "that right now a revival of 
the economy at the microeconomic level should be a priority 
because, when it comes to the macro level, the most important 
decisions have already been implemented." 
  "We also discussed organizational issues," Rosati said. "I 
would like to enjoy substantial autonomy when it comes to being 
in charge of the economy, and the prime minister did not object 
to that, but he did stress that it must be about independence, 
not arbitrariness. I want to increase the role of the Council 
of Ministers' Economic Committee, to have it make all economic 
decisions. One of my conditions is also better access to the 
prime minister, both with regard to conveying information to him 
and decisionmaking. Important issues must not be postponed. I 
must also enjoy autonomy when it comes to staff issues, and I 
must also have sufficient time in which to prepare my 
initiatives." 
  The candidate for the post of deputy prime minister also 
stressed that, during his conversation with the prime minister, 
he returned to the issue of Marek Borowski's resignation; he 
said he fully shares the prime minister's view and his decision 
regarding the resignation because there must be loyalty and 
trust and rapport between managers and their subordinates. 
  "The prime minister informed me that he will present my 
report to his advisers and members of the government and will 
let me know his decision within a week. If the answer is 
positive, I could take up the post effective 1 April, and that 
includes the time required for the president to sign the 
nomination and for me to wrap up my dealings in Geneva, although 
I am not sure whether that is a very good date on which to begin 
a job as serious as this one. 
  "My feeling is that the prime minister took note of my 
conditions and did not object to them. Waldemar Pawlak did not 
set terms of his own, but he did stress agriculture and some 
industrial branches--namely, mining, the defense sector, and the 
food industry," Rosati said. 
  He also said he had not discussed with the prime minister 
what the president's opinion on his candidacy might be, and that 
he informed the prime minister that, as regards the case of the 
Foreign Debt Service Fund [FOZZ], he has no reason to feel 
guilty and will gladly submit to an interrogation. He is just 
surprised that he should be interrogated now--that is, two and a 
half years after the investigation began. 
  Other members of the FOZZ Board of Directors, with regard to 
whom no charges had been formulated, just as with Dariusz 
Rosati, were questioned as witnesses a year ago, or even earlier 
than that. 
  "There are no differences between the prime minister and 
myself that would make cooperation impossible." This is how 
Dariusz Rosati summed up Saturday's conversation with Pawlak. 

