Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Tim Johnson] </F>
  [Text] Tokyo, March 14 KYODO -- Vietnam views the 
Philippines' successful transformation of a former U.S. naval 
base at Subic Bay as a model for commercializing its own 
Russia-utilized naval facilities at Cam Ranh Bay, according to a 
senior Vietnamese Foreign Ministry official. Deputy Foreign 
Minister Le Mai, who left Tokyo for Hanoi on Monday [14 March], 
made the disclosure in an interview with KYODO NEWS SERVICE 
during a visit to participate in an international conference on 
Cambodian reconstruction, which ended Friday. 
  "The reality of Subic Bay -- to turn a military base into a 
commercial base -- is very interesting to us," Le Mai said. "I 
don't think that, in this post-Cold War era, military bases are 
as important as before." The Philippine Government transformed 
Subic Bay, 80 kilometers northwest of Manila, into a free port 
and industrial zone after U.S. forces left in November 1992, 
ending nearly a century of U.S. military presence in the 
country. Over 350 million dollars has reportedly been invested 
there so far by Filipino and foreign companies. Le Mai said 
Vietnamese officials have already visited Subic Bay on an 
inspection tour at the invitation of the Philippine Government. 
  Russia, which inherited use of Cam Ranh Bay from the former 
Soviet Union, has been scaling down its presence in recent years 
and the number of its visiting naval ships has dropped sharply. 
Compared with thousands before, only a few hundred Russian 
servicemen now reportedly remain at the base in central Vietnam, 
many of them manning a large signals-intelligence facility 
there. Moscow is said to desire continued access for refueling 
and provisioning of its naval ships. 
  "I think the best thing is not to have any foreign military 
forces using the facilities there," Le Mai said. "We want to 
have a peaceful environment. We rendered some facilities to the 
Soviet Union in the past and now Russia, but as you know Russia 
is too busy with her `homework' and the role of military bases 
is going down, down in this new post-Cold War situation." 
  He added that Vietnam is keeping open all "long-term 
options" 
for use of the facilities. 
  Prior to its evacuation of its troops from South Vietnam 
during the Vietnam war, the United States invested some 250 
million dollars to develop Cam Ranh as a commercial port, 
building deep-water harbor facilities later taken over for use 
by the Soviets. 
  Hanoi is said by some Vietnam-watchers to favor a limited 
Russian presence at Cam Ranh Bay to deter Chinese ambitions in 
the South China Sea. According to Le Mai, Vietnam is trying to 
solve "by peaceful negotiation" its territorial disputes with 
China and several other countries in the region centering on the 
Spratly Islands. 

