BFN 

  [Text] Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin demands that Jordan 
put an end to the activities of the Hamas [Islamic Resistance 
Movement] office in Amman. Speaking to reporters on 
Independence Day, Rabin said that the Amman office is closely 
linked with the terrorist acts of Hamas in Israel, and that 
Israel holds the Jordanian Government responsible for anything 
that happens on Jordanian soil: 
  [Begin Rabin recording] Whoever watched closely the reaction 
and the action of the Hamas after carrying two murderous attacks 
in 'Afula and Hadera on peaceful Israeli people, could not but 
realize that all the spokesmanship, all the statements to the 
whole world came from the office of Hamas in Amman, headed by 
Muhammad Nazzal, that almost every day appears on television and 
other means of the media. We are fully aware that today the 
Hamas focal center of assistance to the Palestinians, to the 
Hamas, among the Palestinians in the territories, expresses 
every statement about murderous activities, threatens how many 
more, everything is done from the office of the Hamas in Amman 
[sentence as heard]. 
  Without elaborating we believe there are other lines of 
communication and assistance between this center of Hamas in 
Amman and the activities of Hamas in the territories and attacks 
on targets in Israel. We have good relations in practical terms 
with Jordan along the border. We are interested in the 
continuation of the peace negotiations with Jordan, but Israel 
cannot tolerate the continuation of Amman being a paradise for 
the activities of the Hamas from Amman. Therefore we would like 
to make it clear to the Government of Jordan, that we see this 
government responsible to whatever happens on its sovereign 
soil, and we would like to make it clear that this situation 
cannot continue. It's the responsibility of the Government of 
Jordan on one hand to continue the peace negotiations that we 
are interested in, and at the same time to prevent that the 
Hamas will have freedom of activities in Amman, in speaking, 
expressing the Hamas policies, issuing all the statements, and 
threatens what will happen in the future. [end recording] 
  [Jerusalem Qol Yisra'el in Hebrew at 0405 GMT on 15 April, 
reporting on Rabin's and Foreign Minister Peres' news conference 
on Hamas activity from Jordan, carries a passage in which Peres 
is recorded as saying: "I have never encountered a case in which 
a country purportedly striving toward peace allows a 
representative of a murderous organization to publicly assume 
responsibility for two murderous attacks and announce its 
intention to carry out three more such attacks. He said this 
openly on television without any reaction, as though it is a 
natural thing. We know that Jordan is exerting efforts to guard 
the border, but there is another border which must be seen to: 
the border of murder and terrorism. We regard this message with 
all possible seriousness and firmness -- it takes precedence 
over everything else. I, like the prime minister, hope that 
Jordan implements all the necessary measures as soon as 
possible."] 
  Our diplomatic reporter Jack Katzenell points out that 
Israel 
has issued similar warnings to Jordan several times in recent 
years following cross-border raids by terrorists, usually 
Islamic fundamentalists. It's always been Israel's position 
that Jordan is responsible for anything that happens on or from 
its soil. However, Israel has never taken military action 
against Jordan in the wake of these warnings. When the Likud 
government was in power such action was demanded repeatedly by 
one of the most prominent figures in Prime Minister Shamir's 
party, Ari'el Sharon, but Shamir pointedly ignored Sharon's 
demands. 

