BFN 

  [Text] Belem do Para, Brazil, 6 Jun (PL) -- The rejection 
of military intervention in Haiti as a solution to the political 
crisis in that country appears to be a majority stand in Latin 
America. Several Latin American foreign ministers unanimously 
expressed their opposition to that possibility when they met 
here yesterday with Strobe Talbott, U.S. under secretary of 
state, to discuss the Haitian situation. The Latin American 
diplomats are visiting this city to attend the inauguration 
today of the 24th OAS General Assembly. Interviewed before the 
meeting with Talbott, the foreign ministers of Venezuela, 
Bolivia, and Costa Rica recommended waiting for the applied 
economic pressures to resolve the problem. "There are still 
diplomatic, economic, and financial measures that can be 
implemented before considering other more extreme actions," 
Costa Rican Foreign Minister Fernando Naranjo Villalobos noted. 
  Venezuelan Foreign Minister Miguel Angel Burelli, whose 
country, along with Canada, France, and the United States, 
belongs to the so-called group of friends of the UN secretary 
general, said with regard to the Haitian situation: "We oppose 
military intervention." Meanwhile, Bolivian Foreign Minister 
Antonio Aranibar Quiroga also said that he opposed any armed 
actions, which he warned, could lead to cures that are worse 
than the disease. 
  U.S. President Bill Clinton has reiterated that he does not 
reject a military option to "resolve the Haitian situation," a 
policy that has even been opposed by leading U.S. Government 
officials. Analysts assert that, in general, the Latin American 
governments reject this possibility, as opposed to deposed 
Haitian President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, who, last week, asked 
for a "surgical operation" to remove the military from power. 
  Questioned by the local media, Talbott expressed confidence 
that the OAS will reiterate the international position regarding 
the crisis in Haiti, which has been subjected since the end of 
May to a total economic blockade by the United Nations. Talbott 
indicated that many measures have already been jointly 
implemented and that he believes other measures will be 
implemented in the coming days. 

