BFN 

<F P=106> [Italicized passages recorded] </F>
  [Text] Jonas Savimbi's soldiers are still shelling the city 
of Kuito. Today more than eight civilians were killed and more 
than 20 others wounded. Our correspondent Abel Abraao reports: 
  [Abraao] Today the center of the city was attacked and 
more than 20 civilians were wounded and eight others killed. 
The victims of the shellings and shooting over the past 24 
hours include a child from an orphanage who was mortally wounded 
by National Union for the Total Independence of Angola 
[UNITA] soldiers when carrying water. 
  Meanwhile, Antonio Muhongo, provincial delegate of the 
Angola National Liberation Front, FNLA, described the food 
situation of the Kuito residents as catastrophic. The political 
official today told our local newsdesk that famine is killing 
innocent children, women and old people and appealed for an end 
to clashes and the resumption of humanitarian aid operations. He 
said the people's interests should be above individual interests 
and appealed to the international community to urge UNITA to 
accept the government's offer and put an end to the war. 
  In Malanje, the atmosphere is different. The government 
forces have inflicted yet more losses on UNITA. Military 
sources revealed that today more than four UNITA rebels were 
killed in Quemba, along the road linking Malanje to Cambondo. 
Our correspondent Francisco Curingana reports: 
  [Curingana] A well informed military source today told 
the provincial radio station that four other rebels were killed 
in Quemba, along the road linking Malanje to Cambondo. On the 
occasion, the government forces captured two AKM weapons and 
a [word indistinct]. The Angolan Armed Forces 
[FAA], National Police, and the civilian defense 
maintain an active defense of all consolidated positions. The 
environment in the city has not altered, public services, 
markets and schools are functioning normally, and the political 
and military situation is under the control of government 
forces. 
  In Moxico Province, six battalions of Black Cockerel 
soldiers 
are regrouping to attack the city of Luena. These soldiers have 
been expelled from Lunda Sul Province, according to our 
correspondent in Moxico Pedro Sofrimento: 
  [Sofrimento] This was revealed by Colonel Mario Nelson 
Mendes, second in command of the Military Region of Independent 
Moxico, in an exclusive interview with Radio Nacional de Angola. 
The FAA senior officer said this movement of UNITA troops from 
the south to the east of the province is not news and the 
government forces are ready to respond to them. It is this 
fighting spirit of the FAA, National Police, and civilian 
defense that permitted the reoccupation of Camanongue District 
at 1400 on 12 June after hard clashes on three different 
occasions in which 11 rebels were killed and an assortment of 
war materiel was captured. 
  [Mendes] At present UNITA has avoided direct contact 
with our forces in the north, in Lunda Sul Province. Its forces 
fled to Moxico Province and I can say that at present 
[words indistinct] the territory. 
  [Sofrimento] Colonel Mendes concluded his interview by 
saying that while the politicians are involved in talks, the 
soldiers defend the physical integrity of the nation and the 
people. 

