BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Vladimir Nadein: "Russian Mafia Alarms America"] </F>
  [Text] Washington -- The U.S. Senate Governmental Affairs 
Committee Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations has held 
hearings on the question of organized crime in Russia. The 
members of the subcommittee, headed by the very influential 
legislator Sam Nunn, were addressed by Louis Freeh, director of 
the FBI; Hans-Ludwig Zachert, president of the German federal 
criminal police, and Mikhail Yegorov, Russian first deputy 
minister of internal affairs. 
  "Today organized crime in the former Soviet Union is an 
international problem," the FBI director noted. "A global 
problem can only be solved by global methods," Senator Nunn said 
in his opening speech. No one has accused the Americans of 
interfering in our internal affairs. Russia does not feel sorry 
for its mafia. But the chairman, wishing to avoid any possible 
misunderstanding, immediately explained what the U.S. interest 
is. 
  First, crime -- and organized crime above all -- has become 
a 
threat to the democratic transformations in Russia and is 
pushing the country toward national socialism. Second, it is 
undermining U.S.-Russian business links. Third, it has 
penetrated U.S. territory. Fourth, it poses a potential nuclear 
threat: Criminal groups dream of capturing mass destruction 
weapons in order to be able to hold the world to ransom. Fifth, 
Russian organized crime has breathed new life into trafficking 
and contraband in narcotics. 
  Another important reason for the Senate hearing was the fact 
that the United States has the world's richest police experience 
in combating organized crime. Several senators compared the 
dangerous streets in Moscow today with Chicago in the twenties 
and thirties, in order to demonstrate how familiar the 
difficulties and hardships of the young democratic Russia are to 
Americans, who have still not beaten this monster. 
<H5>  When Was the Gun Loaded? </H5>
  The distinctive and in many respects unparalleled organized 
crime of the postcommunist world is not a brand-new phenomenon, 
although, as FBI Director L. Freeh said, "only four years ago 
the former Soviet Union did not officially recognize organized 
crime among its serious problems." 
  There was no objection from his colleagues to this 
viewpoint. 
The German expert put the flare-up of organized crime down to 
the "opening up of Eastern Europe and its desire for political 
changes" and to the criminals' extraordinarily swift adaptation 
to completely new circumstances. 
  The general from the Internal Affairs Ministry [MVD], 
Mikhail 
Yegorov, gave a more detailed account: "The growth of criminal 
associations in the former USSR was due to the state command 
system of government and its result -- the shadow economy. The 
numerous efforts in the sixties and seventies to change economic 
laws by force encouraged the expansion of the underground market 
and the creation of a substantial criminal potential. Illegal 
industrial and commercial structures appeared. Major thefts 
became widespread in the state and public sectors of the economy 
and official corruption became common. A new social stratum 
emerged, comprising people with large amounts of illegal 
capital. At the same time, in the criminal milieu tens of 
thousands of bosses of various ranks were trained within prison 
walls." 
  According to Yegorov, the changes that then took place in 
public and political life led to a conflict of interests between 
dealers in the shadow economy and the traditional criminal 
world, particularly for spheres of influence. But they soon 
found a common language based on mutual interest. Dirty money, 
legalized in the economic sphere through bank fraud, theft, 
racketeering, robbery, and the sale of weapons and drugs, 
sewrved to develop organized crime. 
<H5>  Twenty "Dirty" Billion </H5>
  FBI Director Freeh from America, President H.-L. Zachert 
from 
Germany, and Gen. M.K. Yegorov from Russia are the senior people 
in their countries responsible for the fight against organized 
crime. They have all climbed the professional ladder, from the 
bottom to the top. All three are regarded not only as 
experienced leaders but also as experts in the field. As they 
sat there at the same table they often referred to one another's 
speeches. Not once did they resort to refuting a colleague's 
words; they agreed on practically everything, only rarely 
providing extra clarification. So it could be said that the data 
on organized crime cited by Yegorov are shared by the chiefs of 
the leading Western police services and their numerous experts. 
  According to Yegorov, 785 organized criminal groups were 
active in Russia in 1990. In early 1994 there were already 
5,691 known groups, led by nearly 3,000 criminal bosses, and 
they included 279 "godfathers." (Director Freeh had earlier 
given the openmouthed senators a popular account of our 
linguistic termninology, enunciating in Russian words which have 
become common parlance here, such as "vor v zakone" 
["godfather"], "vorovskoy zakon" ["criminals' law"], "blatnoy" 
[criminal], "smotryashchiy" [?someone who keeps a lookout], 
"obshchak" [fund of money for criminal purposes], and so on. 
Some 926 groups make up 155 criminal associations with 
memberships of between 70 and 300. The total number of active 
members of these associaitons is more than 100,000. But there 
is no single organized crime center in Russia and the groups and 
their leaders have many differences. 
  Bank frauds were recognized as the largest-scale crime in 
Russia. "It appears that the most frequent form of criminal 
activity bringing in high profits in Russia is bank frauds and 
other forms of swindle in which corrupt businessmen and 
government functionaries participate," the FBI director said. 
"At the present time the FBI has launched several special 
investigations into Russian-American enterprises which have 
engaged in laundering `dirty' money through American banking 
institutions. These complex schemes are linked with 
multilateral international transactions, and in many cases are 
at the final stage sent back to Russia in the form of cash." 
Freeh attributed the deaths of 35 Russian bankers in the past 
year to the handiwork of organized crime, perfectly obviously in 
pursuit of the goal of gaining control over the Russian 
financial system. 
  He also added that amendments adopted by Congress in October 
1992 to the law on the procedure for investigating the 
laundering of "dirty" money are making U.S. soil less congenial 
to Russian crooks, and that cooperation with the MVD will enable 
a significant proportion of the billions of dollars which 
disappear to the West every year to be returned. 
  Gen. Yegorov again confirmed that the sum of this money is 
roughly equal to $20 billion. He acknowledged that his 
subordinates do not yet have sufficient experience and knowledge 
to put active members of criminal groups behind bars. However, 
the majority of them are under MVD surveillance. 
  President Zachert did not express optimism. In his opinion, 
Germany has been in the past few years not just an arena of high 
criminal activity on the part of Russian criminals, but also a 
place for them to relax and plan new operations, a place for 
their families to live and bring up their children. "Several 
instances of extortion, often connected with the kidnap of 
family members, have been recorded in Germany," President 
Zachert said. "In the majority of cases this is directed 
against former Russians well known for their criminal past." He 
also cited cases where German businessmen have also been victims 
of savage beatings for refusing to pay up to extortioners from 
private Russian "protection bureaus." 
  The FBI director thoroughly analyzed every case of criminal 
actions against Americans in Russia, and Gen. Yegorov reported a 
high clear-up rate for such crimes. However, senators intimated 
unambiguously to the MVD's authorized representative that they 
consider the actions of the Russian militia in investigating 
crimes against American citizens to be extremely slow. 
  Verging on Fantasy 
  The most mystical part of international police operations 
(and criminal actions too, however) is connected with nuclear 
fissionable materials. 
  Let us leave to one side the science-crime-fiction element, 
although it was referred to by Senator Cohen in posing questions 
about the probability of components for the manufacture of 
nuclear charges falling into criminal hands. And let us not 
censure the Americans for being more worried about the threat of 
a nuclear bomb explosion somewhere among New York's skyscrapers 
than about Chechen crimes in Moscow. The problem is fueled by 
the fact that many entirely respectable publications and 
television companies have published reports about kilograms of 
plutonium which have already been stolen from Russian 
enterprises and military bases. And about the tonnes of 
plutonium which will mysteriously disappear tomorrow. Such an 
article, which has just been published in the magazine ATLANTIC 
MONTHLY, was cited during the hearings by Senator Nunn. On 
these questions, the FBI director stated that "as of the present 
time not one case is known in which the existence for sale of 
highly enriched materials suitable for the manufacture of 
nuclear weapons has been confirmed by the law-enforcement 
organs." However, he added that there have been many cases of 
the illegal transportation of uranium and plutonium in Europe, 
and that all this material had been stolen in the former USSR. 
  For his part, Yegorov analyzed in detail, without exception, 
every case of the theft of nuclear material. He graphically 
demonstrated that it invariably involved material which, if it 
were to be regarded as a real threat, would require intensive 
reprocessing at a number of specialized enterprises. 
  The demand for radioactive materials in Europe, particularly 
Germany, was described by president Zachert as a myth, one to 
which the "crassest section" of the criminal world responds with 
surprising persistence. It has been proved, he stated, that 
there is no market for such products in Europe. However, the 
danger of real weapons of mass destruction being stolen cannot 
be ruled out. Zachert said that this kind of control requires 
considerable expenditure on specialized equipment. Moreover, 
the lack of demand here today does not mean that it won't appear 
tomorrow in another place. 
<H5>  The "Golden Crescent" and Dope-Induced "Highs" from Chernobyl </H5>
  It was noted at the conference that the enormous 
contribution 
of the post-Soviet area to the world trade in narcotics was not 
a myth but a proven reality. 
  The enormous potential of the "Golden Crescent" -- Pakistan, 
Afghanistan, and Iran -- in producing opium has become a factor 
posing a serious threat since the previously carefully guarded 
borders of the USSR collapsed and disappeared Through 
Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan, which add their own 
narcotics production to the goods in transit, the route runs via 
Kazakhstan, Russia, the Baltic states, and Poland to West Europe. 
  Modern semi-industrial facilities for manufacuring synthetic 
drugs operate in Russia, Poland, and Czechoslovakia [as 
published], while poppy straw, which also goes for export, grows 
around Chernobyl, although it is not of such good quality as 
that from Kirghizia [Kyrgyzstan] and the Chu Valley. 
  Because of the absence of borders and the utter corruption 
of 
officials, this route has become so easy and accessible that the 
Colombian cocaine barons now use it too. According to a 
representative of the German police, where narcotics 
infiltration routes are studied specially carefully, Moscow's 
Sheremetyevo Airport has become an important transit point for 
smuggling drugs to the West. 
<H5>  Time Is Short </H5>
  The leaders of the world's three largest police agencies 
agreed that they are dealing with clever, treacherous, and 
ruthless enemies. They unanimously expressed themselves in 
favor of the closest cooperation: The American, the German, and 
the Russian confirmed that time is short. 
  Freeh reported that he will very shortly be visiting Moscow 
as part of a high-powered American delegation (State Department, 
Treasury, and Drug Enforcement Administration), where an agency 
maintaining constant liaison between the MVD and the FBI will be 
opened. "Our cooperation requires a legislative foundation," 
Yegorov stated. According to him, the present high level of 
cooperation is due to the personal trust and liking that exists 
between him and the FBI director. "But cooperation should not 
depend on likes," the MVD general stated. 
  Asked by Senator Nunn what he would do with $15-20 million 
("I'm not giving it to you, it's just a hypothetical question," 
the American hastened to add, making plain the cold reality), 
Yegorov said: I would buy computers, develop a data base, and 
assemble people for two kinds of attack on crime -- 
brainstorming and the armed approach. However, he described the 
creation of international police groups to investigate specific 
cases as the chief prerequisite for success in the fight against 
international crime. The Russian general unambiguously rejected 
any likelihood of the occurrence of what is the topic of 
animated discussion in the American press, namely the 
possibility of power being seized in Russia by a criminal group. 
However, he did not rule out a turn of events whereby a mafia 
stooge is elected a deputy or appointed to high office. 
  The session of the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on 
Investigations has not received extensive comment in the press 
yet but has been briefly commented on in television bulletins. 
Asked by me whether he could compare the hearings in the 
American Senate and the Russian Duma, Yegorov said: 
  "I won't answer because I don't want to offend anyone...." 

