BFN 

<F P=106> [By Liang Chao: "Laws To Put Brakes on Illegal Land Deals"] </F>
  [Text] The government is drafting several laws and 
regulations to regain control of the real-estate market. 
  The process has been stepped up this year to prevent land 
speculation and tax evasion and to ensure rents are collected, 
said the State Land Administration (SLA). 
  Three sets of regulations will be worked out to cover the 
price, registration and taxation of State-owned land, said SLA 
Director Zou Yuchuan. 
  The government hopes the measures will curb rampant 
speculation like that which occurred last year when businessmen 
bought the rights to State land then resold them for huge 
profits. 
  Many institutions also illegally rented out State land they 
had received free. 
  As a result, the government suffered major losses. 
  Furthermore, the illegal sales have resulted in the loss of 
large areas of farmland, causing a grain crisis. 
  To tackle these problems, the SLA is drafting the country's 
first law on real estate trade and rules on the mortgage of 
State land. 
  In addition, preparations are underway for a new land law 
that will streamline management and revise the 1987 Land 
Administration Law. 
  "These laws and rules will play an important role in 
unifying 
State policies on land trade and regulating the real estate 
market," said Zou. They would also prevent the illegal transfer 
of land-use rights between users who evade taxes. 
  The laws and regulations aim to set up a real estate 
framework including: 
  -- A system to distribute State land resources. 
  -- A real estate system listing market prices, SLA-set 
prices 
and the minimum prices. 
  -- Rules on the share of tax revenue central and local 
governments receive through land deals. 
  -- The establishment of consulting,information and land 
evaluation agencies. 
  -- And the development of a legal system that covers taxes 
and the ownership, use, transfer, lease and registration of land. 
  In China, all land belongs to the State and before the 1980s 
it could not be transferred. 
  But the reforms now treat land as a commodity that can be 
sold on the market. 
  "An operational land market system is vital to government 
efforts to build a market economy in China," Zou said. 

