Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Sinan Yilmaz] </F>
  [Text] Ankara -- Turkey will enter into an important 
phase in March. The important period that begins with the 
Ramadan Feast of the Muslims, will continue with the Newroz 
Feast of the Kurds and will finally end with the March 27 local 
elections which will effect both the Kurds and the Turks. These 
three important events will take place within one week of each 
other. The widespread belief held by the public is that the 
local elections will not be held in a completely safe 
environment. There are reports already which predict that both 
the state and the outlawed Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) will 
exert pressure on each other during the elections. The first 
example of such pressure was experienced in Cizre. Cizre is a 
district that is mostly influenced by the PKK and for this 
reason the state is attaching special importance to this 
district and taking similar measures in other settlements. The 
most obvious element of such measures is that suburbs are being 
evacuated and village guards are being settled there. The 
communities which are forced out of their settlements during 
these operations are also missing out on their opportunity to 
vote. It is reported that about 1.5 million people in southern 
and southeastern Anatolia are being forced to migrate. 
  The excitement and the tension of the March 27 local 
elections have already begun. In the western part of the 
country, almost all parties' candidates are being announced and 
election campaigns have started. However, there is nobody in 
southern and southeastern Anatolia who has announced his or her 
candidature for the mayoral elections as yet. With the 
exception of one or two, almost every candidate's name is being 
kept secret. Following the outlawed Kurdistan Workers' Party's 
boycott, the political parties are keeping the names of their 
candidates secret for security reasons. The pro-Kurdish 
Democracy Party (DEP) is also reluctant to announce its 
candidates for fear of reprisals. 
  The other common element among the parties is that they all 
feel that the March elections will not be held in a safe 
environment. The source of this suspicion is the prediction that 
both the government and the PKK will apply pressure on each 
other during the elections. 
  It is necessary to point out though that the communities 
living in this region do not want such pressure or election 
rigging. Both seem impossible to avoid. For one thing, the 
government is afraid that the PKK will support the Democracy 
Party's mayoral candidates and use the election as a referendum 
to bring them onto the international political platform to argue 
for the Kurdish cause. 
  The other worry is that the PKK will argue that the election 
results are invalid because of the pressure the government has 
exerted on the candidates of the Democracy Party and will again 
try to use this as ammunition against Turkey at the 
international level and boycott the election results. Everybody 
in the region is curious about the PKK's attitude toward the 
local elections. The PKK has not expressed any opinions about 
the elections as yet. There are reports that it will make a 
statement on February 15 about the local elections. It is 
feared that if the PKK calls for non-participation in the local 
elections, there will be a reduction in the number of votes in 
the region and the PKK will use this as a referendum to argue 
its case. 
  This has proven to be the least favored option so far. DEP 
leader Hatip Dicle's remark: "We may reach an historic decision 
and not take part in the elections" is one element that adds 
weight to this theory. One other possible outcome is that the 
PKK regards the results of an election which it has boycotted to 
be to its advantage. In short, the PKK will try in any case to 
use the election results as its referendum. Almost everybody 
seems to agree that the results of the local elections will be 
in the PKK's favor. The PKK is aiming to win at least 200 local 
government posts in the Southeast. As the PKK makes these 
calculations, the government is making preparations to ensure 
that the elections take place. 
  As a result of amendments made earlier, members of the Armed 
Forces will be able to vote at the local elections with their 
weapons in their hands. Certain sections of the community are 
critical of this decision, saying the shadow of weapons will be 
on the ballot boxes, but the government authorities say that 
this measure is necessary for security reasons. As a 
precautionary measure, the authorities say, the ballot boxes 
will be taken by helicopter to a safe place for counting. 
Recent newspaper reports say that some 150,000 additional 
soldiers have been sent to the region in preparation for the 
elections. Observers point out what the PKK will do is not 
certain, but suspect that it will attack polling booths at which 
the armed forces will cast their votes in order to ensure that 
the government does not have the chance to change the election 
results. One fact is that the PKK has forbidden all political 
parties from taking part in the elections. All parties except 
the Welfare Party (RP) and the Nationalist Movement Party (MHP) 
have obeyed this order. For this reason parties are having 
difficulty in finding and endorsing mayoral candidates in the 
region as the candidates will be the first targets. 
<H5>  Cizre Is a Battlefield </H5>
  As the date for the local elections draws closer, the 
fighting in Cizre, a district of Sirnak province, between the 
security forces and the PKK militants intensifies. As armed 
conflicts are taking place almost everyday, the inhabitants of 
the region are being forced to flee. 
  There are reports which claim that up to 2,000 families have 
left the district as a result of pressure from the security 
forces. Some are going back to the villages they came from 
while others are going to Adana, Mardin, Iskenderun and 
Istanbul. Also among the reports is the claim that village 
guards are being settled in the dwellings vacated by the 
villagers. The government wants the chief village guard and RP 
candidate Kamil Atak to be elected as the mayor for Cizre. 
  The other issue is that those villagers who leave their 
villages will be unable to vote because they are not on the 
voting registers of the cities they move to. One other 
interesting thing is that the village guards who move into the 
empty houses will not be able to vote either. It would not be 
an exaggeration to say though that village guards who are not on 
the electoral roll will be made to vote. This would be regarded 
as an act of interference in the election process by the 
authorities. 
  The reason for the security forces labelling Cizre as a 
special zone is that Cizre is one of the districts in which the 
PKK is very effective. The number of people living in the 
surrounding villages, Cizre and the Sirnak province is said to 
be around 100,000 (including the ones who have moved out) even 
though the population in the area has decreased in the past 
one-and-a-half months due to the large numbers of people leaving 
the area. The fact that village guards are assisting the 
security forces in exerting pressure on the villages means that 
there is a contradiction. The village guards can only be active 
in villages in accordance with the laws in place but they are 
now becoming active in towns and cities as can be seen from 
their activities in Cizre. 
  According to reports received from Cizre and its environs, 
the village guards are able to question people following the 
operations they carry out in cooperation with the security 
forces. It is claimed that some of these people who are 
detained have also been killed, at least 15 of them by the 
village guards. Eyewitnesses say that a villager named Ahmet 
Kutle was assassinated by the village guards in the command of 
Kamil Atak in front of the Kerem Hotel. 
<H5>  Events Experienced in Cizre Day by Day </H5>
  In January, security forces put up posters in Cizre which 
read: "Young man, you may have joined an organization or 
committed crimes either voluntarily or by force. Society and 
the state believes that one may make a mistake and also believe 
in the necessity of pardoning those who repent. In order to 
benefit from this opportunity, turn yourself into the nearest 
security office." Another poster read, "Flags depicting the 
hammer and sickle are the symbol of communism. The PKK's real 
flag is the red flag with the hammer and sickle which the PKK is 
hiding from the people. The PKK's main target is to establish a 
communist order." 
  The tension which began with the hanging of these posters 
has 
reached its peak with the operations carried out of January 22 
in Sur, Dagkapi, Alibey, Dicle and Meydanbasi neighborhoods 
where nearly 500 people were taken into custody. Those who were 
taken into custody were reportedly ordered to stand and hold 
their hands on top of their heads for three hours. Meanwhile, 
the town's telephone connections were cut off as well. 
  During the night after the day when operations were carried 
out in the neighborhoods, PKK militants conducted a raid on the 
quarters of the Security Directorate. It was claimed that four 
policemen were killed in the raid. The Office of the Emergency 
Rule Governor announced that one PKK militant and a policeman 
were killed and four other policemen were wounded in the attack. 
Following the raid, security forces were alleged to have combed 
the town at random and one child was allegedly wounded in the 
operation. 
  The tension continued in the following days. On January 27, 
village guards and security forces staged a march. After police 
had instructed tradesmen in Cizre to hang Turkish flags on their 
shops otherwise they would be asked to pay a TL [Turkish lira] 
500,000 fine, there was a protest march against the PKK. The 
number of marchers rose to 600 with the participation of the 
village guards affiliated to Kamil Atak. It was claimed that 
certain village guards looted some shops during the march. 
  On January 28, the Nur neighborhood was raided by the 
security forces and the village guards. 
  On January 30, the body of Ibrahim Danis (19), who was 
alleged to have been taken into custody during the operation in 
Kurtulus neighborhood on January 27, was found. Danis's body 
was alleged to have been put in a house which belonged to a 
village guard and the house was claimed to have been bombed 
later. 
  Persons above the age of 10 have started being taken into 
custody. While it is claimed that people who are taken into 
custody are tortured and forced to abandon the town, seven of 
those who were taken in custody were killed and no information 
about 15 others could be obtained. The names of the people who 
are claimed to have been killed after being taken in custody are 
as follows: 
  Ibrahim Danis, Resit Pusal, Selim Ebubekir Duran, Ahmet 
Yusuf 
Tun and his son Isa Tun, and Selim and Ahmet whose last names 
cannot be determined. 
  A total of nine people, two of whom are children, have lost 
their lives since the intensive clashes broke out. 
  People have become accustomed to the clashes which are 
experienced almost every day. The clashes began on January 7 
with PKK militants throwing hand grenades at a panzer and 
continued until the next morning. Two individuals were wounded 
in the clashes and 35 workplaces were destroyed. The latter 
included buildings of the PTT [Post, Telephone, Telegraph 
office], Ziraat Bank and the bureau of the daily OZGUR GUNDEM. 
The fact that heavy weaponry such as antiaircraft, mortar and 
machine guns are used during the clashes means that serious 
damage has been caused. Naturally, security of life is the main 
problem. No one is safe. The people of Cizre have started to 
pay the price of the support they have given to the PKK. Ties 
have now been cut off completely before the elections. The most 
apparent outcome of this fact is that village guards have a say 
in all parts of the town. 
<H5>  The Village Guard System </H5>
  The village guard system has been set up in accordance with 
Village Law No. 442. Guards are selected according to 
provisions set out in the law. Under this law, guards are 
assigned only in their respective villages. However, in 
practice, they are away from their villages for days and weeks 
at a time, and they even participate in cross-border operations. 
As is the case in the Cizre example, they can take people in 
custody and question them. The village guard system exceeded 
its legal base a long time ago and has been operating outside 
the law. Village guards have become people who commit crimes in 
the name of the state with the power they get from the state. 
The main characteristics of the village guards is their being 
selected from among the pro-state Kurdish tribes. In a way it 
may also be termed a paid military service. However, it is also 
true that besides those volunteer village guards there are also 
those who are forced to become village guards. It is known that 
those who refuse to become village guards encounter dangers, 
including death. In their respective regions, village guards 
have established a system which resembles autonomous authority. 
For example, Chief Village Guard Alihan Tatar, who lives in a 
fort-like house in Sirnak, has put a Turkish flag on top of his 
house and declared his autonomy. 
  The fact that a concrete development has not yet been 
achieved in the solution of the Kurdish matter, which is one of 
Turkey's major problems, makes the local elections, which are to 
be held on March 27, all the more significant. 
  The most important expectation of the people in the region 
is 
that they will experience fair and democratic elections. 
However, this does not seem possible. It is clearly seen that 
both the state and the PKK will exert pressure during the 
elections. 
  As a matter of fact, everything has now started to be 
treated 
almost in humorous terms. Fundamental terms such as legislation 
and law have almost lost their significance. One incident, 
which could become the subject of a joke, occurred in Bitlis. A 
total of 79 civil servants, who work at state offices such as 
the Turkish Electricity Authority (TEK) and the Village and 
Rural Affairs Authority, have been sent to provinces like Tokat, 
Kayseri and Cankiri on the grounds that they have provided 
assistance to the PKK. The Office of the Chief of General Staff 
reportedly wanted those people to be followed in their new areas 
as well. However there is one point to be made here--and this 
is where the humor lies--the law calls for a prison term ranging 
from two to five years for those who assist an illegal 
organization and requires trial by state security courts. 

