Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by "nl" under the rubric "Research and Technology": </F>
"Karlsruhe Tritium Laboratory/Laboratory Studying the Fuel for 
an Energy Source for the Distant Future/Settling of Safety 
Problems. Fusion Research Has Supplanted the Fast Breeder"; 
first paragraph is an introduction] 
  [Text] Duesseldorf, Wednesday, 1 Dec 93 (HANDELSBLATT)--Now 
a tritium laboratory (TLK) has officially opened at the 
Karlsruhe Nuclear Research Center. This is an experimentation 
facility by means of which nuclear researchers want to acquire 
precise information and working know-how in dealing with larger 
quantities of tritium--a necessary step toward the hoped-for 
commercial exploitation of nuclear fusion for the generation of 
electricity in the still distant future. 
  The acquisition of reliability and safety data have to have 
high priority here. Tritium, the heaviest of the three isotopes 
of hydrogen, along with deuterium (heavy hydrogen) is needed as 
fuel for plasma fusion reactors. Nuclear fusion--the fusion of 
light atomic nuclei and the atomic-energy-liberation process of 
the sun--is at some time to be utilized in fusion reactors on 
the earth for energy transformation and the generation of 
electricity. Therefore, TLK's specified tasks are dictated by 
the requirements of research and development work on fusion 
research. The nuclear research center is included with the 
fusion project in the European fusion technology program and in 
the ITER (International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor) 
reactor project. 
  With TLK the nuclear researchers in Karlsruhe have the first 
finished experimentation facility of this size for fusion 
research in Europe. As yet they have seen comparable facilities 
only in Los Alamos, USA and Tokaimura, Japan. The laboratory was 
built over a period of seven years with an investment of around 
45 million German marks [DM]. The state of 
Baden-Wurttemberg 
and the Federal Ministry for Research and Technology each 
absorbed in a special financing arrangement 50 percent of the 
costs incurred. The Nukem and Siemens companies were appointed 
as general engineers by the nuclear research center for 
construction of the laboratory. 
  The laboratory was built in the same building in which a 
breeder test stand was built in the seventies. This demonstrates 
the change in KfK's [Karlsruhe Nuclear Research Center's] 
scientific-technical problem range and the reconstruction of its 
infrastructure and experimentation facilities. Working with the 
lightest elements, the isotopes of hydrogen, is being practiced 
today in the same room in which years ago heavy elements like 
uranium and plutonium were dealt with. 
  Radioactive tritium has a (relatively short) half-life of 
12.3 years, but at the same time high diffusibility through 
other materials. The researchers want to achieve the safe 
handling of this hydrogen gas by means of a multiple barrier 
system. This consists of the metal walls of the equipment and 
pipes in which the gas is handled. In addition, all the 
apparatus is enclosed by a secondary system with glove boxes, a 
sub-atmospheric-pressure maintenance system, and tritium hold-up. 
<H3>  Development Work for Protection of Personnel and the 
Environment </H3>
  The building itself constitutes the third barrier. Its 
exhaust air is constantly monitored. Not only will the 
feasibility in principle of the occurrence on just the earth of 
the fusion process that takes place in the sun be decided one 
day by the realization of this process in a reactor, but also 
the solution of as yet less discussed safety problems in the 
protection of personnel and the environment. 
  As a priority, chemical and process engineering problems 
relating to cleaning the fusion reactor fuel mixture will be 
worked on within TLK's range of tasks--like, for example, the 
removal of impurities such as oxygen and nitrogen. Uranium, 
which combines tritium in the form of uranium tritide (a stable 
uranium-hydrogen compound) acts as a storage medium. The tritium 
can be set free again by heating up this storage medium, and the 
tritium is then available for experiments. An integrated isotope 
separation system can separate the components of hydrogen 
mixtures into normal hydrogen (H), deuterium (D) and tritium (T) 
and resupply the thus purified tritium to the experiments. The 
pilot plant's process control system is automated and permits 
round-the-clock operation. 

