Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, January 12 (XINHUA) -- A senior Chinese 
wildlife official today denied overseas reports that bears in 
captivity in China are tortured. 
  Vice-minister of Forestry Shen Maocheng said that reports of 
torture of bears on a farm in south China's Guangdong Province 
are partly false and partly rumors. 
  According to propaganda by an animal welfare fund in Britain 
and reports by German media, bears on Nanping Bear Farm in 
Zhuhai Special Economic Zone, Guangdong Province, were not only 
used to produce bile which was siphoned through a tube from the 
liver, but also were killed to make food or soup, said the 
minister. 
  The reports also estimated that 8,000 bears in China were 
tortured in that way everyday and China planned to use 40,000 
bears for bile production, Shen said. 
  The minister told XINHUA that there are about 5,000 bears in 
captivity in China for bile production and China will not 
increase the number, since the bile output is enough for 
traditional Chinese medicine production. 
  Shen added that "there is indeed a bear with only three paws 
on the farm, but the lost paw was not cut away by the farm 
owner." 
  He added that the three-pawed bear was picked up from the 
wild and raised by the owner. 
  Investigations show that the farm was set up without 
official 
permission and the illegal farm has been closed, he said. 
  Under an official regulation issued in 1991 on bear raising, 
training and breeding, farms without adequate techniques or 
facilities are not allowed to raise bears. 
  "It is unreasonable and extremely unfair to ignore China's 
great efforts to preserve wildlife and its substantial progress 
by using a single example." 
  He admitted that some bear farms, which had been run without 
official permission and were poorly equipped, were shut down 
last year, indicating that basic requirements for operation 
include adequate technology and facilities. 
  "Since the existing authorized farms produce enough bile, no 
new farm will be allowed to be set up," Shen said. 
  He said that China cannot agree with the one-sided view by 
some pure conservationists in the world which emphasizes 
preservation and opposes any kind of use of animals. 
  "In that case, all the scientific experiments and research 
which use animals should not be carried out. Human beings can 
not use horses and oxen to work and can no longer eat chickens 
and mutton," the minister said. 
  He added that "China puts preservation and protection of 
bear 
resources first and use of bears second." 
  According to official estimates, there are tens of thousands 
of wild bears in China. 
  "China made great achievements in protecting and preserving 
endangered wildlife in the past decade and will continue to do 
so," Shen said. "We welcome well-meaning advice and aid given by 
all the other countries in the world to join in the effort to 
preserve wildlife." 

