Union   Viewed 

<F P=102> 94WD0334A Moscow SEGODNYA in Russian 15 Apr 94 p 7 </F>
<F P=103> 94WD0334A </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow SEGODNYA </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Aleksandr Kudakayev under the rubric </F>
"Investigation": "Narcotics"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  The History of "Dope" in Russia </H5>
  Drug addiction was not something unknown in the former USSR. 
Traditional smoking of narcotics like opium and hashish was a 
common phenomenon in the Asian part of the USSR. But drug 
addiction did not have the character of a mass predilection. The 
situation was somewhat different in the European part. There 
were practically no narcotics like these here. After World War 
II people with a predilection for dope who fought at the front 
used mainly morphine and the similar synthetic drug promedol 
obtained legally and illegally through medical workers. Another 
social environment for drug addiction was the world of art and 
politics, but here the use of morphine was an exception. Among 
representatives of the criminal world hashish and opium were 
more widespread, but users of "dope" enjoyed no respect. It 
should also be noted that both for tsarist Russia and for the 
USSR, epidemic alcoholism was a much greater problem. 
  In a word, the consumption of narcotics was extremely 
limited. It was restricted to drugs stolen from hospitals or 
narcotics of a vegetable origin with primitive processing. This 
situation remained until the end of the 1960's. 
  The explosion of drug consumption in the USSR at the end of 
the 1960's and beginning of the 1970's, from all appearances, 
was linked to the beginning of the low-grade crisis of the 
entire system of socialism (what was subsequently called the 
"time of stagnation") and, as a result, the appearance of the 
para-hippie culture. It seems that disenchantment with the 
previous ideals of society and the lack of new points of 
reference for youth caused a repeat of the outburst of drug 
consumption in the West, albeit 10 years later. 
  The main drug used by youth was marijuana. Russia was 
historically a large supplier of hemp (rope and sacks are made 
from it and boats are caulked with it) and therefore areas 
planted in marijuana are fairly extensive. In practically all 
regions marijuana grows wild over large areas and it is easy to 
find it in the yard of a multistory Moscow building. Southern 
varieties of marijuana are distinguished by a higher content of 
narcotic substance. With the arrival of the hot weather everyone 
wishing to would take trips to regions where it is grown 
(Central Caucasus and Central Asia), crossing police cordons 
without any special problems. With such an expansive area where 
marijuana grows wild as in the USSR it was in principle 
impossible to cut off access to it. Even then there were main 
places of production and routes for transportation of marijuana. 
  After a certain amount of time the increase in the overall 
number of drug addicts brought about an increase in the demand 
for stronger drugs. It was satisfied mainly through theft and 
pilfering from medical institutions. This phenomenon became so 
widespread that in 1974 a number of changes and amendments 
involving drugs were introduced into the criminal code. 
  Synthetic narcotics were practically unknown, and if they 
appeared on the market they were of foreign origin. Exceptions 
were extremely rare. Of the known cases of underground 
laboratories one can note the story of the group of workers of 
the chemical faculty of Moscow University imeni Lomonosov. They 
were set up to produce LSD right there in the university 
laboratory. But it was not commercial production. Much more 
widespread in the area of strong narcotics was the use of 
poppies, which were grown in mass quantities in Ukraine. 
Initially only the milky juice of the head of the poppy was 
used, but the increased consumption made it necessary to use the 
entire plant. The existence of an immense uncontrolled raw 
material base made it possible for any drug addict to acquire 
poppies independently and produce drugs from it. Usually a group 
of several people provided themselves with their own drugs. 
Certain of them sold some of their "product" to their lazier 
colleagues. During those years one could not speak about 
organized crime or a drug mafia. 
  It is known that even at that time the territory of the USSR 
was frequently used for transit of drugs from third countries, 
but there is no available information about the participation of 
Soviet crime groups in this business. 
<H5>  The `Afghan' Myth </H5>
  One of the myths of the Russian history of the drug business 
is the Afghan war. Certain experts have been inclined to regard 
the Afghan war as the main cause of the outbreak of drug 
addiction at the end of the 1980's. But these assumptions are 
not being borne out at the present time. Cases of private use of 
drugs by soldiers of a "limited contingent in Afghanistan" 
existed, but they only show that even then drugs occupied firm 
positions among youth. And the easy access to them in 
Afghanistan and the constant threat only served as the 
background. In fact the outbreak of drug addiction at the 
beginning of the 1970's caused an increase in the raising and 
production of drugs, after approximately 10 years the market was 
flooded, prices dropped, and the overall level of consumption 
rose, which was also the cause of even greater growth. It seems 
that the creation of this myth served as a justification for the 
state's inaction in the sphere of fighting drugs. 
<H5>  The Modern Situation </H5>
  For several years now all more or less serious criminal 
groupings have been shipping drugs into the capital. Even two 
years ago on the territory of the Commonwealth the overall 
circulation of the drug business amounted to tens of billions of 
rubles. This figure can now be multiplied by 100. 
  Recently it has become much easier for criminal groupings to 
gain access to narcotic substances. And there are several 
reasons for this. In the first place, a wave of inexpensive 
narcotics began to enter Russia from neighboring republics. 
There the ruble is quoted much higher than their own currency. 
In the second place, the large-scale attack of crime on society 
has led to a situation where medications containing drugs are 
stolen "indiscriminately" from hospitals and medical warehouses. 
Finally, there has been a sharp increase in the production of 
synthetic narcotics. On the territory of Russia in 1993 Ministry 
of Internal Affairs organs discovered 296 underground 
laboratories that produce various kinds of drugs (twice as many 
as in 1992). More than a third of all the laboratories were 
producing opium, 14 percent--marijuana, 9 percent--amphetamines, 
and 8 percent--hashish. 
  The main kinds of crimes involving drugs in 1993 are 
characterized by the following data (indicated in parentheses 
are the comparisons to the 1992 level): 
  --reported crimes involving narcotic and strong substances, 
53,152 (178 percent); 
  --illegal manufacture, acquisition, storage, shipment, and 
forwarding of narcotic substances without the purpose of 
sale--42,055 (182 percent); 
  --illegal manufacture, acquisition, storage, shipment, and 
forwarding of narcotic substances for the purpose of sale, 
illegal sale of narcotic substances--7,194 (181 percent); 
  --the inclination to use narcotics and strong 
substances--338 
(178 percent); 
  --the organization or maintenance of gathering places for 
the 
consumption of drugs or provision of premises for these 
purposes--449 (154 percent); 
  --illegal planting or raising of plants containing 
narcotics--343 (380 percent). 
  The situation is also complicated by the circumstance that 
the borders with the republics of the former Union today remind 
one of entry yards. Here is a small example. On the Tajik-Afghan 
border the border guards do not keep track of violators so much 
as protect themselves from commandos firing from the other side. 
All the while almost entire caravans with "goods" move into 
Central Asia. From there, naturally, they migrate to the center 
of Russia and even to the West, since they have no place to get 
rid of their drugs in Central Asia. 
  Of course it is not only from Afghanistan that drugs are 
shipped to the black markets of large cities of Russia. If you 
want to you can find both Colombian cocaine and Indian 
buprenorphine here. 
  In principle the picture is most terrifying in Moscow. On 
the 
menu for drug addicts of the capital, 95 percent of the items 
are shipped in and only 5 percent are "their own," synthetic, 
which were manufactured in some kind of underground laboratory. 
Because of the fact that the standard of living in the capital 
is higher than in other cities of Russia (a large number of 
people can buy drugs) and also because of the great surplus of 
narcotic substances on the market and, correspondingly, the low 
prices for them, recently Moscow has become an ideal market for 
the sale of narcotic substances. 
  The capital drug market is controlled mainly by Azeri, 
Chechen, and Dagestani criminal groups. According to militia 
figures, there are more than 150 interregional bands like this 
in the capital today. As a rule, each group is divided into two 
parts: suppliers and dealers. The specialization changes very 
rarely. In 1993 workers of the Department for Combating Illegal 
Circulation of Drugs of the Moscow Militia arrested 2,183 people 
for crimes involving drugs, of whom 141 were adolescents. Many 
of the drug dealers were released on bail of several million 
rubles ($2,000-$3,000), which most likely is not reflected in 
any way in their financial dealings. According to experts of 
militia experts, in Moscow alone more than 500,000 people 
regularly use drugs. 
  Drug prices in Moscow: A matchbox of good hashish costs up 
to 
100,000 rubles [R] ($60), a kind that is almost as good 
("shala")--up to R15,000 ($8), a glass of poppy straw costs 
R20,000 ($15), and synthetic narcotics--$100-$150 a gram. 
  Most of the drug users whose "commodity" is shipped in from 
Ukraine are not rich people. Therefore in order to obtain his 
regular fix the drug addict is prepared to commit practically 
any crime. 
  Moscow is now not only a good sales market but also an 
excellent transit point for exporting drugs abroad. Drugs are 
usually delivered to Moscow from Central Asia and Siberia and 
sent out to countries of Eastern Europe. There are cases when 
drugs from the territory of the former Union also end up in 
certain West European capitals--Paris, Bonn, and Rome. This 
business is intended for immigrants from the Near East, North 
Africa, and...Russia, who prefer the much less expensive 
"commodity" even if it is of lower quality. It is curious that 
these transnational crime groupings are most frequently led by 
domestic drug barons, who have sensibly set themselves up in 
their own offices in those same European capitals. 

