Language: <F P=105> Vietnamese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Dang Van Ky: "Fighting Opium Smoking in Nghe </F>
An--Efforts Failing To Discourage Desire To Smoke"] 
  [Excerpts] Each year Nghe An produces 14 tons of 
opium, excluding several tons coming into the province from 
Laos. Where does it go? Tens of thousands of people, emaciated 
and sick, are suffering from and going broke because of opium. 
Hundreds of billions of dong are being poured into a bottomless 
pocket. Questions remain unanswered.... 
  Dreadful Figures 
  [Passage omitted] According to statistics, Ky Son District, 
a 
district that shares 192 kilometers of border with Laos, has 
3,000 opium addicts; Tuong Duong District, 1,400; Que Phong 
District, 1,800; Quy Chau District, 174; Quynh Giang Village (in 
Quynh Luu District), a village that is located on National Route 
1A, 57. The City of Vinh and other districts all have some 
addicts, but are not included in the statistics, which show a 
total of over 6,000 drug addicts in Nghe An. 
  If we look more closely, we will find that the poorer and 
more backward the rural areas are, the larger the numbers of 
addicts they have. This is true in terms of ethnic groups. Of 
the total of over 5,000 addicts in the Nghe An highland 
districts, the Hmong people account for 37 percent; the Hdu, 37 
percent; the Thai, 24 percent, but the Vietnamese, only 2 
percent. A more harmful fact is this: The addicts in the 15-45 
age group account for 78 percent, with many children among the 
addicts being breadwinners that their families depend on. What 
will become of their race? 
  Let us give you other statistics: There currently are in the 
highlands of Nghe An 3,250 hectares of land used for poppy 
cultivation, with annual opium output reaching 14,000 kilograms. 
In addition, 1,000 kilograms are brought in from Laos through 
the smuggling route. These amounts are enough not only to 
supply the 6,000 Nghe An addicts with opium, but also to 
"support" tens of thousands of people being "in the same boat" 
from Hanoi to Saigon. 
  Not Very Successful Fights 
  The people of Nghe An did not wait until today to fight 
back. 
If we go back nearly half a century, after August 1945, Nghe An 
had at least four memorable timeframes. The first phase in the 
years of 1945-1946 saw a campaign aimed at attacking social 
ills, including opium addiction. People smashed opium smoking 
paraphernalia, threw opium into streams, and happily announced 
to fellow villagers that they had quit smoking opium. In some 
villages close to 100 addicts succeeded in giving up smoking. 
Stopping the habit 100 percent. Some until now. 
  More than 10 years after the delta had enthusiastically 
carried out the land reforms, the highlands was crazy 
about democratic reforms. All social ills were blamed 
on "enemy plots." People who were caught in these ills were 
considered "caught by the enemy's tricks." As a result, lots of 
people secretly threw both their smoking paraphernalia and opium 
into caves. The fact that people were told to obey orders was by 
itself a force. 
  About five years later people realized that opium addiction 
had not decreased but actually was rising. Some localities lost 
their hope, sighed, and let things happen according to their 
fate. Other localities, the most outstanding one being Ky Son 
District, did exactly the opposite: They firmly fought back. The 
leadership at the district level made a decision to order 
forced concentration. They issued summons to call 
addicts to appear at a specified location. Fences had been 
erected. Guards were stationed everywhere. Did addicts froth at 
the mouth as a symptom of withdrawal? They were free to do so. 
Did they scratch, curse, and break things? They were free to 
do so. Did they defecate and urinate? They were free to do so. 
Did any chronic ailments recur because of a lack of opium? Too 
bad if they happened to them that way. The concentration camps 
became a battlefield, a dumpsite, an unbelievable place.... 
People called them the quitting method. 
  In the past, the Tran dynasty fought the Chinese and 
Mongolian invaders three times before being able to persuade 
them that they should not dare to come to this "land in the 
south" anymore. Nghe An fought the "opium invader" twice, but 
it remained unbeaten. That was really a kind of terrible weed. 
Therefore, as we entered the 1990's, 30 years after that 
dreadful "quitting method," once again the detoxification 
campaign had to be revived. This campaign has been going on 
since the beginning of 1992. 
  In the face of the AIDS danger, mankind as a whole has 
unanimously spoken against the intravenous use of drugs. Vietnam 
is a part of this global campaign. And Nghe An is a part of 
this national part. This means that compared to the three 
previous antidrug campaigns, obviously the campaign this time is 
different in both nature and scope. 
  Addicts generally consist of: First, well-to-do people who 
have nothing to do but to seek pleasure, like the group of "da 
do" (red stone) people in Quynh Chau, or the new rich. Second, 
adolescents who curiously try something new by smoking just for 
fun and then get hooked. However, the third kind of addicts is 
the most numerous and pitiable: They are victims of poverty and 
backwardness. Addiction happens to these people in two ways. 
The first comes from the belief that opium has a tonic quality 
that gives them strength. To chop down trees and to clear bushes 
to make terraced fields is not an easy job, and this does not 
count the distance to be traveled that requires climbing hills 
and crossing streams. To compensate for this expending of 
energy, an appropriate intake of protein is needed. But these 
people usually do not have much to eat, just a few bowls of 
rice, even just a few pieces of manioc or wild roots. Then they 
come to the opium-smoking paraphernalia. And as a magic wand, a 
few puffs banish the fatigue in their body. They do not know 
that the opium provides them with stimulation that creates a 
false strength, a strength that saps their own body. The second 
way: Because of poverty and backwardness, they contract 
diseases. They do not get treatment by doctors, except for folk 
healers. They do not have medicines, but they have opium. Do 
they have to give it up? No, they just take a tiny piece of 
opium, put it into their mouth, and swallow it. Diseases are 
cured right away. When they are sick again, they will get 
another tiny piece of opium and swallow it. They do not even 
know when they have been hooked. This explains why we have 
"all-family" addiction and addiction of fetuses, just like the 
case of Hua Bac Village (in Ky Son District) where all 
residents, old and young, 100 percent of its population, are 
addicts. 
  In the detoxification campaign this time, the province has 
the participation of its Ethnic Minorities Committee and Labor, 
War Invalids, and Social Welfare Service. As to districts, they 
usually send in a district deputy chairman. Villages send in 
their chairmen. Currently, Nghe An has five detoxification 
centers. Four are located in districts--Ky Son, Tuong Duong, Que 
Phong, and Quy Chau--and one in a village, Quynh Giang (which 
once held the leading banner in the nationwide public health 
field, with the center director, Tran Chu, earning the title of 
the field's hero). 
  Although there are organs and individuals responsible for 
the 
campaign, the method that is used to carry out this totally 
scientific task has been labeled "up to your convenience and 
creativity." This is thus the greatest weakness of this current 
detoxification campaign. Because the centers are allowed to use 
their own "creativity," each center uses its own method and has 
its own prescription. Let us take the largest detoxification 
center, Ky Son District, as an example. Ky Son had a medical 
aid station of the border defense forces in Subregion 50. It 
consisted of one physician, two doctor's assistants, seven 
nurses, and one orderly. By the middle of 1993 (after more than 
a year), it had completed detoxification in 118 cases. It 
achieved a high rate of success, much higher than that of other 
detoxification centers. 
  "Please tell me the reasons for your success," I once asked 
district Deputy Chairman Mua No Tu, the head of the 
detoxification committee. 
  "There were many reasons," Mua No Tu answered me, smiling. 
"First of all, the addicts wanted to be rid of the habit. They 
were broke. Their houses leaked. They had no rice. Their 
clothes were all rags. They were emaciated and sick. Both 
wives and husbands showed displeasure toward each other on their 
face. If they did not undergo detoxifying treatment, they would 
die. You see, my dear journalist, we enjoy lots of affection. 
In some villages, as we announced the detoxification program 
available for 10 addicts, 30 and 40 people showed up, which made 
us send several of them home." 
  The Subregion 50 physicians really had been working hard in 
this totally humanitarian task. They had to travel all the way 
to Hanoi to learn from other physicians and to find medications. 
The Hanoi physicians, out of respect for their colleagues, 
taught them the method of treatment and sold them 10 doses of 
medications at the total price of 3 million dong. Back at the 
center, they used three doses on three patients. The first day, 
everything was fine. The second day, everything was fine. The 
third day, oh God, the patients either got mad or fainted. 
Everybody was scared stiff. Orders were given to stop the 
medication in order to look for another prescription. But which 
one? The Ky Son District CPV [Communist Party of Vietnam] 
Committee secretary, Cao Tien Tan, had a traditional 
prescription handed down from his ancestors which he believed 
was good. But unfortunately he was in the position of a 
district party secretary. What if something happened? 
  "In Vientiane there is a brilliant healer," somebody 
suggested. 
  The center wrote a letter to invite him over. Having learned 
from the experience with the Hanoi prescription, the prospective 
employer wrote: 
  "We invite you to come and stay to treat our patients. We 
will provide you with meals and drinks. After the treatment, if 
it brings about good results, we will pay you the full amount of 
3 million dong for the 10 doses of medications. We will 
reimburse you for travel expenses, too." 
  The Vientiane doctor replied that he was very busy and that 
he would only sell the medications and could not stay at all. 
Why? It was obvious that he was not sure about the results of 
the treatment. Finally, the center had to lose 1.6 million dong 
as "supplemental allowance" paid to him. 
  Ky Son also sent people to Vinh to buy other medications. 
And 
finally it had to use the district party secretary's 
prescription, now called TK92. It was TK92 that helped to cure 
113 of the 118 cases, with only five patients becoming addicted 
again because of a recurrence of their chronic diseases. What 
did they use to treat these diseases? Once again, opium. And 
so they became addicted once more. Presently, patients in Van 
Chan District (in Yen Bai Province) and in Thai Binh Province 
have used TK92, with good results (but TK92 used for addicts in 
Quy Chau District has not brought about any good results, 
probably because of a failure to follow exactly the physician's 
prescribed instructions). 
  The method that Quynh Giang Village used to detoxify addicts 
was totally different from that used by Ky Son. Whether because 
the 57 addicts there had violated the honor of a locality that 
had been given the national public health leading banner, or 
because of any other reasons, that Quynh Giang adopted the 
"dictatorial" measure to bear upon its addicts, we did not know. 
Prior to organizing the detoxification program, the village had 
built four high walls. It also put up a barbed-wire fence. In 
addition to the medical staff, the village cadres also stationed 
four public security men there. Then orders were issued for 
holding a meeting. Then people were sent out to escort the 
addicts in. It was as noisy as an operation launched to catch a 
bunch of bandits. In the first phase, there were 11 
detoxification patients. After two months, a review found that 
five of them became addicted again. In the second phase, 12 
patients were to receive treatment, but three of them escaped 
because of excessive fear. The nine addicts who were caught and 
taken to the center all went on "medication hunger strike" and 
promised that they would quit the habit by themselves. 
  The results obtained in other centers were no better than 
those in Quynh Giang. Que Phong took in 22 addicts for 
detoxification, but four of them escaped from the center, 
leaving 18 behind. After two months, a review found that 14 
became addicted again. In Quy Chau, after two months, 18 of 24 
patients smoked again. In Tuong Duong, after two months, 18 of 
27 patients smoked again. And so, excluding the Ky Son 
detoxification center, only 24 cases were treated sucessfully in 
the other four centers. 
  And yet, in this phase 1, the state had spent 170 million 
dong. 
  It was because of the successes and failures in phase 1 that 
the campaign leaders have changed the way to manage it. Since 
the middle of 1993 the Nghe An Public Health Service has been in 
charge of the detoxification program in the province. Perhaps 
this is the right approach. Medically speaking, drug addiction 
is a disease. Since it is a disease, treatment must come from 
physicians. 
  Question Marks Remaining 
  After more than a year of detoxification in Nghe An we must 
reluctantly ask these questions: Can Nghe An save the more than 
6,000 people, the pitiable and reproachable people, from the 
vicious cycle of addiction? When is this mission of salvation 
over? It is difficult for anybody to offer an answer. However, 
this is not the only pain. We do not know whether some 
adolescents, malaria patients, and people afflicted by stomach 
diseases, stomach aches, and so on are getting close to opium 
and befriending it at the same time when statisticians are 
adding and subtracting figures or not. We do not know whether 
during the two years in which Nghe An succeeded in saving those 
150 people from opium addiction the same number of people might 
have been "caught in the trap" of opium. 
  The most important issue, which most absolutely requires 
action, is to destroy the source of materials. It is just that 
simple. It is complicated, too. If we try to know everything, we 
will find that very many Hmong villages live on growing poppy. A 
couple who grows poppy harvests from 1.5 to 2.5 kilograms of 
opium in each production season. The price of a kilogram of 
opium at its source is 1 million dong. According to its plan, 
Nghe An Province will spend 2.3 billion dong to help ethnic 
groups to buy cows, pigs, seedlings, and so on in order to 
switch from growing poppy to growing other crops. Is it all 
right that way? To be more exact, is it completely all right 
that way? What is the use of raising cows and pigs and finding 
nobody to buy them because the terrain consists only of 
mountains, chasms, and hilly land, where there are no means of 
communications at all? This means that we must build roads. If 
that sum of money--2.3 billion dong--from the Bank of Vietnam is 
also spent on building roads and bridges, it will be just a drop 
in the bucket! 
  There also is this question: Because the highlands of Nghe 
An had once produced 14 tons of opium a year and still had been 
getting tons of the same stuff from across the border, when this 
stuff becomes scarce, how much of it--2 tons, or 4 tons--will we 
expect to see sweep across the border now? 
  And so we still cannot stop worrying about the unexpected 
consequences of this black demon that is called opium! 
  Vinh, October 1993. 

