Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ovidio Bellando] </F>
  [Text] Foreign Minister Guido Di Tella yesterday received 
precise instructions from the head of state to speed up the 
negotiations linked to an offer made to the United Kingdom to 
clear the mines planted by Argentina in the Malvinas Islands in 
1982. 
  The head of state issued these instructions during a meeting 
of the national cabinet, during which the foreign minister 
reported on the repercussions of the Argentine proposal in the 
London and Malvinas Islands media. During the meeting President 
Carlos Menem also instructed the ministers to promote social and 
economic programs in their areas, on which we are reporting 
separately. 
  Di Tella described as highly positive the opinions published 
in the newspapers THE INDEPENDENT, THE GUARDIAN, and THE DAILY 
TELEGRAPH, which mentioned the scoop published on 4 January by 
LA NACION on the proposal to clear the mines. 
  It was leaked that the foreign minister explained that the 
offer is a consequence of a position championed at the United 
Nations, which favored not only the discontinuation of planting 
antipersonnel mines (so called to differentiate them from 
antitank mines), but the discontinuation of their manufacture as 
well. 
  The foreign minister also explained that according to 
Malvinas Islands sources, it has been estimated that the task of 
clearing the 30,000 mines will cost 5 million pounds (about $8 
million). 
  Although conventional arms are involved, the United Nations 
believes this situation affects civilian communities, because 
the sides that engaged in the war are not removing the mines. 
As an example, diplomatic sources pointed out that these kinds 
of explosions frequently occur in Central America, crippling 
peasants. 
  The foreign minister allegedly reported that he had received 
from London a suggestion that the task be carried out by a 
Commonwealth country in order to avoid the islanders' 
resistance. It would thus not be unlikely that Canadians or 
Australians would participate in this task. 

