BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, June 11 (KCNA) -- A meeting was held in 
the United States on June 6 on the occasion of the month of 
solidarity with the Korean people (June 25-July 27) and the 1st 
anniversary of the adoption of DPRK-U.S. joint statement (June 
1993). 
  Present there were public figures including representatives 
of the co-sponsor organizations -- the New Jersey Peace Action, 
the Montclair Committee on Central America, the International 
League of Women for Peace and Freedom, the Penny Row Hammer 
Branch Organization of the New Jersey Rainbow Federation, the 
Single Peace Committee, the Montclair UN-U.S. branch 
organization and the South Mountain Peace Action. The deputy 
chief of the DPRK mission in the United Nations was invited. 
  Kim Hyo-sin, vice-chairman of the Federation of Churches of 
South Koreans in his speech at the meeting exposed the injustice 
of the U.S. policy towards Korea and the partiality of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency and demanded that the United 
States stop pressure and blackmail against the DPRK and improve 
its relations with the latter. 
  Paul Ahuja, representative of the International Action 
Center, said in his speech that the U.S. possessed of a large 
quantity of nuclear weapons and plutonium is threatening North 
Korea with "sanctions," saying it might have "nuclear weapons." 
  He said [words indistinct] that U.S. Forces are present in 
South Korea "to defend freedom, democracy and peace" is a sheer 
lie. He stressed that a peace agreement must be signed between 
the DPRK and the U.S. and Korea must be reunified in a peaceful 
way. 
  He called upon the participants to sign the signature paper 
supporting "10-point Programme of the Great Unity of the Whole 
Nation for the Reunification of the Country" advanced by the 
great leader President Kim Il-song. 
  Susan Bailey, co-chairman of the U.S. Get Out of Korea 
Committee said that the United States is threatening North Korea 
over the "nuclear issue" in order to stifle its socialist system. 
  She calls for solidarity with the Korean people in the 
struggle for defending the independence of their country and 
socialism. 
  The participants signed the paper supporting the 10-point 
programme. 

