BFN 

<F P=106> [By Rain Ren] </F>
  [Text] The Governor, Chris Patten, yesterday urged China 
to move rapidly to dispel public anxiety caused by the 12-year 
prison sentence imposed on reporter Xi Yang for "stealing state 
secrets". "I hope that Chinese officials understand why there is 
so much worry, not just about the way the case has been handled 
but about the sentence, for example, which has been handed down, 
which seems to most people in Hong Kong and beyond, I think, as 
wholly disproportionate to what we learn of the charges against 
the journalist in question," Patten said. 
  The British ambassador to Beijing, Sir Robin McLaren, 
arrived 
in Hong Kong yesterday for discussions with Patten about the 
jailed journalist, a Ming Pao reporter. Sir Robin said the 
British embassy would ask for more explicit information about 
Xi's case through diplomatic channels. 
  The Governor seemed pessimistic about how much help he could 
offer because Xi was a Chinese citizen. "There is one point, 
which you know, which distinguishes Xi Yang's case from that of 
one or two other journalists in the past," he said. "Xi Yang is 
a local (Hong Kong) resident and works for a Hong Kong newspaper 
but is a Chinese citizen, so there is a limit to what we are 
able to do under the normal international rules and regulations 
in pursuing his case. 
  "There are limits to what the British government can do. 
  "So, I very much hope the Chinese authorities will spell out 
very clearly what the rules and regulations which journalists, 
not least the journalists of Hong Kong newspapers, have to 
follow when they are covering events in China. 
  "These have been a very worrying few days and I hope, I hope 
from the bottom of my heart, that Chinese officials will move 
rapidly to remove people's anxieties because those anxieties are 
very, very real and very, very profound." 
  The chairman of the Foreign Correspondents' Club of Hong 
Kong 
(FCC), Philip Bowring, yesterday expressed concern over Xi's 
case. He said the "secrets" for which Xi was jailed were 
"entirely unexceptional, being the normal stuff of discussion in 
market economies." "Even were Xi technically in breach of some 
ill-defined law, the sentence is excessive by any criteria. 
  "It is a reminder of politically motivated punishments 
handed 
out during previous periods such as the Cultural Revolution," he 
said. "The harsh sentence appears intended as a warning to the 
Hong Kong press not to report news or events in China other than 
that which has been approved or announced in official media. 
  "This has, we believe, already influenced reporting in Hong 
Kong on China and we fear self-censorship will spread to 
coverage of Hong Kong itself." 
  He said Xi's sentence would deter mainland Chinese from 
talking to foreign or Hong Kong reporters "even on mundane 
investment and economic matters which have no political 
significance". "This makes foreign correspondents doubly 
concerned for the safety of Chinese with whom they are in 
contact," he said. "Such penalties are designed not merely to 
choke off dissident news sources, but discourage ordinary 
Chinese, be they officials, factory managers or academics, from 
answering questions for information and basic data." 
  The FCC predicted a negative impact on local companies who 
analysed mainland companies listed in Hong Kong stock exchanges. 
"If journalists cannot report basic, timely information without 
fear of arbitrary use of draconian state secrecy laws, it is 
hard to imagine how, for example, managers and accountants can 
produce accurate reports and accounts for listed Chinese 
companies," Bowring said. 
  The Association for Democracy and People's Livelihood (ADPL) 
has collected more than 20,000 signatures from the Hong Kong 
public on a petition protesting against Xi's sentence. The 
response from Beijing advisers on Hong Kong affairs has not been 
enthusiastic. Since the launch of the signature campaign last 
Wednesday [13 April], only two advisers, Vincent Cheng and Lee 
Kai-ming, have signed the petition. The Democratic Alliance for 
Betterment of Hong Kong (DAB), which has 10 members who are also 
advisers for Beijing, said it would not participate in any other 
local activities protesting against Xi's treatment. 

