CSO 

<F P=106> [Roundtable discussion by various officials involved in </F>
railroad electrification led by V. I. Kulik, deputy chief 
engineer of the Transbaykal Railroad, and reported by V. 
Pakulin, GUDOK correspondent in Chita; date not given: "...Plus 
Electrification"] 
  [Text] Either such is the time or we have forgotten 
how to be obliging. It's worth recalling how the program for 
completing the electrification of the Transbaykal mainline, 
planned for 1993, has turned out to be a complete fiasco. But 
the fact is that the decision was taken in the railroad, and in 
the Ministry of Railways, and in the government. And all the 
participants in the construction were focused on it, of course. 
It has fallen through. 
  To look into the reasons for the failure, to make the 
necesary conclusions, and to determine the tactics of 
actions--such was the goal of a meeting of leaders of the 
organizations, enterprises, and subdivisions engaged in the 
electrification. Its materials, as well as conversations with 
the participants in the construction staff, have served as the 
basis of an external (zaochnyy) "roundtable" on the pages of 
GUDOK. Valeriy Ivanovich Kulik, deputy chief engineer of the 
Transbaykal Railroad, leads the session. 
  V. KULIK. The desertion of the workers of the 
Nizhneangarsktreansstroy trust, who already at the beginning of 
last year abandoned the most important facilities at the Sbega 
station, must be considered one of the chief reasons for the 
failure. They left the poligon so hurriedly that we have lost a 
great deal of time in searching for a new contractor. Thanks be 
to Tsentrobamstroy, which has acquired these facilities. 
  On the other hand, the unsatisfactory work of certain 
subdivisions which remained on the construction project has had 
an effect. We placed great hopes on Bamstroyput. However, this 
once solid and reliable organization has not justified them: 
neither the plan for the contact system or for general 
construction operations has been fulfilled. 
  Construction administration No. 87 of Bamstransvzryvprom 
also 
has let us down very substantially. The pile-supported areas in 
Uryum and Ksenyevskaya have not been handed over because of 
what--a collapse at the boiler house and the contact system duty 
post building. We need to exchange opinions and determine our 
attitude to the plans for the current year. 
  First of all about finances. In the past year the 
construction project has run a fever not only from the fact that 
people have worked poorly but because of our inability to work 
under the new economic conditions. The situation has changed 
drastically. We--both the customers and the contractors--have 
proven to not be ready for this. One has had to reorganize 
oneself literally on the go. Financing has been a muddle. 
Although we also have settled up with the contractors 
satisfactorily. It has had an effect primarily on deliveries of 
building materials, structures, and equipment. 
  We all have had to learn to manage construction by purely 
financial methods. Something was received, something wasn't. In 
addition, even the banks made their own contribution--it would 
happen that their operations dragged on for months. We were 
forced to send money from the road to the supplier plants, 
detaching funds from needed operating costs. Thanks be to the 
mainline's leadership, which took several unpopular steps, 
realizing the difficult situation with electrification. Thanks 
also to the contractors, who have acted in the situation which 
has developed so that the work would not come to an end. The 
money was used basically for the solution of targetted tasks. 
  I will not undertake to forecast how the situation will 
develop this year. Nevertheless electrification has been 
financed in the first quarter; the money needs to be used. Of 
course, we will carry out mutual set-offs with the suppliers. We 
will obtain a portion of the building materials from other roads 
to cover their debts to the Transbaykal Railroad. However, the 
principal hope is that the ministry will not leave the 
construction project without funds. 
  V. KOVALENKO, General Director of the Tsentrobamstroy 
Joint-Stock Company. As far as our builders are concerned, 
we have no complaints against the customer. The road has helped 
us satisfactorily with fuel, materials and even with some 
advanced payment. 
  Ye. KISIMES, Technical Supervisor of the Klyuchi 
Joint-Stock Company. On the other hand we haven't managed 
to do much. We supplied all the facilities with builders in 
March of last year. However, the pre-payment for reinforced 
concrete, metal, and cement was moved to April instead of 
February-March and the brigades lay idle for practically two 
months. True, even some deliveries paid for were not made. Let's 
say that the Shimanovsk Building Structures Plant has disrupted 
our work at Ksenyevskaya station. It'll soon be a year since the 
money was transferred, but we are not able to furnish the 
foundation of the dwelling house with floor slabs. Now they 
state at the plant: "A cubic meter of reinforced concrete costs 
us 254,000 rubles"... Apparently one will have to solve anew the 
problem of supplying facilities with materials and structures. I 
consider this a top-priority task. 
  N. KOSHMAN, Lieutenant General, Deputy Chief of Railway 
Troops. Last year, at the request of First Deputy Minister 
of Railways O. Moshenko, the command adopted a decision to add 
two more sections (peregon) to the volumes of work previously 
agreed upon: Temnaya--Kendagiry and Kendagiriy--Ksenyevskaya. 
Even given the fact that we were not prepared for this and would 
not have been able to cope. Financing and shortfalls in 
deliveries of metal from Omsk put us in a difficult position. I 
think that this year one should determine precisely what 
directions are to be considered top-priority and to proceed 
along them, not scattering forces and funds. Each contractor 
ought to be aware of "his own shunting" and operate in 
accordance with the technological schedule. It is clear that an 
"electric locomotive" will not operate without a contact wire. 
That is why, when distributing funds, one needs to pay special 
attention to the soldiers engaged in installing the supports. 
One must consider that we will have to work practically only on 
rock faces, and this means additional expenditures of funds and 
time. 
  G. MADFIS, Chief of the Production-Technical Department 
of SU(Construction Administration)-87. The Transbaykal has 
fully settled up with us based on the year's results. On the 
whole our agreement is payment based on the operations actually 
performed. But now we are asking it to give us a 50-percent 
advance. This is approximately R100 million. The fact is that 
indebtedness to suppliers and payments that can't be put off 
amount to a half billion for the trust. People aren't receiving 
wages and it is difficult to send them to the poligon. One will 
have to borrow cash from the merchants. 
  V. KOZLOV, Chief Engineer of the Bamstroyput 
Joint-Stock Company. And it's difficult for us to dispatch 
people. If we had the money, we could have compelled them to 
work. 
  V. KULIK. I can understand Bamtransvzryvprom. 
However, more than R60 million were transferred to Bamstroyput 
at the beginning of last year. They didn't get to the 
construction project. Bamstroyput has spent them for its own 
needs: just what didn't they buy, right up to electric light 
bulbs... But your inertia in electrification costs the road 
billions in losses. Think about how to get people to the track. 
  V. DUDKIN, Chief of SMP(Construction-Installation 
Train)-868. Our signalmen were prepared to perform the 
entire volume of work last year. A little was left but the 
hold-up with the advance payment forced us to come to a stop at 
the end of November. However, I want to speak about something 
else. The losses at the facilities that people leave are great. 
In Arteushka there's a facility "with a beard." It's four years 
since we left there, having performed 95 percent of the work. 
Today everything is a mess there. A new estimate to restore 
everything must be compiled. Seven kilometers of cable were 
abandoned at the Ksenyevskaya station in '91. We'll return soon 
they thought. They signed a contract and paid for storage. But 
now you can't find any traces, as well as the large quantity of 
cable. And, you see, it's also a considerable amount of money. 
  A. SALOSHIN, Deputy Chief of Glavbamstroy, Operations 
Coordinator. Slightly more than R7 billion were allocated 
for 1994 for the completion of electricification through state 
capital investments. But not less than 20 is needed. One needs 
to expend the funds very judiciously, having eliminated all 
unproductive expenditures. 
  N. YAKOVLEV, Chief Engineer of the Mogochin 
Division. Indeed, the problem of financing is very acute 
and the agitation of the builders is understandable. But it 
turns out that we divide billions but forget about debts. The 
electrification participants owe the Mogochin Division more than 
R170 million for housing, electric power, and food, for electric 
locomotives and motor vehicle transport, for coal and for car 
demurrage... And one can't brush aside the debts on the 
pretext--"We're working for you." It's not the time. 
  Now the division no longer will be able to supply the 
subdivisions on the principle--who will ask for how much. I ask 
everyone to calculate their minimum requirement for fuel and 
lubricants and electric power and to conclude contracts for 
locomotives and cars. 
  V. KULIK. I think that the observation is correct. 
Financial discipline should be the same for all. We will help of 
course--one cannot keep an eye on all the enterprises. And no 
matter the uncertainty with financing, this year we must do all 
to complete the work properly. This depends on everyone. You 
understand. The pile drivers have been delayed and the circuit 
has been stretched. The builders come to a standstill and 
because of them the installers and the trouble-shooters are 
idle... The whole business suffers. 
  Ye. KISIMES. Here every contractor needs to turn 
over his facilities not only on time and according to the 
approved schedule, but also not to do slipshod work. What have 
we run into at the Sbega station? The underground portion of the 
water intake needs to be built but it turns out there are still 
no wells. They have flung people to the second lift pumping 
station, but there the piles have not been obtained. At the 
purification installations also the few piles are not enough. So 
no one has returned to finish his work. 
  There are important facilities in Mogocha. In the spring we 
dug out the foundation area under the locomotive brigades' rest 
home practically by hand--we furnished the frame, we furnished 
the joinery products. We have been in contact with the sanitary 
engineers and the electricians--and we have started. The 
customer also needs to act more promptly. 
  V. ZYRYANOV, Chief Engineer of Power Train No. 
705. I'm afraid that the installers may find themselves "in 
extremis" also this year. A tremendous amount of work awaits us: 
2,600 control panels need to be installed and almost 212 
kilometers of carrier cable and 240 kilometers of contact wire 
reeled out. Two traction substations, three sectioning posts, 
and much else are to be installed. 
  We have analyzed the situation and come to the conclusion 
that we will manage if the general construction work schedule 
will be precisely maintained. We are fully ready to begin 
installation at the substation in Uryum and we ask that it be 
handed over in the second quarter. In the second half of the 
year we will proceed to the substation in Sbega and we will have 
time now to do both. But if we fail with the first the second 
will be under question. One hasn't a choice in the installation 
of the contact wire of a facility: we work where we can. We have 
good contact with the military builders. We follow literally on 
their heels. However, one needs to accelerate the installation 
of supports and construction. With an adequate work front behind 
us there will be no delay. 
  A. KHEKILAYEV, Deputy Manager of the 
Bamtranstekhmontazh Trust. Today all are agreed that work 
needs to done on electrification. And, with all the 
complexities, we will work. Well, we will overcome the 
complexities by joint efforts. I think that we need to pass from 
mutual reproaches and complaints to mutual understanding and to 
find optimum solutions together. 
  We have been successfully collaborating with Tsentrobamstroy 
for a long time. I have no doubt that the facilities in Uryum 
and Sbega will be handed over on time. As yet there is no such 
contact with the Klyuchi company. We ourselves have also been 
guilty in certain conflict situations. We have often confined 
ourselves to shouts over the phone instead of working shoulder 
to shoulder and seeking compromise. And making concessions in 
something. 
  I would like to continue normal interrelations with the 
Bamstroyput Joint-Stock Company but the fact is that this 
organization offers us nothing. This causes doubt as to whether 
the builders will fulfill their obligations. However, we will 
try to find a common language even with them. 
  The main thing is that relations between the construction 
participants need to be legitimized. And work schedules and 
deliveries of material and equipment coordinated. I would like 
to come to an agreement with the customer that equipment be 
delivered directly to the sites. 
  G. GORYUNOV, Chief Engineer of SMP-764. Indeed, 
the participants in the electrification should coordinate 
operations and consider the interests of colleagues, who also 
need to live. I realize that it is more profitable for the 
builders to do more rapidly what is easier and what "lies 
closer." But give us installers a work front. Let's say that at 
the Nanagry station only one support in all has not been 
delivered. But they have brought us to a standstill. If it's all 
the same to you where to put the support up, deliver it to the 
station so that we could finish some portion of our own work. 
And a request to the soldiers that at the section you also 
randomly put up the supports where it's more convenient and 
where the foundation area is ready, but after that you return to 
what has been left out. We readjust ourselves to you and now and 
then are forced even to outdistance you. So, in returning, don't 
sever our lines, preserve our labor. 
  N. TUMASOV, Deputy Chief of the Electical Supply 
Service. It makes me happy that all the meeting 
participants firmly state: we will hand over the contact system. 
Indeed, there are all the possibilities for this now. However, 
one cannot, in speeding up construction, depart from the 
accepted standards. Delivery for installation of a contact wire 
suspension must be provided with a complete set of construction 
and installation elements. The omission of supports about which 
Gennadiy Andreyevich speaks can lead precisely to violations of 
this requirement. One needs to hand over the system with 
complete anchor sections. 
  A. SALOSHIN. This year the subdivisions will have 
to work according to the schedules which have been agreed upon. 
I think that there ought to be regular staff meetings--to 
identify deviations and to name the guilty. The absence of 
individual responsibility engenders irresponsibility. 
  V. KULIK. In winding up the conversation, I wish 
to note that the character of today's meeting differs from all 
the previous ones by the calm and business-like discussion of 
problems, and by unanimity and a common interest in finishing 
the construction as quickly as possible. 
  Since the past year has shown that the majority of the 
subdivisions are able to solve on a high level the tasks that 
have been set, there is complete confidence in success. Now, as 
has been correctly noted here, everything depends on we 
ourselves--how we adjust the collectives, how we supply them 
with everything necessary, from structures to bread, how we 
regulate interaction. I won't say that the final lap of 
electrification will be easy. However, we have chosen the road 
of agreement. It is not difficult to adopt a decision; it is 
much more difficult to carry out what has been planned. 

