Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, March 22 KYODO -- Iceland's Prime Minister 
David Oddsson said Tuesday [22 March] his country plans to 
resume commercial whaling in the "near future" but has not 
decided when. "The problem is the possibility of selling whale 
meat," Oddsson told a news conference, alluding to an 
international ban on trade in whale products. 
  "We could never eat all the whales we would like to hunt," 
said Oddsson, who is in Japan for an informal visit to accompany 
the national soccer team for friendship matches with Japan's 
J-league. Iceland has a population of 260,000. 
  As a "very small economy" the fishing nation also must take 
into account possible reactions of antiwhaling groups, he said. 
"For organizations like Greenpeace it is very easy to hit a 
country like us," he said. 
  In 1989 Iceland halted whaling after environmentalists 
called 
for an international boycott of Icelandic products. Frustrated 
over a moratorium on commercial whaling decreed by the 
International Whaling Commission (IWC) in 1985, Iceland withdrew 
from the organization in 1991. 
  Iceland will consider rejoining the IWC if it "will change 
its methods," he said charging that the commission has been 
taken over by antiwhaling interests and "terrorist groups like 
Greenpeace." The IWC must "realize" that it is possible to 
catch whales without risking overhunting, Oddsson said. 
  The 40-member IWC at its annual meeting in Kyoto in May 
rejected a set of rules devised to allow controlled harvesting 
of nonthreatened whale species, known as revised management 
procedure, dashing pro-whaling nations' hopes for a lifting of 
the whaling ban. 
  If the ban remains in place, the increasing number of whales 
will threaten the stock of other fish vital for Iceland's 
economy, the premier said. But he said "things are changing," 
noting increasing support for the idea of controlled culling of 
whales during the past two years. 
  That the United States, while ardently protesting against 
IWC-member Norway's resumption of small-scale commercial whaling 
in June 1993, did not act on its threats indicated that 
Washington is shifting from its antiwhaling position, he said. 
  However, Oddsson said he does not plan to discuss the 
whaling 
issue in talks with Chief Cabinet Secretary Masayoshi Takemura 
scheduled for later Tuesday and declined to comment on Japan's 
whaling policy. At last year's IWC meeting Iceland called on 
Japan and Norway to quit the commission. 
  Japan has abided by the ban on commercial whaling but 
catches 
a limited number of whales in Antarctic waters each year for 
what it says is for scientific reasons. Japan's whaling fleet 
is currently carrying out its annual research mission to the 
Antarctic to hunt its permitted quota of some 330 minke whales 
while monitoring blue whales. 

