BFN 

  [Text] Culture and Information Minister Hamid Yusuf Hammadi 
held a news conference in Khartoum this afternoon. The news 
conference was attended by chief editors of major Sudanese 
newspapers, television correspondents, and correspondents of 
Arab and foreign news agencies. 
  At the outset of the news conference, the minister addressed 
developments on the situation at the UN Security Council with 
regard to the unfair embargo clamped on Iraq, as well as the 
positions of permanent and nonpermanent members of the Council 
on the issue. He also explained the relationship between Iraq 
and the Special Commission chaired by Ekeus since 1991. 
Furthermore, he reviewed Iraq's fair positions and its 
implementation of Paragraphs 8 and 13 of Section C of UN 
Security Council Resolution 687. He also addressed the evasion 
demonstrated by the Special Commission and inspection teams, the 
media deception, and the political pressures applied by the U.S. 
Administration and the British Government to maintain the 
sanctions. He noted that the U.S. Administration and the 
British Government have become isolated because of these 
positions of theirs. 
  The minister also spoke on his mission in Sudan and several 
other Arab states, which included the communication of personal 
messages from the leader president, may God protect him, to the 
leaders of these countries, explaining the Iraqi position, as 
well as the positions of the UN Special Commission, the U.S. 
Government, and the British Government. He discussed possible 
coordination with fraternal and friendly states to ensure 
compliance with UN Security Council Resolution 687 by the 
council itself. 
  The culture and information minister reviewed with the 
reporters in Khartoum the impact of the unfair embargo, as well 
as the great Iraqi jihad in the course of the reconstruction 
drive currently under way in Iraq. He answered the questions 
they posed. 
  At the end of the news conference, the personal envoy of the 
leader president, may God protect him, met with the heads of the 
Arab diplomatic missions accredited to Sudan at the premises of 
the Iraqi Embassy in Khartoum. He reviewed with them what Iraq 
has implemented of Paragraphs 8 and 13 of Section C of UN 
Security Council Resolution 687, as acknowledged in reports the 
UN Special Commission has submitted in this regard. He also 
explained to the Arab diplomats the developments of the 
situation at the UN Security Council. 
  Moreover, the minister spoke about the invitation National 
Assembly Speaker Sa'di Mahdi Salih extended to a delegation of 
the Kuwaiti Parliament to visit Iraq to discuss all outstanding 
issues, including the issue pertaining to missing Kuwaitis, the 
call that reflects a desire to explain the facts to the Kuwaiti 
Parliament, which the Kuwaiti rulers are attempting to 
misrepresent, as they did prior to August 2, 1990. 
  The meeting was attended by Iraqi Ambassador to Sudan 
'Abd-al-Samad Sumayd 'Ali. 

