Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Press review] </F>
  [Text] Under the headline "On the Eve of the Historic 
Summit," AL-BA'TH says: The exceptional attention given to the 
Geneva summit between Presidents Hafiz al-Asad and Bill Clinton 
is due primarily to the interest in achieving peace in the 
Middle East; a peace which is considered an international demand 
more than it is a regional or local demand. That attention is 
also due to the fact that Syria is the cornerstone in the making 
and maintenance of peace. The strategic view of Syria's 
president, Arab leader Hafiz al-Asad, has been confirmed by 
events and experiences to be credible, sound, and concerned for 
establishing a just and comprehensive peace, that is based on 
the resolutions of international legitimacy and which 
corresponds to the aspirations of the world community to defuse 
tension and wars in the region and establish peace and security. 
  The expected summit in Geneva is yet another positive 
response by Syria aimed at giving another opportunity for the 
peace process to proceed forward toward the set objective, 
namely the establishment of the just and comprehensive peace in 
the region. 
  AL-BA'TH adds: Syria's positive stands toward the peace 
process have helped keep this process viable and alive and 
blocked the Israeli rulers' stands and intentions aimed at 
undermining this process and distorting it through partial, 
incomplete deals. 
  The paper stresses that the constructive cooperation 
displayed by Syria toward the initiative of the former George 
Bush administration and the current Clinton administration has 
played a decisive role to ensure that the chances for peace are 
not squandered, that the comprehensive nature of the solution is 
not undermined, and that the objectives and foundations of the 
initiative are not bypassed. 
  The paper stresses that peace can only be achieved with the 
return of the land and the ending of occupation. The paper 
further stresses that the Syrian and Lebanese tracks are 
integrated and the peace process cannot be completed without 
them; that stability in the region is vital and important and is 
a principal element for world security; and that such a 
stability can only be realized by achieving the just and 
comprehensive peace that is based on international legitimacy 
and the UN resolutions. 
  AL-BA'TH concludes by saying: When leader al-Asad decides 
comprehensive peace in exchange for complete withdrawal, he is 
stressing the equation of right and justice that can be accepted 
by all nations and peoples and that can entrench and maintain 
peace. Syria is committed to the peace it advocates and to all 
of its dimensions and results. Syria means exactly what it 
says, and there can be no deviation from what President Hafiz 
al-Asad says. 
  Within the same context, and under the headline 
"Comprehensiveness and Stability," TISHRIN writes: As we follow 
all the assessments, analyses, and expectations on the summit, 
the basic fact that comes clearly to light is that when Syria 
leads the process to achieve the just and comprehensive peace in 
the region, Syria is in fact strengthening the course of 
international legitimacy on the basis of right, justice, ending 
occupation, and placing the region on the path of stability and 
security, away from hegemony, terrorism, expansionism, wars, and 
calamities. 
  The paper adds: By adhering to the comprehensive and just 
solution, Syria is reaffirming that if the region is to enter 
the age of peace then this can only be achieved by implementing 
the UN resolutions and the principles of the U.S. initiative, 
foremost of which is the return of land to its rightful owners, 
a positive serious Israeli response to the requirements of peace 
and ending the occupation of the occupied Arab territories, 
dismantling settlements, and putting an end to the Israeli iron 
first and expansionist aggressive policy. The paper adds: With 
this alone, the Arabs can guarantee their rights and with this 
alone the just and comprehensive peace can be achieved. 
  TISHRIN concludes by saying: Syria, together will all 
sincere advocates of the just and comprehensive peace, sees in 
the Geneva summit a major event. It hopes that this summit, and 
its positive results, will provide a real ground to achieve a 
just and comprehensive peace, which is an essential requirement 
for regional stability. 
  On the same subject, and under the headline "Syria's 
Strength," AL-THAWRAH says: The world is paying great attention 
to the summit, hoping it will yield positive results for the 
future of peace, security, and stability in the Arab region. 
Meanwhile, Israel is standing alone, fabricating clamor over 
the summit even before it convenes in an attempt to reshuffle 
cards, hoping that the Geneva summit will not yield the expected 
results. 
  AL-THAWRAH adds: Israel, which is avoiding the real and just 
peace, does not want the peace process to return to the correct 
path. The paper adds: It is hoped that the summit will return 
the peace process to its correct path, whereby a U.S. commitment 
to the spirit of the U.S. initiative itself will make Israel 
face the fact that it cannot escape international legitimacy and 
that it must provide the requirements for the just and 
comprehensive peace that can do justice to the Arabs and 
guarantee the return of their occupied territory and usurped 
rights. 
  AL-THAWRAH concludes by saying: Leader al-Asad is not going 
to Geneva to talk about the Golan Heights alone. He will be 
carrying with him the concerns of the nation and care for its 
future and critical issues. Historic leadership goes to leader 
al-Asad, who embodies loyalty to the pan-Arab issues and views 
Syria's national interests from the pan-Arab perspective. This 
is the secret of Syria's strength and important role, chartered 
by leader al-Asad with its pan-Arab dimensions. This is also 
the reason why its decision is so considerable and stands so 
decisive in every pan-Arab issue. 

