Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tunis, Feb 25 (AFP)--PLO-Israeli negotiations to 
launch autonomy in the occupied territories will continue 
despite Friday's [25 February] massacre of more than 50 
Palestinians at a Hebron mosque, an aide to chief Yasir 'Arafat 
said here. 
  Sakhr Habash, a member of the central committee of Arafat's 
Fatah movement, ruled out a suspension of the autonomy talks. 
"On the contrary, these acts show that peace is needed urgently." 
  Under the September 13 autonomy accord with the PLO, Israel 
was to have begun withdrawing troops from the West Bank town of 
Jericho and the Gaza Strip about three months ago but 
negotiations have snagged on security issues. 
  Habash said there was a risk of reprisals from Palestinians 
in the occupied territories over the massacre at the mosque in 
Hebron, the West Bank. Hardline groups opposed to the peace 
talks have vowed to carry out revenge attacks. 
  Habash said the United States was mainly responsible for the 
massacre, adding that the gunman, Baruch Goldestein, was of 
American origin and a product of racist US-Jewish groups. 
  "The United States must respond to these psychopathic groups 
... because their interests are against peace," Habash said. 
  Habash also laid the blame on the United Nations for failing 
to give international protection to Palestinians in the 
territories. 
  PLO chairman Yasir 'Arafat called for "international 
protection" for the Palestinians in the territories. His envoy 
at the UN was hopeful that the Security Council would hold an 
emergency meeting to discuss the massacre later Friday. 
  The PLO also declared three days of mourning and a general 
strike in the occupied territories after the massacre of more 
than 40 Palestinians in the West Bank town of Hebron. 
  The PLO denounced the shooting as "criminal slaughter" and 
said the Israeli government was responsible, a PLO statement 
said earlier. 
  The international community, including the co-sponsors of 
the 
peace process Russia and the United States, should act to "put 
an end to such massacres." 
  Official PLO spokesman Yasir 'Abd-Rabbuh said between 20 to 
30 Jewish settlers led by an Israeli army captain carried out 
the massacre. 
  'Abd-Rabbuh rejected Israel's "lying version" which said a 
lone gunman, Goldestein, shot dead 53 Palestinians at the West 
Bank mosque during dawn prayers. 
  "The PLO blames the Israeli government and its army for this 
crime," 'Abd-Rabbuh said at a press conference here. 
  'Aziz al-Hashmami, aged 40, told AFP he was inside the Tomb 
of the Patriarchs when the shooting started and said that "four 
to five" gunmen had opened fire as the Palestinian knelt in 
prayer. 
  'Abd-Rabbuh said Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin 
telephoned PLO chief Yasir 'Arafat to apologise for the attack. 

