BFN 

  [Text] Hong Kong, 6 May (XINHUA) -- An economic panel of 
the Preliminary Working Committee [PWC] for the Preparatory 
Committee of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region [HKSAR] 
held the sixth meeting in Hong Kong from 4 to 5 May. PWC deputy 
director Henry Fok Ying-Tung and Lu Ping, PWC deputy director 
and secretary-general, attended the meeting. 
  The meeting discussed a study report on the handing over and 
post-1997 management of the HKSAR's land funds, pointing out 
that the land funds are important financial reserves for the 
future HKSAR government and suggesting that, as of 1 July 1997, 
all of the land funds be handed over and subject to the disposal 
to the HKSAR government. To better handle the handing over, it 
is necessary to make preparations in advance. 
  The meeting again discussed the coordination of large-scale 
capital construction in Hong Kong and Guangdong Province and 
held that the two localities both face the problem to coordinate 
management over railway, highway, land transportation ports, 
harbors, and air transportation. If the problem is not resolved 
soon, it will affect Hong Kong's longterm development and 
exchanges between the two localities. The meeting called on the 
British-Hong Kong Government and the departments concerned in 
the hinterland to set up a planning organ soon, so as to discuss 
and resolve relevant issues. 
  This meeting also heard and discussed a report by a study 
group on Hong Kong's land and housing policies under the 
economic panel on its work since March. The meeting held that 
the rising of real estate prices in Hong Kong has drawn Hong 
Kong residents' and investors' attention. This problem has a 
bearing on the people's livelihood and social stability; on Hong 
Kong's competitiveness as an international banking and trading 
center; and on its smooth transition. They said they will 
earnestly study the current state and longterm development plan 
for Hong Kong's land and housing policies; and will make 
opinions and suggestions for relevant parties' reference. 
  At the meeting, members heard a briefing by Huang Diyan, 
director of the Hong Kong and Macao Administration, Bank of 
China, on the bank's Hong Kong branch participating in issuing 
the Hong Kong currency; and a midterm work report by a study 
group on security for the retired under the economic panel. 
  The economic panel will hold the 7th meeting in Beijing from 
8 to 9 June. 

