Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vidmantas Viksraitis, director general of the </F>
Association of Light Industry Enterprises of Lithuania: "A 
Glimpse into Lithuanian Light Industry"] 
  [Text] The light industry is one of the oldest and most 
developed industries in Lithuania. At present, about 100 large- 
and 5,000 small-scale enterprises belong to the light industry, 
with over 140,000 people employed in them. Its production 
accounts for 26% of the total industrial output of 
Lithuania 
with textile, knitwear and sewing industries predominating. 
  Likewise the whole national economy, Lithuanian light 
industry faces a critical economic situation in the transition 
process to a market economy. During the first years of 
independence, the output of light industry went down slower than 
that of other industries. This was determined by several 
factors. During the last decade, about 70% of obsolete 
technological equipment was renovated by modern Western 
machinery. In principle, the previous contacts regarding 
purchase of raw materials and sales of products have been 
retained. Experienced managers and high-skilled specialists have 
not been replaced in respect to a new political situation. 
  The reasons behind the general decline of industrial 
production which recently became especially evident (high prices 
for raw materials and energy resources, unsettled interstate 
payments and an artificially high exchange rate of the litas 
against the dollar) have considerably weakened the state of 
light industry enterprises as well. During the last nine months, 
sales of light industry products in Lithuania, Estonia, Latvia 
and the CIS countries have dropped significantly. In spite of 
this, the first positive steps in co-operation with Western 
states can be observed. During the three quarters of 1992, 
56% 
of light industry goods were sold within the republic, 
39% in 
Estonia, Latvia, Georgia and the CIS countries. Only 5% 
were 
sold in Western countries in 1992, while during the last nine 
months of 1993 the sales of textile and knitwear products in the 
amounted to 17.2%. A considerable increase in sales has 
been 
observed over the latest few months. Thus, 2.3 times more 
textiles and knitwear goods were sold to Western countries in 
September compared with August. 
  This is primarily due to a consistent and purposeful work of 
light industry enterprises in seeking for contacts with Western 
partners. They have established ties with reliable partners in 
Germany, France, United Kingdom, the U.S.A., Japan, Belgium... 
These contacts are helpful in purchasing technological 
equipment at lower prices and they result in a higher quality of 
products. Managers of light industry enterprises understand well 
that with no sales agents in one or the other country exports to 
the West are actually impossible. The Lithuanian enterprises 
have concluded co-operative contracts with sales agents in 
almost all Western states as well as in many Asian and American 
countries. 
  It should be noted here that over 90% of light 
industry 
enterprises have already become joint-stock companies. 
  The Association of Light Industry Enterprises of Lithuania 
has made a considerable contribution to the promotion of trade 
links with the Eastern and Western partners. At present, it 
includes 87 state, joint-stock and individual companies with 
about 100,000 workers employed in them. During this year alone, 
on the initiative of the Association over 80 managers and 
specialists of light industry enterprises participated in the 
fifth and sixth Leipzig fashion fairs as well as in the trade 
fair "Recontreset Partenariat" in Paris and the international 
exhibition of fabrics "Interstoff" in Frankfurt am Mein. 
Commissioned by the Economics Ministry, the Association has 
recently organized the presentation of the Lithuanian industry 
and business in Odense (Denmark). 
  The Association invites foreign companies and private firms 
to get acquainted with Lithuanian light industry in the 
following forthcoming exhibitions: 
  - CEETEX'94 (England) -- technology and investment 
(May 9-12) 
  - EXPORTEUER'94 (France) -- exhibition (June 15-17) 
  - INTERSTOFF (Germany) -- fabrics fair (October 
25-27) 
  - DIUSSELDORF (Germany) -- fashion fair (March 6-8) 
  - HELSINKI INTERNATIONAL FASHION FAIR 11/94 
(November 21-23). 
  If you are interested in establishing cooperative relations 
with the Association of Light Industry Enterprises of Lithuania, 
please contact: 
  ALIEL, Saltoniskiu 29/3, 2677 Vilnius, Lithuania; Tel: 
(370-2) 75 18 77; 35 13 23; 73 83 39; Fax: (370-2) 35 11 75 

