BFN 

  [Text] The Provincial Electricity Authority is planning 
for construction of two power projects at the Thai-Burmese 
border costing about Bt[baht]4 billion, its governor said over 
the weekend. 
  The first project involves hydro electricity with an 
investment of Bt2 billion. The other is an underground thermal 
project in Keng Tung, Burma, with an investment of Bt2 billion. 
New Zealand will participate in the latter project. 
  According to Chulaphong Chunlaket, governor of the 
Provincial 
Electricity Authority, the Thai authority recently agreed with 
Brig Gen Kyaw Win, representing the Burmese side, to jointly 
invest in a hydro-electricity plant at Mae Sai River costing Bt2 
billion, 70 per cent of which will come from the Thai side. 
  Chulaphong said that the authority will invite the private 
sector to provide up to Bt700 million or half the total Thai 
investment. 
  The hydro-power plant will produce 12 megawatts of 
electricity. The plant will supply two megawatts of electricity 
to Burma at Bt1.75 per unit. The remaining 10 megawatts will be 
distributed in Mae Sai district in Chiang Rai. 
  Chulaphong said that the Burmese side will provide labour 
and 
construction materials. He added that the Thai government does 
not need funding from the Asian Development Bank as private 
investment should be enough to fund the project. 
  The Mae Sai power project is one of seven projects looked at 
by the Thai-Burmese border committee. The other six are the 
Khlong Kra project, North Salween project, South Salween 
project, Moei projects I, II and III. 
  The Burmese side engaged EPDC [expansion unknown] of Japan 
to 
study the Mae Sai project one year ago. 
  Chulaphong said that Thailand has yet to fully study the 
Khlong Kra project, and it is expected that a feasibility study 
will be started after the study on the Mae Sai project is 
completed. 
  When the Mae Sai project runs at full capacity, it might 
have 
a capacity of 15 megawatts, Chulaphong added. 
  The second project is an underground thermal unit in Keng 
Tung, Burma, which is expected to have a capacity of 10 
megawatts. The project requires an investment of Bt2 billion. 
The Burmese side will own 30 per cent of it, the same as the 
Mae Sai project. 
  Chulaphong said that the second project is under 
negotiation, 
and the Provincial Electricity Authority has invited private 
companies from New Zealand to participate in the project. 

