Contamination   Viewed 

<F P=102> 944K1024A Kiev ZELENYY SVIT in Ukrainian No 4, Mar 94 p 3 </F>
<F P=103> 944K1024A </F>
<F P=104>  Kiev ZELENYY SVIT </F>
<F P=105>  Ukrainian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by O. Kharlamenko, head of the Mariopol PZU (Green </F>
Party of Ukraine) Club, and L. Olshevskyy, member of the ZELENYY 
SVIT UEA (Ukrainian Ecodefencinform Agency): "Why Are There So 
Few Happy Families in Mariopol?"] 
  [Text] During the first quarter of last year 800 marriages 
were registered in Mariopol, whereas 764 divorces were 
registered during this same period. According to data from a 
sociological poll conducted by a civic organization here, the 
principal reason for such "family" instability is the 
infertility and impotence of this city's human population. These 
factors have reached 60 percent and 33 percent respectively. 
  However, even if a family in Mariopol has a "real man," that 
does not necessarily mean that such a family will add a third or 
fourth member. The rate of stillbirths and infant mortality 
before the age of one year during the period 1989-1991 varied 
between 45 percent and 50 percent. Thanks to modern-day 
medicine, this indicator declined to 26 percent in 1992. But 
this was specifically due to ultrasonic diagnostics and the 
interruption of pregnancy in cases where anomalies were 
discovered. And this was already after nature itself had made a 
choice: From 1989 through 1992 the number of miscarriages 
increased from 24 to 32 per 100 pregnancies. 
  Nor can those families in which an infant has arrived always 
be called happy. Of each 1000 children, 22 are born with birth 
defects (for the sake of comparison, in Simferopol this 
indicator stands at 8). 
  At a time when the birth rate is declining, the mortality 
rate is rising: During the first quarter of 1993 it increased by 
25 percent in comparison with this same period in 1992. But what 
do births and deaths have in common? The connecting link here is 
a cancer-treatment facility which was built for 90 beds but 
which now has 220. 
  This situation is dreadful, but it can be explained. This 
city with its 540,000 inhabitants provides 35 percent of 
Ukraine's steel and 30 percent of Ukraine's sheet metal. 
Mariopol also produces 90 percent of all kinds of septic tanks, 
as well as equipment for metallurgical and ore-enriching 
complexes. It carries out contracts for the Ministry of Medium 
Machine Building, and--in addition--has a plant producing 
medical equipment, as well as very large construction 
enterprises. The Mariopol seaport is the biggest on the shores 
of the Sea of Azov. Its annual goods turnover amounts to 12 
million tonnes. Plying the world's oceans are at least 100 ships 
of the Azov Shipping Company, which are registered in the Port 
of Mariopol. 
  And all these entities are gasping and spewing out terrible 
poisons. Two steel-smelting plants and one coal-tar chemical 
plant have become particularly old and obsolete. This complex, 
which still bears the name of Illich, is regarded as the most 
modern and up-to-date in Ukraine. Among its production 
facilities, which extend around the city's outskirts, is an 
open-hearth shop with three furnaces having a capacity of 900 
tonnes each and three others having a capacity of 650 tonnes 
each. It has these furnaces, but they lack any equipment for 
combatting the contaminants from them. During the last 30 years 
unsafe wastes discharged by these plants have accumulated in 
enormous quantities in bodies of water which are unsuitable for 
this purpose. Solid wastes alone, which include 75 percent iron 
compounds, 1 percent manganese compounds, and 1.2 percent zinc 
compounds, have accumulated to the extent of more than a million 
tonnes. People say that during the Soviet Union period the 
Japanese wanted to acquire all of these materials wholesale, but 
the Soviet government refused--saying that not a single gram of 
strategic raw material should be turned over to a potential 
enemy. And the adulterated wastes have been abandoned at two 
dump sites, from which sufuric acid has already been leaking for 
many years now. 
  That which the people of Mariopol drink can hardly be termed 
"water." The small Northern Donets River, which constitutes the 
principal source of water here, is dreadfully polluted, and the 
purification station is not operating in accordance with the 
normative requirements. Its operators have been compelled to add 
more chlorine than provided for by the norms, but that still 
does not help the situation much because waste waters are 
seeping into the system. 
  At one time Mariopol was a health-resort area. But nowadays 
the beaches are closed down every year. Salmonela bacteria have 
been found near the waste-water discharge collectors on the 
beaches, and cholera bacteria have been found in the Kalchyk 
Stream, which winds its way through the city. 
  It is not an easy matter to track down all these bad things, 
all the more so in that there are only five inspectors on the 
staff of the Ministry for Environmental Protection's local 
administration. Efforts to reinforce them should not be impeded. 
It would also be a good idea to outfit them with up-to-date 
monitoring equipment. Only when a correct diagnosis has been 
made and effective monitoring controls set up will we be able to 
actually proceed to carry out plans providing for the 
development of alternative industrial sectors, the optimization 
and modernization of metallurgical enterprises, as well as 
putting new purification capacities into operation. 

