Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Richard Savill report: "Reynolds Offers To Give </F>
Clarification on Peace Proposals"] 
  [Text] Belfast -- Dublin appeared at odds with London last 
night as Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, offered 
to give clarification of the Downing Street peace declaration. 
  His remarks in a keynote speech, almost a month after the 
signing of the declaration, seemed to undermine Mr Major's blunt 
refusal to elaborate on the agreement. 
  Sinn Fein's demands for clarification have been repeatedly 
dismissed by Downing Street, which has accused the IRA of 
attempting to enter talks without halting its campaign of 
violence. 
  Mr Major's tough line was endorsed yesterday by Mr James 
Molyneaux, the Ulster Unionist leader. 
  Mr Molyneaux said: "Practically every paragraph cancels 
itself out. 
  "Where you have a phrase or a sentence that is repugnant to 
any pro-Union citizen, that is immediately cancelled out in the 
same paragraph by a counterstatement." 
  Mr Reynolds's speech to the Irish Association at Dublin 
Castle was aimed at both nationalists and Unionists and was 
clearly designed to keep the peace process alive. 
  He said the Downing Street document did not provide a 
solution in itself, but was merely the "first step on the road" 
to peace. 
  He made a strong attempt to reassure Unionists, stressing 
that a united Ireland could not be imposed in the absence of the 
"freely given consent" of a majority of people in Ulster. 
  Mr Reynolds added: "Likewise the democratic right of 
self-determination by the people of Ireland as a whole must be 
exercised with and subject to the agreement and consent of a 
majority in Northern Ireland." 
  He said: "Both governments accept that Irish unity would be 
achieved only by those who favour this outcome, persuading those 
who do not, peacefully and without coercion or violence." 
  An attempt to impose a united Ireland without the consent of 
a majority of Ulster people would be a recipe for instability. 
  And he added: "There can only be a mutual process of 
demilitarisation through confidence building on all sides. 
Continuing violence and conflict is not merely evil, it is 
futile." 
  Mr Reynolds said the declaration, for the first time gave an 
"explicit, rock-solid" guarantee that if a majority in Ulster 
wanted a united Ireland, Britain would uphold that wish. 
  He declared: "The beginning of every new journey holds some 
fears. These can be overcome. The priority must be the 
protection of human life. We want everyone to choose the path 
to peace and turn away from the cul-de-sac of violence." 
  Britain also explicitly acknowledged and agreed to support 
the right of the Irish people to come together in whatever form 
they choose. 
  He added: "British imperialist interest in Ireland is dead, 
even if we still have to resolve some of its legacy." 
  Mr Reynolds also said: "I would appeal to those with whom 
the ultimate decision for peace now lies. Do not let this 
opportunity pass. Do not because of the weight of the past, or 
because of very natural instincts, condemn the people of either 
community to another generation of suffering." 
  Mr Reynolds's speech was made against a background of 
continuing violence. 
  The Ulster Freedom Fighters shot and injured a Roman 
Catholic 
man in West Belfast. 
  And the IRA was blamed for a mortar attack on a joint 
police/Army base at Crossmaglen. 

