Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Threat of Trade Sanctions"] </F>
  [Text] The US is reportedly threatening Pakistan with 
trade sanctions. During the tenure of the Nawaz Sharif 
government, two cases were filed under the US Trade Act of 1974 
which seek the withdrawal of the `most favoured nation' status 
thus far accorded to Pakistan. The grounds for this are that 
Pakistan has not been abiding by ILO [International Labour 
Organization] conventions on labour rights. Bonded and child 
labour are said to be widely used in some industries here. 
According to reports in the litigation underway, the present 
government has deliberately failed to meet the deadlines set by 
the American judicial committee and this could result in the 
threat of the sanctions being turned into a reality. Whether 
this allegation is accurate is uncertain, but in any case since 
both the Labour and Commerce Ministries as well as the Law 
Division are involved, it is not clear who is in fact 
responsible for framing the answers required by the litigation 
in the US. Matters have come to such a pass despite the fact 
that the PM [Prime Minister] had constituted a committee headed 
by Shahnaz Wazir Ali to coordinate the concerned Ministries' and 
Departments' efforts. It now appears that this Committee was 
for some reason unable to meet the deadlines. Perhaps the lapse 
was not intentional but related to the complexity of the matter 
and the various government departments' inefficiency. An entire 
gamut of our exports such as carpets and textile goods are 
likely to be the victim of these sanctions, if imposed. 
  A large part of our population lives way below the poverty 
line. To simply state that child and bonded labour should be 
eliminated to meet American legal requirements for preferential 
treatment in trade is unrealistic and ignores the harsh problems 
our poor face to merely survive. Obviously, earnings from these 
forms of labour cannot be replaced by any measure overnight, 
even though our government ought really to be paying more regard 
to safety nets for our less privileged. As a prerequisite to 
doing away with these ills, jobs will have to be created on a 
vast scale and adequate remuneration for the bread earners of 
families provided so that the poor are not compelled to send 
their children to work or engage in bonded labour. Meanwhile, 
the government should gear up its efforts to try and convince 
the US authorities that we are heading in the desirable 
direction and in turn, stave off the crippling effect, estimated 
at a loss of $200 to $400 million in 1994 alone, that trade 
sanctions would have on the economy. 

