Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Peta Firth] </F>
  [Text] The government is drawing up alternative funding 
arrangements for the new airport in what is the strongest sign 
yet it may go it alone on the controversial project. Financial 
Secretary Sir Hamish Macleod said yesterday the Legislative 
Council and Airport Consultative Committee (ACC) would be 
briefed shortly on alternative funding arrangements. 
  New ways of funding both the airport and Container Terminal 
9 
(CT-9) would be investigated in consultation with the two 
groups, Macleod said. 
  Britain and China have been deadlocked over the airport 
financing plan for the past two years, resulting in delays which 
will stall Chek Lap Kok's opening date beyond 1997. Macleod 
said legislators and the ACC would be briefed on progress, 
including the latest costs and timing of the airport. He said 
Hong Kong's economy would be damaged if the projects were 
delayed much longer. The delays "cannot go on indefinitely," he 
said. "The broader question is what is the best way ahead. We 
will have to discuss that with the Legislative Council and, of 
course, the consulting committee." 
  Funding the projects with a combination of equity, loans, 
and 
with public money would be looked at "to get the best value for 
money," he said. Macleod stopped short of saying the government 
would take unilateral action but warned that time was running 
out. 
  Britain must consult China on the airport's financing under 
the 1991 Memorandum of Understanding. But the talks have fallen 
victim to the Sino-British political row over Governor Chris 
Patten's constitutional reforms. 
  Macleod said Hong Kong would have more money to spend on 
public works related to the airport because of a budget surplus 
this year. He revealed that his prediction in last year's budget 
that Hong Kong would have a small deficit this year was wrong. 
  His 1994 budget, to be published on 2 March, would show a 
healthy surplus, but the surplus was unlikely to be pumped into 
either the airport or CT-9 projects, he said. 
  "We must not get into the frame of mind that just because we 
have a surplus we have to spend it," he said. He did, however, 
say that other infrastructure projects including the Tinkau 
Bridge which will form part of the link between Kowloon and 
Lantau, were going ahead. The government would call for tenders 
to build the bridge "quite soon", he said. 
  Macleod also revealed that the 1994 budget would include a 
rate capping package to protect people from sharp increases in 
rates as a result of rocketing property values. He also 
welcomed constructive criticism on government proposals to levy 
a 3 percent salary contribution from staff and employers to 
finance the government's old-age pension scheme. Details such 
as the size of the contribution and the payments to pensioners 
could all be looked at again but he stood by the principle, he 
said. 

