Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Prime Minister Haydar Abu-Bakr al-'Attas by </F>
AL-DUSTUR correspondent Salih al-Qallab in Aden; date not given] 
  [Text] [Al-Qallab] We have noticed that the subcommittee 
formed to follow up on the implementation of the accord document 
has not yet donce anything. Are there any obstacles in its way? 
  [Al-'Attas] On the contrary. The committee began its work 
yesterday (the day before yesterday) in the afternoon. It has 
drawn up a program to discuss what it is going to do. The 
committee is now discussing the venue for the endorsement of the 
agreement. Jordan and the Sultanate of Oman have been suggested 
as possibilities for the signing ceremony. We proposed Jordan 
in light of His Majesty King Husayn's concern about the crisis 
and his efforts to resolve it. The same goes for Sultan Qabus 
and many other brothers and friends. 
  After dealing with this point, the committee will move on to 
another. It will name the people who will attend the ceremony 
on Arab and international levels. This will give the ceremony 
more weight, since an international presence represents one of 
the guarantees for implementation of this agreement, which is 
the outcome of immense efforts made by all parties and political 
forces in Yemen. 
  In addition to these two tasks, the subcommittee should 
study 
security arrangements, so the leaders will be able to go to 
their workplaces. The question of security is very important 
and the entire Yemeni nation is preoccupied with it. The 
subcommittee also has to think about how it will go about 
implementing the accord after its endorsement and how to prevent 
any obstacles that could be presented by the parties harmed in 
the process. 
  [Al-Qallab] Do you think that some parties which signed the 
agreement are trying to go back on what they have signed and are 
trying to procrastinate? 
  [Al-'Attas] All the parties that signed the agreement have 
continued to welcome it and assert the need to implement it. 
  [Al-Qallab] Some Arabic newspapers have reported that House 
of Representatives Speaker Shaykh 'Abdallah Bin-Husayn al-Ahmar 
has some reservations about the document, even though his party 
has signed it. Is this true? 
  [Al-'Attas] Yes, this is true. I have also noticed that the 
AL-SAHWAH newspaper, which speaks for the Yemeni Reform 
Grouping, reflects something like this. These reservations were 
announced during the drafting and discussion of the document. 
However, after consultations and exchange of views, it was 
drafted without any reservations. I have to say here that after 
we drafted the document and while we were still in the 
conference hall, we noticed that some papers were circulated 
with new reservations, but these reservations were not accepted 
by the parties to the dialogue. 
  [Al-Qallab] When you say papers, do you mean the letter 
reportedly sent by Shaykh 'Abdallah Bin-Husayn al-Ahmar to the 
subcommittee? 
  [Al-'Attas] Not at all. The letter of Shaykh 'Abdallah came 
before this stage, and was welcomed by the dialogue committee. 
However, we noticed that SABA' (the official Yemeni News Agency) 
did not report the fact that the dialogue committee welcomed the 
letter when it disseminated a report about the subject. 
  [Al-Qallab] The topical question one poses here and 
everywhere is about the nature of the challenge this document 
faces? 
  [Al-'Attas] This is not the first document that has been 
signed and not been implemented. However, it differs from the 
others because it will bring about major changes in Yemen, and 
will set Yemen on the right and sound path not only with respect 
to unity, but also with respect to the establishment of a modern 
state of institutions. 
  The big challenge we face is how to get support for this 
document and work together within a broad national framework to 
implement its provisions. 
  Here, I must point out that there are forces which have 
started to work against the document and its implementation. In 
my opinon, these forces will try more viciously in the future to 
abort what has been agreed upon. Therefore, we should secure 
Yemeni popular guarantees and even Arab and international 
guarantees to foil the attempts of these forces and to have our 
country take the required step forward. 
  [Al-Qallab] Does this mean you expect some sort of action by 
the opposition forces to block the road to the implementation of 
this document? 
  [Al-'Attas] There is no doubt about this. That's why we 
propose Arab and international guarantees because we expect 
military action to harm the agreement and move in the opposite 
direction. 
  [Al-Qallab] We heard that a plane carrying foreign oil 
experts was hijacked two days ago while it was on its way from 
Sanaa to Sirwah and that there is tension on the military level 
there. Is this true? 
  [Al-'Attas] These acts are carried out by the forces which 
oppose unity. These forces revealed their real faces 
immediately following unity. They carried out several actions 
harming security and targeting Yemeni national figures, 
particularly Yemeni Socialist Party [YSP] leaders and cadres and 
some leaders of the General People's Congress [GPC], and figures 
from other parties. 
  In addition to this, these forces targeted oil companies, 
and 
what happened the day before yesterday is part of this ongoing 
series. 
  [Al-Qallab] Is the issue of the plane over, and have the 
hijackers given themselves up? 
  [Al-'Attas] No. Efforts are still under way. It is known 
that two days before the hijacking of this plane, another plane 
was hijacked. This reminds us of the incident of the kidnapping 
of the U.S. diplomat. As soon as he was released, a German 
national was kidnapped. 
  If you ask why these things occur, I will tell you it 
because 
the way we handle those who commit such deeds is wrong. For 
example, when a tribesman carries out a kidnapping, the 
authorities placate him instead of arresting him and taking him 
to court. This encourages others to do the same thing. This is 
one of the points on which I have not budged as I have 
repeatedly rejected placating kidnappers when they commit the 
crime of hijacking. 
  [Al-Qallab] We notice that you talk about those who carry 
out such acts as if they were ghosts. You are not giving names. 
Who are those people behind the kidnappings, explosions, and 
assassinations? 
  [Al-'Attas] We know the names and affiliations of those 
people, but we avoid talking about them because we are doing our 
best not to harm any party directly unless we are sure. You 
know that a person is innocent until proven guilty. The problem 
is that some people are trying to obstruct the activity of the 
judiciary, which should pass an honest, impartial judgment. 
  Giving a more active role to the judiciary would spare us 
many problems, especially concerning the trading of accusations 
between the major powers. For example, a certain party could be 
accused of being behind a certain incident, but the court could 
prove its innocence, and thus sedition would be prevented. 
  [Al-Qallab] Who is preventing the judiciary from playing its 
role? 
  [Al-'Attas] Last August, I addressed a letter to the 
Presidential Council asking for either the arrest of those who 
are carrying out the explosions and assassinations -- who 
include Armed Forces officers -- or sacking the Interior 
Ministry command, because it is not implementing the 
instructions it is receiving from the Prime Ministry. The 
government could also resign. The result was that only one 
person from the southern provinces was arrested and the police 
and security agencies in the southern and eastern provinces 
carried out their duty while the police in other provinces did 
not do anything. 
  [Al-Qallab] The YSP Central Committee -- and you are a 
member of the YSP Political Bureau -- has made a decision on the 
return of some ministers and senior officials to Sanaa. 
However, we see that you are still in Aden. Is this a position 
you have adopted? 
  [Al-'Attas] I am here for private reasons. 
  [Al-Qallab] You were the target of an assassination attempt 
a while ago, did you find out who was behind the attempt? 
  [Al-'Attas] Of the dozens of attempts that took place in 
Sanaa over a two-year period, my bodyguards managed to arrest 
one of the culprits while he was placing a large explosive 
device near my house. At the time, I was meeting with my 
deputies. Had the explosion occurred, it would really have been 
a disaster. The strange thing is that the emergency service was 
notified in advance that an explosion had occurred, but the 
ambulance went to another location by mistake. That person was 
caught in the act. Several reports were then sent to the 
Interior Ministry about the incident, but the reports were 
changed after they arrived at the ministry. It was later 
discovered that there was a great infiltration of the security 
agencies. I can say for sure that this applies to other 
attempts against several senior officials and some nationalist 
figures. I want to say that if the security question is not 
settled, things will get worse. 
  [Al-Qallab] You have said that you are staying here in Aden 
for private reasons. But in light of what you have just said 
and of the attempt on your life, and after you have been 
prevented from entering the capital of your country, I believe 
that your refusal to return to Sanaa is a glaring sign of 
protest. Is this true? 
  [Al-'Attas] Of course, this is absolutely true. This is 
because the continuation of this situation has very grave 
consequences for Yemen. It is difficult to go ahead when 
matters, including those concerning expenditure, are decided 
behind the back of the prime minister. 
  [Al-Qallab] We have heard that some 20 billion Yemeni riyals 
have been counterfeited. Is this true? 
  [Al-'Attas] First, I would like to say that there have been 
no cases of Yemeni bills being counterfeited. However, there 
have been some cases of other currencies being counterfeited. 
  [Al-Qallab] Can you give us examples? 
  [Al-'Attas] Yes. There have been cases of Saudi riyals and 
U.S. dollars being counterfeited. These two currencies are 
being used [in Yemen]. 
  [Al-Qallab] If the document is signed but not implemented, 
will you remain in office, with the situation that you have 
described in mind? 
  [Al-'Attas] By God, I explicitly say that if the document is 
not signed, or signed but not implemented, I cannot stay in 
office. 
  [Al-Qallab] In this case--if the document is not signed, or 
signed but not implemented--do you not have fears for the unity 
of Yemen? 
  [Al-'Attas] This document is the last chance. If it is not 
signed and implemented, then no one can predict the volume of 
the catastrophe that will befall Yemen. Hence, I say that we 
refuse for the document to be accepted only in an attempt to 
abort it. 
  [Al-Qallab] I heard that your party has decided to 
unilaterally implement the document in the areas under your 
control even if the document is not signed? 
  [Al-'Attas] In practice, especially concerning local 
government, some steps can be taken in this regard. 
  [Al-Qallab] In the past, you--the YSP--were accused of being 
atheist and communist. Now, you are accused of being pro-Saudi 
and pro-Kuwaiti. Why are these charges made? 
  [Al-'Attas] These are nothing but political vituperations. 
Time has proven that these charges are unfounded. At this 
point, I would like to say that the YSP wants good relations 
with the neighboring states in the Arabian Peninsula. I also 
say that despite the known circumstances, our stance on the Gulf 
crisis has been clear. 
  [Al-Qallab] Will Vice President 'Ali Salim al-Bid return to 
Sanaa before the document is signed? 
  [Al-'Attas] Never. He will not return before the document is 
signed. 

