Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Baghdad, 19 Mar (INA)--Iraqi Prime Minister Ahmad 
Husayn Khudayyir has urged Turkey to adopt a strategic stand on 
Iraq in light of the fact that Turkey's interest is in 
cooperation with Iraq. 
  In an interview with AL-JUMHURIYAH published today, he said 
it is in the Turkish people's interest to have good relations 
with the Iraqi people, because their economy, one way or 
another, is linked with the Iraqi economy and its growth rate. 
  He reiterated Iraq's desire to normalize relations with 
Turkey. He said: We always seek good relations with Turkey. We 
have said this several times. He said he was confident 
cooperation between the two sides will create a state of 
stability and mutual benefit. 
  The prime minister urged Turkey to abandon hesitation. He 
said close Iraqi-Turkish relations are the main factor in 
Turkey's economic prosperity and stability. 
  He also focused on a basic point in international and 
regional relations, namely, the inability of any foreign force 
to maintain a permanent presence on another nation's territory. 
He said all foreign forces will inevitably leave the region. 
Turkey's leaders should not fear taking a bold step to meet 
their country's economic interests by returning to the formulas 
and bases of cooperation and trade exchange the two countries 
previously maintained. He recalled the positive results for the 
Turkish economy when prosperous trade cooperation prevailed 
between the two countries. 
  Ahmad Husayn Khudayyir then touched on the periodic meetings 
Turkey, Iran, and Syria hold to discuss the Iraqi Kurdish issue. 
He described them as an aggression against Iraq's sovereignty, 
interference in its domestic affairs, and a violation of the 
most important principle of international law, namely, the 
principle of sovereignty and respect for other countries' 
domestic affairs. He said Iraq's unity is an affair for its 
people and leadership, not for any of these countries. In the 
future, he said, they will regret their positions. 
  He criticized the three countries for their silence about 
the 
foreign military presence in the region. This presence 
threatens the region and harms the security and sovereignty of 
all the region's countries, not just Iraq. He recalled 
colonialist circles' attempts to use the ethnic and religious 
minorities' card to create problems in countries that seek 
freedom and independence. He reiterated that recent 
developments in northern Iraq were imposed by foreigners, 
expressing the belief that this situation is temporary and will 
soon end. 
  He said Iraqis are not prepared to relinquish any part of 
their national entity. He recalled developments that led to the 
11 March statement that ended the Kurdish problem, as well 
President Saddam Husayn's meetings with the Kurdish leaders, 
including Mas'ud Barzani. At that time, Barzani said Saddam was 
courageous enough to unify Iraq and lay down a strong basis for 
a prosperous Iraq. 
  He then touched on Iraqi-Iranian relations. He said Iraq has 
always voiced its readiness to establish normal relations with 
Iran and has taken many initiatives in this regard, but the 
Iranian leaders say one thing and do another. 
  He referred to the recent negotiations held by the Iraqi and 
the Iranian sides in Tehran. He said the two sides focused on 
the main outstanding issues and agreed to hold further talks 
about them. 
  He urged Iran's leaders to consider their people's future 
interests by resuming normal relations with Iraq, in the 
interest of both sides. 
  Regarding Iraqi assets in some Arab countries, Ahmad Husayn 
Khudayyir regretted that some Arab regimes continue to hold 
Iraqi assets under the pretest of compliance with international 
resolutions, while some Western countries have released these 
assets and enabled the Iraqi people to use them for humanitarian 
needs. 
  He also said direct contacts with these countries are still 
under way in order to release Iraq's assets. 
  The prime minister defined Iraq's principled position on 
pan-Arab issues and affairs and the Arab nation's central 
issues. He said Iraq has not abandoned its pan-Arab policy 
under the most difficult circumstances and will play a great 
role in Arab cooperation. 

