BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, May 12 (YONHAP) -- South Korean Foreign 
Minister Han Sung-chu, addressing the whirlwind of change 
already sweeping the post-UR [Uruguay Round] world, has urged 
the public to rectify the constant lag in sensing such change. 
  He warned against new issues -- the environment, labor and 
competition policies -- becoming a new form of protectionism and 
vowed South Korea will pursue independent policies minimizing 
the trade accord's adverse impact while contributing to the new 
world order. 
  "The world is going through the process of becoming one 
market and one economy. This is the new reality," Han said in a 
luncheon speech to the Korean Council on Foreign Relations. 
  "Korea's domestic as well as external situations are 
changing 
at a breathtaking pace. Our perception should keep abreast of 
that pace but in many cases our perception is lagging behind," 
he told the council of senior and foreign diplomats in a speech 
titled "Post-UR International Order and Korea's Foreign Policy." 
  Unfortunately, South-North Korean relations are still 
calculated on a zero-sum game basis, but South Koreans must 
realize the new international order will be based on non 
zero-sum games. 
  In a comprehensive explanation of South Korea's position on 
major new issues, Han clarified what the country can and cannot 
accept. 
  On labor, for instance, South Korea has no reservations on 
improving protection of workers' basic rights. "And prisoner and 
child labor should be prohibited by all means," said Han. 
  But South Korea does have reservations about attempts to 
establish international standards, which "will hardly contribute 
to enhancing workers' rights nor is this practicable," the 
foreign minister said. 
  On competition policy, individual mechanisms considered 
unfair or restrictive -- monopolies, quotas, subsidies, 
countervailing and anti-dumping duties -- "should be reviewed on 
a case-by-case basis before judgement is passed," he said. 
  The foreign minister defended the government's decision to 
join the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) by 1996, reasoning membership in the group will give 
Korea time to prepare its economy in advance. 
  But here again, South Korea will pursue independent 
policies. 
  South Korea's Official Development Assistance (ODA) level 
lags behind the requirement set by the OECD's Development 
Assistance Committee (DAC). 
  "Korea is considering wavering its membership in the DAC 
even 
if it joins the OECD by the year 1996," he said. 
  "Korea intends to comply with as many provisions as its 
economy can abide without serious disruption," he said. "And 
for the rest, Korea will present a reasonable schedule for 
liberalization." 

