BFN 

    [Editorial Report] Havana Cuba Vision Network in Spanish at 
0130 GMT on 18 May carries the Open Agenda program with host 
Antonio Resillez and guest Public Health Minister Julio Teja. 
The program focuses on the new medicine distribution plan. 
  Resillez states that there are 135 essential medicines, of 
which 73 are included in the control card system. Teja states: 
"It is a reality for our people that there is a level of 
frustration caused by the lack of medicine nationwide. This 
began to intensify in the second half of 1993 and intensified 
even more in the first quarter of 1994." Teja says that the new 
distribution plan has the "full support of the government 
leadership and the Communist Party of Cuba." He adds that 
resources are limited and therefore: "There is not going to be 
an overnight overabundance of medicines, nor are distribution 
levels going to be restored. The recovery process that began 
today in Havana is, rather, a process of recovery." Teja 
stresses that it is important not to build false expectations 
among the population and that many have commented that the 
medicine distribution plan is somewhat confusing. 
  Teja adds: "The main goal is to ensure the availability of 
medications. We have created conditions to ensure that there are 
more medications than last year and hope figures similar to 
those of 1992 will be attained. The essential medicine group 
includes medicines sold by control cards, those required for 
chronic or long-term illnesses." 
  In answer to a question by Resillez, Teja says that the 
chronic category comprises 2 million people with mainly 
cardiovascular ailments, asthma, diabetes, etc. Teja says that 
the main change is in monitoring mechanisms, and that the 
process of medical certificates is being reviewed because there 
have been many irregularities and the goal is to ensure that 
norms are complied with. He says medical certificates will be 
reviewed and people will be issued new cards with a minimum of 
inconveniences. Regarding the controlled sales of 29 medicines, 
Teja adds that these will replace unregulated sales. He says 
that production of herbal medicines and medications derived from 
bees will be boosted and are not included in the new 
distribution system. 
  Regarding sanitary pads for women, Teja states that there 
was 
a dire shortage in 1993 and that 1994's production goal is to 
make 16 million packages of 10 sanitary pads, or twice previous 
production figures. He adds this will not solve the shortage, 
however, because as many as 20 million packages were produced 
annually in previous years. 
  Teja stresses the importance of the People's Councils and 
the 
Family Doctor Pprogram in implementing the medicine distribution 
plan. He explains that the ration book is the identification 
document to be used in the neighborhood pharmacies, although the 
medicine acquired will not be recorded on it. A record of 
medications sold to the individual will be kept by the pharmacy 
itself. He adds: "The community has developed mechanisms to 
ensure that families can acquire medicines but avoid people 
buying medicines simply because they are entitled to do so. This 
is a concept we have to eliminate, and that is going to be done 
through education and through monitoring by community medicine 
committees, Family Doctor Program doctors, etc. The population 
should not buy such things, like they do at the grocery store, 
just because they are entitled to do so. We want to have a 
stable availability of products at the pharmacies." 
  Teja adds that the new plan is not rigid and that people 
will 
be able to buy "minimal necessary amounts" of medications at 
pharmacies in other neighborhoods in order to meet emergency 
needs. 
  Resillez points out that medicine production increased to 
approximately 60 million pesos in 1993 and is expected to reach 
to 84 million in 1994. Teja adds that this increase reflects 
higher production levels, and that medicine prices will remain 
stable. He makes a comparison between prices in Cuba and Spain 
stressing that medicine prices abroad are much higher. Teja adds 
that Cuba imported approximately $22.3 million in medicines and 
raw materials in 1993, that $25 million have been allocated for 
medicine imports in 1994, and that efforts are being made to 
replace imports by producing alternative materials and thereby 
increasing the availability of medicines. 
  Teja adds that the possibility of, as was suggested in the 
Parliaments in the Workplace, charging for the vitamin pills 
being distributed to the population is being studied and that 
should this occur, the vitamin complex will be available at a 
low cost. Teja points out that exporting Cuban-made medicines 
rather than reducing the medicine supply, contributes to 
producing more medicines for national consumption. He concludes 
by stating that experience has shown that rigid nationwide plans 
are not effective; therefore, "general guidelines have been 
issued, and every province is allowed to draft its own plan to 
meet specific social and geographical conditions." 
  Teja concludes by expressing his optimism for the new plan 
and welcomes the idea of appearing on the Open Agenda program 
again, along with other Public Health sector figures. 

