BFN 

  [Text] Violence is back on the agenda in Lome, Togo. Five 
Frenchmen and a Beninese were injured in the Togolese capital 
last night when a grenade thrown into a restaurant in the Be 
district exploded. The six victims are not in danger of death 
and the Togolese police have declined at this stage of their 
inquiry to speculate on the reasons behind the attack. The 
targeted restaurant belongs to a Frenchman and is known to be 
mostly patronized by Europeans. 
  Politically, problems are piling up in the country. Edem 
Kodjo, the prime minister appointed by General Eyadema and who 
is still finding it difficult to convince his opposition allies 
to join him, hinted yesterday that he may resign if his allies 
continue to refuse to take part in the government he plans to 
form. From Lome, Olabire da Cruz reports for Africa No.1: 
  [Begin da Cruz recording] The negotiations begun a week ago 
between the two parties of the Togolese parliamentary majority 
have actually been disrupted following Mr. Agboyibor's Action 
Committee for Renewal [CAR]'s restatement of its decision not to 
participate in any government to be formed by Mr. Kodjo, a 
decision reiterated in a communique issued by the CAR yesterday 
evening. The communique stated that at the 3 May meeting 
between delegations of the two majority parties, the Togolese 
Union for Democracy [UTD] made it clear that if the CAR 
maintains its decision, the alternative would be for Mr. Kodjo 
to resign. UTD officials do not deny that such a decision is 
possible should the CAR drive its ally to the wall, but they add 
that they have never maintained that that is the only stand to 
adopt. They further explain that the question is whether the 
CAR has gauged the consequences of its action and is prepared to 
assume responsibility for them. 
  So, as I said earlier, the CAR has reiterated its decision 
to 
stay out of Mr. Kodjo's government. Is Mr. Kodjo prepared for a 
coalition or an alliance with the former single ruling party, 
the Rally of the Togolese People? The UTD executive's answer is 
no. In this case, the only way out for Mr. Kodjo -- assuming he 
does not resign -- would be to form a government based on the 
civil society or on possible deserters from the erstwhile ally, 
a situation already experienced by the former prime minister in 
forming his last two governments. 
  In another development, five Frenchmen and a Beninese were 
injured last night following the explosion of a grenade thrown 
into a restaurant where they happened to be at about 2100. It 
is not yet known who committed the act, or their reasons for 
their doing so. The injured persons are not in danger of death. 
[end recording] 

