BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Michel Cariou] </F>
  [Excerpts] Gikongoro, Rwanda, June 27 (AFP) -- French 
paratroopers Monday [27 June] entered the southwestern town of 
Gikongoro, 100 kilometers (60 miles) inside Rwanda, on a 
reconnaissance mission as five people were killed when a shell 
landed on a Kigali church. 
  French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe meanwhile said that 
France's military intervention in Rwanda, dubbed Operation 
Turquoise, had attained its first objective by restoring 
security to threatened people. 
  More than 200,000 Hutus fleeing the rebel Rwandan Patriotic 
Front (RPF) have found refuge in the Gikongoro region, according 
to local authorities. The town is only 20 kilometers (12 miles) 
from the frontline between the Rwandan Armed Forces and the 
rebel movement. 
  A military spokesman said the 12-man patrol arrived in two 
vehicles amid outbursts of joy from townspeople. It would 
return to the Rwandan-Zairian border later Monday. [passage 
omitted] 
  About 1,200 French crack troops and 300 vehicles were 
deployed on the Zairian-Rwandan border early Monday, or roughly 
half of the troops that are to take part in Operation Turquoise 
before the end of the week, commander General Jean-Claude 
Lafourcade said. 
  In Paris, assistant chief of staff General Raymond Germanos 
said that French troop strength between the two staging posts of 
Goma and Bukavu, in Zaire on the Rwandan border, was being 
progressively expanded to its full strength of 2,500, and would 
reach 1,300 by Monday evening compared with 1,150 Sunday. 
  No incidents had been reported, but the troops had noted 
tensions when they made forays into western Rwanda. "People are 
frightened and don't always show it," Germanos said, "The 
atmosphere is very tense." The town of Kibuye on the shores of 
Lake Kivu was the main seat of inter-ethnic tension between 
Tutsis and members of the majority Hutu tribe, another military 
source said. The source said several hundred Tutsis had taken 
refuge around the town under the protection of nuns and were 
being threatened by Hutu extremists. 
  In the Rwandan capital Kigali five people were killed and 
several others injured when a shell landed on the Sainte Famille 
church. The church and the surrounding area, in a 
government-controlled district of the capital, is home to some 
8,000 largely Tutsi people, the UN mission to Rwanda said. 
  Conditions in the complex are deteriorating and the UN has 
been unable to evacuate anybody for over a week, to the despair 
of the refugees who are now not receiving any aid. 
  About 800 Tutsis are inside the building, remaining there 
round the clock for fear of being killed by the Hutu militia who 
guard the complex and who are said to be responsible for several 
massacres since the conflict erupted in April. 
  Guinea-Bissau said Monday it was willing to send backup 
troops to assist the French military mission in Rwanda and was 
studying the matter with French officials. 
  Meanwhile, the International Committee of the Red Cross 
succeeded in evacuating 45 wounded Rwandans from Kigali's 
overcrowded hospital as the capital experienced a lull in the 
fighting. The evacuation was thwarted on Sunday when Tutsi 
rebels pounded Hutu government positions in central Kigali, 
where the hospital is located. 
  In a related development the French daily LE MONDE reported 
Monday that a missing flight recorder from a plane crash that 
sparked the bloody civil war in Rwanda had turned up in Paris. 
  The "black box" is in the hands of former gendarmerie 
captain 
Paul Barril, a member of a disgraced anti-terrorist unit that 
once worked for French President Francois Mitterrand. 
  The box went missing after the April 6 crash of Rwandan 
president Juvenal Habyarimana's Falcon 50 at Kigali airport, 
shot down in a suspected rocket attack. [passage omitted] 

