BFN 

<F P=106> [`White paper' published by DPRK Foreign Ministry on 11 </F>
April in Pyongyang] 
  [Text] The Monju, the first fast breeder reactor of Japan, 
was put into normal operation on 5 April, in defiance of bitter 
denunciation and concern worldwide. This means a dangerous step 
in Japan's nuclear armament. 
  Japan's nuclear armament has reached the danger point today. 
This is an open challenge to the denuclearization of the Korean 
peninsula and desire of mankind to build a nuclear-free world, 
and is a question of which the international community must take 
a serious view. 
  Recognizing that it is necessary to inform governments, 
parliaments, political parties, and public organizations in many 
nations, international organizations, and peace-loving people of 
the world, of the dangerous nature of Japan's nuclear armament, 
and to urgently block it, the DPRK Foreign Ministry publishes 
this white paper. 
  1. Japan has been seeking its nuclear armament a long time. 
  Japan's ambition for nuclear armament has been fully 
revealed 
by remarks of successive Japanese authorities and official 
documents. 
  Article 9 of the Constitution of the State of Japan (Peace 
Constitution), which was adopted in November 1946 under strong 
internal and external demand and pressure, stipulates that the 
Japanese people, sincerely aspiring international peace based on 
justice and order, shall abandon forever all war, armed threat, 
and armed action through the invocation of state power as a 
means of resolving international disputes. To this end, they 
shall not have an Army, Navy, Air Force and other war potential 
and will not recognize the right of belligerency of the state. 
  The successive Japanese authorities, however, urged by the 
desire to turn the country into a military power, a nuclear 
power, have tried by hook or by crook to justify their nuclear 
armament scheme since the 1950's, totally denying or arbitrarily 
interpreting the Constitution itself. 
  On 7 May 1957, then prime minister of Japan, Kishi, said at 
the Budget Committee of the House of Councillors that if anyone 
simply mentions nuclear weapon, all people say it contravenes 
the Constitution. Such an interpretation of the Constitution, 
however, is wrong. Without looking into future development, we 
cannot say uniformly that it is wrong to mention any kind of 
nuclear weapon. (Japanese book "Japan's Nuclear Arming Which Has 
Reached This Stage," 1975) 
  The document entitled "The Military Outline of the Second 
Defense Capabilities Adjustment Plan" prepared by the 
secretariat of the Joint Chiefs of Staff of Japan Self-Defense 
Forces in 1959 stipulates that from the military point of view, 
Japan should have the capability to use tactical nuclear weapons 
for defensive purposes, not to mention its capabilities to cope 
with a nuclear war. (The above-mentioned book) 
  On 10 February 1968, Takatsuki, minister of Legislation of 
the Japanese Cabinet, said at the Budget Committee of the House 
of Councillors that the Constitution does not stipulate that we 
should not possess nuclear weapons and we may possess 
conventional weapons. Although the Constitution rules that we 
cannot possess war potential, the Self-Defense Forces exist 
based on the Self-Defense Forces Law. 
  The interpretation that the Self-Defense Forces are approved 
[yongin] in accordance with the Constitution is the very 
interpretation of weapons. In other words, nuclear weapons and 
other weapons are not discriminated against in the Constitution. 
(The above-mentioned book) 
  On 7 February 1968, Kurai, then Japanese minister of 
Agriculture, said in a news conference that the Peace 
Constitution should be revised for the young generations and 
Japan should have atomic bombs, as well as 300,000 troops in its 
Armed Forces. (The above-mentioned book) 
  The Japanese authorities' wild design for nuclear armament 
was dealt a hard blow by the movement to ban atomic and hydrogen 
bombs, which has gained strength within and without Japan since 
the 1950's. This compelled then Japanese Prime Minister Eisaku 
Sato, quite upset, to announce at the Diet in 1968 the three 
non-nuclear principles--not to manufacture, possess, and 
introduce any nuclear weapons. 
  For this announcement, he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. 
  On 2 June 1969, however, Sato said at a plenary session of 
the House of Representatives that the three nonnuclear 
principles can be altered any time when the policy is changed or 
the cabinet is replaced by another (the above-mentioned book), 
making it plain that these principles advocated by him were 
rhetoric to deceive public opinion at home and abroad. 
  A document entitled "Independent National Defense Plan," 
prepared by the Japan Defense Agency in 1969, revealed Japan's 
intent to develop and possess its own nuclear weapons and 
intercontinental ballistic missiles to carry them. (Japanese 
paper ASAHI EVENING NEWS, 27 June 1969) 
  The Japan Defense Agency's 1970 defense white paper noted: 
According to the law governing the application of laws, it is 
possible to possess the minimum quantity of small nuclear 
weapons needed for self-defense if they do not pose any threat 
of aggression to other countries. (Japanese book "Japan's Black 
Star," 1972) 
  In 1971, when Japan's nuclear energy development was 
stepping 
up in a full scale, while announcing the fourth plan for 
rounding off the national defense capabilities, the director 
general of the Japan Defense Agency, Nakasone, said that the 
Japanese law did not forbid defensive nuclear weapons. (JIJI 
press, 8 July 1971) 
  On 2 March 1978, Japanese Foreign Minister Sonoda said at 
the 
Foreign Affairs Committee of the House of Representatives that 
he did not mean to say that Japan could not possess nuclear 
weapons because it was restricted by the provision of the 
Constitution itself. (JIJI press, 2 March 1978) 
  On 8 March 1978, Japanese Prime Minister Fukuda, said at the 
Budget Committee of the House of Councillors that it was 
possible to adopt a decision on equipping the nation's armed 
forces with nuclear weapons. (TASS news agency, 26 March 1978) 
  While expressing the government's coordinated view on 
relations between the possession of nuclear weapons and Article 
9 of the Constitution at the Budget Committee of the House of 
Councilors on 9 March 1978, the Japanese Government said: 
Retaining combat strength within the minimum scope needed for 
self-defense is not forbidden by Article 9, Clause 2 of the 
Constitution. The government interprets that possessing nuclear 
weapons or ordinary weapons within that scope is not forbidden 
by this clause, either. (JIJI press, 9 March 1978) 
  At the Budget Committee of the House of Councilors on 15 
March 1984, Japanese Prime Minister Nakasone, answering an 
interpellation by a Komei Dietman, said: Japan may possess 
atomic power if it is for national defense. (Japanese ASAHI 
SHIMBUN, 16 March 1984) 
  On 4 June 1984, Nakasone rejected the opposition party's 
demand that one more principle on prohibiting the use of nuclear 
weapons be added to the three principles on denuclearization, 
saying that this issue can cause an international law problem 
because Japan's adoption of the principle on prohibiting the use 
of nuclear weapons may infringe upon the sovereignty of nuclear 
states. (KYODO press, 5 June 1984) 
  Entering the nineties, the Japanese authorities, mentioning 
the changed international situation, have openly revealed their 
scheme to step up their nuclear armament at the final stage. 
  In an interview with commentator (Tawara Shoiziro) before 
his 
assumption of office, Japanese Prime Minister Miyazawa, said: In 
my opinion, the most economic way of military preparations for a 
country like Japan is nuclear armament, which is technologically 
possible, and for which we have no financial difficulty. 
(Japanese magazine CHUO KORON, September 1991) 
  The Japanese Government has created deliberate obstacles 
[inwuijogin nangwanul chosonghae odaga] to the progress of 
DPRK-Japan Government-level talks on normalizing diplomatic 
relations by raising the so-called nuclear suspicion issue of 
the DPRK as a precondition, and it finally broke the talks in 
November 1992. 
  When the DPRK and the United States began to hold dialogue 
to 
resolve the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula through 
negotiations, the Japanese authorities expressed more clearly 
their intent to step up their own nuclear armament under the 
pretext of our nuclear issue. 
  In a news conference held in Singapore in July 1993, 
Japanese 
Foreign Minister Muto said: If North Korea develops nuclear 
weapons and this posed a threat, we can depend upon the U.S. 
nuclear umbrella. It is important, however, that we have the 
will to manufacture nuclear weapons if North Korea develops them 
in a full scale. (AP news agency, 11 September 1993) 
  Japanese Foreign Minister Muto said it is important that we 
have the will to manufacture nuclear weapons. In a ceremony 
marking the anniversary of the founding of the Japanese Foreign 
Ministry, the foreign minister said that although Japan was 
placed under the U.S. nuclear umbrella over the past years, it 
needs a self-defensive capability under the present situation in 
which Moscow and Washington are cooperating with each other. 
(KYODO News Agency, 21 July 1993). 
  Yosihuni, Japanese Foreign Ministry authority in charge of 
nuclear affairs, said on 9 July 1993: If North Korea possesses 
nuclear weapons, there will be a number of opinions among the 
public regarding the means to deal with such situations. 
However, this will weaken our commitment to the Nuclear 
Nonproliferation Treaty. (U.S. paper WASHINGTON POST, 22 
November 1993) 
  Referring to the need to build up defensive capabilities to 
promptly and accurately cope with the possible dangerous events 
in neighboring countries, such as nuclear suspicion and missile 
development by the DPRK, in particular, Japan has recently 
attempted to formulate within this year new general principles 
of the defense program reflecting the end of the Cold War and 
domestic situation. 
  Japan has openly manifested its plan to arm itself with 
nuclear weapons even on UN forums. Until the first half of the 
sixties, the Japanese Government, though reluctantly, voted for 
resolutions on the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons and 
bar on nuclear weapons at the UN General Assembly. From the 
second half of the sixties, however, it voted against or 
abstained from voting on such resolutions, thus disclosing its 
intention to become a military power, a nuclear power, at any 
cost by making haste with nuclear development at full scale and 
producing and stockpiling nuclear weapons. 
  At the 22d session of the UN General Assembly in 1967, the 
27th session of the UN General Assembly in 1972, the 31st 
session of the UN General Assembly in 1976, the 32d session of 
the UN General Assembly in 1977, the 33th session of the UN 
General Assembly in 1978, the 34th session of the UN General 
Assembly in 1979, and the 35th session of the UN General 
Assembly in 1980, the Japanese Government abstained from voting 
on the resolutions on reviewing the treaty to ban nuclear 
weapons; on the permanent ban of nuclear weapons; on 
guaranteeing the security of the non-nuclear possessing 
countries; and on prohibiting all nuclear weapons from being 
tested or exploded. Also, it has voted against the resolution 
on prohibiting nuclear weapon deployment and on prohibiting the 
use of nuclear weapons. (Japan's magazine CHUO KORON, March 
1982) 
  At the 37th session of the UN General Assembly in 1982, the 
40th session of the UN General Assembly in 1985, the 41th 
session of the UN General Assembly in 1986, the 42d session of 
the UN General Assembly in 1987, the 43th session of the UN 
General Assembly in 1988, the 44th session of the UN General 
Assembly in 1989, the 45th session of the UN General Assembly in 
1990, and the 47th session of the UN General Assembly in 1992, 
the Japanese Government also voted against or abstained from 
voting on resolutions on the banning the use of nuclear weapons; 
on banning nuclear weapons; on the prevention of nuclear war; 
on banning nuclear weapon deployment into the territory of the 
nonnuclear possessing countries; on the strengthening of the 
security of nonnuclear possessing countries to cope with the use 
of nuclear weapons by the nuclear possessing countries or their 
threat to use them; on the freezing of nuclear weapons; on the 
prevention of nuclear war; on South Africa's nuclear 
capability; and on Israel's nuclear armaments. (UN General 
Assembly Resolutions written in English, 1993) 
  Explaining the reason why the Japanese Government voted 
against or abstained from voting on those resolutions, it said: 
A total ban on the use of nuclear weapons is incompatible with 
nuclear deterrent and it might destroy the nuclear equilibrium. 
However, in reality, this was an open and undisguised 
revelation on the UN arena of Japan's ulterior intention to 
produce and possess nuclear weapons and pave the way for 
overseas aggression so that it could use them in case of 
emergency. 
  Thus, since the fifties to date, Japan has plotted to adopt 
its nuclear armaments as a policy and to legalize it under the 
veil of three nonnuclear principles, opposing and distorting the 
Peace Constitution. 
  2. Japan's nuclear armament has reached the danger line. 
Japan's nuclear policy is being promoted in two directions, that 
is, solving the problem of power by nuclear energy and, at the 
same time, securing a large quantity of plutonium for the 
manufacture of nuclear weapons by itself to proceed with nuclear 
armament at any moment. 
  In 1956, the Japanese Government established, under the 
Science and Technology Agency, a division that controls and 
commands the atomic energy sector in a unified manner. It also 
established, under the division, such permanent offices as an 
atomic energy committee, an atomic energy institute, an atomic 
energy business association, and an atomic energy corporation. 
Since then, the Japanese Government has positively pursued 
atomic energy development. 
  The first nuclear power station was built and went into 
operation in Japan in July 1966. Since then, the Japanese 
Government has considered the construction of nuclear power 
stations to be an important state policy to solve the energy 
problem. 
  The Japanese Government mapped out a 10-year plan to take 
comprehensive measures concerning energy in an effort to 
overcome the worldwide oil crisis of 1973 and accelerated 
nuclear development in earnest. 
  All of these were in fact a means for Japan to arm itself 
with nuclear weapons. 
  According to the director of the High Center of Social 
Sciences of France, in 1976, the United States made such special 
concessions to Japan as approving its civilian [minsuyong] 
nuclear development and promising it a continued supply of 
highly enriched uranium under a far looser inspection system 
than other allies in reward for Japan's ratification of the 
Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty. 
  As a result, Japan has been able to freely reprocess nuclear 
materials and develop advanced technologies for its rearmament. 
(Radio France Culture, 5 November, 1993). 
  Japan has already installed enough nuclear facilities to arm 
itself with nuclear weapons. 
  At the beginning, the United States, with a view to control 
Japan's nuclear development, sold to it only light-water 
reactors feeding on U.S.-made enriched uranium and prohibited it 
from developing other types of atomic reactors. 
  Under this condition, Japan developed a new-type converter 
[jonhwanno] mainly feeding on Canadian natural uranium with an 
investment of $404 million. This converter was built in 
Tsuruga, Fukui Prefecture, and has been in full operation since 
1979. (Japanese book "Imidas" 1992) 
  In this way, Japan has gained relative independence in 
nuclear development, freeing itself from U.S. control. 
  According to the white paper on nuclear energy published by 
the Japanese Government in 1993, Japan has 16 nuclear power 
stations with 46 reactors in operation, which are capable of 
producing 37,360,000 kw of energy. This means that Japan ranks 
third in the world after the United States and France in the 
total designed capacity of nuclear facilities [haeksolbiui 
chongsolgye nungnyok]. 
  The year 1993 alone witnessed the commissioning of 12 new 
reactors [panungno], and nine units of facilities with a total 
capacity of 8.9 million kw are under construction. In all this, 
Japan annually uses some 3,000 tonnes of nuclear materials of 
various sorts. 
  Japan may become a dangerous nuclear power with its capacity 
of nuclear weapon production largely expanded when 10 nuclear 
power stations, one fast breeder reactor, one uranium enrichment 
plant, and one low-intensity radioactive waste storage, all of 
which are now under construction, and four nuclear power 
stations, including one new-type converter, one reprocessing 
plant, and one high-intensity radioactive waste storage, all of 
which are now projected, are put into operation. (Japanese book 
"Imidas," 1992). 
  Japan started the construction of the world's largest 
nuclear 
fuel reprocessing plant, the first such plant in Japan, in April 
1993 in Rokashomura, Aomori Prefecture. The plant is scheduled 
to be in operation in the year 2000. The plant will have an 
annual capacity to reprocess 800 tonnes of nuclear waste, 60 
percent of the total amount of nuclear waste in Japan and can 
extract five tonnes a year of plutonium known to be the most 
toxic. (KYODO news service 28 April 1993) 
  Japan has secured enough nuclear materials to arm itself 
with 
nuclear weapons. 
  Japan set itself a long-range goal of depending upon fast 
breeder reactors feeding on plutonium in the fifties when it 
started the development of atomic energy and has produced and 
stockpiled a large quantity of nuclear materials by operating 
reprocessing plants since the mid seventies. 
  Japan has stockpiled 26 tonnes of plutonium which surpasses 
by far the quantity needed for peaceful purposes. It is enough 
to manufacture more than 3,000 atomic bombs of the Nagasaki 
type. (Japanese magazine BUNGEI SHUNJU, June 1992). 
  Japan buckled down to the implementation of its great 
program 
for the use of plutonium at the beginning of 1992. In the 
period from 1975 to 1992, it brought in one tonne of plutonium 
from Britain in top secrecy and reportedly shipped in 1.5 tonnes 
of plutonium from France in 1993. Japan mapped out a plan to 
fully operate the Monju, a fast breeder reactor, from the year 
2000 and to secure about 400 tonnes of plutonium by 2010. 
(Russian paper, KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA, 13 February 1992) 
  Considering the fact that 120 atomic bombs of Nagasaki type 
can be made with one tonne of plutonium, 48,000 atomic bombs 
could be manufactured with 400 tonnes of plutonium This is a 
colossal amount enough to blow off numerous planets, such as the 
earth, in an instant. What offers particular problem is that 
Japan plans to secure about 100 tonnes of plutonium by the year 
2010, though the amount of plutonium actually needed by Japan is 
estimated at 85 tonnes. (KYODO news service, 5 October 1992). 
  This means that, by 2010, Japan will store 15 more tonnes of 
plutonium than the needed for peaceful purposes, enough to 
manufacture some 2,000 nuclear bombs. Therefore, Japan's claim 
that it has stockpiled an appropriate amount of plutonium for 
economic development can never be justified. 
  A latest report on the nonproliferation of nuclear materials 
including plutonium, which an influential advisory agency worked 
out, entrusted by the U.S. Defense Department, expressed deep 
concern over Japan's nuclear armament and said Japan should be 
urged to fundamentally reexamine its nuclear policy, demanding a 
stop to the project of the demonstration reactor for a fast 
breeder reactor. 
  Urging Japan to reduce the scale of the construction of 
nuclear power stations with 12 reactors feeding on plutonium 
planned to be completed by the year 2005 and stop the 
construction of a new-type demonstration reactor following the 
Monju and the construction of the reprocessing plant No. 2 in 
Rokashomura, Aomori Prefecture, the report said potential fear 
of Japan's nuclear arming is sprouting within the U.S. 
Government. (Japanese paper MAINICHI SHIMBUN, 19 November 1993). 
  Voice of America on 6 April 1994 said that the commissioning 
of a fast breeder reactor in Japan is arousing serious 
apprehensions and uneasiness in European countries and the 
United States, to say nothing of its neighboring nations, and it 
is foreseen that it would give a greater shock to the acute 
nuclear issue. This indicates that Japan might become one of 
the largest nuclear states in the near future, the radio added. 
  Japan possesses modern means of nuclear delivery. 
  The so-called Self-Reliant Defense Program worked out by the 
Japanese Defense Agency in 1969 makes it plain that Japan would 
continue to develop and possess domestic nuclear weapons and 
ballistic missiles for their delivery. (Japanese paper ASAHI 
EVENING NEWS, 27 June 1969). 
  Japan's system of launching nuclear warheads was already 
established during the Third Program of Readjustment of the 
Defense Capacities from 1967 to 1971. The Japanese Defense 
Agency completed the domestic production of cruise missiles in 
1985 in cooperation with the Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and 
other companies. 
  This cruise missile is a sophisticated guided missile which 
is available for the delivery of nuclear warheads and 
conventional warheads. 
  The Japanese Self-Defense Forces successfully carried out a 
test launching of a Japanese ground-to-warship missile SSM-1 at 
the Pacific Missile Center of the U.S. Navy in California in 
the summer of 1987. (Japanese magazine, SEKAI SEIJI, first 
semimonthly issue of January 1990). 
  As of December 1991, Japan possessed 393 155-mm howitzers 
and 
132 203.2-mm howitzers which can fire nuclear warheads. The 
number of its nuclear-capable planes is on the steady increase. 
  Japan had secured 145 F-15's, new-type fighter-bombers 
with an action radius of 1,052 km by 1991. It plans to increase 
its number to 180-200 by the end of 1994. 
  It developed a new fighter-bomber FSX by remodeling the F-16 
in 1993 and plans to introduce 130 of the model by the year 2000. 
  On 4 February 1994, Japan successfully launched a new 
H2-type 
rocket No. 1, developed entirely by its independent technology, 
at a space center in Tanegashima, Kagoshima Prefecture. This 
rocket is capable of launching a two-tonne stationery satellite, 
almost four times heavier the satellite most rockets of the past 
were capable of launching. As a result of the successful launch 
of rocket No. 1, Japan's rocket development technology could 
equal that of the United States and European countries. 
(Japan's NHK Broadcasting Station, 4 February 1994) 
  This H2-type rocket is 50 meters in length and 260 tonnes in 
weight and can be converted easily into a military use. 
  The former director of the Atomic Energy Research Center of 
Rikkyo University, Japan, stated that Japan has been able to 
make substantial material and technological preparations for 
manufacturing high-performance nuclear weapons in one month or 
so. More than 150 companies and over 3,300 factories are 
involved in the manufacture of nuclear warheads in Japan. In 
recent years, Japan's investments in this domain have sharply 
increased from $1.73 million in 1954 to approximately $360 
million in 1991. (The Indian paper WORUM, 11 March 1994). 
  In actuality, Japan has built perfect material and 
technological foundations for the manufacture of nuclear 
weapons. And, government authorities of Western countries, 
including the United States, expressed concern over Japan's 
nuclear armament. 
  Speaking at the Senate Arms Service Committee on 2 February 
1994, in the capacity of defense secretary before being 
nominated as defense secretary [as heard], U.S. Defense 
Secretary Perry testified that there is the strong possibility 
that Japan will pursue possessing nuclear weapons. (Japan's 
YOMIURI SHIMBUN, 8 February 1994) And, Sam Nunn, chairman of 
the U.S. Senate Armed Services, said that Japan's antinuclear 
policy is temporary and can change quickly. (Voice of America, 
31 January 1994) 
  Former Under Secretary of Defense Wolfowitz said that, 
depending on circumstances, Japan will certainly join the 
nuclear club because it is fully capable of developing nuclear 
weapons in terms of technology and money. (Japan's YOMIURI 
SHIMBUN, 8 February 1994) 
  The Voice of America reported on 4 February 1994 that the 
successful launch of the H2-type rock proves that Japan's space 
technology could become a major competitor to that of the United 
States, powerful western European countries, and, in Asia in 
particular, to China. It also reported that the United States 
is greatly concerned, despite Japan's outward policy of 
denuclearization, of Japan's capability to instantaneously 
[sunsikkane], or at the latest, in a few weeks, develop a very 
large number of the most powerful nuclear shells [haektan], in 
the event that such a threat was to be raised in the future. 
  In its report to its government, the British Defense 
Ministry 
said that Japan is capable of arming itself with nuclear weapons 
very quickly and may have already manufactured atomic shells 
because it has plutonium, electronic devices, and other key 
bomb-manufacturing elements and technology. (The British 
newspaper THE SUNDAY TIMES, 30 January 1994) 
  French Foreign Minister Juppe held talks with Aichi, 
director 
general of the Japanese Defense Agency, on 1 April 1994. When 
Aichi mentioned that the French National Defense White Paper 
indicated the possibility of Japan possessing nuclear weapons, 
Juppe said that the National Defense White Paper, pointed out 
that Japan is technologically capable of developing nuclear 
weapons after considering the possibilities. He also expressed 
concern over Japan's nuclear armament. (Japan's NHK 
Broadcasting Station, 1 April 1994 and the Swedish paper SVENSKA 
DAGBLADET, 31 January 1994) 
  Japan has everything needed to manufacture instantly 
nuclear weapons and has already developed nuclear warheads that 
are ready to load the necessary amount of plutonium. (Swedish 
newspaper SVENSKA DAGBLADET, 31 January 1993) 
  Japan has everything necessary for the development of 
nuclear 
weapons. (Swiss paper (LE NOUVEAU QUOTIDIEN), 31 January 1994) 
  Japan is not only able to easily manufacture nuclear 
warheads, but is also prepared to turn into a hegemonic state 
with nuclear weapons, if it makes up its mind to do so. (South 
Korean magazine WOLGAN CHOSON, November 1991) 
  Japan's efforts for a nuclear buildup can only be described 
as the new generation's efforts to hold supremacy over the 
world. If things remain this way, it will not be long before 
Japan becomes a nuclear super power and exercises its power by 
regulating the supply of nuclear materials to other countries. 
(South Korean newspaper CHUNGANG ILBO, 21 July 1992) 
  Worldwide media has expressed great concern over Japan's 
nuclear armament by reporting that Japan's nuclear armament is a 
major stumbling block to the denuclearization of the Korean 
peninsula and the rest of the world, and has called for checking 
and frustrating its attempt. 
  Paul Leventhal, director of the U.S. Nuclear Control 
Institute, in a hearing before the Diplomatic Committee 
[committee name as heard] of the U.S. Senate on 15 January 1992, 
disclosed that a major stumbling block to the denuclearization 
of the Korean peninsula is Japan's plan to secure plutonium, and 
called on the U.S. Government to frustrate its plan. 
  The International Atomic Energy Agency should inspect 
plutonium stockpiled by Japan instead of North Korea's military 
facilities. The United Nations should call the world's attention 
to Japan's facilities, not North Korea's. Without rectifying 
the double standard policy applied by the United States and the 
United Nations, the world's nuclear issue will never be resolved 
and the world's peace and security will not be guaranteed. 
(South Korea's MUNHWA BROADCASTING COOPERATION, 16 January 1992 
and the Nepalese weekly (TRISTI) 13 May 1994) 
  Reporting that Japan's nuclear potential threatens not only 
the Korean people, but also the peoples of Asia and the rest of 
the world, people who value world peace and security should 
heighten their vigilance against Japan's nuclear armament and 
join in the international effort to hinder Japan's nuclear 
threat. (Indian newspaper (SAMACHAR POST), 19 February 1992) 
  Impeding Japan's attempt to become a militant country and 
develop its nuclear potential is a desperate demand to protect 
peace and security of Asia and the rest of the world. (Russian 
newspaper PATRIOT, 9 July 1992) 
  If Japan is armed with nuclear weapons, it will pose the 
most 
serious and grave threat to the Korean peninsula and, 
furthermore, it will harass peace and security of Asia and the 
rest of the world. 
  With Japan's nuclear armament reaching the dangerous level, 
the danger of the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula being 
made meaningless is increasing. 
  Though Japan is promoting its nuclear armament to the danger 
point, the United States and other Western countries are turning 
blind eyes to this and carrying on a hysteric pressure campaign 
over our fictitious suspected nuclear development. This double 
standard, in fact, encourages Japan's nuclear armament. 
  The DPRK Government expresses the belief that the 
governments, parliaments, political parties, and organizations 
of all antinuclear and nonnuclear states and international 
organizations, and peace-loving people of the world will 
heighten vigilance against the dangerous moves of the Japanese 
authorities for nuclear armament and make positive contributions 
to the peace and security of Asia and the world by checking and 
frustrating them. 
  [Issued] 11 April 1994, Pyongyang 

