BFN 

  [Text] The Uruguayan Government has convened an 
extraordinary session of the OAS Permanent Council tomorrow to 
discuss possible military intervention in Haiti by the United 
States. This information was confirmed by Foreign Minister 
Sergio Abreu who, commenting on another issue, underlined that 
Uruguay has not adopted any unilateral position concerning the 
common external tariff. 
  During a briefing before the Senate International Affairs 
Committee this afternoon, Abreu pointed out that Uruguay's aim 
in convening an extraordinary session of the OAS Permanent 
Council is to find the means to prevent a unilateral decision 
that may affect the principle of nonintervention and harmonious 
relations in the hemisphere. 
  With regard to Mercosur [Common Market of the South], the 
foreign minister stressed that neither negotiations nor the work 
of task forces with other member countries have been suspended. 
He noted that all negotiations, whether with NAFTA or the EC, 
will be undertaken as a group. 
  Commenting on the situation in Haiti, Abreu said: 
  [Begin recording] [Abreu] Well, in view of the announcement 
made by the U.S. President concerning a possible military 
intervention in Haiti, the Uruguayan Government has decided to 
convene an extraordinary session of the OAS Permanent Council to 
exchange ideas on this situation, and perform what we consider 
an act of preventive diplomacy, i.e. to seek the necessary means 
and instruments to stave off a unilateral intervention that may 
affect the principle of nonintervention and the harmonious 
functioning of hemispheric relations. 
  [Unidentified reporter] Have you already discussed this 
issue 
with lawmakers? 
  [Abreu] Exactly, we have informed the International 
Relations 
Committee about this, in the first place, as it is not only an 
issue of prime importance but also pertains to the country's 
foreign policy. And above all there is the need to seek a 
dialogue that will enable parties to abide by the Governor's 
Island agreement on Haiti and to prevent unilateral measures 
that may affect what we believe is a principle that must be 
respected in a clear way and with no restrictions. 
  [Reporter] What conclusions have you derived from your 
meetings? 
  [Abreu] Well, we have discussed the Haitian issue with the 
Bolivian foreign minister, who presides over the ad hoc group. 
He entirely shares our views. We understand that this issue 
must be assessed [words indistinct] so that it can then be 
submitted to the OAS General Assembly, which will be held in 
Belem, Para State, Brazil, at the end of the month. We have 
also had a telephone conversation with the Brazilian foreign 
minister, who is at present in France, and with the Chilean 
foreign minister. We were all of one mind regarding our concern 
about and interest in warding off unilateral intervention. We 
therefore agreed to discuss this issue at the appropriate forum, 
which is the OAS, and above all to start working with a view to 
devising a solution which, I repeat, combines the interests of 
democracy and also full respect for the principle of 
nonintervention. 
  [Reporter] Did you discuss the Mercosur issue with 
lawmakers? 
  [Abreu] Yes, we have made it clear -- and it is very 
important for the press to record this -- that there is 
absolutely no unilateral proposal on the part of Uruguay 
concerning the common external tariff. We have not suspended 
negotiations, and Uruguay has not withdrawn from the task force. 
[end recording] 
  These were the remarks made by Foreign Minister Sergio 
Abreu. 

