Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Liz Mineo] </F>
  [Text] Before his arrest Demetrio Limonier Chavez 
Penaherrera, also known as "Vaticano," was the head of the 
largest drug-trafficking mafia in Peru, administering like no 
other drug trafficker huge amounts of drugs and dollars. It is 
estimated that he alone sold an average of 60 tonnes of cocaine 
base per year, valued at $900 million. 
  "Vaticano" was the main cocaine base dealer in Peru for the 
Cali cartel, as well as its safest trafficker, as he could 
guarantee the cocaine base shipments to Colombia in small hired 
airplanes that took off from the clandestine landing strips he 
controlled. 
  During its golden times between 1989 and 1992, the Chavez 
Penaherrera empire, whose headquarters were located in 
Campanilla, extended to Uchiza in the south and Saposoa in the 
north. 
  Although his organization became the most powerful one in 
Peru, his gang never attained the nearly absolute power and 
sophisticated structure of the Colombian drug cartels. 
"Vaticano's" organization was, in some aspects, even a step 
behind some of his Peruvian counterparts. 
  His arrest, which took place in Cali in mid-January, ended 
the belief that Chavez Penaherrera would found the first 
Peruvian drug cartel. This possibility has yet not been ruled 
out, as there are several drug mafias in the country that are 
reportedly in better condition to do what he could not. 
  Meanwhile, the police think that one of the Chavez 
Penaherrera brothers, Elias, also known as "Lan Chile," has 
taken over control of the "firm." 
<H5>  "El Ministro" </H5>
  Waldo Vargas Arias, a Colombian drug trafficker whose alias 
is "El Ministro," heads the second most important 
drug-trafficking "firm" in Peru, and ought to be the main 
candidate for replacing "Vaticano." 
  It is said that Vargas Arias sends more than 40 tonnes of 
cocaine base per year to the Colombian drug "kingpins" with whom 
he deals directly. "El Ministro," however, is far from being 
just a cocaine base dealer, as he manages a network of 
clandestine laboratories. He processes cocaine hydrochloride and 
manages a large network of contacts with Peruvian drug 
traffickers. 
  Without a doubt, the most profitable activity he has is 
processing and exporting cocaine hydrochloride. More than half 
the national production of cocaine comes from "El Ministro's" 
laboratories. It is estimated that in 1993 nearly 70 tonnes of 
cocaine hydrochloride were produced in the country. 
  Although Waldo Vargas Arias has surpassed "Vaticano" in 
several aspects, it seems that he really does not wish to be on 
top of the rest of the drug kingpins. 
  "`El Ministro' prefers to remain in the jungle managing his 
businesses. It seems that he is not interested in power, given 
that his lifestyle is neither flamboyant nor exaggerated like 
that of `Vaticano,'" a police source said. 
  Vargas Arias' operations center is located in the Lower 
Huallaga region, although he has recently expanded outside San 
Martin Department, near the town of Lagunas, near Yurimaguas. 
<H5>  The Cachique Rivera Brothers </H5>
  According to the police, the Cachique Rivera brothers' gang 
is the surest candidate for becoming the first Peruvian drug 
cartel, given its broad network over nearly the entire national 
territory and the different activities in which it participates. 
  These enterprising brothers are not only cocaine base 
middlemen, but have extended their activities to all the 
possible drug trafficking components. 
  They administer a network of laboratories, manufacture 
cocaine hydrochloride, are engaged in precursor traffic, control 
several clandestine landing strips, and have their own fleet of 
small airplanes. 
  They have the largest network of contacts with Peruvian 
drug traffickers, maintain direct contact with the chiefs of the 
Cali cartel, and have some connections in Europe. As if that 
were not enough, they have their own drug money "laundering" 
system. 
  The Cachique Rivera brothers operate in several zones 
throughout the national territory. They operate in Cajamarca, 
Chiclayo, and Trujillo in the north; in Aguaytia and Pucallpa in 
the east; in Lima and Ica in the center; in Sierra Pasco, 
Palmapampa, Apurimac, and Pichis-Palcazu Valley in the 
mountains; and in Manu in the south. Their operations center is 
located in Aguaytia, a town in Ucayali Department. 
  Their gang is made up of four brothers from Tingo Maria. 
Their names are Adolfo, also known as "Alferez"; Abelardo, also 
known as "Teniente"; Segundo, also known as "Capitan"; and 
Nicolas, also known as "Mayor." It is known that Abelardo lives 
in Cali and is regarded as the fiercest of the four. According 
to the police he conducts their "firm's" operations from 
Colombia, while Segundo surveys the normal operation of the 
"business" in the jungle area. 
  The power of the Cachique Rivera brothers can hardly be 
matched by the other mafias that operate in the country. It is 
estimated that they send nearly 15 tonnes of cocaine 
hydrochloride per year to the Cali cartel, which makes them 
their main supplier. 
  Together with "El Ministro,"the Cachique Rivera brothers are 
the main producers and exporters of cocaine hydrochloride in 
Peru. 
<H5>  The Group of Six </H5>
  According to Dinandro [Antidrug Division] and DEA files, a 
special group is made up of six lesser known "firms" which are 
nonetheless just as important given the amount of drugs and 
dollars they move. 
  These "firms" are headed by Jorge Alvarez Enriquez, also 
known as "Chino Jorge"; Braulio Tafur Alvarado, also known as 
"Tio Braulio"; Juan Leguia Manzur, also known as "Nino"; Luis 
Perez, also known as "Luco Culon"; Carlos Melendez Andrade; and 
Willer Alvarado Linares. 
  All of them are cocaine base dealers. They collect cocaine 
base and sell it to the Colombian drug traffickers, with whom 
they deal only through middlemen. Their areas of operation are 
located in many settlements in the Huallaga region. 
  Alvarez, Tafur, Perez, and Alvarado operated in Saposoa, 
Juanjui, Uchiza, and in the Lower Huallaga. Leguia and 
Melendez operated in Palmapampa and Manu, which has become a new 
drug trafficking operations center. 
  From this group, the most important traffickers are Leguia, 
Manzur, and Melendez Andrade. They have their own small 
airplanes and access to clandestine landing strips which 
guarantee the transportation of drugs. Among all of them, 
Melendez seems to have more advantages than the others, as he 
controls some laboratories in which he manufactures washed coca 
paste and cocaine hydrochloride. 
  It is estimated that all these firms send nearly 15 tonnes 
of 
drugs per year to Colombia. 
<H5>  The Rest </H5>
  Other less important gangs that also deal in large amounts 
of 
drugs are made up of families that operate in different parts of 
the country. 
  According to the police, the brothers Luis and Jorge 
Cardenas 
Guzman, also known as the "Mosquitos" -- sons of the well-known 
drug trafficker "Mosca Loca" -- operate in Bellavista and 
Iquitos. The brothers Luis and Javier Lopez, also known as 
"Crespo I" and "Crespo II," operate in Saposoa and Campanilla. 
  Eliseo Alvarado Perez, also known as "Champa," father of 
Willer Alvarado Linares, is known as one of the "bosses" of 
Aucayacu, and the Julca Urrello brothers -- one of whose members 
was arrested together with "Vaticano" in Cali -- operate in Ica. 
  There are many other traffickers who are known only by their 
aliases: "Cristo," "Tolima," "Azul," "Tio Poderoso," "Bigote," 
"Charapa," "Pelo Duro," "Galleta," and "Clavo." These are just 
some of the aliases registered by the police in its files, which 
grow every day with the names of criminals who aspire to one day 
follow after "Vaticano," who is currently in prison. 

