BFN 

  [Text] [Announcer] Our colleague Arijana Saracevic was on 
duty today in the building of the Presidency and she monitored 
the information that came in. We have her on the line and she 
says she has some important information. Good evening, 
colleague Saracevic: 
  [Saracevic] Good evening, colleague Selimovic. As you have 
already said, I am reporting from the building of the 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Presidency and from the Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Government session, and I have a piece of truly (?incredible) 
information to tell you. Namely, the U.S. Congress has passed 
the McCloskey Amendment regarding the lifting of the arms 
embargo. It is interesting to note that 245 congressmen voted 
in favor of the amendment, while 175 voted against it. I have 
Dr. Haris Silajdzic, prime minister of the Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Government, beside me and I am going to ask him to comment on 
the information that we have just received. 
  [Silajdzic] Well, your colleague has already said most of 
it. We were not expecting such a significant and great victory. 
This Congress decision has now been submitted to U.S. President 
Clinton, who can veto such a decision. If he vetoes it, a 
two-thirds majority will be needed in the next vote in order for 
the United States to unilaterally lift the arms embargo for 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. Therefore, we are dealing with a unilateral 
lifting of the embargo, which the UN Security Council can no 
longer influence. In case there is no veto -- presidential veto 
-- the embargo will then be lifted by this decision alone. If 
there is a veto, a two-thirds majority will be needed in the 
next vote in order for the lifting of the embargo to be 
realized. Thank you. 
  [Announcer] Mr. Silajdzic, if you are still with us, could 
you briefly comment on....[pauses]. President Clinton has a 
[word indistinct] right, and his statements -- we have been cut 
off -- have caused a veritable storm, which makes it very 
difficult to believe that there will not be problems connected 
to this decision -- the one passed by Congress -- all the more 
so because President Clinton has [words indistinct]. 
Nevertheless, as Prime Minister Silajdzic said, this is a 
great diplomatic victory. 

