Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [All figures as published] </F>
  [Text] There is a paradox: According to a survey 40 percent 
of those polled have a good opinion of the president, although 
42.8 percent oppose his reelection. There is also no strong 
consensus about privatization or the reform of the labor law. 
  With just a few weeks to go before the elections for 
Constituent Assembly conventioneers, support for President 
Carlos Menem and his economic policy is still strong. 
  This is the result of a Lynch, Menendez, and Nivel Company 
survey of 1,000 Buenos Aires and greater Buenos Aires residents 
who, according to the National Electoral Directorate, could vote 
in the elections slated for 10 April. The survey was carried 
out in February. 
  According to this survey, 47 percent of those surveyed have 
a 
positive impression of the president, while 29.4 percent have a 
negative impression. The ratio is therefore 1.6 in favor to one 
against. 
  As to the performance of the administration, 40.8 percent 
consider it good, 32.8 percent see it as average, and 25 percent 
think it is bad. Concerning Menem's reelection in 1995, 41.7 
percent supported it while 42.8 percent were against it. 
  The economic policy obtained the support of 44.5 percent of 
those surveyed, while 24.5 percent opposed it. The ratio was 
1.82 for to one against -- very similar to that of Menem's 
performance as a whole. 
  Meanwhile, the privatization policy was viewed favorably by 
only 35.4 percent, while 33.6 percent had a poor opinion of it. 
  The figures changed remarkably regarding the reform of the 
labor law. While 41 percent opposed it, only 19.6 percent 
supported it, and 27.8 percent of the people surveyed said they 
knew nothing about the subject. 
  The company that did the survey reported that "support for 
Menem, his administration, and his reelection stands at over 40 
percent, which augurs a victory for the administration in the 
elections for Constituent Assembly members." 
  Adriana Martinez Vivot was the coordinator of the survey, 
which was done by sampling and used a questionnaire containing 
both partially open-ended and closed questions. The margin of 
error was estimated at 4.5 percent, which means that the results 
were 95.5 percent reliable. 

