Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Maria Laura Avignolo] </F>
  [Text] London -- For the first time since the Malvinas War, 
the chief of the government intelligence services, Hugo 
Anzorreguy, was received by his British counterparts during an 
official 36-hour visit to London. This courtesy will be 
returned in Buenos Aires today, when David Spedding -- the 
number two man in the British MI6 service, and the future number 
one by the end of 1994 -- will arrive here for a three-day stay. 
  As a result of this meeting it was decided that SIDE 
[Secretariat for State Intelligence] agents will be trained in 
"intelligence analysis" by British spies "in the next few 
months." 
  During a rainy morning yesterday, and watched over by 
discreet bodyguards, Anzorreguy held a long conversation in 
impeccable English with Colin McColl, chief of the domestic 
espionage service MI5 [title as received]. 
  More feminine, Stella Rimmington -- the first woman 
directing 
the foreign secret service MI6 [title as received] -- invited 
him on the same day to lunch at San Lorenzo restaurant, Lady 
Di's favorite restaurant in Knightsbridge, near Harrods. 
Rimmington extended the invitation to Anzorreguy's wife, 
Margarita Moline O'Connor, who accompanied her husband on this 
"tour of espionage and good manners" through Spain, France, and 
London. 
  Anzorreguy's visit had previously been canceled due to the 
illness of President Carlos Menem. 
  With British coolness, Colin McColl told Anzorreguy -- five 
minutes after beginning the conversation -- that the British 
intelligence services are very discreet: They do not grant 
interviews, or allow photographs, or let any information be 
leaked. In subliminal language he meant to say that the 
conversation should be kept strictly "off the record." 
  Anzorreguy was appalled with the MI5 chief's knowledge of 
the 
Argentine "dirty war"; he knew so much that it was as if he had 
absorbed the minds of an Argentine military officer and a 
guerrilla member. 
  The subject of terrorism monopolized the conversation, 
together with the problem of immigration as a possible source of 
conflict. 
  For McColl, the problems are the Pakistanis, Indians, and 
residents of the former British colonies in the Caribbean. 
Anzorreguy told him that their equivalent, for Argentina, are 
the Paraguayans, Bolivians, Chileans, and Peruvians who want to 
come to Argentina "dazed by the economic miracle." 
  When a year ago Anzorreguy visited the chief of the Russian 
secret services in Moscow, the Russian chief's first question 
was very direct. "Tell me what Galtieri was like," the Soviet 
spy asked with curiosity, in referring to the Argentine general 
who commanded the Malvinas War. Anzorreguy swallowed his 
feelings, remembered the description of "majestic general" used 
by an aide to (former U.S. President) Reagan to describe the 
mastermind of the invasion of the islands, and answered: "He 
was a presumptuous general." 
  Stella Rimmington did not ask a single question about the 
Malvinas War, and much less about Galtieri's personality or 
about the investigations into the soldiers executed in the 
Malvinas Islands. In her new and austere office with a view of 
the River Thames, the MI6 chief aimed the conversation toward 
the danger of nuclear proliferation without control and 
terrorism. 
  Rimmington walks daily from her house to her office without 
any guards; she has been photographed only once; she has no 
domestic servant; and she is an expert Sovietologist. 
  During their conversation Anzorreguy stressed the "excellent 
diplomatic relations" between Argentina and Chile. 
  When CLARIN asked Anzorreguy about the misunderstandings 
between Chile and Argentina that Argentine Foreign Ministry 
sources attributed to the British Government, "Mr. Five" [senor 
cinco] minimized these: "These are pranks that we could play, 
too," he said. 

