BFN 

  [Text] Otsu, May 2 KYODO -- The leader of new party 
Sakigake [Harbinger] voiced support for an extension of the 
current Diet session Monday [2 May] to pass a bill instrumental 
for holding House of Representatives elections based on 
single-seat constituencies and proportional representation. 
  Sakigake leader Masayoshi Takemura told a news conference in 
Otsu that deliberation of the bill delineating new single-seat 
constituencies would take "until late July or August." 
  The current Diet session ends June 29. 
  Under the current election system, the 511 lower house 
members are elected from three- to five-seat constituencies. 
  Takemura, chief cabinet secretary under the cabinet of 
former 
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, said he hopes that the next 
lower house elections will be held "if at all possible" under 
the new election system combining proportional representation 
and direct elections in single-seat constituencies. 
  He said, however, that further political turmoil could make 
it necessary to call a general election before the new election 
system has been established. 
  "We would have no reason to wait if political turmoil made 
it 
mandatory to hear the will of the people," he said. 
  Takemura also decried as "not good" that certain parties 
have 
"seized" government power in an apparent reference to the new 
coalition centering on Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata's Shinseito 
[Japan Renewal Party] and Komeito, which is backed by the Soka 
Gakkai Buddhist lay organization. 
  Sakigake, which belonged to the seven-party coalition that 
ousted the Liberal Democratic Party from power in August after 
almost four decades of unchallenged rule, refused to take posts 
in the Hata cabinet but pledged support for the minority 
government. 
  But the sudden formation of the new parliamentary group 
Kaishin, which includes Shinseito and Hosokawa's Japan New 
Party, has created "an unusual situation," said Takemura in 
explaining why Sakigake decided to stay out of the Hata cabinet. 

