BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres by Miriam </F>
Wasserman and Victor Manuel Vargas in Santa Fe de Bogota; date 
not given] 
  [Text] [EL TIEMPO] The road to peace to which Israel and 
the PLO are committed is filled with uncertainties for the near 
future. Great courage is required. Has this effort yielded 
positive results? 
  [Peres] First, an uncertain peace is better than the 
certainty of war. If we cannot attain peace, we will have no 
uncertainties. I think we will continue to pay the price of 
peace before we can see its fruits. Nevertheless, we will not 
change our minds because of this fact. We will continue with 
the process. 
  [EL TIEMPO] What are the largest obstacles to peace at this 
time? 
  [Peres] There are different obstacles in different 
countries. 
We have to see how the Palestinians will get organized in Gaza 
and Jericho. Then we will continue to negotiate the various 
stages that follow in the process -- in other words, the 
expansion of their administration to five or six specific areas 
and the extension of autonomy to other territories. 
  The Syrians, on the other hand, want to conduct the 
negotiations in a very strange manner. They want the talks to 
be held behind closed doors and in a limited manner. If you 
want to normalize relations, you have to normalize the 
negotiations, because otherwise the people will not believe you 
are serious. I do not think Syria is doing things properly. 
Israel wants negotiations with Syria to be more open, at the 
ministerial level, and on a bilateral basis. We would like to 
negotiate on all issues -- that is, on peace, on security, and 
on the withdrawal from the Golan Heights. The Syrian president, 
however, wants us to say we will return the entire territory 
first, and then we can sit down to negotiate. I do not think 
this will happen. 
  With the Jordanians, we have already started. Our working 
relations with them are much better. I think it is important 
not only to resolve past problems and conflicts between us and 
the other countries of the region, but also to construct a new 
Middle East. If a new Middle East is not constructed, peace will 
not be secured. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Will this new Middle East be constructed based 
on 
a "land for peace" policy? 
  [Peres] You see, "relations for peace" are much more 
important than "land for peace." The problem of land can be 
settled, but, if we do not have good relations, the true problem 
will not have been resolved. Therefore, what we have to change 
is the climate in the Middle East. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Since we are talking about the climate, do you 
not consider it worrisome that the joy that was felt after the 
Declaration of Principles was signed in Washington in September 
has disappeared in Israel? 
  [Peres] I think that is not very important, because our 
government was elected for four years. In other words, it would 
not be wise for the government to revise its decisions every 
day. The government is not like a hospital, where a patient's 
temperature is taken every morning, a certain measure is taken 
to correct this, and the results are assessed at the end of the 
day. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Two Israeli soldiers were murdered recently in 
the Gaza Strip. What would occur if such things begin to occur 
frequently? Will Israel occupy the territories again? 
  [Peres] I am not going to answer that question, because I do 
not want to leave the impression we left Gaza to return there at 
a later date. 
  We are not going to return to Gaza. 
  What we are going to do is to demand that the Palestinians 
take all necessary measures to apprehend and punish those 
responsible for the crime. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Some analysts believe this was not the right 
time 
to sign a peace agreement because the PLO is not ready to 
exercise leadership over the occupied territories. What do you 
think? 
  [Peres] I think the analysts should be replaced. Most 
analysts did not predict anything of that which has taken place 
so far. I do not know of one analyst who knew Gorbachev would 
end communism, or that Mandela would make peace with De Klerk. 
  I do not know of any analyst who knew we would take a first 
step toward peace in terms of Gaza and Jericho. I can only cite 
the man who was my leader, Ben Gurion, who said all experts are 
experts on things that have already happened; we do not have 
experts on what the future holds. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Why is there so much difficulty with the 
election 
of the 24 members of the interim Palestinian Government? 
  [Peres] When you have appointments instead of elections, you 
have a problem. Every time you appoint one person, you make 10 
others unhappy. I think Arafat wanted to please many groups, 
and this is difficult to do. The PLO is a coalition of many 
opposing factions. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Do you consider this a serious problem for 
Israel? 
  [Peres] We cannot decide who our counterparts should be, 
just 
as we cannot choose our parents. Nevertheless, what we can 
indeed decide is the kind of relationship we want to maintain 
with them. What we are trying to do is to build a new 
relationship. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Do you not think that relocating Israeli 
settlers 
now living in the occupied territories might contribute to peace? 
  [Peres] No. The best thing for peace would be for relations 
to improve between Jewish settlers and the Palestinians. If 
there are 400 Israeli settlers and 100,000 Palestinians in 
Hebron, what is the problem? 
  But some of these settlers are there because they think 
these 
territories belong to Israel and... 
  Thinking is not dangerous. The situation only becomes 
dangerous when you fire your gun. 
  [EL TIEMPO] But they are armed. 
  [Peres] We are going to adopt measures to seize their 
weapons, but we are not going to take measures against their 
dreams. We live in a democracy, and, in turn, they have the 
right to dream. 
  [EL TIEMPO] What specific measures will be taken to disarm 
Israeli settlers? 
  [Peres] We will explain to them that we are not going to 
allow force to define our relationship with the Arabs. 
  [EL TIEMPO] What role does the economy play in the future of 
peace? 
  [Peres] Peace is an economic measure. If there is no peace, 
a lot of money will be wasted in war. In the past 10 years, we 
have wasted $1 billion in weapons. With this money, we could 
have changed the Middle East. Consequently, making peace will 
contribute greatly to improving the economy. 
  [EL TIEMPO] What can and must the international community do 
to ensure and promote this process? 
  [Peres] The international community must support peace. We 
are trying to help Palestinians raise the necessary money to 
build their own administration and their own police. 
  The world must take part not only in peacekeeping missions 
but also in peacemaking missions. 
  For instance, what is taking place in Rwanda is terrible. 
There is a radio station that each morning calls on people to 
murder children, and no one has bombed that station. This is 
incredible. They say, "kill children" and you will end the 
problem. We are saying: Let's kill the problem in order that 
children can live. 
  [EL TIEMPO] What form does Israel ultimately want the 
territories to assume? 
  [Peres] We have already spoken about the idea of a common 
market. Where there is a clear majority, the government should 
be under the auspices of that majority, but no people should 
dominate another. For the Palestinians, the best solution would 
be the creation of a Jordanian-Palestinian federation. 
  [EL TIEMPO] What do the Jordanians think of this? 
  [Peres] I think both the Jordanians and the Palestinians 
would be in favor of a federation, but I am not sure they agree 
on who should head it. 
  [EL TIEMPO] In an article for NEWSWEEK, Henry Kissinger said 
the moment Arafat stood next to Rabin at the White House Rose 
Garden (during the signing ceremony for the Declaration of 
Principles) the Palestinian state became an inevitability. What 
is your opinion? 
  [Peres] I believe he is a very wise man, but we do not 
agree. 
  [EL TIEMPO] Why is Israel opposed to a Palestinian state? 
  [Peres] If you have a Jordanian state and a Palestinian 
state, the conflict would worsen. The majority of Jordanians 
are Palestinians, and the majority of the Palestinians have 
Jordanian passports. It is an artificial division. If you have 
a problem, you must find one solution, not two. If you have two 
solutions, then you are creating another problem. 
  The land that Israel returns must remain demilitarized. A 
Jordanian-Palestinian federation would guarantee this in part of 
the territory, but if we have two states, an arms buildup would 
immediately begin and we would have to pay the price of this. 
  [EL TIEMPO] During your entire life, and especially since 
Israel was created, you have been in a leadership position and 
have undoubtedly left your mark on history. How and for what 
would you like to be remembered? 
  [Peres] For saving the lives of five or 10 children. That is 
the most important thing. 
  [EL TIEMPO] What can the Colombian people learn of the peace 
process you are conducting? 
  [Peres] I believe that the most important thing is to know 
that there are no complex situations but, instead, complex 
people, and the people can overcome such complexities if they 
take the situation into their own hands. We must look toward 
the future and not toward the past. 

