BFN 

<F P=106> [Viktor Litovkin report: ``Russia's Missile Guard Increased </F>
by Nine Topols''] 
  [Text] Yoshkar-Ola-Moscow -- This was unprecedented. The 
until recently top-secret strategic missile regiment belonging 
to the Kiev-Zhitomir Order of Kutuzov Missile Division deployed 
in Yoshkar-Ola inaugurated the performance of alert duty in the 
presence of Mariy-El Republic President Vladislav Zotin and 
before the gaze of television journalists, pressmen, and 
photographers, among whom were IZVESTIYA special correspondents. 
  The regiment comprises nine RS-12M Topol road-mobile 
delivery 
vehicles. Journalists were shown the holy of holies -- the 
alert forces' fixed command post which controls the launch of 
missiles, the launch area equipment, its protection and defense 
system, and the guard quarters where the missilemen perform 
their alert duty -- and had all the questions that interest us, 
including where the missiles are targeted, answered. 
  Before giving you that answer I would inform you that the 
regiment was assembled out of different pieces, as it were. Its 
officer backbone is made up of men who served in the missile 
unit belonging to the 43d Vinnitsa Army stationed in the 
settlement of Lebedin, Suma Oblast, Ukraine. The regiment was 
once equipped with SS-20 Pioneer intermediate-range missiles, 
which were destroyed some years ago under the Treaty on 
Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles. The new 
equipment was received last August from the city of Postava, 
Belorussia [Belarus], from the Topol strategic missile division 
which was disbanded there and withdrawn from the republic's 
territory. 
  These systems replaced some of the RS-12 (SS-13 according to 
the U.S. classification system) fixed-site missiles with which 
the Yoshkar-Ola division is equipped. Officer retraining took 
six months, and they entered on alert duty on their new systems 
on 19 April. 
  It is also interesting that the regiment disbanded in 
Ukraine 
was created in Akhtyrka in 1655. It was the oldest military 
unit in Russia and had taken part in the Battle of Poltava. By 
edict of Empress Elizabeth the regiment was named the Akhtyrka 
Hussars. It was commanded at the battle of Borodino by General 
Denis Davydov, who took it as far as Paris. Lermontov and 
Alyabyev served there... 
  Now its colors and combat decorations, including the Orders 
of the Red Banner, Kutuzov, and Bogdan Khmelnistskiy are kept in 
the Central Museum of the Armed Forces. 
  The missile officers, I was told by assistant commander 
Lieutenant Colonel Vitaliy Lezhanin, have asked the Defense 
Ministry leadership to restore the memorabilia and the honorary 
title to them, but only time will tell whether the General Staff 
will heed them. In the opinion of those who perform alert duty 
today, they have every right. 
  Colonel Vladimir Kashkin, the commander of the regiment, 
told 
me that he doesn't know what his missiles are targeted on. Only 
the General Staff has such information. But division commander 
Major General Musa Tsegoyev clarified the position, stating that 
under the strategic missile agreement with the United States 
strategic missiles have ``zero'' targeting and that their 
mission will only be programmed at a time of threat. They 
maintain watch to deter any potential aggressor so that never 
comes to pass. 
  The missilemen's unprecedented openness in inviting 
journalists to see the regiment's entry on alert duty is, in my 
view, not just a desire on their part to report gradually on the 
execution of their international commitments. There is another 
reason for this too. As is well known, the former Russian 
Supreme Soviet did not ratify START, but the reequipping of the 
missile division in Yoshkar-Ola and the disbandment of strategic 
regiments in Belorussia and Ukraine constitute the 
implementation of that treaty. 
  Russia will keep its word, although the parliamentarians 
have 
not turned this word into law. 

