CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ivkica Bacic: "`Hot List' of War Profiteers"] </F>
  [Text] SRPSKA REC published on the front page a 
receipt from Dafiment Banka which confirms that the wife of 
Serbia's president, Mirjana Markovic, withdrew 278,000 Swiss 
francs from that bank, and a list of the ministers, reporters, 
and opposition politicians who have a "secret agreement" with 
the bank's owner. 
  Belgrade (from VJESNIK's permanent correspondent)--What was 
published in previous weeks by Belgrade's DUGA, revealing which 
of the prominent and influential Serbs withdrew foreign exchange 
deposits after the collapse of Dafiment Banka, and who "secretly 
dined" with bank owner Dafina Milanovic, receiving valuable 
gifts from her (jewelry, automobiles, foreign exchange), was all 
just a dramatic overture to the real political hurricane that 
has been raging in Serbia since Saturday, and which was caused 
by the weekly SRPSKA REC and Danica Draskovic, the wife of 
opposition leader Vuk Draskovic, and both a director and 
columnist in the newspaper. 
  The new issue of SRPSKA REC published on the title page a 
receipt from Dafiment Banka saying that the wife of the Serbian 
president, Mirjana Markovic, withdrew 278,000 Swiss francs from 
that bank, and also published receipts with the amounts 
withdrawn by Marko Milosevic (son of the Serbian president), 
Prime Minister Mirko Marjanovic, former Prime Minister Nikola 
Sainovic, new customs director Mihalj Kertes, Police Minister 
Zoran Sokolovic, opposition leader Vojislav Kostunica, General 
Director of Serbian Radio-Television Milorad Vucelic, that 
company's reporter Stefan Grubac, and chief editor of TV 
Politika Aleksandar Tijanic and his deputy Bogdan Tirnanic. The 
same list also includes Dragomir Draskovic, nominally the head 
of the SKPJ [expansion unknown], as well as Ljiljana 
Habjanovic-Djurovic, a DUGA reporter who is famous as the one 
who initiated the financial and political scandal known as 
"Dafimentgate." 
<H5>  Prohibitions, Pressures, Threats </H5>
  Back on Friday, an unprecedented commotion was raised over 
the first announcement of the "hot" list that SRPSKA REC would 
print the next day. First Tijanic and Vucelic refused to 
broadcast a paid television ad when they heard what that 
newspaper was bringing on the front page, and then the head of 
the POLITIKA firm Zivorad Minovic, prohibited distribution of 
the newspaper through POLITIKA's sales network, even though 
SRPSKA REC and Minovic have a signed contract on marketing. 
Later, on the only available television channel, Studio-B, 
Danica Draskovic appeared and testified about the pressures and 
threats to which she and the entire editorial staff had been 
subjected. "Tijanic told me, `Finally I will put you in jail and 
you will never get out of it. We will destroy you and that 
vermin from your newspaper," Danica Draskovic stated, recalled 
that SRPSKA REC had been banned twice before, both times when it 
wrote something about the Milosevic-Markovic couple and their 
alliance with crime. Or, as Danica Draskovic said in Sunday's 
BORBA, "It is not a case of an alliance between politics and 
crime. The same people are both politicians and gangsters. By 
day they destroy cities, engage in ethnic cleansing, rape, 
slaughter, and rob. In the evening they justify all those 
terrors by saying it is in the national interest, and at night, 
they count their war booty and transfer it abroad. The ballots 
of the ruling party and its backup parties coincide with 
Interpol warrants and the list of the International Tribunal for 
War Criminals. The Knin-Pale-Dedinje-Cyprus line is the most 
frequent European financial line," Danica Draskovic said. 
  Even though he gave exceptional publicity on his television 
station to the scandal over Dafiment, which was initiated by 
DUGA, without questioning at all the credibility of DUGA's 
facts, and praising DUGA's courage for exposing how prominent 
Serbs were robbing the people, Aleksandar Tijanic, in addition 
to threatening Danica Draskovic, hurried to accuse SRPSKA REC of 
forgery on his television station. "Danica's list is a carefully 
arranged cocktail of names of people who are either her 
political opponents or reporters who wrote in a principled 
manner about those who took the money of small depositors. She 
wants to turn a financial scandal into a political one," Tijanic 
stated. 
  Along with that very interesting observation by Tijanic, 
according to which the previous coverage was principled, and 
"Dafimentgate" was only a financial scandal until it was taken 
up by SRPSKA REC (which, by the way, cites the committee of bank 
creditors, as well as DUGA), which expanded the list of those 
who loved Dafina to the last mark, there are also Tijanic's 
words that neither he nor Bogdan Tirnanic were Dafina's 
depositors, and that he will sue Danica Draskovic for slander. 
"All those who withdrew money after the bank's collapse, 
including Danica, will end up in court, or in a 
sanatorium--Danica herself can choose. Bogdan and I will demand 
compensation in the amount that she stole from Dafina and we 
will return that money to the people. And we will send packages 
to Danica, wherever she is, in jail or a lunatic asylum," 
Tijanic announced furiously from the screen of his television 
station. 
<H5>  Panic in the Government Leadership </H5>
  How much panic seized the very leadership of the Serbian 
authorities because of SRPSKA REC's revelation that the 
Milosevic family was also very directly involved in the scandal 
is also indicated by the fact that "from the very top," Kostadin 
Pusara (head of the team for consolidation of Dafiment Banka) 
received an order to comb through immediately and publicly, 
without approval from the judicial bodies that had sole 
jurisdiction, the list of several hundred thousand of Dafina's 
depositors. The result of Pusara's instant check on Tijanic's 
television station, and on Sunday in the newspaper of the same 
name under the title "Danica Draskovic's Forgery," was expected: 
No one in Milosevic's family ever invested in that bank, nor did 
any of those cited by SRPSKA REC (Pusara made the only exception 
for DUGA reporter Ljiljana Djurovic, because, he said, "I have 
not managed to check her yet"): SRPSKA REC's receipts "are 
certainly not credible," and consequently Pusara "does not doubt 
at all that the judicial authorities will clear up that media 
hysteria over the bank," especially now that the state has 
decided that Dafiment will not go into bankruptcy, but rather 
continue operating, which "obviously does not suit certain 
profiteers." 
<H5>  Where Should the Minister of Justice Stick His Nose? </H5>
  Who is it that is not suited by discovering the truth about 
the undeniable alliance of the state and crime, not just in the 
case of Dafina Milanovic (who was in prison twice because of 
embezzlement and forgery before Dafiment), but also in the case 
of the fugitive Jezdimir Vasiljevic, and the ministerial 
scandal, never cleared up in the courts, that awkwardly 
coincided with the violent death of two directors of Jugodrvo 
(it had to do with oil, the most profitable business in a 
country under an embargo), and about the operating licenses for 
hundreds of quasi-banks and savings banks that were closed only 
after they freely robbed the people for two years, and about 
Seselj's Radicals, who were frantically persecuted during the 
election campaign and arrested on charges of crimes and war 
crimes, but all suddenly freed when Seselj threatened that he 
would also reveal certain secrets from the period of flirting 
with the Socialists? 
  That is actually not an issue for anyone. It is clear that 
Serbia could not finance the war (wars!) or survive under the 
embargo without the assistance of the mafia (domestic and 
international), which, for the needs of the state, has grabbed 
up foreign exchange, installed the black market, developed deals 
in oil, arms, and cigarettes, laundered money.... That this sort 
of question is extremely naive and inappropriate is best 
illustrated by Serbian Constitutional Court Judge Slobodan 
Vucetic, who recently stated, "If a law-governed state were born 
overnight, by some chance, the jails and border crossings would 
be too crowded," to which one can add a comment by one Belgrade 
attorney: "I don't know whether the minister of justice dares to 
stick his nose in anything but his handkerchief." 

