Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] News Service. The deputies of the people condemned 
the willful action taken by the Director of the Voice and Vision 
organization in answering the Majles Inquiry and Investigation 
Group on the Voice of the Islamic Republic and also his insults 
to the Majles. 
  Our correspondent reports that at yesterday's open Majles 
session Hojjat ol-Eslam val-Moslemin Nateq-Nuri, speaker of the 
Majles, emphasized the special position of the Majles in the 
Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran. He said: As a 
servant of the Majles, I consider it necessary to defend the 
status and position of the Majles, because if this position is 
not defended, in reality it will hurt the clear rights of the 
Majles, which, by order of His Holiness the Imam (peace be upon 
him), is the head of all affairs and is the central 
manifestation of the will of the nation. 
  He added: The Majles is the nation's law-making center. The 
constitutional experts created this honor, and Iran's Majles is 
the most powerful in the world in terms of its prerogatives. 
  Hojjat ol-Eslam val-Moslemin Nateq-Nuri discussed the duty 
of 
the Majles. He said: One dimension of the Majles mission is 
making laws. Another dimension is supervision of the 
implementation of the laws it enacts. 
  He said: The Constitution has 40 articles on the importance, 
position, duties, and rank of the Majles. Based on one of these 
duties, which is inquiry and investigation, we are studying the 
performance of the Voice and Vision organization. 
  He added: Based on Article 79 of the Constitution, the 
Majles 
has the right to inquire and investigate all the nation's 
affairs, and based on Article 149 of its executive guidelines, 
whenever a deputy thinks it necessary, he can submit his request 
for inquiry and investigation in writing to the Majles Speaker's 
Council and the relevant commission, and the commission will 
make the necessary information available to that deputy or 
deputies, and it will invite the deputy or deputies to give the 
reasons at the earliest opportunity why it is necessary to do 
the inquiries and investigation. After study, the commission 
will report to the Majles on its approval or rejection of the 
deputy's request. This report will be given priority on the 
Majles agenda, and if approved in the Majles the inquiries and 
investigation will be done. 
  He added: The organization or unit, which is investigated, 
is 
required to provide all the necessary information to the Inquiry 
and Investigation Group. 
  Mr. Nateq-Nuri noted: Based on its lawful mission, the 
Majles 
has about 17 research and investigation projects of various 
organizations and bodies on its agenda, and after studies are 
completed a report on these will be made public. 
  He discussed the inquiry and investigation report on the 
performance of the Voice and Vision organization of the Islamic 
Republic of Iran. He said: This report was about 500 pages. We 
asked the gentlemen doing the research to reduce its size. It 
was reduced finally to 150 pages, and then to 100 pages. In 
places where the honor of individuals was concerned and where 
the honor of individuals was affronted, a pronoun was 
substituted except in cases where the names of individuals were 
used in a positive way. Of course the name of the chief of the 
organization was also used in one or two cases. 
  He said: When several of the deputies asked for an inquiry 
and investigation, the letter with this request came to me. 
Because the Voice and Vision organization is managed under the 
direct supervision of the vice-regent, I kept the letter until I 
could learn what to do from the vice-regent. When I presented 
the request for research and investigation to him, he said not 
only should the Voice and Vision organization be studied, but 
also that any other place that is necessary should also be 
carefully studied. He said you should even study individuals. 
Based on the exalted leader's instructions, the commission began 
its work with Majles approval. 
  The speaker of the Majles noted: Today the vice-regent of 
the 
Muslims is the exalted leader, and his vice-regency is that of 
the Prophet of God and God's vice-regent. We must make what we 
do conform to his wishes, and we must obey his excellency. The 
members of the Majles Guidance Commission are prominent people 
whose record of combat is concealed from no one. If we were to 
talk about who incited the people of Esfahan against the shah's 
regime, Mr. Parvaresh was one of the first ones to incite the 
people of Esfahan against the regime of the idolaters. After the 
triumph of the Islamic revolution he was also minister of 
education and training, and during the period of the sacred 
defense he was one of the decision makers on the Supreme Defense 
Council during the First Majles. 
  He said: Mr. Parvaresh has the confidence of the exalted 
leader and had the confidence of His Holiness the Imam (peace be 
upon him). What the Voice and Vision organization said about him 
was an insult to the Majles, an insult to the people of Esfahan 
and an affront to His Holiness the Imam (peace be upon him). 
Dealing in this way with the Imam's name is an insult to what 
the Imam called holy, which in my view is a great affront. 
  The Majles speaker noted: As a servant of the Majles I 
consider it my duty to defend the Majles. The exalted leader 
said: It is incumbent upon everyone to preserve the honor of the 
Majles. Is this preserving the honor of the Majles? Is this 
following the exalted leader? 
  He said: When the first part of the answer from the Voice 
and 
Vision organization to the Majles inquiry and investigation 
report was broadcast, the exalted leader stopped its further 
broadcast. Wasn't stopping the broadcast of this answer a signal 
that this action did not please his excellency? 
  It is necessary for me to say to our dear nation that the 
exalted leader prevented the broadcast of the answer from the 
Voice and Vision organization. Despite this, isn't answering and 
insisting on one's position ignoring the response from the 
exalted leader? This is definitely a violation. 
  Hojjat ol-Eslam val-Moslemin Nateq-Nuri noted: Appointing 
and 
dismissing the official in charge of the Voice and Vision 
organization is the prerogative of the leader of the revolution, 
and we will obey any decision he makes. I thank the pious and 
toiling personnel of the Voice and Vision organization. Everyone 
appreciates the efforts of the pious personnel in this 
organization. 
  With all its educational programming, the Voice of the 
Islamic Republic is not to be ignored. Its artists were even 
active before the Islamic revolution and after the triumph of 
the Islamic revolution they continued to make their art 
available to the government. I thank these people and everyone 
appreciates them. 
  He said: The Majles research and investigation of the 
performance of the Voice and Vision organization was done 
precisely to preserve the rights of the pious and toiling 
personnel in this organization. 
  The speaker of the Majles also discussed the exalted 
leader's 
remarks on 13 Aban [4 November] (National Antiworld Imperialism 
Day) and the position his excellency took against America. He 
said: Unfortunately the episode of the Voice and Vision 
organization's answer to the Majles inquiry and investigation 
report overshadowed the peerless remarks by the exalted leader 
on 13 Aban, which were the heart's desire of the Iranian nation, 
and little has been said about it. 
  He said: When the exalted leader takes a position against 
America and cries out, one feels that it is His Holiness the 
Imam (peace be upon him) roaring against America. 
  He added: Some people thought that the occupation of 
America's spy den was done blindly. The exalted leader mentions 
what happened before the revolution and says that the occupation 
of America's spy den was a reaction to America's crimes! 
  Hojjat ol-Eslam val-Moslemin Nateq-Nuri noted: Our 
contemporary generation remembers America's crimes. After the 
triumph of the Islamic revolution some of them remained in the 
American Embassy and continued with their plots. They made 
contact with the opponents of the revolution and encouraged 
agents from the former regime to sabotage the revolution and the 
nation. These actions by America caused the spy nest to be 
occupied. 
  He added: In his remarks the exalted leader says that some 
people look at the situation superficially, and that weak people 
with a superficial view should not be allowed to discuss the 
occupation of the spy den. Elsewhere he says: Revolutions have 
usually eliminated these weak ones. Powerful countries and 
nations have also usually eliminated these weak ones who have 
gained power illegitimately. 
  The Majles speaker noted: The exalted leader said that 
preserving relations with America is damaging to nations and 
countries. In nations where there have been revolutions and they 
did not cut their ties with America completely, the Americans 
deprived them of heart and even of their revolutionary leaders. 
First they frightened the nations and their revolutionary 
leaders, and then they removed them from public life. 
  In conclusion he said: I say to the exalted leader that it 
is 
an honor for the Majles to obey and follow you, and we never 
forget for a moment to follow your excellency and your 
positions. We vow to follow you on the path of battle with world 
imperialism, and death to America will always be our slogan. 
  The same report states that Hasan Aminlu, deputy from 
Shabestar and Dari Najafabadi and Mohammad Reza Bahonar, 
deputies from Tehran, gave pre-agenda speeches at today's Majles 
session in which they discussed the broadcast over the national 
Voice of the Islamic Republic of the answer from the Voice and 
Vision organization to the Majles inquiry and investigation 
report, and they condemned this. 
  In his pre-agenda speech, Mr. Hasan Aminlu, deputy from 
Shabestar, said: Unfortunately the management of the Voice and 
Vision organization, instead of giving its answer to the Majles, 
violated the law by creating public controversy and raising 
questions about the nation's trustees. I condemn this illegal 
act, which is an unworthy act of heresy, and I consider it the 
right of the Majles to do research and investigation for the 
health of the government and to preserve the values of the 
revolution. 
  In his pre-agenda speech, Najafabadi discussed the same 
issue. He said: Although the honor and position of the Majles is 
concealed from no one, instead of resolving to correct its 
weaknesses, the management of the Voice and Vision organization 
insulted and slandered the Majles, and it made accusations 
against committed and valuable people such as Mr. Parvaresh and 
Mr. Yahyavi and the Inquiry and Investigation Group. 
  He added: Insulting the Majles is an insult to whom? 
Wouldn't 
it have been better if he had come to his senses a little and 
dropped the blackmail, the threats and the controversial 
statements? 
  The same report states that Mr. Mohammad Reza Bahonar, 
deputy 
from Tehran, emphasized the fact that this action was a 
violation of the law. He praised and thanked the Friday imams 
throughout the country, especially the Friday imam of Qom, His 
Holiness Ayatollah Meshkini and the temporary Friday imam of 
Tehran, for their support of the Majles. 
  Mr. Bahonar said: The chief of the Voice and Vision 
organization does not have the right to use this organization's 
resources as his own resources. 
  He added: The Majles will use all its ability and power, 
which arises from the will of the nation and the wishes of the 
vice-regent, to do research and investigation in every area it 
deems advisable, and it will make the results available to the 
martyr-nurturing people. 
  In conclusion Mr. Bahonar said: Yesterday the supervisor of 
the Voice and Vision organization expressed doubt about the 
continued direct broadcast of the Majles proceedings over the 
Voice of the Islamic Republic. If the manager of the Voice and 
Vision organization is speaking as the policymaker of the Voice 
and Vision organization, this conflicts with the exalted 
leader's view. May God help everyone to know his power in 
whatever position he may occupy, and help him not to step out of 
his own domain. 
  He said: God willing, the government officials will deal 
carefully with this matter and conclude it so the issue will be 
eliminated. 

