Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Naumov: "Multiplication or </F>
`Subtraction'?" 
  [Text] On 1 February Sberbank [RF Savings Bank] depositors 
rushed to bank windows to receive compensation for their 
deposits, which have been devalued by inflation. But very many 
of them learned with bitterness and disappointment that the 
increased savings promised by authorities were not yet for them. 
The only compensation there was tears. 
  Let us recall that on 24 December 1993 the RF president 
signed Decree Number 2297, "On One-Time Compensation for 
Depositors of the Russian Federation Savings Bank With Deposits 
as of 1 January 1992." The decree foresees one-time compensation 
in an amount that is triple the sum of savings in the accounts 
of those depositors who had deposits in Sberbank on 1 January 
1992. The decree was to go into effect on 1 February for 
invalids and retired persons. On 1 July 1994 the decree will 
apply to all remaining citizens who had deposits in Sberbank on 
1 January 1992. 
  T. Tyurin, deputy director of the RF Sberbank's 
Administration for Savings and Accounts comments on the 
situation: 
  "In order to receive compensation for deposits (if, of 
course, the individual wishes to withdraw this money instead of 
keeping it in the account), it is necessary to present proof of 
retirement in addition to the bank book. Some depositors 
withdrew their money from accounts after 1 January 1992, but 
they will also receive compensation. These citizens must bring 
their proof of retirement to the financial operations officer. 
Their paperwork will be found in the archive and compensation 
will be calculated and issued. Or, if the citizen wishes, 
compensation will be deposited in his personal account. 
  "Other depositors with accounts up to 1 January of last year 
will also receive due compensation (threefold increase in 
savings), but only after 1 July 1994, as stipulated by the 
presidential decree. 
  "I will add that depositors have the right to compensation 
regardless of the form of their deposit -- including 
fixed-period deposits for children, term deposits, and so forth." 
  Our commentary follows. Early January of 1992, as we recall, 
was marked by a heavy blow to the average Russian citizen -- the 
liberalization of prices. People who had put something into a 
savings account from their modest incomes, whether for a better 
life or for their funerals, suffered most. Basically, they were 
deprived of their savings, which were swept away by inflation 
after price liberalization. 
  Let us recall that after this a Law on Indexing, applying to 
wages as well as citizens' savings deposits, was passed. The 
government "did not notice" it. On 28 March 1993 President B. N. 
Yeltsin issued Decree Number 409, "On Protecting the Savings of 
Citizens." It contained a great deal that was important and 
just, and that was directed at protecting the legal rights of 
suffering citizens. Although many were doubtful about the point 
concerning sources to finance payments to suffering depositors 
(which TRUD wrote about at the time), the fulfillment of the 
decree would have eased the situation of citizens who had become 
victims of inflation. Alas, the government again ignored the 
presidential decree. The proposal that was born then was nipped 
in the bud in the desks of the finance ministry. But the most 
surprising thing of all was that no one was held responsible. We 
got the impression that the decree was some sort of "distraction 
therapy" for the destitute and that from the start it had been 
earmarked for "being eaten alive" by the government. 
  For many people, the new decree also raises other questions. 
We know that as of 1 January 1992 savings totalled 372.3 billion 
rubles. According to the most measured assessments, inflation 
decreased this total by a factor of approximately 100. Now the 
intention is to increase it fourfold for us (keeping in mind the 
amount of the deposit itself). 
  The sources for compensation are unclear. According to the 
decree, 400 billion is to be allocated from the sale of gold 
reserves and gemstones, and another 200 billion -- from Sberbank 
profits. This totals only 600 billion, whereas simple arithmetic 
shows a sum of over a trillion. Where will the rest of the money 
come from? 
  Another question is raised by T. Onishchenko, co-chairman of 
the society to protect the interests of depositors: 
  "The money of depositors, while in turnover, worked to 
create 
Russia's national wealth. Now the official policy of 
privatization completely ignores this fact. Numerous proposals, 
including by the newspaper TRUD, to repay robbed depositors `in 
kind' -- with land and fixed capital -- have not yet been 
acknowledged in any way." 
  It should be said that on the official level this proposal 
has also not yet been rejected. Thus perhaps it is not too late 
to seriously discuss compensation for losses borne by citizens 
who at one time entrusted their government with their 
hard-earned money. 

