Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] President Hashemi-Rafsanjani today received the 
Islamic Conference Organisation [ICO] Secretary General Mr. 
Hamid al-Ghabid, who is in Tehran. 
  At the meeting, the president placed emphasis on the role 
and 
significance of the ICO in helping to resolve Islamic countries' 
problems. He said: The world of Islam, with 1.2 billion people 
and various political and economic levers, has a huge power, the 
appropriate and timely utilization of which requires decisions, 
planning, avoidance of side-issues, and attention to the main 
problems among Islamic countries. 
  Mr. Hashemi-Rafsanjani expressed regret at current problems 
which have been imposed on the world of Islam due to 
inappropriate utilization of capabilities and resources in 
Islamic countries and added: Such problems can be solved 
through correct understanding of the world of Islam's sensitive 
current conditions and through coordination and exchange of 
views among planning officials of Islamic countries, as well as 
the targeted and coherent utilization of power levers. 
  The president expressed concern over the continuation of war 
and fratricide in the Islamic country of Afghanistan and pointed 
out: The Islamic Republic of Iran has repeatedly warned leaders 
of the warring sides in Afghanistan about the dire and worrying 
consequences of recent clashes and has called on them to think 
of the interests of the Muslim people, and the reconstruction 
and renovation of Afghanistan before anything else. 
  Mr. Hashemi-Rafsanjani described the continuing genocide in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina in the heart of so-called civilized Europe as 
a bitter incident which has hurt the feelings of over 1 billion 
Muslims and shamed the indifferent governments which have merely 
watched events. He said: The brave resistance and 
steadfastness of the oppressed people of Bosnia-Herzegovina have 
aroused fear and concern among the aggressive Serb forces and 
their western supporters. They are trying to break this 
resistance and force the Muslims to surrender. Therefore, one 
must strengthen the resistance of the people of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina and make the enemies lose hope of achieving 
such a surrender. He continued: The ICO and the free countries 
of the world are also expected to stop the further trampling of 
the rights of the oppressed people of Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  Pointing out that Islamic countries expect more from the ICO 
in solving the problems of the Islamic world, including the 
problem of Palestine, the president announced the readiness of 
the Islamic Republic of Iran for more cooperation with that 
organization in order to play a more active role in the world of 
Islam. 
  The ICO secretary general briefed the president on the 
current activities and programs of the organization. Speaking 
of the problems of the world of Islam -- Palestine, 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, Afghanistan, and a number of other Islamic 
countries -- he said: The stances of the ICO are based on the 
establishment of peace and tranquillity and preventing the 
spread of differences, as well as ending them. 
  Pointing to the efforts of the organization in putting an 
end 
to the clashes in Afghanistan, he said: Afghan leaders must be 
convinced to resolve their problems and differences peacefully 
through negotiations. 
  The ICO secretary general expressed regret over the fact 
that 
apart from a limited number of countries among Islamic 
countries, other countries have not given much active support to 
the people of Bosnia-Herzegovina. He expressed the hope that 
with the active and all-encompassing cooperation of Islamic 
countries, the ICO could play a more active role in resolving 
the problems of the world of Islam. 

