Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Nikolay Belyy, ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI correspondent, </F>
Blagoveshchensk: "Calculating on Accord. Communists Named Their 
Bloc `Amur's Choice'"] 
  [Text] Remaining quiet for a time after the recent fight 
for a seat in the Russian parliament, various political forces 
of Amur Oblast are organizing once more and are coming out in 
another round of the political fight. The Amur governor 
scheduled elections to the local organs of representative 
authority for 27 March, and for the petty province they are no 
less, if no more, of an irritant than the fight for a cushy job 
in remote Moscow. Really, there are two important forces that 
are capable of influencing the precarious mood of this same 
province, here, on the Amur: the young and ambitious democratic 
movement, under the aegis of Russia's Choice, is opposed by the 
regional organizations of the Communist Party of the Russian 
Federation, the Agrarian Party, the SPT [Socialist Party of 
Workers], the Union of Communists, the RKRP [Russian Communist 
Workers Party], the Amur Communist Union of Youth, and the 
oblast Council of Veterans. But this was not enough for the 
opponents of the democrats: They quickly, it seems, so as not to 
appear before the people in an odious "leading and guiding 
uniform," for sake of appearances organized the neutral-looking 
associations Amur Voter and Amur's Choice. Calculating on 
accord: Perhaps the voter will fall for the speculative 
subterfuge of the communists; after all, Russia's Choice in 
December, given all of its miscalculations, was the only one 
that was able to oppose the communists. 
  The latter, in their turn, garnered 14 percent of the votes 
in the elections to the Federal Assembly, which, in the opinion 
of the oblast management of Russia's Choice, indicates a 
reduction in their social base in the Amur region, until 
recently considered to be a "Red island" in the Far East. This 
fact, however, appeared to be a poor consolation for the 
democrats, who permitted not only the Communist Party to move 
ahead, but also the Agrarians. Not one representative from 
Russia's Choice or the DDR [Democratic Reform Movement] in 
Moscow made such a breakthrough. 
  New elections are approaching, the fight for local power is 
nearing, and, alas, the scenario of the lost battle is repeating 
itself. Once again, as it was two months ago, the democrats are 
small in number, "terribly far from the people," and, on top of 
it all, despite their own recognition of the reasons for the 
December defeat, are as disunited as before. Once again, 
Russia's Choice has its own candidates, and the democratic 
reform movement has its own, and the oblast administration, 
which most of all should not be indifferent to what kind of 
elected oblast public assembly will result once again, has its 
own views on the figures that will make it and mechanisms for 
achieving victory. The question is whether there will be a 
victory, but fights among themselves, judging by everything, 
cannot be avoided, and that is all that is needed by the fellows 
from the Communist Party, which is "beloved by the people." 
  Once again logomachy, phrase-mongering, the explanation of 
attitudes toward a subject, who said what, or who failed to hear 
something are in fashion. But the Communist Party is not dozing. 
And the representatives in the past elections stood watch 
literally at each election precinct, they sat for hours, as if 
screwed to their chairs, next to the ballot boxes. And they 
intend today to act with no less proletarian persistence. The 
Amur Oblast electoral commission had barely made the decision on 
the organization of the electoral districts for the elections of 
deputies for the Amur Oblast assembly, when the communists 
urgently conducted their plenum on the mobilization of their 
forces for 27 March. Places were determined for each party 
"screw" in the class struggle for the hearts of the voters. 
  Which cannot be said of the executive authority in the 
localities. I made telephone calls to a number of cities and 
rayons in the Amur region and, in essence, I heard everywhere 
the standard: The work is just unfolding, and tactical 
approaches and strategic aims are being determined. Of the 
parties and movements in the rural rayons, only the communists 
are prevailing completely--other political forces, they say, are 
not visible. This information was reported in an invariably 
cheerful tone--we will fight, they said, and oppose, and so on. 
They also "fought" in December, but the result was negative. Let 
us hope complacency does not take over once again, that same 
ephemeral fancy of the greatness, speaking in the words of the 
poet, "in one's own position...." 

