BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland under the </F>
"Perspective" rubric: "Our Welfare State Is Not Under Threat in 
the EU"] 
  [Text] It is not surprising that, in the debate on the EU 
[European Union] too, many people raise questions about what 
will happen to our social welfare arrangements in the years to 
come. This is something that has a central place in our 
consciousness -- and has to do with our feeling of security. 
The future of the welfare state depends first and foremost on 
two things: Our political will to give priority to 
social welfare provisions and our economic capacity 
to meet their costs. If EU membership had meant that we would 
weaken our welfare provisions, I would have been unable to 
recommend Norwegian membership. We in Norway want to decide the 
shape of our welfare provisions -- the system of social welfare 
payments, the health service, the care of children and of the 
elderly -- whether we are members of the EU or not. 
  The battle for the welfare state will be fought here at 
home, 
as it always has been. The Conservative Party's national 
conference this year gave advance warning that the debate on the 
choice between a lighter tax burden and an active welfare state, 
on the size of the public budget and the scale of our social 
welfare provisions, is not a thing of the past. Social welfare 
policy will always depend on our own political /will/ to 
establish priorities. 
  It is completely natural that social welfare policy is a 
national concern. EU cooperation first and foremost covers 
areas where there is a need for committed cooperation across 
national borders, areas where /joint/ decisions must be reached. 
Decisions which can best be taken nationally or locally should 
not be made at EU level. The shaping of welfare provisions is 
closely linked to the individual country's social structures and 
traditions. Decisions in this field need familiarity first and 
foremost and a knowledge of the people who are to benefit from 
the provisions -- and this requires a willingness to show 
solidarity and to work for a just distribution of resources. 
  To the extent that the EU countries can be said to have a 
common policy in the social welfare field, it is to prevent 
so-called social dumping. It is important to prevent individual 
countries from using poor workers' rights to attract investment 
in the competition with the other member countries. The work to 
counter social dumping has led among other things to the fact 
that the EU has told its members that they must give at least 14 
weeks of paid maternity leave. This has meant that some 
countries have had to increase their maternity leave. In most 
fields Norway -- and many of the countries that are currently 
members of the EU -- have better provisions that the minimum 
standards for which the EU has prepared the ground. But this 
does not mean that either we or the other countries with better 
provisions need to reduce our benefits. 
  Even though we are proud of our welfare model, we are not 
alone in Europe in having a highly developed social welfare 
system. The welfare state is a European invention. The 
majority of EU countries are welfare states with a high level of 
social security and a good degree of equality in living 
standards among the people. In all European countries social 
welfare is founded on the fact that the public sector has taken 
responsibility, even though the actual shape of the different 
benefit provisions differs somewhat from country to country. 
  Nor is it the case that we here in Norway spend that much 
more money on social welfare provisions than do other European 
countries. Denmark and Sweden use a larger share of their gross 
national product on public spending. EU members the Netherlands 
and France are more or less in line with us. Hot on our heels 
come Belgium and Greece. Indeed, Greece spends a larger 
proportion of its gross national product on public consumption 
-- that is, what we normally call public services -- than we do. 
  The fact that there is also variation between the different 
social welfare models in the EU countries is due to the fact 
that social welfare policy is a national affair. The fact that 
Spain spends a smaller share of its income on public sector 
welfare provisions than Norway does is due to Spain's history 
and the political choices Spain has made. The fact that Iceland 
-- which is not a member of the EU -- has an even lower level of 
public spending than Spain has is also due to national 
circumstances, traditions, and priorities. 
  It is therefore our own national political will which will 
decide the level of our public spending. 
  Nevertheless, the political will is not enough on its own. 
We are also completely dependent on our economic 
capacity to meet the spending an active social 
welfare policy requires. Here the same rule applies for Norway 
as it does for everyone; we cannot over a period of time spend 
more money than we have. We can borrow for a period, but in the 
long run we can only rely own our strength and the income we 
succeed in procuring for ourselves. The same applies to the 
welfare state. We actually have to be able to afford 
to pursue an active social welfare policy. 
  This is why the laborious and demanding work of putting the 
Norwegian economy to rights has been totally necessary in order 
to guarantee the future of the welfare state. We have first and 
foremost a national responsibility to procure for our country 
the income needed to guarantee social welfare provisions. But 
our ability to procure this income is also linked to our 
relations with the international community. We are entirely 
dependent on whether other countries are willing to buy our 
goods. As a small country we are especially dependent on stable 
international economic conditions. EU membership will give us 
influence in the cooperation which will shape Europe's future, 
and which will mean much for our economic development, whether 
or not we become members of the EU. 
  In order to ensure the future of the welfare state we also 
have to ensure an income for the public sector. There is 
nothing in the EU's rules on tax and duty harmonization which is 
an obstacle to upholding the level of public budgets. On the 
contrary, EU membership could be important when it comes to 
upholding the fundamental level of income for the welfare state. 
By giving Norwegian industry and commerce the growth stimulus 
that comes from gaining access to a market of 350 million people 
on the same terms as our European competitors, we are laying the 
foundations for greater wealth creation and increased income. 
Membership of the EU will make it more certain that we can 
afford to pay the bill for the welfare society. As a result it 
is not true -- as some people say -- that it is the economic 
arguments which speak in favor of membership of the EU, while 
considerations of social welfare policy speak against. The 
economy and social welfare are inextricably linked. 
  The challenge in the years to come will be to maintain broad 
popular support for public social welfare policy. Here we must 
also be capable of reforming welfare provisions when new needs 
make themselves felt -- in part because of the ever growing 
numbers of the elderly among us. People must feel that welfare 
provisions make a contribution to making everyday life simpler 
and more secure. Today a clear majority have, on the whole, 
ample personal finances. The path to private provisions could 
therefore be a short one if public services are not felt to be 
satisfactory. This will be one of our major challenges in the 
field of social welfare policy. 
  For me, the goal of securing the foundation for social 
welfare, alongside environmental and security arguments, is the 
most important argument for recommending a "yes" to EU 
membership. If membership had been a threat to our welfare 
state, I would have been unable to recommend the Norwegian 
people to vote "yes." 

