BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "He Who Defies the Law Will Surely Be Punished </F>
According to the Law -- Further Discussion of Xi Yang Case"] 
  [Text] Relevant departments in Beijing have indicated that 
MING PAO journalist Xi Yang was charged for his involvement in 
spying and stealing state secrets on the mainland rather than 
carrying out normal news coverage or "mistakenly trespassing on 
the restricted zone." Through another defendant, Tian Ye (bank 
staff member), Xi Yang spied and stole China's financial and 
economic secrets in June and July last year. China suffered 
serious economic losses when the secrets were published in MING 
PAO. The court holds that Xi Yang's move constituted a crime of 
spying and stealing state secrets and the case was very serious. 
  What secrets did Xi Yang spy out? According to information 
released by the Chinese Government sources last October, the 
financial secrets stolen by Xi Yang include: Unreleased plans 
of the People's Bank of China concerning deposit and loan 
interest rate changes, the decision of the People's Bank of 
China on participating in international bullion transactions, 
and other important financial secrets. 
  According to the Section One of Article 51 of the "PRC 
Criminal Law" and "Supplementary Provision on Punishing the 
Crime of Leaking State Secrets," for his crime of stealing state 
secrets Xi Yang could have been sentenced to a set term of more 
than 10 years' imprisonment, life imprisonment, or even death, 
and deprived of his political rights. 
  Obviously, Chinese judicial organs have tried Xi Yang 
according to the law because his illegal activities violated 
China's laws. China is now administering the country by law and 
anyone who dares to defy the law will be punished. 
  Since reform and opening up, China has made marked progress 
in building its socialist legal system, and the officials and 
inhabitants have enhanced their sense of the legal system. 
Although China's legal system has yet to be further enhanced 
and China is proceeding in this direction, the marked progress 
made by China is this field is known to all. It is puzzling 
that some political groups in Hong Kong and at the press office 
where Xi Yang worked totally ignored this. If the remarks made 
by the outside are excusable owing to the relatively weak links 
in China's legal system in the past (particularly during the 
"Cultural Revolution"), why are people flagrantly trying to 
blame the move when China has vigorously strengthened its legal 
system and acted according to the law? Some people are 
criticizing China every day for its rule by man at the expense 
of rule by law, saying that there is no judicial independence in 
China. However, when China is practicing law and independence 
of the judiciary, they again are making indiscreet remarks, 
confusing right and wrong, wantonly throwing mud at China in an 
attempt to meddle in and undermine China's legal system and 
independence of the judiciary through various channels, and even 
are calling on foreign forces to interfere in China's internal 
affairs. What is all this for? 
  The editorial of a newspaper said yesterday: "According to 
information released by XINHUA (that is, the aforementioned 
important financial secrets), it may be secrets and even 
classified documents to the officials, but it is apparently a 
piece of news to a journalist. He tries to obtain it as a piece 
of news material and report it as a piece of news of public 
interest. This is the professional duty of a journalist." 
Hence, the paper believes that it will "obtain" the material, 
which is of news value, whether or not the "government regards 
it as secret or classified documents" and whether or not it is 
illegal. Are they not encouraging or even forcing journalists 
to violate the law (an editorial of a newspaper referred to it 
by the fine-sounding name of "taking risks in breaking rules")? 
Naturally, the agency with such a viewpoint is trying to defy 
the law in mainland China. They regard China's secrets as 
nothing important, but dare not apply the same method to 
"obtain" secrets of the Hong Kong or British Governments. Such 
a dual standard is identical to their concept of news. However, 
he who defies the law in mainland China will be punished by the 
law. 
  The Chinese judicial authorities handled the Xi Yang case 
according to the law and for his repentance, also sentenced him 
leniently. As Xi has lodged an appeal, the authorities are 
making arrangements for the second trial and have approved the 
defendant's lawyers hired by MING PAO on behalf of Xi Yang. As 
the case involves state secrets, it will not be tried openly. 
This shows the reason, as well as legal principle of the 
judicial authorities. 
  The recent criticisms by a number of Hong Kong political 
figures (some are even judges) and by the agency where Xi Yang 
served that China's judicial system has and will continue to be 
proved to be wrong. When people from the mainland come to Hong 
Kong, they should abide by Hong Kong laws. Hong Kong people 
(including journalists) also should abide by China's laws when 
they travel in mainland China. This is an important aspect of 
the "one country, two systems" concept, which has been proved by 
the Xi Yang case. 

