Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Railway Research Review 1993"] </F>
  [Text] 
<H5>  Introduction </H5>
  Although over 25 years have passed since development began 
on 
superconducting magnetic levitation (maglev) rail systems, the 
steady stream of research results is at the verge of blossoming. 
As reflected in the recent name change from ultra high-speed 
rail to magnetic levitation rail, not only is high speed sought, 
but importance is placed on the low noise and ease of 
maintenance characteristics of a noncontact railway, which has a 
drive method that does not depend on adhesion, and on energy 
conservation by using lighter weight cars, which is a feature of 
a primary ground system (driving and controlling the car is 
mainly performed by ground facilities). 
  Since superconducting maglev rail possesses these superior 
qualities, it is awaited not only as a practical application of 
superconduction but as a new means of transportation for the 
next generation. 
<H5>  System Improvements </H5>
  Before development began at the Railway Technical Research 
Institute, the MLU002 test vehicle was completed in March 1987 
and began trial runs on the Miyazaki test track. However, 
quench, the state where superconductivity is not maintained, 
occurred frequently in the superconducting magnet, the most 
important element in superconducting magnetic levitation. 
Therefore to move closer to practical realization, the whole 
system was reviewed and improvements were made to the system by 
placing importance on stability and reliability. The 
improvements are as follows. 
  (1) From the perspective of the development level of the 
superconducting magnets, such as their durability and 
reliability, the surface propulsion coils are placed at two 
levels with a phase of 240&deg; where the electromagnetic effect 
on the superconducting magnet becomes small. 
  (2) To achieve improved reliability of the superconducting 
magnets and low magnetic field leakage into the cars, the pole 
pitch of the superconducting magnets is shortened. This action 
is taken because power supply conversion by a GTO inverter could 
be used. 
  (3) In order to increase energy savings, the method used is 
sidewall levitation where the levitation coils are shaped like 
the number eight and have small magnetic repulsive force 
(magnetic resistive force). A large levitation force is obtained 
by using sidewall levitation. 
  These system changes are planned for use in the Yamanashi 
test track. Therefore, final performance verification is being 
performed on the Miyazaki test track. 
<H5>  Recent Major Developments </H5>
  As explained earlier, the most important issue in 
implementing a maglev railway is improving the stability and 
reliability of the superconducting magnets. In order to solve 
this problem, the objective was to understand the quench 
phenomenon of superconducting magnets and suppress its 
occurrence in the magnets. With funds from all of the Japan 
Railways (JR) companies, surveys and tests were performed on the 
electromagnetic oscillation characteristics under a wide range 
of test conditions for superconducting magnets using 
electromagnetic oscillation test equipment. In addition, 
prototypes of the superconducting coil and magnet were made by 
JR Tokai. Quench resistance tests and electromagnetic 
oscillation tests were conducted in parallel. Through these 
tests, a great deal of new information was gained on the effect 
of electromagnetic oscillations on heat generation in the 
superconducting magnet section. Moreover, useful insight was 
gained on how to improve the characteristics of the 
superconducting magnet's response to electromagnetic 
disturbances. 
  The results of various tests and investigations demonstrated 
that the quench phenomenon is, for the most part, sliding 
friction heat between the inside groove and the coil caused by 
an external oscillating force. Superconducting magnets to be 
manufactured in the future will have sufficient margin in coil 
stability, stronger cross-sectional coil structures, and low 
current densities. This series of results is reflected in the 
design and manufacture of the superconducting magnets to be used 
in the newly constructed MLU002N test vehicle and the Yamanashi 
test vehicle. 
  The development of wheel disc brakes and tires that can be 
used from a speed of 500 km/h in the car and the development of 
an axle for the undercarriage and air brakes were given priority. 
  Various repetition durability and climate resistance tests 
were performed on the surface coils. In particular, the 
mechanical strength of the epoxy resin that is the mold material 
for the sidewall levitation coils was carefully checked. Also, 
research and development was diligently performed on the coil 
installation method and on maintaining installation precision. 
In addition to the major effect these factors have on the 
difficulty or ease of construction, they are important from the 
perspective of the feel of the ride. 
  A large-capacity 10 MVA class GTO inverter was built as the 
ground facility for the Miyazaki test track. We analyzed the 
major waveform characteristics in its output characteristics and 
high-frequency filter design. Based on these test results, we 
are starting to construct a practical GTO inverter for the 
Yamanashi test track. 
  As for developments related to branching equipment, 
development continues on branching equipment for high speeds and 
development is under way on branching equipment for the terminal 
and car bases. 
  In addition, the development is beginning on the control 
system, that includes the train drive control, operation 
control, and driving maintenance system, and the information 
transmission system. 
<H5>  Noise </H5>
  Maglev railways do not have the unavoidable wheel rotation 
noise and electricity collection noise of the pantograph found 
in wheel and rail systems, the only source of noise is the noise 
of air flowing around the cars. This is a superior feature. 
However, since air flow noise is proportional to the sixth to 
eighth power of the speed, it becomes large. Thus, not only 
conventional noise measures centered on soundproof walls, but 
measures to specifically control noise from the cars are 
required. By implementing noise reduction measures like reducing 
the cross-sectional area of the cars, removing projections from 
the cars, smoothing the surfaces of the cars, optimizing the 
front shape of the cars, and smoothing the surfaces of the 
surface coils, we can expect a 10 dB decrease in noise. In 
particular, aerodynamic optimization of the shape of the front 
section is essential to noise reduction. The front section's 
shape is not only important in terms of noise, but from the 
perspective of reducing drag. Hence, large-scale wind tunnel 
tests are being performed often. 
  The Shinkansen noise standard in Japan evaluates the peak 
value of the train during transit. In contrast, the noise 
standards in Europe and the United States use the equivalent 
noise level that includes the continuous noise period and the 
number of trains. Similar to airplanes, cars in maglev railway 
travel are not in contact with anything when traveling in the 
high-speed region, therefore, the quality of the noise differs 
from that of railroads. In addition, continuous periods of noise 
are extremely short since running is at ultra high speeds. 
Because the WECPNL (Weight Equivalent Continuously Perceptible 
Noise Level), which is the airplane noise standard (Environment 
Agency notice), is tentatively used in the Yamanashi test track 
as the noise evaluation method that is able to account for the 
running frequency of the cars, the continuous time, and the time 
range, 75WECPNL (Airplane Standard Type II compatible) is 
adopted. 
<H5>  Energy </H5>
  Experts have pointed out that the reason for the large power 
consumption in the running tests at the Miyazaki test track is a 
maglev railway is a transportation method with poor energy 
efficiency. In order to perform high-speed tests on a short 7 km 
test track, Miyazaki test track that requires a maximum 0.3 g 
acceleration and deceleration is considered unusual. 
  If the railways become faster, energy consumption will 
increase in response to the running resistance. Because 
aerodynamic drag is proportional to the square of the speed, 
most of the running resistance in the high-speed range is 
occupied by aerodynamic drag. As we move towards faster speeds 
in the future, how to decrease the running resistance, that is, 
aerodynamic drag, becomes a problem. Therefore, using the front 
shape with the least aerodynamic drag and reducing the 
cross-sectional areas of the cars are required. But this comes 
with the drawbacks of less comfort for the passengers in cars 
with small cross-sectional areas and fewer seats. 
  In trying to address the desire for faster speeds, the 
advantage of faster speeds to improve express service is 
overcome by the disadvantages of increased energy consumption 
caused by the faster speeds and decreased living space. As a 
consequence, social consensus and marketing decisions by 
businessmen are probably needed. 
  Since the ground facilities for a maglev railway use many 
drivers and controllers in the primary ground method, the cars 
can be much slimmer than conventional cars. Consequently, the 
percentage of a car weight occupied by passenger weight, namely, 
the payload ratio, increases (occupied car state: 20.0 tons, 
empty car state: 15.5 tons in a middle car). Because the system 
was constructed based on the idea that what does not have to be 
moved is not moved, it has the benefit of energy efficiency. 
  When energy efficiency in the energy (kcal) per person's 
weight in kilograms are compared without regard to speed, a 
domestic airport has a value of 579; an automobile, 527; the 
Tokaido Shinkansen, 105, while JR Maglev's value is only 315. 
<H5>  Magnetism </H5>
  There is the impression that a maglev railway generates 
strong magnetic fields that harm the human body. In fact, the 
effect of the magnetic fields generated by the superconducting 
magnets on the passengers and on people who live along the track 
is at the same level as the magnetic fields they normally live 
in. Many electrical appliances like electric razors, hair 
dryers, televisions, and washing machines that everyone uses 
have magnetic fields. The magnetic fields of medical treatment 
pads (1,300 gauss) for stiff shoulders or magnetic necklaces are 
also close to the body. Furthermore, the whole body is exposed 
to a maximum of 20,000 gauss (stationary magnetic field) in 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) equipment that is rapidly 
spreading in the medical field to image tomograms. Of course, 
artificial precision devices such as heart pacemakers in the 
body and video cameras are sensitive to magnetic fields. 
  No safety standards concerning magnetic fields have been 
established in Japan. While there is no proof that magnetic 
fields are harmful to health, example standard values for 
fluctuating magnetic fields established nationally in foreign 
countries are 50 gauss or less at 50 Hz in the German Industrial 
Standard and 20 gauss or less at 100 Hz established by the 
British Radiation Protection Committee. 
<H5>  Conclusion </H5>
  The development of the maglev railway is entering the stage 
where efforts will center on improving reliability and reducing 
costs in the move towards practical use. By considering 
development and evaluation methods in other fields like 
automobiles and airplanes and actively incorporating the 
development technology from each field, development is 
proceeding at a rapid pace. A variety of tests are planned for 
the Yamanashi test track as a compilation of these technology 
developments. The results may lead to a deeper understanding of 
most of the technical issues and the final evaluation of the 
maglev railway may become possible. 

