Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Hao Hsueh-ching and Sofia Wu] </F>
  [Text] Geneva, March 21 (CNA) -- A Republic of China [ROC] 
delegation to the Convention on International Trade in 
Endangered Species (CITES) Standing Committee meeting has 
decided not to attend the proceedings. 
  "After careful consideration, we have decided not to attend 
the CITES meeting to avoid possible embarrassment that might 
arise from facing mainland Chinese delegates," said Li San-wei, 
head of the nine-member Taiwan delegation which arrived in 
Geneva Sunday [20 March] to dissuade the CITES from imposing 
trade sanctions on Taiwan over wildlife conservation issues. 
  "Nevertheless," Li said, "we'll grasp every informal 
opportunity to explain our conservation efforts to delegates 
from other countries." Li is also deputy director of the ROC 
Council of Agriculture's Forestry Department. 
  The CITES meeting, which opened Monday, will discuss 
rhinoceros and tiger conservation as well as review progress in 
wildlife conservation in Mainland China, South Korea, Yemen and 
Taiwan. 
  Although Taiwan is not a CITES member, CITES Standing 
Committee Chairman Murray Hosking had hoped Taiwan would attend 
the Geneva meeting as an observer. 
  As Mainland China, a CITES member, has consistently claimed 
sovereignty over Taiwan and sought to downgrade Taiwan in 
international arenas, Taiwan delegates decided not to attend any 
formal CITES Standing Committee sessions here. Even if Taiwan 
delegates were to attend such sessions, they would not be 
allowed to speak. 
  The Taiwan delegates, however, will take part in 
non-government organizations (NGO) sessions to be sponsored by 
the CITES Standing Committee in connection with its formal 
annual meeting. During the NGO sessions, Li Ling-ling, a 
zoology professor at National Taiwan University, will detail 
Taiwan's efforts to end illegal trade in protected wildlife 
products. 
  Representatives from three private Taiwan conservation 
organizations will also speak in the NGO sessions, stressing 
Taiwan's determination to eliminate illegal wildlife trade. 
  Before coming to Geneva, the Taiwan delegates attended a 
March 14-18 CITES Asian region conference in Jerusalem. 

