Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jean-Pierre Gaudard: ``Environment: New Decree </F>
to Be Published Next Month; Used-Oil Recovery Network Being Set 
Up''--first paragraph is L'USINE NOUVELLE introduction] 
  [Text] Industrial waste specialists could find new markets. 
But the collection system must be revised, and treating 
processes evaluated. 
  It is now a certainty: Eco-Oils, the consortium that manages 
the used-lubricant recovery system, will be ready to start 
operating on 1 March 1994, when the former public system 
financed by an additional levy will be terminated. 
  The founders of Eco-Oils, oil companies and independent 
lubricant manufacturers, have already hired the man who will 
head the organization, a manager from Elf, and they have chosen 
premises near those of the Lubricants Professional Committee, in 
Rueil-Malmaison (Hauts-de-Seine). 
  The decree reorganizing the oil-recovery system, which was 
the subject of intense negotiations between professionals and 
the Environment Ministry, should be published in October. 
Contrary to a recommendation of the Pietrasanta report that was 
submitted to the environment minister last December, the 
incorporation of regenerated oil into lubricants will not become 
mandatory. The additional levy on lubricant stock produced or 
imported in France (currently 150 francs [Fr] per ton) will be 
replaced by a voluntary contribution from ``producers'' (whether 
manufacturers of importers) who will be responsible for what 
happens to their products. Eco-Oils will probably be the only 
organization, but it will not have a formal monopoly because, in 
theory, everyone has the right to collect its own waste. With a 
budget of close to Fr150 million, the consortium will sign 
procurement contracts with organizations collecting used oil, 
and supply contracts with organizations eliminating them. 
  Will the recasting of the system make it possible for the 
oil-recovery network to get out of bankruptcy? Everybody hopes 
so. For the past two years, the crisis has kept getting worse. 
The expansion of the collection system (the quantities collected 
rose from 89,000 tons in 1986 to 173,000 tons in 1992) does not 
make it possible to lower costs, which are estimated to be about 
Fr500 per ton. At the same time, aging, technological 
obsolescence, and falling new-oil prices (due to falling 
crude-oil prices) proved fatal for regeneration units. 
  Two of them, UFP [expansion not given] (in Lorraine) and 
Solunor (in the Nord), closed down last year. The last plant, 
CBL [expansion not given], in Seine-Maritime, has been reprieved 
and survives only by not paying anything for used oil. 
Overhauling it would require an investment of about Fr300 
million, but the unit may be doomed because the process it uses 
produces tar-containing acid waste. 
  The reorganization of the collection system, therefore, does 
not solve all the problems. Simultaneously with the setting up 
of Eco-Oils, the ADEME [Environment and Energy Management 
Agency] will order an economic and ecological audit to evaluate 
various processes of regeneration, energy upgrading (in cement 
works, EDF [French Electric Power Company] power plants, in 
fluidized beds with CDF [French Coal Mines]), or recycling in 
refineries (as catalytic cracker feed or heavy fuel-oil 
component). This study is causing quite a stir in the small 
eco-business world, as the Batelle group, through an offer said 
to be much less costly, hopes to break down the pre-eminence of 
the Eco-Bilans company on the French market. 
  The possible construction of an oil-regeneration plant, 
which 
might aim to reprocess French lubricants and lubricants from 
some neighboring markets, will be the occasion of some more 
tough dealing. This time, the competitors will be major 
industrial-waste processing companies and the U.S. company Waste 
Management; the latter's reprocessing plants, which use vacuum 
distillation technology, have already caught the interest of 
French technicians. 

