Language: <F P=105> Burmese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Senior General Than Shwe, chairman of the State 
Law and Order Restoration Council [SLORC] and commander in chief 
of the defense services, attended and delivered a closing 
address at the third day session of the 1993 third coordination 
meeting, which is held every four months, between the SLORC and 
state and division law and order restoration councils [LORC]. 
[passage omitted] 
  Sr. Gen. Than Shwe, in his closing speech, noted regional 
authorities have presented reports on the progress of 
implementing development activities, future projects, and that 
responsible personnel from the central level have given 
necessary explanations. [passage omitted] He also noted examples 
from the experience of near disintegration of our country and 
other tragic incidents in other countries around the world. He 
also stressed that present activities should leave behind good 
legacies for the new government, which will emerge in accordance 
with a firm constitution rather than becoming a burden for the 
future. Thus, all regional activities should be regarded as 
beneficial for the country's development. 
  Next, the SLORC chairman explained that country's present 
situation has reached a junction and we must send the country on 
the path to become a modern, developed, and tranquil country. 
He said the National Convention is being held in order to draw 
a new and firm constitution in order to achieve that goal, while 
efforts are being made for national reconciliation and national 
unity. Sr. Gen. Than Shwe reiterated the invitation extended to 
armed organizations in the jungles, which came into being 
together with the country's independence, to return to the legal 
fold and join earnestly in implementing development works of the 
country. He stressed the genuine goodwill in the invitation 
because full efforts can only be put into the country's 
development when there is national unity. He also noted the 
connection between politics and economics and urged responsible 
personnel to try to develop both politically and economically. 
Continuing, Than Shwe explained the responsibility for economic 
development lies not only with the various ministries, but also 
with regional authorities. Regional authorities should take the 
responsibility of developing their own region and Than Shwe 
stressed the need to share responsibilities. The SLORC chairman 
explained that the delegation of authority to regional personnel 
is for better management. [passage omitted] 

