BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed talk: "Our People's Army and People Who Are </F>
Upholding the Great Commander Are Ever-Victorious"] 
  [Text] Today, in an exciting [pokchan] environment in 
which our people are resolutely defending socialism and further 
glorifying it despite the vicious challenge from the 
imperialists and reactionaries, our people are meaningfully 
marking the first anniversary of the election of the dear leader 
Comrade Kim Chong-il, supreme commander of the Korean People's 
Army [KPA], as chairman of the DPRK National Defense Committee. 
  During the fifth session of the Ninth Supreme People's 
Assembly of the DPRK President Kim Il-song in April of last year 
elected KPA Supreme Commander Comrade Kim Chong-il as chairman 
of the National Defense Committee. This was the realization of 
the unanimous desire of all officers and men of the KPA and 
people and a meaningful event of great importance in building 
our revolutionary Armed Forces and carrying out the chuche 
revolutionary cause. 
  On this felicitous anniversary of the day when the dear 
leader Comrade Kim Chong-il was upheld at the top of the 
revolutionary Armed Forces, our People's Army and people are 
filled with great revolutionary pride in living and fighting 
while upholding the ever-victorious iron-willed commander. 
  Today our People's Army is a one-a-match-for-100 
revolutionary Army more strongly than ever prepared politically, 
ideologically, militarily, and technologically. It is 
excellently carrying out its honorable mission as an Army of the 
party, revolution, and people. 
  Our Army has grown and strengthened into an invincible, 
powerful Army that can defeat any powerful imperialist enemy, 
because it upholds a great iron-willed commander. 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song has taught: Comrade Kim 
Chong-il has an indomitable will, unparalleled courage, and 
outstanding resourcefulness, and an outstanding art of military 
operations. This is a guarantee for the strengthening and 
development of our revolutionary Armed Forces and their 
invincibility. 
  A working class party must have a great commander at the 
head 
of its revolutionary Armed Forces if it is to strengthen and 
develop them into invincible ranks. This is a stark truth 
proven by the history of the working class's building of 
revolutionary Armed Forces. 
  The dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il, who was upheld as 
supreme commander of our revolutionary Armed Forces, is a great 
politician who has literary and military accomplishments and an 
iron-willed commander who has outstanding foresights, 
unparalleled courage, outstanding resourcefulness, and a tested 
art of military operations and who leads the cause of building a 
chuche-oriented Army to victory. 
  The dear comrade leader, who had earlier led the cause of 
building a chuche-oriented Army, presented a plan to imbue the 
entire Army with the chuche idea. In this way, he provided a 
fundamental guideline that helps strengthen and develop the 
People's Army into the party's revolutionary Armed Forces 
boundlessly loyal to the chuche revolutionary cause by 
implementing the chuche- oriented military ideas and theories 
and tactics. 
  As required by the task to imbue the entire Army with the 
chuche idea, all the ranks of the Army have been made ranks of 
chuche-type revolutionary soldiers; the arms and equipment have 
been modernized; a chuche-oriented art of military operations 
has been implemented in military activities; and the 
chuche-oriented leadership system and method have been 
established thoroughly. As a result, our People's Army has 
grown into a chuche-oriented revolutionary Army that takes pride 
in the fact that it is now an invincible powerful Army. 
  The supreme commander Comrade Kim Chong-il strengthened 
and developed our People's Army into an invincible and 
ever-victorious revolutionary Armed Forces. The sagacity of his 
leadership lies most of all in leading the work to highly 
manifest political and ideological superiority. 
  The revolutionary Army is an army that defeats the enemy 
through political and ideological superiority. When the 
soldiers are firmly armed with the revolutionary ideology and 
have a thorough faith to safeguard the party and the leader, can 
they fight to the end and be victorious without being afraid of 
being attacked by any powerful enemy? 
  The dear comrade leader who always endowed a decisive 
significance in the political and ideological element turned 
priority attention to highly manifesting the political and 
ideological superiority in strengthening the People's Army, and 
vigorously pushed ahead with it. Therefore, the chuche-oriented 
ideological system of the whole Army was firmly established, and 
the work to maintain the People's Army into a true 
chuche-oriented military rank of the revolutionaries, endlessly 
loyal to the party and the leader, was actively carried out. 
  As a result, the political and ideological level of the 
officers and men of our People's Army was enhanced to a very 
high stage that cannot be compared with anything else. 
  Today, the soldiers of our People's Army have a thorough 
revolutionary outlook on the leader, which they know of no one 
else but the great leader and the dear comrade leader, and are 
sacrificing their lives to defend the welfare of the leader 
[suryongnim] and the comrade leader, and are unconditionally and 
thoroughly fulfilling the order of the party and the leader. 
  Heroes Kim Kwang-chol and Han Yong-chol protected and 
safeguarded the great leader's and the dear comrade leader's 
portraits and saved the lives of their comrades in our Army by 
intercepting with their bodies a hand grenade which was about to 
blow up. Such loyal fighters are being produced successfully. 
This is a direct example of how high the ideological and mental 
level the officers and men of the People's Army have reached. 
  As our Army advocated and defended with its life the 
respected and beloved General Kim Il-song by highly calling, 
"Hurrah for the great Comrade Han Pyol," during the dawn of the 
Korean revolution, truly, the lofty political and ideological 
trait which is overflowing in our Army clearly proves that we 
can always fight resolutely by shouting, "Hurrah for our supreme 
commander Comrade Kim Chong-il," in whatever violent storm. 
  The sagacity of the dear comrade leader's leadership who 
strengthened and developed our People's Army into an invincible 
and ever-victorious peerless strong Army also lies in firmly 
preparing the People's Army militarily and technically. 
Military and technical preparation is one of the important 
indexes that characterizes the Army's combat strength and might. 
  Under the condition in which the imperialists have complete 
expectations for modern weapons and up-to-date military 
technology, the revolutionary Army must be firmly prepared not 
only politically and ideologically but also militarily and 
technically. When the revolutionary Army is possessed with 
military and technical might, as well as with the political and 
ideological might, it can become a peerless strong army. 
  Our supreme commander Comrade Kim Chong-il devoted all his 
energy and efforts to firmly prepare our revolutionary Armed 
Forces militarily and technically in accordance with the demand 
of a modern war. The comrade supreme commander frequently 
visited the military training sites of the People's Army, and 
wisely led the soldiers so that all of them can acquire 
exquisite and superb tactics by strengthening training, deeply 
discussed ways to achieve infallible marksmanship and on 
military technology and knowledge in their sectors, and also led 
them to have an iron-like physical strength. 
  Along with this, he made it so that armaments of the 
People's 
Army were endlessly modernized in accordance with the demand of 
the chuche-oriented war method and the country's concrete 
situation, further strengthened each service and branches, and 
firmly consolidated the outposts of the fatherland into an 
iron-like fortress. Thus, through such a wise leadership, the 
military and technical might of our People's Army today has been 
extraordinarily strengthened. 
  All officers and men have firmly armed themselves with the 
comrade supreme commander's unique military ideology, theories, 
and tactics. The entire Army has been modernized and turned 
into an Army of cadres, and all fortresses have been 
consolidated as impregnable ones. These are important changes 
that show the might of our Army. 
  In the course of the struggle to implement the policy of 
turning the entire Army into an army of cadres and modernizing 
it, all soldiers have become capable of fulfilling the role of 
the position one grade or more higher than each one's rank, and 
military equipment has firmly been prepared in conformity with 
the demand of modern war and with the country's specific 
realities. Thus, our People's Army has become a matchless, 
strong army capable of smashing the enemies with one blow, no 
matter where they rush in -- land, sea, or air. 
  The wise leadership of the dear comrade leader, who is 
constantly strengthening our Army's might, is also shown by the 
fact that he has consolidated the blood linkage between the Army 
and the people indomitably by embodying our party's ideology of 
unity between the Army and the people. 
  The revolutionary Army comes from the people, and it is the 
People's Army that serves the fatherland and the people. The 
source of the revolutionary Army's invincible might lies in its 
blood linkage with the people. Without the people, the People's 
Army cannot exist, nor can it fulfill its mission as the 
revolutionary Armed Forces. 
  Our party's ideology of unity between the Army and the 
people, which was established during the period of the 
anti-Japanese struggle and has been developed and enriched by 
the dear comrade leader, is a chuche-oriented military ideology, 
with which the Army and the people are defending the fatherland 
and are vigorously pushing ahead with the socialist 
construction, united as one. 
  Considering the general embodiment of the unity between the 
Army and the people an important principle in building the 
revolutionary Armed Forces, as well as an essential problem in 
greatly enhancing the socialism of our own style, the dear 
comrade leader has wisely led us to brilliantly realize it. 
  As a result, the great ideology of unity between the Army 
and 
the people has fully bloomed in our country. On the road of 
upholding the comrade supreme commander, the Army and the people 
have become an invincible, united body inseparably bound to each 
other. Our People's Army officers and men are the people's 
genuine sons and daughters who love and fight for the people by 
devoting their lives, and the people love the People's Army like 
their own family and actively support and encourage it both 
materially and morally. 
  The single-hearted unity between the Army and the people 
around the dear comrade leader is indeed the source and firm 
guarantee of the invincibility of our revolutionary Armed Forces. 
  The dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il has firmly developed 
our 
People's Army into ever-victorious, revolutionary armed ranks 
which are firmly prepared politically, ideologically, 
militarily, and technologically, and which are linked with the 
people in blood. His wise leadership and immortal achievements 
are indeed the valuable result of his matchless, extraordinary 
military wisdom, peerless braveness, and excellent tactics of 
leading the Army. 
  Thanks to General Kim Chong-il, the sagacious general of 
sagacious generals [yongjang chungui yongjang], who is wisely 
leading the cause of chuche Army building with that much 
outstanding traits, our People's Army and people achieved a 
great victory in the gunfireless political and military showdown 
with the enemies [chongpotani nalliji annun choktulgwaui 
chongchi kunsajok taegyolchoneso] last year, and they are now 
firmly defending socialism while sternly smashing the 
imperialists and reactionaries' maneuvers to crush us. 
  It is the greatest honor and happiness for our People's Army 
and people to uphold General Kim Chong-il, the greatest general 
ever known, who has personified the wisdom of a sagacious 
general since youth and has opened the great golden age of 
building the revolutionary Armed Forces with his extraordinary 
and seasoned leadership, as the supreme commander of our 
revolutionary Armed Forces. 
  We will always keep this honor and pride deep in mind, unite 
ourselves as one around Supreme Commander Comrade Kim Chong-il, 
and uphold his leadership by fulfilling our filial and loyal 
duties. By doing so, we will further strengthen our 
revolutionary Armed Forces and hasten the completion of the 
chuche revolutionary cause. 
  Our People's Army and people who uphold the great 
iron-willed, sagacious general are invincible, and victory and 
glory will always be in store for them. 

