Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Igor Chernov report from the "Latest News: TRUD </F>
Correspondents and News Agencies Report" roundup: "The 
President Has Been Unlucky... With the Weather"] 
  [Text] Sochi -- Russian President B. Yeltsin has spent 
almost a week in Sochi -- half the spring vacation. Journalists 
are not allowed past the gates of the vacation home, and, as 
such, information about what is going on at "Facility No. 1" (as 
the president's dacha is called) has to be obtained secondhand. 
  N. Yegorov, chief of the Kuban Administration, and Sochi 
Mayor N. Karpov, who have visited Boris Nikolayevich, report 
that the president is in excellent form and was very keen to 
discuss the problems facing Krasnodar Kray and the resort of 
Sochi. 
  According to reports from other sources close to the 
president's entourage, Boris Nikolayevich is relaxing and 
putting in a lot of work on the mechanism for implementing the 
Memorandum of Accord. The only thing giving the head of Russia 
cause to complain is the mediocre weather: It is cool (plus 8 
degrees) and overcast in Sochi, and it has been spitting rain 
all week. 
  Being on the territory of the president's dacha is a 
somewhat 
luckier break: It is one of three state dachas located in the 
central part of the resort on the Bocharovo Brook. I admit that 
I have not actually viewed its attractions, but I do know 
something of the specialized facility. The dacha is a two-story 
building built in the 1950's for the Union leadership. 
Khrushchev, Tikhonov, and Ryzhkov all took vacations here.... 
According to the recollections of older people in the locality, 
Boris Nikolayevich first came to the "Bocharka" in the fall of 
1985. 
  Rumor has it that, on that fall evening in 1985, "Facility 
No. 1" made a good impression on Boris Nikolayevich, and when 
Yeltsin became president the main dacha on the Bocharovo Brook 
was assigned to him alone. Since 1991 the Yeltsins have spent 
two separate weeks a year here. 
  Boris Nikolayevich's aides and accompanying personnel live 
on 
the first floor of the building. The presidential suite is on 
the second floor. 
  The dacha stands on an elevated section of ground. From the 
windows there is a marvelous view over the sea, and all around 
is a fabulous, subtropical park in which rare plants abound. 
  Boris Nikolayevich as we know, prefers active recreation: 
limbering up on the tennis court, swimming in a pool with heated 
sea water, playing billiards... Of course, the dacha does have 
its own beach, but at this time of the year it is only "hardy 
winter bathers" who take to the sea.... 

