Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Ardy Stoutjesdijk, Netherlands World Bank </F>
director in Moscow, by Wierd Duk, in Moscow; date not given: 
"`The Money Is Going to the Wrong People'-- Netherlands World 
Bank Director In Moscow Fears A Catastrophe"] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] Ardy Stoutjesdijk, age 55, a 
Rotterdammer in Russia, is the director of the World Bank's 
Moscow office. How does he think the stumbling Russian economy 
will fare? 
  "It is not the best time to ask that question," Stoutjesdijk 
said. "The new Chernomyrdin Government has only just been 
formed. But given the way things are developing, the following 
scenario is feasible: A catastrophe will take place in three to 
six months. Then the last reformers will resign and the 
government will have to completely reverse its policies, or an 
entirely new team will replace it." Perhaps they would again be 
reformers, Stoutjesdijk added, but he did not exclude the 
possibility that the ultra- nationalist and communist opposition 
would then strike. 
  Stoutjesdijk came to Moscow two years ago from Washington. 
"And it is only now that all the logistical problems have been 
solved," he said. "At last we are in a good building." He 
pointed to his desk. "Normally these telephones should work." 
The World Bank has sixty offices in lender countries, according 
to the economist who left the Netherlands in 1964. "And Moscow 
is one of the biggest," he added. 
  [Duk] Should Russia carry out more or less economic reforms? 
  [Stoutjesdijk] There were a number of positive developments 
in 1993, like price liberalization, privatization and the 
budgetary policies which were strengthened considerably under 
Fedorov. This has led to a significant drop in inflation. The 
rouble's exchange rate has been stable for a long time. 
  But some things did not happen and that is very bad. It is 
very negative that agricultural reforms failed to occur. They 
started privatization very late in this sector. The agriculture 
sector is completed dominated by large state companies with a 
generally reactionary sort of management. [passage omitted] 
  [Duk] Can the reforms be delayed, as Prime Minister 
Chernomyrdin is now suggesting? 
  [Stoutjesdijk] The number of options is far more limited 
than 
generally assumed. The priority remains the inflation problem, 
which is causing a flight of capital, lack of investment and 
loss in purchasing power. The poor are now able to pay for just 
their food and nothing more. Inflation must be curbed, and 
therefore in any event the government budget must be limited. 
Especially in a country where so much money goes to the defense 
industry and industries which are linked to defense, to people 
employed by the government or in subsidies to other industries. 
Views such as Chernomyrdin's, that the reforms can be "slowed 
down," are only understandable if people like him really believe 
that another way is possible. Perhaps they think that, but 
often they have not been educated in macro-economics. 
  [Duk] The conditions set by the IMF and the World Bank are 
criticized because they impose an excessive social and political 
toll. There will be massive unemployment if inflation is 
tackled hard, subsidies and cheap credit are stopped and 
unprofitable companies go bankrupt. That can cause social 
unrest and play into the hands of extremist politicians like 
Vladimir Zhirinovskiy. 
  [Stoutjesdijk] Our advice is based on experience in a large 
number of countries. There is practically no economic subject 
where we have not reached agreement with the reformers in 
Russia. They even use the IMF and World Bank as an argument in 
cabinet meetings. 
  Far-reaching reforms and fighting inflation are indeed 
unthinkable without increased unemployment. [passage omitted] 
  [Duk] Are those people [the wrong people receiving money] in 
or close to the Russian Government? 
  [Stoutjesdijk] I would be particularly pleased to know who 
is 
getting that money. 
  [Duk] Tell that story to the average Russian voter and he 
will immediately vote for far-reaching reforms. 
  [Stoutjesdijk] That is also my criticism of the reformers. 
They have not sold their policies to the people well. Perhaps 
their approach is painful in the short term, but in the long 
term a majority will benefit. 
  But I must also acknowledge that the sort of advice given to 
the Russian Government, and the attitudes of the actual 
reformers, are strongly influenced by the U.S. model. An 
orientation to Western Europe could have already reduced the 
hardest consequences of the reforms. But social security has to 
be financed and we must not forget that foreign aid has been far 
less than promised. The aid is mainly provided in the form of 
debt rescheduling. 
  To return to the criticism that the IMF's and World Bank's 
conditions are exacting too high a toll: As yet there is no 
prospect of measures which would lead to a large increase in 
unemployment. In fact, we are even seeing that Russian 
production is to be protected, that import tariffs will increase 
and there even seems to be talk of possible price controls. In 
brief: There is a real possibility that in a few months we will 
have a situation here which is just as catastrophic as that in 
Ukraine or Romania. Perhaps this government will then see that 
tough measures are necessary and perhaps the Russian people will 
accept these measures if they are taken by former communist 
managers like Chernomyrdin. These policies are not accepted from 
an academic like Gaydar. 
  [Duk] Anatoliy Chubays, the liberal privatization minister, 
has stayed on. How important is that? 
  [Stoutjesdijk] Privatization policies are crucial. At 
present between 70 and 80 percent of small enterprises have been 
privatized. Now the privatization of medium-sized enterprises 
with less than 25,000 employees is taking place. That is 
happening very quickly. Every month between 2 and 3,000 
companies are privatized. 
  The dinosaurs of 25,000 employees and over are a problem. 
They are all in a terrible state and as such can scarcely be 
privatized. Sometimes whole communities have been built up round 
such companies. If you close the company, then you close the 
community. These companies will have to continue to be 
supported in the future. You cannot leave that to the market, 
but you can say to their managers: In the coming years look to 
see what can be saved from such a company. 
  [Duk] What would the World Bank do if Russian policies 
changed significantly? 
  [Stoutjesdijk] If we see that things are becoming disastrous 
here, then we will have to modify our lending policies. Should 
there be an arrears in repayments, then we would stop. Look, of 
course we understand too that all policies must have a basis in 
society. For example there was a big conflict between reformers 
and the old conservative parliament on the desirability of loans 
and setting up the privatization program, but here I am with the 
hard fact that I have $2.5 billion available for various 
projects, including $500 million for reorganizing agriculture. 
Whether and how this is to be used depends on the political 
will in Russia. 

