Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Maria Victoria Cristancho, Taisa Medina, and </F>
Patricia Spadaro] 
  [Text] Over the past four months the governments of 
Venezuela and Colombia have exchanged diplomatic notes, setting 
out their respective positions on the demarcation of maritime 
and underwater boundaries in the Gulf of Venezuela. 
  The texts of the notes, which are in the hands of EL DIARIO 
DE CARACAS, had been held in great secrecy due to the high level 
of sensitivity of the subject in both countries. 
  The first note was sent by the Colombian Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs on 15 September 1993 and was answered by the Venezuelan 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs two months later on 15 November 1993. 
  The note from Colombian Foreign Minister Noemi Sanin was 
sent 
in connection with the visit which Venezuelan Foreign Minister 
Fernando Ochoa Antich made to Bogota in August 1993, during 
which he made a statement on the dispute. 
  In her note Colombian Foreign Minister Sanin pointed out 
that 
her Venezuelan counterpart had expressed "views which my 
government does not share." 
  The Colombian foreign minister recalled that, "The official 
position of Colombia is that, unless something else is provided 
in a treaty duly ratified by the two parties or in a decision by 
an arbitrator or by a court, the demarcation of the border 
between our respective territorial seas, continental shelves, 
and Exclusive Economic Zones should be accomplished in the 
following way: 
  "A. Starting from the point where the land border between 
the 
two countries reaches the sea at the place called `Los 
Castilletes,' an equidistant line should be drawn between the 
points farthest out from the adjacent coasts of the two 
countries to a point equidistant from the coasts facing each 
other. 
  "B. From the previously mentioned point the border will 
continue along a median line drawn between the points farthest 
out from the adjacent coasts of the two countries. The small 
islands known as `Los Monjes' [The Monks] will not be used for 
drawing baselines in the determination of the border." 
  It was learned that Colombian Foreign Minister Sanin did not 
discuss the map with the Colombian negotiators who, for the past 
three years, have been carrying on conversations with their 
Venezuelan counterparts, on the basis of the modus operandi set 
forth in the Agreement of San Pedro Alejandrino, approved by the 
two parties on 6 May 1990. 
  For his part Venezuelan Foreign Minister Ochoa complained to 
his Colombian counterpart about using this channel to engage in 
polemics regarding this dispute, when a mechanism has been 
specifically agreed upon by both countries for handling this 
subject. 
  Ochoa pointed out that I am "surprised that your [Sanin's] 
government has handled this matter by means of a diplomatic 
note, when the Agreement of San Pedro Alejandrino is still in 
force between our two countries...I consider that, since a 
Binational Presidential Negotiating Commission exists, made up 
of representatives appointed by both governments, to determine 
an equitable border line, in accordance with the norms and 
principles of international law, there is no justification for 
creating a dispute about the matter. Nevertheless, you must 
understand that it is impossible to remain silent in view of the 
statements made in your note. In this respect I must say the 
following: 
  "A. Venezuela has and always has had, in complete conformity 
with the law, full sovereignty and possession over its land and 
maritime territory in the Gulf of Venezuela. 
  "B. Venezuela has and always has had, in complete conformity 
with the law, full sovereignty and possession over the 
Archipelago of Los Monjes. These islands have created a 
territorial sea, a contiguous zone, a continental shelf, and an 
Exclusive Economic Zone, as well as any other zone which could 
be established. Consequently, these rights must be respected and 
applied in the demarcation of our maritime and underwater 
boundaries, as has been recognized by the Republic of Colombia 
during the whole process of negotiations. 
  "C. In your referenced note we have observed with surprise 
the introduction of new elements in the description of the 
Colombian position which have never been presented by the 
delegation of your country to the Binational Negotiating 
Commission in the course of the discussions now under way. 
Therefore, I reserve the position of the Government of 
Venezuela." 
  Ochoa stated in his note that, "Venezuela repeats once again 
that the allegations contained in your note and described as the 
'official position of Colombia' are contrary both to the facts 
as well as to the law and have been refuted by our government in 
numerous notes whose terms need not be repeated here but in 
which our position has been expressed in a clear and unequivocal 
way." 
  The Venezuelan foreign minister also alluded to his 
appearance before the Colombian communications media. In this 
respect he pointed out: "My statements in answer to questions 
asked by the Colombian press during my official visit to Bogota 
were in the framework of the Venezuelan position." 
  In both notes the ministers of foreign affairs emphasized 
the 
feelings of friendship and cooperation between the two 
countries, while at the same time they repeated the intentions 
of the two countries to reach a peaceful and friendly solution 
to the dispute. 
  At the request of Andres Pastrana, one of the candidates for 
the presidency of the Conservative Party of Colombia, the 
negotiators of both countries agreed to request that the subject 
of the boundaries in the Gulf of Venezuela be excluded from 
discussion in the elections campaign until February 1994, when 
the next president of Venezuela will assume office. 
  The proposal was welcomed by Presidents Cesar Gaviria of 
Colombia and Ramon J. Velasquez of Venezuela and accepted by 
candidates for the presidency in the two countries. 
  During his recent visit to Caracas Pastrana congratulated 
Venezuelan political figures for having kept their promise to 
keep silent on the subject. He considered that the same thing 
should continue to be done in Colombia. Pastrana has proposed 
extending the agreement until the end of the elections campaign 
in Colombia, a matter which is still under consideration. 

