Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Gavriil Popov, chairman of the Russian Movement </F>
for Democratic Reform, under the "In the Corridors of Power" 
rubric: "The Amnesty"] 
  [Text] The release from prison of the leaders of the 
October rebellion caused jubilation among some and shock among 
others. Many unequivocally see this amnesty as a huge defeat for 
the president of Russia. Let us try to sort out what is 
happening on stage, and what--behind the scenes. 
  In the course of discussing the amnesty, Shakhray's party, 
which lays the greatest claim on being considered "Yeltsinite" 
and "Chernomyrdinite" and includes several government ministers 
as well as a de facto deputy prime minister and member of the 
Security Council, suddenly supported the amnesty. One cannot 
assume for a second that leaders who are willing to go any 
length to attain for their party the status of a presidential 
party would act this way without consultations at the very top. 
Especially considering that Shakhray's party switched its 
position toward support of the amnesty precisely when it became 
clear that opposition factions could not get the amnesty for 
Lefortovo prisoners to pass on their strength alone. 
  Kazannik could have threatened to resign before the Duma 
vote. He did not. On the contrary, he encouraged the Duma: I 
will carry out its decision. 
  Next. The general procurator resigned after he released the 
prisoners. He clearly was "played up" to his successor, 
relieving him of making the critical decision. 
  There was another, behind-the-scenes process behind public 
actions. What, precisely? 
  It would be to the advantage of the new leaders of the Duma 
opposition to free the "old-timers" in such a way that the 
latter would have stayed in secondary roles or left politics 
altogether. Therefore, Duma members clearly would have waited 
with the amnesty had not the administration rushed them. 
  The presidential circles were aware that against the 
background of the government camp's falling authority 
trials could play into the hands of the accused. We 
cannot, after all, accuse someone of sabotaging shock therapy if 
we have abandoned it ourselves. In short, the temptation to drop 
the trials was growing. But they wanted very much to have 
someone else make this happen. This would have relived the 
administration of the need to provide explanations. 
  Since a majority of Duma deputies were bound by a commitment 
to free the prisoners, this needed to been taken advantage of. 
But the new opposition leaders were not the only ones who 
preferred to push the prisoners into secondary roles--the 
administration wanted the same. It was clear to those in the 
administration that the opposition currently does not have a 
common strong leader. And for new actors--and this the 
administration also was aware of--it would take years to become 
worthy contenders for the job of the president or the head of 
the government in the eyes of the people. Therefore, the 
administration was more afraid of those members of the 
opposition who were facing the trial than those sitting in the 
Duma. 
  One can easily see a release being granted on condition not 
to participate in political activities and elections until the 
next presidential and Duma election as a scenario acceptable to 
both parties to the amnesty. But this obvious version of amnesty 
was not realized. Why? 
  The presidential team always had skillfully used the 
factor of fear before the opponents of the reform. At the 
referendum in April 1993 they managed to reduce everything to a 
fight between the two camps--of supporters and opponents of the 
reform. During the September-October crisis they also managed to 
create a situation of confrontation. In December, however, no 
matter how Russia's Choice tried to put together a single bloc, 
no matter how it tried to present the elections as a fight 
between two forces, it failed. After the election, a hysterical 
campaign of fighting the threat of fascism began. The idea 
was quite old: First drive all the democrats under the banner of 
anti-fascism, and then into the pro-president bloc. 
  The administration still has not given up on the idea of 
"uniting" out of fear for the fate of the reform. But how 
to produce such fear? The course of the reform had been 
such that the fear for the fate of reform had been increasingly 
associated with the administration's incompetency. Nobody feared 
Zhirinovskiy and Zyuganov. Hence came the idea to free the 
GKChP [State Committee on the State of Emergency] members and 
the Octobrists in order to restore the situation of psychosis, 
hysteria, and fear among the democratic forces. This was the 
desire that prompted the administration to go ahead with an 
unconditional amnesty. 
  It will be necessary, of course, to dramatize the amnesty. 
"Betrayal" on the part of one of the presidential parties (the 
most obedient one will play this role, of course). The 
"dramatic" resignation of the general procurator. 
"Disagreements" among advisers and aides. Panic in the ranks of 
Russia's Choice. Democratic Russia getting hysterical. The 
purpose of this all is to scare both the people, all democrats, 
and the West. Then chances of gaining from the amnesty increase. 
  So what did the high contracting parties--the presidential 
team and the Duma--agree on? Let me sketch a probable blueprint. 
They could not fail to consider three scenarios for the 
development of events. 
  Scenario No. 1. "Ideological Fighters." Not 
wishing to acknowledge themselves guilty, the accused reject the 
amnesty and demand a trial. A scenario that is most dangerous 
for both sides. It leads to a rising authority of the accused, 
which neither the presidential not the deputy side want. 
  Scenario No. 2. "Second Roles." After the release, 
some prisoners will leave politics altogether for now, while 
others will settle for the roles offered to them by the new 
opposition leaders. This is not the worst scenario for the 
presidential side, since this produces a "watch thy brother" 
situation, and amnestied extremist leaders find themselves under 
the control of more moderate Duma leaders. 
  Scenario No. 3. "Old Leaders." Released extremists 
do not settle for second roles. But the Duma is occupied. Then 
they have to regain their position outside the Duma, in the 
streets. The situation in the country is exacerbated sharply. 
  In this case the Duma with clear conscience "surrenders" 
these incorrigible and ungrateful "heroes of street 
fist-fighting" (using I.P. Rybkin's term) to the administration. 
This scenario would suit the administration best. This they can 
use to scare both reform supporters and the West. They can even 
push through approval for a state of emergency. 
  One would think--so what! Politics is impossible without 
games and cunning. But in reality the situation is not all that 
harmless. 
  First, the third scenario, which is most 
realistic, may lead to a dangerous development of events--if 
they remain passive, if the mood in the Army is uncertain and 
reformist forces refuse to unite to the crack of the 
administration's "whip." 
  Second, the voters, tired of attempts to make 
policy behind their backs, may lose the last shreds of 
confidence in both the president's administration and the 
president himself. Having realized that they have been 
manipulated, supporters of reforms may stop responding to 
appeals for support. 
  Third, the exacerbation of the situation caused by 
extremist actions of those amnestied, and their second 
incarceration, will not create the public background so greatly 
needed in already difficult negotiations on coalition. 
  To overcome this danger, the administration does not have to 
reject the amnesty. It needs, first, to severely limit the 
spectrum of potential actions of the former Lefortovo prisoners. 
Both with respect to their right to participate in political 
activities and with respect to the right to be elected. 
The Duma ought to pass amendments to the amnesty 
decision. For instance, that some of those granted amnesty 
are barred from obtaining a Moscow residency permit; some--from 
engaging in activities involving commodity and material values; 
and so on, and so on. 
  And second: Constructive forces in society and the 
presidential team should not wait for events to develop, but 
should anticipate them by expanding the work on forming a 
national coalition of supporters of reform. 
  What is needed, however, is unity that is based on a 
constructive foundation instead of fear. Unity on the basis of 
agreement with, rather than subordination to, the 
administration. 
  I remember Korney Chukovskiy's poem "Fedora's Trouble." This 
Fedora let her house get into such bad shape that all the dishes 
ran away from her. Fedora kept trying to frighten the escapees 
with all sorts of horrors--that they would get lost, drown in 
the bog, etc. But this policy of fear did not work. Fedora 
finally won by promising to radically rid the house of all the 
old dirt. And then the dishes came back. 

