BFN 

<F P=106> [`Text' of interview with King Husayn by unidentified </F>
AL-SIYASAH AL-DUWALIYAH correspondent; place and date not given] 
  [Excerpts] Paris, 4 May (PETRA)--His Majesty King Husayn 
has reiterated Jordan's commitment to the peace process. 
[passage omitted] 
  Interviewed by the Paris-based magazine AL-SIYASAH 
AL-DUWALIYAH, his majesty said that, God willing, Jordan and 
Jordanians shall keep their heads held high and will never bow, 
except to God. [passage omitted] 
  Following is the text of the interview: 
  [AL-SIYASAH AL-DUWALIYAH] The launching of the Arab-Israeli 
peace process two years ago has stirred hopes and fears. How do 
you assess these hopes and fears? 
  [Husayn] There will inevitably be great hopes to end this 
tragedy in a way to give all concerned parties, particularly the 
Palestinian side their rights on their national soil, and 
consequently to give all sides the chance for a new way of life 
permeated by stability and tranquility. However, there are 
fears that the hardheads on both sides will continue to try to 
abort the possibilities of reaching a solution which satisfies 
all parties, and which is acceptable to the coming generations 
so they can live under its canopy and build on it. 
  Regarding the fears, they are real ones and are represented 
by the lack of coordination, regardless of signs of coordination 
from time to time on the Arab level, given the state of 
inter-Arab affairs we are experiencing in the Greater Arab 
Homeland, which lessens our chances of attaining the desired 
settlement. 
  For example, in the last period, following the bloody Hebron 
massacre, it became clear that the Israeli authorities should 
assume their responsibilities now and in the future. All sides 
will be able to see this in the future. Israel has failed to 
fulfill its duties, and must, as an occupying power, be held 
responsible for a string of events, including the burning of the 
al-Aqsa Mosque, the transgressions on the Christian holy places, 
and the aggression, more than once, against the Hebron Mosque, 
ending with the most recent tragedy. This poses the following 
question: Has Israel fulfilled its duties to protect and 
safeguard these holy places on the road to reaching a solution 
that satisfies all parties? In our opinion, there cannot be a 
solution without tackling the religious mandate which safeguards 
the rights of the followers of the three divine religions. 
Sovereignty over the holy places should only be to God. 
  As a result of the lack of coordination during the 24 or 36 
hours preceding the issuance of the UN Security Council 
resolution on the Hebron massacre, and as a result of the 
dialogue among the Palestinian, U.S., and other sides, to which 
we were not a party, we were not surprised that the resolution 
was issued the way it was. I tried to do the impossible in the 
last moments. I tried to hold contacts to achieve something and 
to focus on the request not to veto the resolution or to 
abstain, particularly by the United States. If this has to 
happen, and it has actually happened, then there must be a way 
by which we obtain an assurance that the United States' policy 
on Jerusalem will not change, as it changed in the past. In the 
beginning, the United States considered settlements illegal then 
these settlements turned into an obstacle to peace, and now we 
have reached the current situation. 
  Perhaps, the way this draft resolution or the tragic 
incident 
were dealt with include some mistakes. In other words, had we 
been able to avoid mentioning Jerusalem and instead refer to the 
Geneva Convention on the protection of citizens under occupation 
in order to protect the Palestinians in all the territories 
which were occupied in 1967, we would have found ourselves in a 
better situation than the one we experienced as a result of the 
resolution and the U.S. abstention; something which could be 
interpreted as a change in the U.S. position on Arab demands in 
Jerusalem. 
  The only explanation for all this is that it is a result of 
the lack of coordination at critical, sensitive points and under 
difficult circumstances. Calling for coordination is apparently 
meant to provide a kind of cover for progress by this or that 
Arab side whenever they feel like it. 
  However, the chief demand for all of us is to have full 
coordination. So far, we have not been able to achieve this. 
Naturally, this is not encouraging because Israel is one side 
while we are several. We have not been able to crystallize a 
position which reflects the Arab position and its seriousness 
about reaching a just, lasting, and comprehensive peace 
acceptable to future generations. 
  On the other hand, there are great hopes that the world will 
pay more attention to the need to act regarding the issues we 
face in order to come up with acceptable solutions that are 
convincing to the peoples in this region to enable them to 
obtain what is their right. We hope that the performance will 
improve in the future to enhance the chances to reach the 
aspired solutions. 
  [AL-SIYASAH AL-DUWALIYAH] What are the prospects for the 
establishment of a Palestinian state? How do you view this 
state? How do you evaluate the position of the Palestinians 
inside and outside [the occupied territories] on the future of 
the region? 
  [Husayn] I am always hesitant to speak frankly about these 
issues, fearing what I say might be misconstrued. However, I 
believe the Palestinian brothers have a chance which they should 
not miss, regardless of what they are going to achieve. We hope 
that the first steps regarding the Oslo accord will constitute 
the beginning and that efforts will continue to implement 
Security Council Resolution 242 and achieve Palestinian demands 
on Palestinian national soil. I feel that what the brothers 
have experienced over the past 26 years and their continuing 
suffering makes it impossible to imagine that a Palestinian 
entity would be established unless it is based on democracy and 
respect for human rights and unless the Palestinian people 
exercise their right to take part in shaping their future, away 
from any methods the Arabs have got used to in this part of the 
world and at this time in the greater homeland. This is the 
only road that can yield good results for the Palestinians. 
Consequently, they should contribute to promoting a new 
pattern, which we here in Jordan insist on proposing to the Arab 
brothers in our greater homeland, through the exercise of 
democracy and respecting the human rights and worth of the Arab 
individual, provided this individual contributes positively to 
the shaping of his own future. 
  [Al-SIYASAH AL-DUWALIYAH] Does the peace process endanger 
Jordan, particularly if autonomy leads to a state of instability 
in the occupied territories which are at the doors of the 
Kingdom? 
  [Husayn] I hope no such thing will take place. We hope that 
the situation in the occupied territories will stabilize when 
these territories are liberated and that the march will proceed 
to liberate this land and grant the Palestinians their rights on 
it. 
  As for us here in Jordan, our course is to safeguard the 
unity of the one big family to which we belong from all origins 
and to have our march proceed on the basis of the national 
charter, the Constitution, democracy, shura, and the respect for 
human rights until the circumstances of any member of this 
family enables him to opt for another course if he finds the 
road open to him to exercise this right. Until that time, we 
will remain more than ever cohesive in the face of all 
eventualities. It is no secret that we are constantly subjected 
to momentous pressure because we believe in democracy, in shura, 
and in man and his right to participate in mapping out his 
future. Some may view this as a threat to them while we view 
it as the only course to achieve stability and build the Arab 
force on the pan-Arab level. 
  On the other hand, threats are being made against this 
country to subdue it. However, with God's help, this country 
and its sons will not be subdued and will only bow their heads 
to God. In my opinion, we are to prepare ourselves for more 
pressure. We must endure these pressures because what is in the 
balance is more important than everything else, more important 
than us, and more important than this stage through which we 
pass. This is because our responsibility is toward the future, 
honor, the cause, and toward justice. No party has succeeded in 
imposing on us something in which we do not believe. We are 
committed to the peace process and we want peace, but a peace 
that can last and under whose canopy all will enjoy a new state 
of affairs that will be different from what we have experienced 
over the protracted past. 
  [Al-SIYASAH AL-DUWALIYAH] Jordanian public opinion has not 
been sufficiently taken into consideration as you repeatedly 
stated. In your opinion, how will the Jordanians approach peace? 
  [Husayn] We have a public opinion and it should be consulted 
and taken into consideration. However, frankly speaking, I 
believe that we should work more to inform the people about all 
the facts so that they can form an opinion. We should stop 
tackling our causes in a pessimistic manner or with the 
mentality of the fifties. We should be realistic and 
responsible and at the same time act through the confidence we 
all have in the soundness of our march and the knowledge we are 
proceeding in the right direction, taking into account all the 
realities we and this region are experiencing. 
  [AL-SIYASAH AL-DUWALIYAH) How do you view the impact of 
peace on regional economy, particularly the Jordanian economy, 
following the signing of an economic agreement between the PLO 
and Jordan and the signing of other agreements by the PLO, 
Israel, and Egypt? 
  [Husayn] As for the economic dimension, there is much talk 
on 
the issue of Arab boycott of Israel, for example. We, however, 
are trying to explain the issue to the world, and we also demand 
that there be a balance in dealing with that dimension. The 
question is not one of an Arab boycott of Israel. I believe 
that the current situation of foreign companies and industries 
with interests in the region is now different from the previous 
one. Israel is actually exercising a boycott. Israel is a 
state that protects its products and exercises a boycott against 
the Palestinians, the Arabs, and Jordan in particular. All 
these issues should be treated in an appropriate manner to clear 
the way for future dealings. 
  On the other hand, if peace is achieved, it will give the 
world and us in particular every chance to deal with many 
persisting issues and will improve the quality of life. There 
are other persisting issues, foremost of which is water, for 
example. We want to know what our share of water is. All 
resources may not be sufficient for all the parties involved; 
namely, Palestine, Jordan, and Israel. This issue should be 
dealt with quickly. 
  Expectations are that water resources available to us in 
Jordan will not be sufficient in the future; even for household 
uses within the next few years. So, alternative resources 
should be sought. 
  We have to move toward peace in light of the contents of the 
agenda of bilateral negotiations with Israel--an agenda which 
was signed by us and the other side and which includes the issue 
of the occupied Jordanian territories--and without encroaching 
on the Palestinian rights pertaining to what used to be our 
responsibilities, until the Palestinian side assumes its 
responsibilities. When these territories return to Jordan's 
sovereignty, we can discuss what can be done regarding the 
Jordan valley beginning from the north, as well as the water 
issue, in order to find answers to the questions on our rights, 
the other Arab sides' rights, and the Israeli dimension in this 
issue. 
  [AL-SIYASAH AL-DUWALIYAH] Would you please brief us on 
Jordan's principled position on peace in light of Amman's 
refusal to sign a peace agreement with Israel before all the 
outstanding issues are solved. Does Jordan mean bilateral 
issues alone or all the Arab issues? 
  [Husayn] All these matters should be dealt with. We have 
been facing an Arab position. In other words, Jordan was asked 
to sign a peace treaty and then discuss all these details. This 
is strange talk. This proposed method applies only to the state 
of surrender not to the state of making a lasting peace. 
Therefore, we insist on dealing with all these different issues 
on the different sides so that peace can crown satisfactory 
solutions to all these issues. Peace cannot be achieved unless 
we deal with all issues. I believe that progress is being made 
on the other tracks. In the final analysis, the goal is a 
comprehensive solution, which is required to change the image 
into the new situation, that is, peace in the region. 
  [AL-SIYASAH AL-DUWALIYAH] How do you view progress on the 
Syrian and Lebanese tracks, especially after the al-Asad-Clinton 
meeting and Syria's acceptance, in principle, of signing a peace 
treaty with Israel? 
  [Husayn] We are now focusing on bilateral issues. However, 
we are well aware that the same method of operation is being 
used on the other tracks. There are issues that affect all of 
us, such as the question of water. There is also an important 
dimension of peace that must entail a change in the pattern of 
people's behavior and the opportunities available to them. This 
change should mean a new beginning in contrast with what the 
case has been so far. All of this requires discussion and 
study. We cannot tell the world: Go ahead and change the 
situation of man in this part of the world before we address all 
these issues. Once we do that, we can ask the world to step in 
and contribute to shaping the future in light of the desired 
peace. 
  I believe that the al-Asad-Clinton meeting was useful and 
very important. There is mutual confidence. This is what I 
have sensed from President Clinton when I met him and also from 
the Syrian president as a result of the frank discussion the two 
presidents had at that meeting. The dialogue is continuing, and 
this is undoubtedly encouraging and gives us hope that things 
will proceed in the right direction. 
  The U.S. President and his administration are coming under 
pressure. There is also an ongoing battle in the U.S. arena by 
certain parties which are trying to bring about positions in 
favor of Israel at this critical stage when we are witnessing 
serious attempts to achieve a just and lasting peace in this 
region. What is upsetting about all of this is that the Arab 
position is fragmented, unpleasing, and unsatisfactory. 
  We asked a question at the outset. Was it necessary to 
involve the question of Jerusalem in Resolution 904 on the 
Hebron massacre, since it was possible to see a U.S. veto or 
abstention? Does this signal a change in the U.S. position? In 
our contacts, we have asked the United States to tell us that 
its position does not signal a change. However, time will tell 
whether or not this is the case. If this is the case, then may 
be there is a flaw in the way we have been collectively 
addressing the question on the Arab level so far. This portends 
losses at present and negative effects on Arab interests in 
general in the future. 
  [AL-SIYASAH AL-DUWALIYAH] The Yemeni accord document which 
was signed in Jordan proved that inter-Arab problems can be 
solved by the Arabs themselves which is contrary to the 
situation during the Gulf crisis. Does this attempt contain 
hopes toward improving inter-Arab relations in a more 
comprehensive way? 
  [Husayn] It seems that we were blamed when we said we hoped 
that this would be the beginning of solving inter-Arab problems. 
On the internal Arab level and within the one family, we may 
not have reached the desired solution yet. However, I feel that 
what has been achieved is a great accomplishment because all 
representatives of the Yemeni people were in Amman when the 
document was signed. 
  Therefore, we hope that the Arab public will play its role 
in 
maintaining the accord and achieving its objectives. 
  Unfortunately, we found that directly after the signing of 
the document, the situation in Yemen was on the verge of a big 
explosion. We, along with our brothers in the Sultanate of 
Oman, made a move. I believe that the efforts by the joint 
military team resulted in removing the specter of bloody 
clashes. All the evidence shows that these clashes could have 
taken a tragic form. 
  Now, what is required of our brothers in Yemen is to prevent 
the reccurence of such a critical situation, on one hand, and to 
maintain their unity and continue formulating the new Yemen as 
they all want this. 
  In my view, it was always possible to handle inter-Arab 
problems on the Arab level and within the framework of one 
family, stemming from a concern over the nation's interest. Are 
we at the threshold of a new era? I certainly hope so. I will 
always seek to achieve this with the best of our abilities. 
However, this requires an equal response and sense of 
responsibility by all and the realization that this is in the 
interest of the nation at present and in the future. This is 
above all other considerations. 
  I cannot say that I am optimistic, but I can say that this 
is 
what the Arab human being wants and that his will should impose 
itself on this awkward situation the continuation of which is 
totally unjustified. 
  [AL-SIYASAH AL-DUWALIYAH] How do you assess the influence of 
extremist currents in the region, especially those who reject 
the peace process in the name of Islam? 
  [Husayn] Extremism does not always reflect a feeling of 
depression and pain. In my opinion, it could come as a result 
of the people's continuous suffering and could reflect a loss of 
confidence in responsible leaderships. In other cases, 
extremism could reflect an ambition to assume power. For 
instance, so far we have been ignoring a very serious issue. It 
is the issue of Afghanistan. At one stage, we, in the Arab and 
Islamic world, reached a concensus to support our brothers and 
kinsfolk in Afghanistan in order to remove foreign influence and 
presence, as well as attempts to cancel the identity of 
Afghanistan. However, the events currently taking place cannot 
be satisfactorily explained by anyone in terms of the continuing 
conflict, infighting, sabotage and the suffering of the Afghan 
people. 
  In fact, this is the worst justification for the 
continuation of such conflicts and massacres of which we hear, 
but which we have not thus far been able to tackle decisively. 
We feel that we have a religious responsibility to defend our 
religion and tolerance in the face of any attempts to distort 
them, which might come as a result of ignorance, frustration, or 
despair on the part of the Arab and Islamic side. At the same 
time, this might take place as a result of other sides' attempts 
to misunderstand us and, consequently, to offend us, and maybe, 
to find a new enemy in this world after the collapse of 
Communism in the former USSR. We beseech Almighty God to save 
the Arab and Islamic world from dangers, whether coming from 
outside, or those posed by acting in the name of Islam when 
Islam has nothing to do with this. 
  [AL-SIYASAH AL-DUWALIYAH] Jordan was a target of acts of 
terrorism from inside and outside. One of the Jordanian 
diplomats was also killed. Why does Abu-Nidal [Sabri al-Banna] 
seek to escalate his war against Jordan, and what is Libya's 
role in this? 
  [Husayn] This is not the first time Jordan has been exposed 
to such criminal attempts and operations, and lost a diplomat of 
its righteous sons. This organization, which is known as the 
Abu-Nidal organization, had played a role in such crimes. We 
cannot jump to conclusions. Investigations are being conducted 
and measures have been adopted in the Lebanese arena concerning 
this incident in particular. We are grateful to Lebanon and 
Syria for the efforts they have thus far exerted to uncover the 
circumstances surrounding this crime. 
  In fact I cannot understand how what happened, this time or 
in the past, could be interpreted as serving the Arab interests 
in one way or another. Concerning this issue, when we have 
known all the details, we will contact the Arab brothers who 
might host this man or his headquarters and discuss the issue 
with them to see what their answer will be concerning the 
continuation of such operations, which, I am very certain, have 
more than once, served the enemies at the expense of Arab 
interests and reputations. 
  [AL-SIYASAH AL-DUWALIYAH] Given the fact that you have been 
in power for 41 years, how do you view the Arab nation's future, 
and do you still believe in Arab solidarity and Arab unity and 
in the possibility of attaining them? 
  [Husayn] I still believe in them and my faith in Arab 
solidarity has not wavered. But, at the same time, I feel 
bitter because I cannot reply to this question in a categorical 
manner. While I have hopes, I still want to be realistic. As 
yet, and in these critical and difficult circumstances I cannot 
say that we have something which we can derscribe as unity, Arab 
solidarity, cooperation, or coordination even at the minimum 
level of what is required when viewed against the backdrop of 
the broader picture. However, contacts with some of our brothers 
and cooperation with them using all our means and capabilities 
are under way. We constantly used to emphasize the need to act 
but in a completely different manner. 
  In the past, I spoke much about the European experiment and 
what it has achieved. I have always wished that we in the Arab 
homeland, being one nation, would achieve some of what they had 
reached. But, when we make a comparison, we find that we are 
still behind what the Europeans have achieved in spite of the 
wars and bloody disputes that have raged among them this 
century. The time has come for a real Arab resurgence in the 
Arab homeland, and we ask God to guide us in this direction. 
  With the opportunities I still have to serve and build and 
with the future that awaits this country, I will do the 
impossible to safeguard Jordan's stability, to maintain Jordan 
as a brilliant flame in the great homeland, and to have it fully 
pursue its role and duties. This country deserves the best and 
we will do the impossible so that the pillars will be strong, 
the bases firm, and the future promising, God willing. 

