Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Yu Changhong (0060 7022 3163)] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, 24 Jan (XINHUA) -- Peng Peiyun, state 
councillor and minister in charge of the State Family Planning 
Commission, recently pointed out: We must strictly control 
population growth while going all out to develop the economy. 
We must fully understand that family planning is the 
indispensable condition for realizing our second and even third 
phase strategic objectives, and we must ensure a good job in 
family planning, monitoring and handling it in the general 
climate of social and economic development so as to create a 
good population environment for China's socialist modernization 
drive. 
  Thanks to extensive, thoroughgoing family planning, China 
has 
been able to effectively control its excessive population growth 
during the peak birth period in recent years. However, due to a 
large base figure, China is still facing a grim situation in 
birth control, and it is urgent matter to build a family 
planning structure in line with China's socialist economic 
structure. As far as this issue is concerned, Peng Peiyuan 
discussed several aspects of family planning work at the sixth 
national demography seminar that ended yesterday: 
  -- To continue to strictly control population growth remains 
the top priority of China's family planning work. The 
development of family planning is uneven across the country, and 
the birth rate in some regions shows no sign of decrease. As 
outdated beliefs regarding birth still exist among some cadres 
and masses, and their practical problems remain unsolved, the 
birth rate can pick up at the slightest relaxation of efforts. 
In addition, some grass-roots units have concealed and failed 
to report new births, and new circumstances and problems 
concerning birth control have also occurred in the course of 
establishing a socialist market economy. Therefore, we should 
fully recognize the protracted, arduous nature of family 
planning work, accurately assess the results in population 
control, and do everything possible to lower the birth rate. 
  -- China is also facing an arduous task in improving 
population quality. Of the more than 50 million disabled in the 
country, more than 10 million were born with deformities; there 
are now 4.17 million disabled children under 14 with birth 
defects, accounting for more than half of all disabled children; 
there are also 180 million illiterates or semi-illiterates in 
the country; and of every 1,000 newborns, 13 suffer from birth 
defects. Over 400 million people are living in iodine-deficient 
areas, which could cause the birth of tens of millions of 
mentally retarded children by 2000 if the problem was not 
solved. Therefore, we must understand that good prenatal care, 
sound rearing of children, and good education are the 
prerequisites for improving population quality as well as the 
essential conditions for solidifying a low birth rate; we must 
coordinate all sectors to energetically and effectively promote 
family planning. 
  -- Population structure problems must be solved. Due to a 
decline in the birth rate and a rise in average life expectancy, 
China is facing an aging population structure which has brought 
along a series of age related problems. In the structure of 
sex, the problem of a high ratio between males and females 
merits our keen attention. Therefore, efforts should be made to 
promote the establishment of a comprehensive pension and life 
insurance system as early as possible. Moreover, equality 
between men and women should also be advocated and policies and 
measures should be taken to lift women's social status. 
  -- Urbanization must be advanced in a planned way. Since the 
policy of reform and opening up was instituted, China's 
population mobility has increased and urbanization has 
accelerated. This trend will grow continually throughout the 
nineties. We should encourage and guide the surplus rural labor 
force to flow in an orderly manner between regions and to 
gradually transfer to job vacancies in nonfarming sectors, 
thereby bringing into play the positive impact of population 
mobility. This is also an important issue that has a close 
bearing on China's economic development and social stability. 
  Speaking in her capacity as chairwoman of the China 
Demography Society, Peng Peiyun also urged demographers to do 
more practical work and provide information and consultation for 
departments concerned. The new term of the society's officials 
also appointed Song Jian, state councillor and minister in 
charge of the State Science and Technology, and seven other as 
advisers. 

