BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement by Andres Pastrana, presidential candidate for </F>
the Colombian Conservative Party; place and date not given -- 
recorded] 
  [Text] Friends: This has been an extraordinary campaign for 
all of us. It has been a trip to the future, a trip of our 
hearts and souls. All over the country, amid both problems and 
hopes, I have sensed a strong desire for change. I can tell you 
the time has come. I have seen it in the faces of Colombians, 
men and women, children, youths, and elderly people, from La 
Guajira to Narino and from the Pacific to the Amazon. They have 
said it: Colombia's time is here. I have sensed that desire for 
change in the hands I have shaken and in the people's embrace. 
They have said it; you say it; and I say it: Colombia's time is 
here. 
  This has not been simply a candidate's campaign. This 
campaign has been inspired by one cause: Making Colombia a 
country of opportunities, putting an end to the vices of the old 
policy and starting a head-on struggle against poverty, whose 
shadow has been following us for some time. 
  As president, I will struggle to have a strong economy, not 
only for the good of the economy itself, but for your personal 
well-being, our people's well-being. The success of our 
economic policy will not only be determined by the cold 
statistical figures; it will be determined by the number of good 
jobs with good salaries and by the higher standard of living all 
Colombians will have. Our economic plan is aimed at creating 
more jobs; not any type of jobs, but well-paid jobs, which is 
the way all Colombians can achieve real well-being. This will 
require a strategy to produce more and increase our exports, 
encouraging and supporting the initiatives of many of you as 
creators of enterprises, micro-enterprises, and sources of jobs. 
  That plan will be a fragile task unless we resolutely attack 
inflation, which has become the most costly and unjust indirect 
tax for all Colombians, particularly for the poor because it 
makes the family basket more expensive and has become the reason 
for daily anguish. We are all paying too much to survive. This 
is the time to change that situation. I will reduce inflation 
to 9 percent. Other countries have done it, and we can do it 
too. We want our people to earn salaries with which they can 
pay for public utilities, bus fares, and food. In other words, 
it is to improve their purchasing power. In order to achieve 
that goal, my government will exercise healthy fiscal 
discipline. In other words, I commit myself to making sure my 
administration does not incur excessive expenses and uses funds 
wisely. I will assume the responsibility of carefully handling 
public expenses to control the inflationary pressure and fight 
revaluation. 
  I have reiterated that the Cusiana oil well is an excellent 
opportunity to invest in our people and in infrastructure if we 
make good use of that extra income. It is like winning the 
lottery; the winner can either waste the money in one night of 
fun or can make good use of it by expanding his business, 
sending his children to study, or making improvements in his 
house. 
  As president, I will prevent the squandering of those 
resources. They will be spent in house construction, education, 
health, and the well-being of all of you. The petroleum of 
Colombia belongs to the people of Colombia and the benefits of 
petroleum must go to their owners, that is, all Colombians. 
  I have assumed a clear commitment with farmers and cattlemen 
to ensure that their activity becomes good business again. The 
countryside has been hit hard. We will rescue the countryside by 
restoring peace and by offering new technology, better marketing 
mechanisms, and better financing systems. I will lend a hand to 
coffee growers because they generously lent a hand to Colombia 
in the past and because coffee continues to be important to the 
country's future. 
  We will consolidate the opening process, but under the 
unquestionable premise that it should bring new opportunities 
for Colombians, with greater social justice. We cannot resign 
ourselves to less. We will ensure that its contributions to 
economic growth reach a great majority of Colombians and ensure 
that it will not reach the same few hands. 
  I have always been convinced, and I have confirmed this 
lately during my direct contact with Colombians, that more than 
investing in specific projects, we must invest in our people. A 
country of opportunities is a country that demands investments 
in training, retraining, and education. 
  I have heard some say that the benefits of investing in 
these 
aspects are evident only in the distant future. I say that the 
economic and social future of Colombia is defined in the 
present. Those who assure that it is possible to have more and 
better jobs without training, retraining, and education are 
ill-informed, or what is worse, are deceiving the people. 
  Countries such as Korea, Taiwan, and Singapore have followed 
this path. They achieved a surprising growth rate in a very 
short time. Not many years ago, I visited those countries, and 
their standard of living was very inferior to ours. They are 
now clearly ahead of us. 
  In this regard, and in specific terms, what we should do and 
what will be done under my leadership as president is the 
following: offer incentives to businessmen for training and 
retraining workers. We will retrain 2 million workers in the 
next four years. We will offer training in the evening to those 
who work during the day to ensure that they increase their 
capabilities and knowledge and also to ensure that they are able 
to obtain a better job with higher pay. We will offer training 
to farmers to ensure that they become more productive and more 
efficient and become countryside businessmen. 
  My project to invest in our children and youths is not a 
long-term goal. It is an urgent priority. We must guarantee 
primary and secondary education to more than 1.9 million youths 
who do not have it today. We must also guarantee preschool 
education to 700,000 children. This ambitious project, which 
costs 500 billion pesos, would be financed with resources of the 
fiscal [word indistinct] and the nation's regular revenues that 
the municipalities have a right to receive. 
  May I remind those who insist on criticizing large 
investments in education that the cost of ignorance is greater. 
We would lose talent, jobs, and economic growth; we would 
undermine our ability to compete; and we would be overlooking 
the fact that education is the starting point of authentic 
equality. 
  There can be no certainty of a future if we fail to protect 
our natural resources that are being increasingly depleted day 
after day -- our forests, water, and soil. Development must be 
sustainable if we want to ensure that it is human. We must 
become the guardians of this wealth, which is a legacy for 
future generations. 
  Perhaps the most complex part of my job as mayor was the 
handling of narcoterrorism, which not only hit political leaders 
and the powerful who find protection more easily, but common 
citizens, who could become the next victim of uncontrolled 
violence at any time. Today, violence and insecurity still 
prevail throughout the country, claiming lives every day and 
building fear among Colombians. It is difficult to convince 
investors to risk their opportunities in a virtual war zone. 
  We have made some progress in the last few years. A 
Colombia under the stigma and threat of violence, however, will 
always be a nation that will not be able to fully develop its 
economic and human potential. As president, I will spare no 
effort and I pledge to do everything within my reach to ensure 
that peace and harmony will blossom again in all the corners of 
the country, because our families, our parents, and our children 
are the foundations of society. We must live again free from 
threats of violence, drug trafficking, and drugs. 
  We need more strength and perseverance in the fight against 
fear and violence. We must not fear fear itself. The 
guerrillas and terrorists struck a diabolical alliance. As 
president, I will not hesitate to enforce the law. I already 
told the country that the government does not choose between war 
and peace; the government's responsibility is to respect the 
institutions and to defend the lives of Colombians. This 
responsibility leaves no room for arguments and focuses the 
government's unavoidable attitude on fighting subversion. 
  Should the guerrillas want peace, they must prove it with 
facts rather than with empty remarks and simple rhetorical 
speeches. Should they be willing to do this, I will be glad to 
personally negotiate with those who have taken up arms, with a 
positive attitude and without shirking my duties. This is the 
broadest hope a ruler can offer. Should the guerrillas maintain 
their current attitude, however, I will exert authority without 
hesitation because it is my duty. I am a friend of peace, yet I 
refuse to engage in fruitless talks, as previous presidents did. 
As they became frustrated, our fellow countrymen lost faith and 
confidence. 
  I will reinforce the Armed Forces and the Police to make 
them 
into a professional army. I will end the compulsory draft, and 
I will invest in military intelligence to effectively combat 
those who insist on destabilizing the institutions and making 
attempts on the lives and patrimony of Colombians. I am 
determined to strongly repress drug trafficking, dirty money, 
and corruption, (?with) the moral authority our liberator once 
dreamed of. I will try to make Colombia the moral country the 
immense majority wants. At the same time, I will fight the 
socioeconomic causes that triggered the spread of these scourges 
and drug consumption in Colombia. You can be sure of one thing: 
I will support neither the legalization of drugs, nor its 
production, commercialization, or consumption. This flat-out 
defiance was and will always be my position. This position is 
not new for me; I have always thought like this because I 
believe that drugs consumed 15 years ago were as harmful for our 
youths as the ones currently consumed. 
  We must all commit ourselves to rescue our countryside, 
cities, streets, and thoroughfares from criminal hands in order 
to reestablish harmony among the citizenry. We will create 
specialized groups to rid the country of mafias made up of 
apartment thieves [apartamenteros], car thieves [jaladores], and 
all types of thugs, starting in large cities. 
  To close my speech, which is being televised for the benefit 
of the Colombian people, I will speak from my heart. A long 
battle is about to end, and I hope everything that previously 
divided us is left behind and that we work together to achieve a 
united fatherland. I have tried not to focus on my contenders' 
mistakes. If they hurt me, the wounds are already healed. I 
sincerely extend my friendly hand to all those who sought to be 
democratically elected by recognizing that their messages were 
impregnated with love for Colombia, a Colombia we all agree must 
be better and fairer. 
  Someday when this campaign is long forgotten, I want it to 
be 
said that we embarked on it full of love for Colombia, trusting 
that our efforts would help it progress. Moreover, I want it to 
be said that we did not alter the faith in and the loyalty to 
our principles and that we attempted to display the best 
feelings of our population in my actions and words. We hurt no 
fellow countrymen. Our unalterable objective was to join efforts 
toward accomplishing a common national goal. We were determined 
to make our presidential term the crusade to ready our country 
for entering the threshold of progress and reconciliation as we 
approach the new century. 
  I believe a president's mission is to fight to ensure that 
each one of us has a job and an income. I believe the struggle 
for the well-being of all of us within the framework of peace 
must constitute a president's daily struggles. I also believe 
the next president's efforts will focus on fighting for a 
Colombia full of opportunities. This is why I am currently 
seeking your mandate. Your needs and expectations will become 
the yardstick for my decisions. I will strive to build a 
country, a government, and an economy that will reflect the 
kindness, honesty, and strength of our people. I cannot promise 
you everything, but I can promise you one thing: Should you 
decide to give me an opportunity, with God's blessings and help, 
I will not fail you. With our vote, let us make Sunday [29 May] 
the day to forge the Colombia we all dream of. Good evening. 

