Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Moscow, Dec. 16 (PTI)--The Russian foreign minister, 
Mr Andrei Kozyrev, has said that cryogenic engine technology has 
military applications and therefore Russia had to, for its own 
security, alter the contract with India. 
  Speaking on Russian television last night, Mr Kozyrev said 
that proliferation of missiles in Asia would only negatively 
affect Russian security. 
  "How can we allow India and not allow, for example, 
Pakistan," he queried during the interview. 
  Mr Kozyrev said that another reason for not allowing the 
transfer of technology was that India has had conflicts with 
some of its neighbours and transfer of this technology would 
only increase tension in the area. 
  Mr Kozyrev stressed that India fully understood Russia's 
stand on the issue and the alteration of the contract had not 
affected Indo-Russian relations. 
  "Relations are good. Mr Yeltsin visited India in January. 
Trade and economic relations are also growing," he added. 
  Mr Kozyrev brought up the cryogenic deal in the course of 
the 
interview as an illustration of the "myths" spread by the 
ultra-nationalists, alleging that the government was betraying 
Russian national interests. 
  "Let's assume that there is a proliferation of rockets in 
Asia. These will be closer to Russia than to the United States. 
Then in whose interest is it, to ensure that this does not 
happen?" he asked. 
  Mr Kozyrev's statement, however, raises more questions than 
it answers, according to observers here. 
  If Russia was aware that the technology had military 
applications, then why did it insist that the rockets and the 
technology could not be used for military purposes and why did 
it offer to prove that in front of an international panel of 
experts? asked a Russian specialist. 
  In this context, he then questioned the wisdom of Mr 
Yeltsin's statement in January in New Delhi that Russia would 
fulfill its commitments to India on the deal. 
  Indian and Russian experts had insisted in the past that the 
engines and technology had no military application and in any 
case India intended to use it only for its peaceful space 
research programme. 

