BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ascension Reyes R.] </F>
  [Text] There are rumors in the Senate Defense Commission 
that several Armed Forces commanders are unsatisfied with the 
Commission's new method of evaluating candidates for promotion. 
  The discontent is due primarily to the fact that leading 
military commanders believe the Commission is overstepping its 
authority by requesting documents that had not been previously 
required. They also object to filling out a questionnaire, which 
must be submitted by candidates ranging in rank from lieutenant 
colonel to colonel and from Navy commander to Navy captain. 
Candidates for division general and vice-admiral are excluded 
from this procedure. 
  It seems that Defense Minister General Rafael Montero 
Revette 
also disagrees with the evaluation system used by the Senate 
Commission. The system requires an interview with each 
candidate, some of whom were excluded from consideration at the 
last minute. 
  For its part, the Defense Commission has presented numerous 
objections to the list of candidates presented by the National 
Guard and Army. Several legislators say the lists are unclear 
and have pointed out several contradictions between the "Order 
of Initial Precedence (OPI)" and the "Correction Factors." 
  The senators also disagree with the changes made following 
the initial evaluation and the final results presented by the 
Defense Ministry. They do not understand why in some cases the 
OPI states that the officers have done excellent work, but later 
the candidates are given a negative score and a request is made 
that the candidate be "placed in a post compatible with their 
professional performance" without specifying the person's 
faults. The senators feel there is a contradiction in saying 
that a person is excellent and later downgrading him on the list. 
  The Defense Commission has received more than four cases of 
candidates for promotion who were rejected. Those officers have 
met with the legislators to give them their files. 
<H5>  Veto to Division Generals </H5>
  On another issue, it has been reported that several of the 
names proposed by President Rafael Caldera to be promoted to 
division generals do not have the support of all senators. 
Several senators say the candidates do not merit promotion while 
others who are more meritorious were not taken into account. It 
is thus possible that the legislature will vote against several 
of those promotions. 

