Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Sigh of Relief"] </F>
  [Text] The minister of Information, Dr. Jawad al-'Anani, 
put it appropriately yesterday, after the signing of the 
Jordanian-PLO economic agreement, when he said that the accord 
would be comforting for the two peoples in Jordan and Palestine. 
Indeed the seemingly tense atmosphere that characterised the 
otherwise warm relations between the leaderships of Jordan and 
Palestine was disturbing for people on both sides of the Jordan 
River. 
  A majority of Jordanians and Palestinians supported the 
start 
of the peace talks in Madrid in 1991. They saw in Jordan 
providing an umbrella for the Palestinian side a good omen and a 
strong indication at the depth of ties between the two peoples. 
Then, and thanks to the persistence of Palestinian negotiators 
and the skill of the Jordanian team led by Dr. 'Abd-al-Salam 
al-Majali, it was possible for the Palestinians to wrest from 
the Israelis recognition of their status as an independent team. 
  Then the Palestinians and the Israelis arrived at their 
declaration of principles in secret talks in Oslo. That took 
Jordanians and everybody else by surprise. Yet Jordan chose, 
after absorbing the shock, to declare its full support for the 
agreement and for the Palestinian negotiators. And one day 
after the historic accord was signed between PLO and Israel in 
Washington on Sept. 13, Jordan went ahead and signed its own 
agenda for the peace talks that was otherwise ready long before 
but waiting for progress on the Palestinian track. 
  Unfortunately, the Palestinian brothers were so submerged in 
their bargaining with the Israelis that they relegated their 
coordination with the Jordanians. Jordan, of course, would not 
have protested had it not been for the fact that every aspect of 
negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis would, one way or 
the other, affect Jordan. Hence, His Majesty King Husayn's 
warning last week: Coordinate or else let each of us go his own 
way. 
  Whether that warning was behind the sending its negotiating 
team to Amman on Wednesday is besides the point. What has 
apparently transpired is a comprehensive agreement between the 
two sides on most of the issues affecting their negotiations 
with Israel and understanding to hold more frequent coordination 
talks between them. 
  Now that the two sides have settled the dispute, people in 
Jordan and the occupied territories can focus their efforts on 
the means to strengthening peace prospects. Meanwhile, the two 
sides need to keep the momentum and work together for the good 
of their peoples. 

