Language: <F P=105> Korean </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [By reporter Hong Chun-ho: "Is the KTC-YKT `Alliance' </F>
Working All Right? -- a Subtle Shifting of Current in the DP 
Power Dynamics"] 
  [Text] The Democratic Party [DP] has been operating by an 
alliance between former Chairman Kim Tae-chung [KTC] and present 
Chairman Yi Ki-taek [YKT]. More specifically, the YKT leadership 
came into being thanks to a tacit support of KTC who had just 
retired from first-line politics. And even today it is difficult 
to explain its existence minus that factor. 
  Needless to say, KTC is a retiree from politics. He himself 
reaffirmed it publicly on many occasions. But the fact is that 
even though he retired from active politics, it does not mean 
that his influence has also been "retired." This fact was 
verified more than once. KTC remains a member of the DP and, 
more importantly, all his men are in good shape in the DP. 
  Will the KTC-YKT alliance remain solid? Does KTC still trust 
YKT? Also, will the next DP national convention--which may 
possibly be held as early as late next year [1994]--bring no 
change in the present factional configuration? Each and every DP 
member must be pondering these questions aloud, for they are 
their greatest concerns and a pending, long-term issue of the 
DP. In this connection, a few things have lately been observed 
anew, making it necessary to shed light again on this dormant 
issue and reexamine it. 
  They are: first, moves relating to the next party convention 
that have become visible; second, a subtle structural change in 
the power dynamics within the DP; third, a rearrangement of the 
battle line by the Tonggyodong [KTC] faction, and finally, 
Chairman Yi's moves. 
  According to the party Constitution, the next DP national 
convention is to be held in May 1995; however, in the event of a 
national election, it can be moved up by a maximum of 6 months 
or delayed by up to 3 months. Therefore, the next DP convention 
is, basically, far more than a year away, but Chairman Yi 
recently referred to the possibility of moving it up within the 
range indicated in the party Constitution. He thus hinted at his 
intent for en early convention, creating a subtle stir in the 
party; until then, he had been negative about moving up the 
convention date. Now, since he himself raised the issue, there 
must have been a reason for it. Conversely speaking, his action 
proves that an anti-Yi offensive within the party is approaching 
to a critical stage. In fact, the nonmainstreamers have been 
demanding, intermittently though, the holding of an 
extraordinary party convention sometime in the first half of 
1994. 
  Chairman Yi seems to be feeling the same pressure in the 
course of his management of the DP's National Assembly policy 
during the regular Assembly session, too. While the "nine man, 
nine different minds" criticism against the party leadership 
continues unabated, he could so far lead the party rather 
smoothly by effectively managing the balance of power among the 
members of the party Supreme Committee. However, as soon as he 
moved to show his own color in his National Assembly speech and 
in his parliamentary strategy as the opposition leader, the 
nonmainstreamers strongly reacted against it. Even among the 
Supreme Committee members, fewer came forward backing him up. No 
Mu-hyon and Yi Pu-yong of the Democratic faction [from the 
former DP before its merger with the UPP] turned their backs on 
him. No Mu-hyon, while holding on to his basic line since the 
last party convention in March, is nevertheless intensifying his 
criticism of Chairman continuously. What makes the chairman 
worry even more is that Yi Pu-yong, who had been relatively 
cooperative, reversed his attitude, turning critical of the 
chairman. Since No and Yi Pu-yong are also members of the Reform 
group, these things have spawned speculations that Chairman Yi 
has not only lost his grip of the Democratic faction but is 
perhaps shunned by the Reform group, too. Only two Supreme 
Committee members, Kwon No-kap and Han Kwang-ok, remain loyal to 
the chairman, while the Tonggyodong faction reportedly sees 
something missing in Chairman Yi, at times feeling dissatisfied. 
  Meanwhile, the Tonggyodong faction has been constantly on 
the 
move since it unified its genealogy in the name of [KTC's] Naeoe 
Munje Yonguso [Institute of Internal and External Affairs]. 
Recently, it reorganized Yonchong, a private organization of 
KTC. Chairman Yi also has launched a membership drive for his 
private organization, Society for the Reunited Mountains and 
Rivers. But he finds himself under mounting intraparty 
pressure. In short, the Reform group does not approve of "dual 
citizenship" of members, putting pressure on the chairman and 
his force. 
  Chairman Yi's camp is aware of all this subtle shifting. So 
much so that some insiders say that they might be oversensitive. 
At any rate, YKT and his force are known to be working on 
strategy to ensure that their leadership continues after the 
National Assembly regular session and further to defend its 
power base at the next party convention while keeping a close 
eye on its own faction that is turning rebellious, on the 
increasingly visible resistance of the progressive forces within 
the party, and on the growing signs of disharmony with the 
Tonggyodong faction, the main force in the DP. 
  In this atmosphere, Chairman Yi reportedly has attempted to 
have a better rapport with KTC recently. In fact, it does not 
pay for either side that they get in contact. For KTC, it could 
harm the image of his retirement from politics. Chairman Yi 
could also be hurt because such contact would further enhance 
his image as a weak leader unable to run the party 
independently. But the immediate reality is that something has 
to be done to change the flow of things in the combined forces 
of the DP apparently plagued by internal disharmony. Chairman 
Yi's side in particular seems to be feeling the intense need. 
Therefore, reports say, he embarked on a rapport with the 
Tonggyodong camp while discreetly keeping a distance. 
  Acting as mediators between the two camps are Kwon No-kap 
and 
Han Kwang- ok, both members of the Supreme Committee, plus Rep. 
Mun Hui-sang, Chairman Yi's chief secretary, and Pak Chi-won, DP 
spokesman. Mun Hui-sang was the first chairman of Yonchong. He 
also had served as its sixth chairman until Kim Ok-tu took over 
recently. He is one of the key figures among KTC's direct 
disciples and he is always present at their gatherings. Despite 
his position as Yi's chief secretary, he would say 
unhesitatingly that "my `home base' is Tonggyodong." Pak Chi-won 
also has his roots in Tonggyodong and was part of the KTC 
campaign in the last presidential election. The two are the key 
workers playing the role of a bridge between the YKT and KTC 
forces to prevent a split and ensure cooperation. 
  They are said to be playing the part of letting Chairman 
Yi's 
side know --through a variety of routes--what KTC thinks about 
Yi's National Assembly strategy and political course in general, 
or vice versa. They contend that there is no gap between 
Chairman Yi and KTC. They explain that there has been no change 
in their basic relationship--even amid the subtle undercurrent 
of a power game within the party. They assert that KTC has had 
no objections to Chairman Yi's political line, to the substance 
of his National Assembly speech delivered in October as a 
product of that new line, and to his press conference remarks in 
late September in which Yi stated that he would give the economy 
priority over the issue of liquidating the past--namely, to all 
those things that fed feud within the party. Needless to say, it 
was Mun Hui-sang himself who led the work in the writing of that 
speech. Moreover, Pae Ki-son, former assistant chief secretary 
for KTC, also took an active part in it. Pae has also been 
working as an aide for Chairman Yi for some time now. Another 
source familiar with developments on both sides asserts that 
"there is nothing going on that could fundamentally reverse the 
internal balance of power within the mainstream." He insists 
that the only problem is the dissatisfaction among mainstreamers 
with the performance of Chairman Yi, who they think lacks in 
leadership for an effective struggle against the ruling camp. 
And it is a problem that can be resolved, he adds. 
  The nonmainstreamers have a different view, though. While 
agreeing that the KTC-YKT alliance will not be easily shaken, 
they do not think that YKT will remain the alternate of the 
mainstreamers for too long. At the same time, the mainstreamers 
themselves have the realistic need to try and shake the 
mainstreamers from inside to make sure that he will not. Their 
concerns are, in fact, no longer over the KTC-YKT alliance but 
focused on the moves of the Tonggyodong faction. 

