Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Marsel Zaripov article under the rubric "Interstate Ties": </F>
"At the Crossroads of Asia and Europe"] 
  [Text] Many people have written about Kazan, the capital of 
Tatarstan, but it was surely Herzen, the "eternal exile," who 
described the city's character most accurately when he said: 
"It is the main caravanserai on the road taking European ideas 
into Asia and the Asiatic character into Europe." 
  That description remains true to this day. 
  In Tatarstan's political life the last week of January had a 
Spanish theme. A republic delegation headed by President 
Mintimer Shaymiyev spent five days on a working visit to Madrid. 
The result of the visit was a major treaty on economic, trade, 
cultural, and information partnership and the creation of 
favorable conditions for contacts between commodity producers, 
cultural institutions, and scientists. 
  Spain is not the first foreign country with which Tatarstan 
is forging direct ties and establishing permanent business 
bridges. Treaties have already been concluded with Turkey, 
Austria, and Greece. 
  Each interstate act of this kind marks the beginning of the 
development of ties and contacts at the level of firms, offices, 
and institutions, which also carry out joint programs. True, 
there is one highly significant difference here. The 
traditionally eastern term "caravanserai" included the market 
ethos of fairs, bazaars, and trading places. Nowadays this 
phrase signifies not so much an exchange of goods as a 
distribution of ideas and technologies and a pooling of efforts 
in the solution of common technical, production, and social 
tasks. True, the main rule of cooperation is older than life 
itself: what to sell, how much to sell, what price to pay for 
it, and what profit to take. 
  One of the main problems which Tatarstan is determinedly and 
persistently working on is not to become obsessed with simple 
commodity exchange but to organize cooperation in the production 
sphere and tackle projects which will benefit the partners and 
the republic itself. It is important that the revenue from the 
sale of goods abroad exceeds spending on imports. 
  In 1993 the republic's foreign trade turnover rose by 45.9 
percent and reached U.S. $948 million. Exports rose 73.3 
percent to $761 million. In the system of world trade 
Tatarstan's goods are distributed as follows: one quarter of 
its exports go to the U.S. market, 13.2 percent to Germany, 12.2 
percent to Turkey, 9.3 percent to Hungary, and 7.5 percent to 
Switzerland. The export register includes oil, too, but machine 
building and petrochemical goods form a large part. 
  However, the import indicators look far more modest -- just 
$187.4 million. 
  There are also around 50 joint ventures with mixed capital 
involved in export trade and import purchases but their role at 
the moment is a purely token one. For instance, the 0.5 billion 
tonnes of oil which such firms account for represents just 2 
percent of total extraction. 

