Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by E. Kemp] </F>
  [Text] Cape Town Feb 20 SAPA -- The Pan Africanist Congress 
[PAC] would return to the armed struggle if necessary to ensure 
the return of the land to the African people, PAC President 
Clarence Makwetu said on Sunday [20 February]. Launching his 
organisation's national election campaign at a rally in 
Khayelitsha near Cape Town, he said the PAC's struggle would not 
end until the land had been repossessed. 
  Presenting the PAC's election manifesto, Mr Makwetu told an 
enthusiastic crowd of more than 5,000 people: "Above all, we 
promise you the return of the land of our forefathers which was 
taken from you by force. If it means we must go back to the bush 
to return our land, we will do so." He said a PAC government 
would give each person a plot of land on which they could live 
with their families. 
  The PAC also promised urgent steps to quell violence, firm 
action against the right wing and an immediate end to school 
boycotts. "We have a message to instigators at our schools. From 
now on, we shall defend by any means the right of our children 
to education," Mr Makwetu said. 
  The PAC was under no illusions that the forthcoming 
elections 
marked the beginning of uhuru (freedom) and the end of 
oppression and exploitation. "The significance of the election 
lies in what it can achieve and (that) is up to you, the people. 
A correct mandate will enable the african people to write the 
future constitution which will deliver us from bondage." 
  The PAC president paid tribute to former Azanian Peoples' 
Liberation Army Commander Sabelo Phama, who died in a car 
accident in Tanzania recently. Mr Phama was to have participated 
in the election campaign launch. 
  Earlier, PAC national organiser Maxwell Nemadzivhanani 
appealed to supporters not to "give your vote for co-option 
under the guise of power-sharing". He said the PAC did not need 
necklacing, secret deals or the promise of a volkstaat 
[homeland] to its oppressors to win votes. 
  "Unless the elections are rigged, the PAC will win." 
  Mr Nemadzivhanani accussed the government of harassing and 
intimidating PAC activists since the organisation's decision to 
participate in the election. Firearm licences had been granted 
to all other organisations expect the PAC, which was still 
awaiting the outcome of licence applications lodged eight months 
ago. 
  PAC National Executive Committee member Barney Desai told 
the 
crowd the PAC would "sweep white domination into the sea". The 
struggle would continue after the election "until every inch of 
Azania is truly liberated". 

