Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Excerpt from report on Buran issued by commission of </F>
experts assembled by the K. E. Tsiolkovskiy Academy of 
Cosmonautics: "It's Advisable and Beneficial"; first paragraph 
is source introduction] 
  [Text] In early 1993, the K. E. Tsiolkovskiy Academy 
of Cosmonautics conducted an appraisal of the status of the 
operations involving the reusable Energiya-Buran system. The 
commission of experts included prominent figures in the domestic 
space program (including the author of the interview above, V. 
P. Senkevich). The commission issued a conclusion about the 
advisable direction of further operations. So that the situation 
regarding that system is clear to our readers, we are printing 
here excerpts from the commission's conclusion. 
  In the early '70s, a fundamentally new space-related 
situation came about in the world. The United States was 
developing a reusable space transportation system that would 
make it possible to increase the flow of payloads into orbit by 
an order of magnitude and, most important, return from space to 
the ground heavy space objects... Noted was... a technological 
breakthrough in strategic arms that, as with the invention in 
its time of the atomic bomb, upset the strategic balance that 
had been achieved... 
  Of course, in the midst of the strategic arms race... the 
creation of an adequate system was a naturally correct 
solution... Thus, in light of the situation and the realities 
that existed in 1976, the decision to create the reusable space 
system (MKS) Energiya-Buran was a sound and necessary decision... 
  From the standpoint of today's political situation, the 
question may arise, did we invest 14.1 billion rubles into that 
program for nothing?... 
  The creation of the MKS Energiya-Buran represents the future 
of the development of space transportation systems, a future 
development of space and aviation equipment that combines all 
the leading principles and advances of the space program and 
aviation. The creation of the Shuttle and the Energiya-Buran was 
a fundamental breakthrough to new technology... Consequently, 
the money spent on the creation of the MKS Energiya-Buran was 
not an unnecessary burden on the budget; it solved a problem 
important to our country regarding the qualitative and future 
development of aerospace equipment. 
  Second, in addition to the future achievements operating for 
the future of Russia, the creation of the MKS Energiya-Buran 
makes purely pragmatic sense. Its design-and-technology base 
makes it possible to create a whole array of promising, 
ecologically clean, high-level characteristics of launchers... 
  Third, the use of the new technological solutions obtained 
in 
the creation of the MKS Energiya-Buran will have an immediate 
and direct economic impact in the national economy, the size of 
which impact is estimated to be 14 billion rubles in the year 
2000 (at 1989 prices)... 
  As can be seen from what has been said, the development of 
the MKS Energiya-Buran was not only necessary solution, but also 
very useful solution for the development of the domestic space 
program and the technological potential of the country... 
  The reusable space transportation system Energiya-Buran, 
like 
the Space Shuttle, represents a first big step that has already 
been taken in that direction, and it depends on us whether we 
will go farther... or stop in mid-step because of temporary 
difficulties and voluntarily, under the pretence of sensible 
economics, move away from the international aerospace market 
with a vain hope of returning in better times. With the current 
rate of development of aerospace equipment, to stop means to 
fall behind, and fall behind forever... 
  What should be done further with the MKS Energiya-Buran? 
Close it down, or finish developing it and begin using it? 
  At first glance, the simplest and, it would seem, most 
sensible thing to do from all points of view would be, as some 
leaders feel, to suspend operations on the system for 8-10 years 
in the hope that by that time the economy of the country will 
strengthen and the possibility will arise for financing that 
expensive program. But one shouldn't be satisfied with the hope 
for a favorable outcome with such a simple solution. Over that 
period of time, the entire complex of ground facilities that 
have been created and the MKS Energiya-Buran itself, including 
the universal superheavy-lift Energiya launcher, will, in 
essence, perish physically and become obsolete... 
  On the other hand, by making the difficult decision to 
complete the development of the Energiya-Buran system, the 
Russian Federation is preserving the progressive development of 
the domestic space program and the high level of 
scientific-technical potential that propelled it to the leading 
ranks... And no matter how hard it is to earmark funds for 
continuing the operations on the creation and use of the MKS 
Energiya-Buran, it is advisable and beneficial to search them 
out. Let it be at first a small amount, but enough for this 
promising area of the space program to get started... 
  COPYRIGHT: Izdatelstvo "Nauka" "Khimiya i zhizn" 1993 

