BFN 

<F P=106> ["Provincial Ideological Work Conference Opens, With Lu </F>
Rongjing Delivering Important Speech"] 
  [Text] A provincial propaganda and ideological work 
conference opened ceremoniously in Hefei on 4 March. The 
conference, convened by the provincial party committee, was a 
grand meeting on the ideological front. Attending the 
conference were leaders of party, government, and military 
organizations in the province, including Lu Rongjing, Fu Xishou, 
Wang Taihua, Fang Zhaoxiang, Liu Guangcai, Shen Shanwen, Du 
Cheng, Shao Ming, Du Yijin, Wang Sheyun, as well as Hou Yong, 
head of the provincial party committee's leading group for 
foreign propaganda. Fang Zhaoxiang presided over the conference. 
  Du Cheng made a report on the guidelines laid down at a 
national ideological work conference. 
  Lu Rongjing delivered an important speech. His speech was 
divided into three parts: 1) Accurately appraise the situation 
on the ideological front and fully understand the heavy 
responsibilities on our shoulders; 2) continue to effectively 
perform propaganda and ideological work according to a basic 
guiding principle and four fundamental tasks; and 3) the 
propaganda and ideological front is extremely important, and 
party committees at various levels should effectively strengthen 
their leadership in this regard. 
  Lu Rongjing pointed out: This conference is one of great 
significance, and it is held in a crucial period in which our 
province is speeding up its economic development. The main 
tasks of this conference are that guided by Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics, we should extensively implement the guidelines 
of the 14th party congress, the Third Plenary Session of the 
party's 14th Central Committee, and the 10th enlarged plenary 
session of the fifth provincial party committee; act according 
to the requirements set by the national propaganda and 
ideological work conference; and study how to further provide an 
effective ideological guarantee and mold favorable public 
opinion for a sustained, rapid, and healthy development of the 
economy, for maintaining political stability and all-around 
social progress. 
  Lu Rongjing said: On the province's propaganda and 
ideological front, We have done a great deal of fruitful work, 
scored remarkable achievements, and accumulated rich experiences 
since the Third Plenary Session of the party's 11th Central 
Committee. Propaganda and ideological work has played an 
important role in emancipating people's minds, changing their 
traditional ideas, unifying the thinking and actions of party 
organizations and people in the province, maintaining the 
political situation characterized by stability and unity, 
promoting reform and opening-up in the province, and advancing 
economic development and the building of socialist spiritual 
civilization. The propaganda and ideological front has made a 
tremendous contribution to bringing about the excellent 
situation in which Anhui is today. 
  Lu Rongjing said: The propaganda and ideological front 
should 
firmly grasp the theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics, a basic guiding principle. It should arm 
people with scientific theories, guide them with correct 
publicity, inculcate high ideals in them, and encourage them 
with fine works of literature and art. This basic guiding 
principle and the four fundamental tasks constitute the overall 
plan and strategic concept for effectively performing propaganda 
and ideological work in the course of accelerating the 
establishment of a socialist market economic structure. Lu 
Rongjing set forth requirements for propaganda and ideological 
work according to the province's actual conditions and in the 
light of the basic guiding principle and four fundamental tasks. 
  First, The most important task of the propaganda and 
ideological front is to persistently arm the whole party with 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics. Lu Rongjing pointed out: Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics is the spiritual prop of the whole party and 
people throughout the country and a powerful ideological weapon 
for us to win victory in reform, opening-up, and modernization, 
and it is the basic guiding principle for our work in all 
fields. The propaganda and ideological front must firmly grasp 
this basic guiding principle and guide all its work with it so 
that our propaganda and ideological work will always keep to the 
correct orientation. 
  Second, we should act according to the overall interests of 
the party's work and persist in guiding people with correct 
publicity. Media opinion is not equivalent to public opinion; 
the former originates from but stands above the latter. 
Concretely speaking, they can be summed up in three sentences: 
Actively support and develop correct public opinion; 
conscientiously transform or overcome one-sided, irresponsible 
public opinion; resolutely resist or eliminate negative, harmful 
public opinion. This is a crucial year for deepening reform and 
promoting development. As far as Anhui is concerned, it is in a 
crucial period in which we can work hard to make progress or lag 
behind by relaxing our efforts. We must guide people with 
correct publicity and mold favorable public opinion for further 
reform, opening-up, the establishment of a socialist market 
economic structure, and the development of social productive 
forces throughout the province; and we should mold favorable 
public opinion for strengthening the building of socialist 
spiritual civilization and the development of socialist 
democracy and the legal system. 
  Third, we should cultivate a new generation of 
well-educated, well-disciplined people imbued with lofty ideals 
and socialist moral values; strengthen ideological and political 
work among the masses; and step up mass activities in building a 
socialist spiritual civilization. 1. To cultivate a new 
generation of people, we should rely on the strength of truth -- 
that is, we should guide and persuade people with truth through 
ideological education. 2. We should rely on the strength of 
moral quality -- that is, we should bring the exemplary role of 
advanced models into full play. There are a number of advanced 
models around us. We should pay attention to discovering such 
models, conscientiously sum up their experiences, vigorously 
commend and publicize them, and strengthen their ranks. By so 
doing, healthy trends will become dominant in society. It is a 
strategic task to encourage the masses to strengthen the 
building of spiritual civilization, which should go on 
throughout the entire process of building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics. The "Main Points for Anhui Province's Mass 
Activities in Building Spiritual Civilization in 1994" worked 
out by provincial civilization commission consist of clear 
guiding ideology, tasks, and objectives. Various localities 
should implement these main points according to their own 
conditions. Party committees and governments at various levels 
must put mass activities in building a spiritual civilization as 
an item on their agendas and do this work as they carry out 
economic construction. 
  Fourth, we should vigorously publicize the main theme and 
promote the thriving and healthy development of cultural 
undertakings. Encouraging people with fine works of literature 
and art is an important task of the cultural front. Propaganda 
and cultural departments at various levels should vigorously 
make overall plans and organize people to create works of 
literature and art reflecting the main theme in order to satisfy 
the increasing spiritual and cultural needs of the masses and to 
encourage them to work hard to advance reform and modernization. 
At the same time, we should unswervingly implement the 
principle of carrying out the antipornography campaign while 
making efforts to bring about prosperity, with a view to 
ensuring the healthy development of the cultural market. 
  Fifth, We should actively do foreign propaganda to make 
Anhui 
known and appealing to more foreign people. The province's 
general requirements for foreign propaganda are to: serve 
economic construction, promote opening to the outside world, 
make Anhui known to more foreign people, create a good image for 
it, help to create a favorable environment, and achieve good 
results. According to these general requirements, our foreign 
propaganda at present and for some time to come should focus on 
publicizing the province's conditions; its achievements in 
reform, opening up, and economic construction; its gratifying 
political situation and united people' and its favorable 
conditions for opening to the outside world. This year is the 
45th founding anniversary of the PRC and the 15th anniversary of 
reform and opening up. We should seize this opportunity to 
systematically publicize Anhui by using various media in order 
to make Anhui known to more foreign people and to increase its 
influence at home and abroad. 
  In concluding, Lu Rongjing stressed: Principal leaders of 
party committees at various levels should effectively strengthen 
their leadership and management in propaganda and ideological 
work, often study and analyze ideological trends in society, and 
promptly put forward appropriate principles and requirements for 
work in this regard. From now on, whether to attach importance 
to and to be good at propaganda and ideological work should be 
regarded as an important aspect in evaluating whether or not the 
leader of a locality or department is strong politically and 
competent in leadership, and in appraising the work performance 
of a locality or department. 
  Attending the conference were more than 570 people, 
including 
secretaries and propaganda department directors of various 
prefectural and city party committees; propaganda department 
directors of county party committees; leaders of organs directly 
under the provincial authority, universities, and large 
enterprises; and those attending a provincial conference of 
broadcasting and television bureau directors, a provincial 
conference of cultural bureau directors, a provincial conference 
on foreign propaganda, a provincial conference of journalistic 
and publishing work, and a conference of the provincial 
federation of literary and art circles. 

