BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chris Parkin, PA News] </F>
  [Text] Prospects for advancing the Northern Ireland peace 
process were examined by five British and Irish government 
ministers today against a background of continuing terrorism in 
Belfast and Dublin. 
  The ministers met near the Irish Republic's County Cavan 
border with Ulster after the opening of a restored waterway link 
between the republic and the north. 
  But before talks were under way, fresh violence in Belfast 
brought security issues back to the top of the agenda. 
  IRA gunmen killed a former regular Army soldier from the 
Shankill Road as he worked as a security guard near the city 
centre. Loyalists bombed a Sinn Fein office at Belfast City Hall 
injuring two workmen and a soldier was hurt in a blast at the 
Fort George Army base in Londonderry. 
  At the weekend in Dublin, the Loyalist Ulster Volunteer 
Force 
paramilitary organisation attacked a city centre pub being used 
by Sinn Fein for a fundraising event. 
  The ministers had planned to concentrate on political 
questions following Britain's response last week to a series of 
questions about the Downing Street peace declaration posed by 
Sinn Fein. 
  Northern Ireland Secretary Sir Patrick Mayhew and deputy 
Irish premier and foreign minister Dick Spring later said they 
pledged to maintain the current "highest ever level" of 
cross-border security co-operation to combat the terrorists. 
  Sir Patrick said what had happened in Dublin had 
demonstrated 
the problem of terrorism was one that had to be faced by the 
security forces on both sides of the border. "The highest 
degree of co-operation will be maintained between us," he said. 
  Irish Justice Minister Maire Geoghegan-Quinn, who was also 
at 
the talks, said she would be presenting a report to cabinet 
colleagues in Dublin tomorrow on the weekend shooting and 
bombing attempt. She will meet Irish Police Commissioner Patrick 
Culligan tomorrow to review security precautions being applied 
in Dublin and border areas to counter loyalist raids. 
  On the political front Sir Patrick said he had noted and was 
grateful for the "very positive Irish government response" to 
Britain's statement last week following Sinn Fein's request for 
clarification of the peace document. 
  Prime Minister John Major and Irish premier Albert Reynolds 
are to meet in London later this week to assess the development 
of their peace initiative. 
  Sir Patrick said: "Both governments stand shoulder to 
shoulder in this respect and in their attitude to Sinn Fein and 
the IRA and the use of violence for political purposes." 
  Also at today's discussions was Northern Ireland Office 
junior minister Michael Ancram who has been involved in 
behind-the-scenes talks with political leaders in Belfast in a 
bid to force a restart of the stalled inter-party talks process 
on the future of the province. 
  Mr Spring reported that a considerable amount of work had 
been done towards establishing a framework for fresh talks but 
further progress had still to be made. 
  Security measures in and around the border area fringed by 
the Irish Republic's County Cavan and Northern Ireland's County 
Fermanagh was intense from daybreak for the top-level 
get-together. 
  Sir Patrick and Mr Spring jointly declared open a canal 
connecting Northern Ireland's Lough Erne and the River Shannon 
on the southern side of the border. The canal first opened 125 
years ago but closed soon afterwards as a nautical flop. It has 
been restored at a cost of 30 million pounds in a project funded 
partly by European Union funds and backed by both the British 
and Irish governments. 

