Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kiev, 14 Feb -- Vasyl Durdynets, first deputy 
chairman of the Ukrainian Supreme Council and coordinator of the 
group of deputies for issues to do with ratification of the 
START Treaty, was interviewed by a UNIAN correspondent on 
nuclear problems and conditions for Ukraine to accede to the 
Lisbon protocol. 
  Durdynets noted that for these issues to be settled by the 
current parliament first of all guarantees from nuclear states 
are needed. There should be documents, in his opinion, which 
would make it legally binding on them not to use nuclear and 
conventional weapons against Ukraine, rule out economic pressure 
and guarantee the integrity and inviolability of our borders. 
  The Foreign Ministry is now at work developing the form of 
guarantees. Mr. Durdynets emphasized that the accession of 
Ukraine to the Lisbon protocol and the nuclear nonproliferation 
treaty as a non-nuclear state is unrealistic. This contravenes 
both its military doctrine and official foreign policy. Mr. 
Durdynets's view is that "a state owning nuclear weapons" is the 
most acceptable formula for Ukraine. 
  On the question of the funds required to dismantle Ukrainian 
nuclear weapons, Vasyl Durdynets said a group of experts from 
Kharkov's physics and technology institute worked out an 
estimate for this. It came up with the minimum sum of $2.8 
billion. This sum is at today's rate. Durdynets spoke in favor 
of setting up a nuclear disarmament fund under UN auspices. 
  With regard to selling conventional weapons, Mr. Durdynets 
stressed that 38 percent of the USSR's military industrial 
complex was concentrated in Ukraine, although this issue so far 
remains unresolved. The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine, in his 
view, ought to defend somewhat more actively Ukraine's right to 
trade arms with the international community. 
  Vasyl Kryuchkov, member of the standing committee for issues 
of defense and state security, is of the opinion that the 
minimum sum required to dismantle Ukrainian nuclear weapons is 
$5 billion. If done professionally, it could be as much as $10 
billion. 

