BFN 

  [Text] London, April 29, SPA -- A delegation comprises of 
heads of Islamic diplomatic missions in London held a meeting 
here today with the British state Minister Foreign Affairs 
Douglas Hogg and the talks dealt with the latest developments of 
the Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  The team groups the heads of diplomatic missions of the 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Malaysia, Turkey, Senegal, Pakistan, 
Egypt, and Iran. The seven countries are members of the liaison 
group assigned by the Organization of the Islamic Conference 
(OIC) [Islamic Comference Organization -- ICO] to deal with the 
the Bosnian crisis. 
  A statement issued afterwards said the delegation conveyed 
to 
the British minister the grave concern of the OIC's member 
states on the continuing attacks waged by the Serbian forces on 
the city of Gorzade which was delcared as a safe haven by the 
United Nations. 
  The delegation also briefed the Mr. Hogg [as received] on 
the 
contents of the statement issued by the foreign ministers of the 
liasion group after a meeting in New York on the Bosnian issue 
last Wednesday. 
  The statement of the foreign ministers of the seven OIC's 
member states expressed the anger and anxiety of the OIC's 
member states on the current Bosnian situation and called on for 
immediate lift of the arms embargo imposed on the republic of 
Bonsia-Herzegovina and enabling the Bosnian people of exercising 
their legitimate right of self-defense according to Article 51 
of the U.N. Charter. 
  The ministers welcomed the ultimatum issued by the NATO on 
April 22 for protection of safe havens and called on for 
enhancement of the international protection in the Bosnian 
Republic and the ministers confirmed the readiness of the OIC's 
states to provide adequate number of land troops for the 
purpose. 
  The statement said the ministers also expressed the OIC's 
support for the idea of holding an international conference for 
peace in former Yugoslavia providing that the Serbs would not be 
allowed to exploit the meeting as cover for their expanionist 
plots. 
  At the end of the meeting, the British minister promised to 
keep the team acquainted with the developments on the matter and 
to consult with them on new development concerning the crisis. 

