BFN 

<F P=106> [By Zheng Jie: "Financial Picture Looks Rosy"] </F>
  [Text] Shanghai's overall financial situation is stable 
and sound, though the supply of capital remains short, according 
to a top banking official. 
  Mao Yingliang, president of the Shanghai branch of the 
central bank, said recently that the development of the 
financial industry is compatible with the city's healthy 
economic growth. 
  According to Mao, local specialized banks added 22.6 billion 
yuan ($2.6 billion) in deposits in the first quarter, surging 85 
per cent over the same period last year. 
  Of the total, private savings deposits more than tripled 
from 
the first four months of 1993 to 10.9 billion yuan ($1.25 
billion). 
  On the premise of keeping the amount of lending within the 
limits drawn by the central bank, Mao said, financial firms have 
intensified their support of the key areas of the city's economy. 
  According to Mao, financial institutions extended 2.8 
billion 
yuan ($322 million) in loans in April. 
  Priority has been given to key national projects in the city 
and local pillar industries, including telecommunications, 
automobiles, chemicals and power, according to the president. 
  Mao noted that local financial reform is being carried out 
in 
an orderly way and that a breakthrough has occurred in the 
reform of the foreign exchange system. 
  Turnover on the Shanghai-based China Foreign Exchange Trade 
System, a national inter-bank centre for trading hard currency 
that officially opened early last month, has surpassed $3 
billion and HK$2.7 billion [Hong Kong dollars]. 
  In that time, according to Mao, authorized foreign exchange 
banks have bought $790 million from businesses and sold more 
than $400 million. 
  On the securities market, transactions in the January-April 
period totalled 243 billion yuan ($27.9 billion), nearly 59 per 
cent higher than a year earlier. 
  Mao said the industry continues to open up, with 100 
overseas 
financial operations having come in. 
  By the end of the first quarter, total assets of overseas 
financial firms amounted to $2.9 billion, a rise of 16 per cent 
over the first three months of last year. 
  Though the situation is generally good, problems still 
exist, 
particularly in the supply of capital, Mao said. 
  Growth in production and inflation have contributed to 
rising 
demand for capital, Mao said. 

