BFN 

  [Text] SINGAPORE, May 19 (AFP) -- Chinese Vice-Premier Li 
Lanqing indicated Thursday that Beijing had no intention of 
reversing its decision to give a US oil company rights to 
explore for oil in territory disputed with Vietnam. Li said 
that while Beijing would continue "friendly consultations" with 
Hanoi on overlapping territorial claims in the South China Sea, 
these talks would cover only disputed territories, not territory 
belonging to China. 
  "In regards to indisputable territories, there is no 
question," he told a business opportunities conference here 
organised by the New York-based Asia Society. Li was asked 
whether China would keep a pledge to its Southeast Asian 
neighbours to keep the peace over territorial disputes in the 
Spratly islands. The islands, which reputedly sit atop vast 
deposits of oil and gas, are claimed in whole or part by Brunei, 
China, Malaysia, the Philippines, Taiwan and Vietnam. 
  Crestone, a Colorado-based oil company, announced last month 
that it planned to drill into the Tu Chinh sandbar, about 400 
kilometers (250 miles) southeast of Vietnam's coast, under terms 
of a concession signed with China. But Vietnam, which claims 
that the Tu Chinh sandbar is well within its special economic 
zone and continental shelf, has demanded Crestone halt all 
operations in the area, saying any exploration was illegal. 
  Li welcomed remarks by Vietnamese Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet 
at the same conference Wednesday that Hanoi would pursue its 
claims in the South China Sea "through peaceful negotiations and 
in an atmosphere of friendship." He said that Beijing still 
believed that claimants should jointly develop disputed areas. 
  Kiet told the STRAITS TIMES daily in an interview published 
Thursday that while Hanoi would defend its territory, it saw no 
reason to use force in Tu Chinh because of improvements in ties 
with China. The Chinese and Vietnamese navies fought a brief 
but bloody engagement in the Spratlys in March 1988. Hundreds 
of Vietnamese were believed to have been killed in the fighting. 

