BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by UKRINFORM special correspondent Sergey Balykov </F>
for TASS] 
  [Text] Simferopol June 2 TASS -- "We are strongly convinced 
that any use of force in dialogue with the Crimea is 
unacceptable. We would like to solve problems and not to exert 
pressure, to cooperate and not to inspect and supervise", said 
Vladimir Butkevich, head of the Ukrainian Parliament's 
Commission for Human Rights, National Minorities and 
Inter-Ethnic Relations. 
  Butkevich, who is also a U.N. expert in human rights, leads 
a 
Ukrainian parliamentary delegation that arrived on Thursday in 
the Crimea for talks with local lawmakers. 
  The delegation comprises members of parliament's various 
commissions and experts. A similar working group, headed by the 
republic's Deputy Parliament Speaker Aleksey Melnikov, was set 
up by the Crimean side. 
  Later in the day, the two delegations met at the negotiating 
table. They are to discuss and bring in line Crimean and 
Ukrainian legislations, to tackle some sensitive economic, legal 
and other issues. The talks following up the Kiev dialogue are 
attended by representatives of the Crimean president and 
government. Nevertheless, Butkevich noted, the Crimean leaders 
understand quite well the dangerous character of the situation 
and are ready to work in close cooperation to solve the common 
problems. We do not have any antagonistic contradictions, he 
stressed. We should remember that the Crimea is an integral 
part of Ukraine, that we are members of the same family, the 
same state, therefore all issues should be solved in a quiet and 
civilized manner. We need another several months to find 
necessary solutions, Butkevich went on to say. But I am 
confident that the current meeting will set a constructive 
beginning to this process, he stressed. 
  The meeting in the Crimean capital Simferopol will 
concentrate on possible ways to bridge the existing discrepancy 
between the Crimean and Ukrainian Constitutions, as well as to 
improve relations between Ukraine and its constituent republic. 
Under Crimean laws, relations with Ukraine should be built on a 
treaty basis, while Ukrainian legislation does not provide for 
any federated arrangement. Also raised at the talks will be the 
issue of dual citizenship. 
  Although both delegations are eager to undo the existing 
knot 
of contradictions, the talks are expected to be rather tense. 
They will be certainly lobbied by local pro-Russian forces, 
whose activists gathered outside the Crimean parliamentary 
building to express their attitude towards the arriving 
Ukrainian delegation. 

