Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> ["Discussion" between Shigezo Hayasaka, political </F>
commentator, and Shoichi Watanabe, Sophia University professor; 
place and date not given] 
  [Excerpt] [Watanabe] When I think about Hosokawa, it isn't 
his abilities or his intelligence that come to mind, but his 
lineage. Half of his ancestors were court nobles, and the other 
half, feudal lords. The fact that he's descended from court 
nobles means that he's the type of person who has no sense of 
obligation. If court nobles had had a sense of obligation, they 
would have suffered the same fate as Masashige Kusunoki 
[1294-1336] and Yoshisada Nitta [1301-1338] [feudal lords whose 
loyalty to the emperor shortened their lives]. He is happy to 
join forces with anyone who is willing to back him, even Ozawa. 
But when the second Hosokawa cabinet is formed, if there's 
someone around who can set the stage, Hosokawa might be 
perfectly willing to join forces with the Liberal Democratic 
Party [LDP]. 
  [Hayasaka] Yes, you're right. When I take a good, long look 
at Hosokawa the politician, I'm amazed at his toughness. This 
has nothing at all to do with intelligence, experience in 
politics, or leadership ability. He is, basically, a mediocre 
man who is ambitious, who is an opportunist, and who likes to 
perform, but he has strength that you won't find in an ordinary 
person. In the first place, he is a total amateur, as far as 
running a nation is concerned. Amateurs are fearless. If the 
media, women, and children urge them on, they'll pick up a 
red-hot poker without a moment's hesitation. And they won't feel 
the heat. That's the kind of strength I'm talking about, and 
Hosokawa has it. 
  In the second place, there's his lineage. He was a lord even 
before he was born. And the blood of court nobles is flowing 
through his veins, too. So, when he's riding in his palanquin 
when a freezing wind is blowing, it doesn't even occur to him to 
think about his bearers, about how they are suffering. He 
doesn't give a thought to the farmers, on the verge of 
starvation, their fingers bleeding, who weave the straw sandals 
his bearers wear. To him, that is the natural order of things. 
He doesn't feel any gratitude or obligation. He feels no 
compassion toward people who have worked hard for him. When they 
have outlived their usefulness, he casts them aside. He doesn't 
feel guilty about that. He doesn't care. That's where his 
strength lies. 
  [Watanabe] There aren't many Japanese capable of such 
behavior now. Well, we can give him points for being a rarity 
(laughter). 
  [Hayasaka] For instance, during the election, his necktie 
got 
worn out, so he went into a shop to buy a new one. The salesgirl 
showed him dozens of neckties, but he said he didn't like any of 
them, and nonchalantly walked out of the shop. His secretary, 
who was nearby, jumped up and ran after Lord Hosokawa, grabbing 
his sleeve as he was about to get into his car. 
  When the secretary told him, "Even if you don't like them, 
don't you think you should buy two or three? This is election 
time, you know." Hosokawa replied, "I don't care," and got into 
the car. He's not concerned about what people think of him. 
  [Watanabe] And it's his lineage that allows him to get away 
with that kind of behavior. If he weren't Lord Hosokawa, nobody 
would lionize him. 
  [Hayasaka] That's right. Even today, the Japanese are easily 
swayed by a lord. 
  [Watanabe] In other words, the support he has now is based 
on 
totally different standards than the support he received in the 
past. Until the time of Tadaoki Hosokawa [1563-1645], the 
Hosokawas fought side-by-side with their soldiers, and they had 
compassion. That's why, when they entered Kiyomasa Kato's 
[1562-1611] domain in Higo [present-day Kumamoto], and learned 
how much affection the people of Higo had for Kiyomasa, the 
first thing they did was to erect a statue of Kiyomasa. Once 
upon a time, the Hosokawas were that thoughtful. Then, after 
about 10 or so generations, they settled into true "lord mode." 
Furthermore, half of Hosokawa's ancestors were members of the 
highest ranking of the five regent families, so entirely 
different principles are at work here. 
  [Hayasaka] He bears a striking similarity to Kiichi 
Miyazawa, 
you know. They are both emotionless, a characteristic rare among 
the Japanese. Neither of them will go out of his way to help 
someone else. They don't get their hands dirty. They don't look 
after their relatives. I'm running out of negatives (laughter). 
  [Watanabe] But at least Miyazawa was able to produce a 
polite 
smile. Hosokawa doesn't smile if he doesn't want to. 
  [Hayasaka] This is the first time in the postwar era that 
we've had a leader like him. The Japanese people don't know what 
to make of him, either. 
  [Watanabe] I think that Ozawa's biggest worry now is that, 
if 
he lets his guard down, Hosokawa may just team up with the LDP. 
  [Hayasaka] That's why Ozawa is now acting as an 
intermediary, 
trying to muster support for Hosokawa, so that the foolish bird 
won't go to roost elsewhere. That is probably the basis for the 
"Hosokawa-Ozawa honeymoon" rumor. Ozawa is fully aware of 
Hosokawa's true colors. Once Ozawa has served his purpose, 
Hosokawa could team up with the LDP at any time. But nobody's 
going to buy that (laughter). 
  [Watanabe] And Hosokawa can do that without any pangs of 
conscience. It's important to remember that. 
  [Hayasaka] But the paradox here is that that kind of 
behavior 
gives strength to a leader. It's a feat that very few people 
could accomplish. 
  [Watanabe] It's a real advantage. If an ordinary person 
could 
get into that frame of mind, he'd be a genius (laughter). 
  [Hayasaka] Ozawa was in a real bind. He backed Hosokawa 
because there simply wasn't anyone else he could back. The 
Social Democratic Party of Japan [SDPJ] lost half of its seats 
in the 1993 election, so Ozawa had to embrace the Japan New 
Party to save himself from ruin. Otherwise, there would have 
been no coalition government. He couldn't back Tsutomu Hata. 
Why? Because the idiots, the leftwingers (actually, the 
conservatives) in the SDPJ, declared that they couldn't stomach 
a leader of the Shinseito [Japan Renewal Party]. So, who would 
head the coalition government? The only choice was Lord 
Hosokawa. That's how it was. An air pocket formed in the 
greatest political turbulence since World War II, and Hosokawa 
fell right into it. The inevitability of fate. Hosokawa is 
blessed with amazingly good luck. 
  [Watanabe] The odds are overwhelmingly against any given 
person's becoming prime minister (laughter). 
  [Hayasaka] As the saying goes, it takes 1,000 days to train 
a 
soldier, but he is used only for half a day. In the past, that's 
the way the bosses of LDP factions operated, more or less, in 
their quests for power. They intoned the ancient proverb, 
"heaven-sent opportunities are less valuable than natural 
advantages; natural advantages are less valuable than the unity 
of men," and vied with each other. Hosokawa hasn't done any of 
that. He came in on a tail wind, backed by his media 
cheerleaders and the gloomy national mood. They say that you 
make your own luck, but it's impossible to compete with anyone 
that lucky. The gods are capricious, aren't they. 
  [Watanabe] Hosokawa has a big advantage in diplomacy, 
because 
he announced that Japan waged a war of aggression. The Americans 
don't really believe that Japan waged a war of aggression. Even 
MacArthur said, "that was not a war of aggression," when he 
returned to the United States. Even if he hadn't said that, the 
United States would still be regretting having dropped the 
atomic bombs and having conducted indiscriminate bombing raids. 
Then, when an idiot comes along, saying, "that was a war of 
aggression," anyone would find it easy to feel sympathetic 
toward him. That's one consideration. 
  The other is that foreigners are drawn toward people with 
noble backgrounds, believe it or not, just as the Japanese are 
fascinated by British royalty. Even if that royalty is not 
particularly beloved in the home country. In Great Britain, 
there are many people who despise class distinctions. But the 
Americans like royalty, and they have nothing to lose by doing 
so. 
  Hirobumi Ito [1841-1909], who was well aware of that 
inclination, instituted a peerage system to replace the 
daimyo [feudal lords] system, which had been 
abolished by the Meiji government. The Japanese diplomats who 
suddenly appeared were not well received by the world's more 
advanced nations at first. But when they announced themselves as 
Count or Prince So-and-So, then they were received properly. 
It's likely that other countries have data showing that Hosokawa 
is a descendant of the oldest daimyo family in Japan, 
and that his mother's side is of noble lineage, and that the 
word has gotten around. Anyone with a distinguished family 
background can rest assured that he will be treated well abroad. 
  [Hayasaka] But when you observe Hosokawa, you notice that 
there's no one around him, no supporter-advisers. He's really 
the emperor with no clothes. For instance, Hayato Ikeda 
[1899-1965, prime minister from 1960-64] boasted staunch 
support, mainly from Shigesaburo Maeo [1899-1981], with whom he 
had toiled at the Tax Bureau [Finance Ministry], and also from 
Yasumi Kurogane [1910-1986], Masayoshi Ohira, Kiichi Miyazawa, 
Zenko Suzuki, and Masaya Ito. In the business world, he had the 
support of the "four financial kings" of the times, Ataru 
Kobayashi [1899-1981] of Fukoku Mutual Life Insurance, Takeshi 
Sakurada [1904-85] of Nisshinbo, Shigeo Nagano [1900-84] of 
Nippon Steel, Shigeo Mizuno [1899-1972] of Sankei, Tsuneo 
Okumura [1903-72] of Nomura Securities, and Yasuzaemon Matsunaga 
[1875-1971] (the electric power demon). Scholars like Osamu 
Shimomura [1910-89], Seiichi Tobata [1899-1983], and Hiromi 
Arisawa [1896-1988] came forth to support Ikeda, because they 
felt that his awkwardness and forthrightness might get him into 
trouble. That was an unprecedented, brilliant array of 
supporters. 
  Kakuei Tanaka also surrounded himself with a group of 
seasoned "generals," headed by his "treasurer," Eiichi Nishimura 
[1904-71], a stubborn old geezer, and including Kiichi Aichi 
[1907-73], Tomisaburo Hashimoto [1901-90], and Susumu Nikaido. 
But if you look at Hosokawa, you see that there isn't anyone 
around him. He is truly an emperor with no clothes. 
  [Watanabe] Only Yuriko Koike (laughter). 
  [Hayasaka] Well, isn't he through with her (laughter)? 
Tetsuhisa Matsuzaki [a political commentator], who was betrayed 
by Hosokawa, said that, in the 1993 election, even a monkey 
could have gotten elected running on the Japan New Party slate. 
I don't think he said that out of spite. That's really the way 
the Japan New Party is. There are only two representatives who 
have insight and a proven track record -- Kunitaro Takeda, who 
is a specialist on agriculture problems, and Yoshio Terasawa, 
the former head of Nomura Securities U.S. operations, who knows 
about money. All you can say about the others is they are 
bursting with happiness and emotion at their good fortune, and 
they smile sweetly. That's about it. The Japan New Party is an 
elite collection of people with zero achievements. 
  [Watanabe] If I had to force myself to find something good 
to 
say about Hosokawa, the collapse of the Soviet Union threw Japan 
into confusion, as though the world had been turned upside down. 
If we look at the Meiji Restoration as a past event of the same 
magnitude, we recall that the elder statesmen of that time 
didn't have any experience, either. But the Restoration 
government continued, because the current carried it forward. If 
I had to come up with a defense for Hosokawa, that's what I 
would say. 
  [Hayasaka] If the wind blows the right way, the Hosokawa 
government will continue. That's a brilliant conclusion. Until 
now, Japan has been a sticky, cohesive nation -- a "village" 
society, a society of relatives, a union of tightly knit 
circles. It had bosses who knew what was what, and who had 
chalked up a lot of experience. So dependable. The bosses had 
experienced both the bitterness and the sweetness of life. 
Everything revolved around them. But that system has now been 
destroyed, and has fallen down with a crash. 
  [Watanabe] The most readily understood example would be 
food-supply security. Japan was determined not to import even 
one grain of foreign rice, but now we've been forced to import 
more than a million tons. All the arguments for protecting 
agriculture have flown out the window. In other words, the idea 
of food-supply security has become meaningless. 
  [Hayasaka] The Japanese people have changed, too. They no 
longer obey when the boss orders them, "Just do what I tell you. 
Vote for the candidates I tell you to vote for." That's what 
happens in a highly educated society. Members of the generation 
born under the new Constitution have come to the forefront in 
huge numbers. People born in the Meiji, Taisho, and early Showa 
eras wield much less influence now. Women have been a major 
force behind change. Many women want justice in its simplest 
sense. But they can see only one kilometer ahead of them, at the 
most, and many of them are easily fooled by the mass media, 
which subsist on form rather than substance, and on hypocrisy. 
  [Watanabe] They think that they're getting an education by 
watching Hiroshi Kume [a popular newscaster who interprets 
current events]. 
  [Hayasaka] Yes. When election time comes around, more women 
than men go to the polls. Now the "female culture" is upon us 
with a vengeance. Politicians and political parties will be in 
trouble if they offend women, and alienate them. 
  [Watanabe] To give a more concrete example, when you, Mr. 
Hayasaka, were Kakuei Tanaka's secretary, you probably couldn't 
have envisioned a female LDP representative in the lower house. 
  [Hayasaka] That's right. Except for the upper house, the 
entrance of a woman into the struggle for control of the manor, 
the lower house, would have been unthinkable. 
  [Watanabe] But it happened. 
  [Hayasaka] My theory about Hosokawa is that the emergence of 
a prime minister like him is a sign of the times. Somehow, he 
makes a good showing. In Seattle, standing with the leaders of 
other nations, wearing his daughter's muffler, he seemed taller 
than they. His wild hair makes a better impression than it would 
if it were plastered down with hair tonic. Or at least there are 
more women now who think so. When you see this sort of thing 
happening, you realize that democracy is the rule of the 
ignorant multitudes. 
  [Watanabe] Even in England, in the days when decisions made 
by Parliament stood out for their excellence, the electorate 
consisted solely of members of the gentry (land owners and all 
those of higher status). At that time, the British Parliament 
made the best political decisions by far. After World War II, it 
ceased to be remarkable. It became just average. The same is 
true for every nation. 
  Another point is that when the Constitution changed, and the 
primogeniture system was thrown out, the problem of providing 
for the elderly emerged. Once upon a time, even in the Tohoku 
countryside, even in the poorest household, parents didn't need 
to worry about their old age if they had even one son. 
  [Hayasaka] The introduction of the equal division of 
inheritance was the source of many evils. It simply uprooted 
Japan's fine, time-honored tradition which had families helping 
each other, and caring for parents in their old age, with the 
eldest son at the center. 
  [Watanabe] Everybody's business is nobody's business. 
Collective responsibility is irresponsibility. 
  [Hayasaka] Precisely. This may seem outrageous, but Japan is 
on the verge of becoming a "sand society" like the United 
States. The United States is a society of drifters. Without 
self-assertion, it would collapse. Everything has to be sharply 
defined. All the young Cinderellas and their male counterparts 
are dreaming of success. That trend is swiftly encroaching on 
Japan. The mass media have become a huge monster, and they have 
the masses right where they want them: blowing a tiny trumpet of 
justice. 
  I have no intention of condemning Hosokawa, but compared 
with 
Japan's traditional leaders, he is an unlikely one. When that 
opportunist senses danger, it is entirely possible that, led by 
Mumin Papa [a character from a Finnish cartoon book about 
trolls, whom Takemura is said to resemble], Masayoshi Takemura, 
Hosokawa will jump on the LDP bandwagon. 
  [Watanabe] Looking back, I think that the LDP erred in not 
creating a television news program to combat the Tetsuya 
Chikushi [a journalist turned newscaster] and Hiroshi Kume 
programs, one with a completely different outlook. For instance, 
why hasn't there been even one program run by you, Mr. Hayasaka, 
or someone like you? Clearly, the party was overconfident. The 
informal discussion programs they used to have on Sunday have 
suddenly disappeared. The news bureaus say they don't want them, 
because they don't agree with the ideas that are presented. They 
say that in no uncertain terms. When the LDP was governing, 
Chikushi's program was on, Kume's program was on. The LDP had 
enough power to insist that there be a Hayasaka program, or a 
Kotaro Tawara [a newscaster who specializes in politics] program. 
  [Hayasaka] Never mind about me, but that was probably the 
overconfidence that stems from being in power for such a long 
time. 
  [Watanabe] The LDP was too optimistic. 
  [Hayasaka] Behind arrogance there is always weakness. And 
they're regretting it now. Isn't that the story? When they woke 
up, the Communist Party had taken control of the Japan 
Federation of Commercial Broadcast Workers' Unions. 
  [Watanabe] The LDP just sat by while anti-Kume and 
anti-Chikushi programs disappeared. 
  [Hayasaka] That's right. But, without question, this is the 
first time that we've had a leader with such a weak party base, 
a leader who seems to be floating around in a state of 
weightlessness. 
  [Watanabe] Japan is the sort of nation that can make 
strengths out of "emptiness" and "hollowness." That's why 
Hosokawa was able to summon up the nerve to talk about opening 
up the rice market. He has no power base to lose, and no past 
obligations, so he can say anything he wants. And then came the 
"divine wind," if you will, which produced a situation which 
prompted the emergency importation of foreign rice. That enabled 
Hosokawa to broach a subject, rice, that no postwar politician 
ever dared to before him. 
  [Hayasaka] Luck was with him once again. The worst harvest 
in 
Aomori and Hokkaido since the Tenmei famine [1782-87] has given 
Hosokawa a prominent place in the annals of history. 
  [Watanabe] And it happened just in time for the Uruguay 
Round 
negotiations. Looking at the situation in the long term, one 
might think that gods sent Prime Minister Hosokawa to Japan from 
heaven. 
  [Hayasaka] So it would seem. 
  [Watanabe] "Emptiness" and "hollowness" are viewed as 
strengths in Japan. In a normal nation, "emptiness" means 
"nothingness." 
  [Hayasaka] And that is what's right there in front of our 
eyes. 
  [Watanabe] That's right. 

