Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, Feb. 6 KYODO -- Japan will scale down its 
extraction of plutonium from spent nuclear fuel, power industry 
sources said Sunday [6 February]. The new measures are 
contained in a long-term plan for the development and use of 
nuclear energy being prepared by the Atomic Energy Commission, 
the sources said. 
  Under the plan, the industry will also embark on long-term 
storage of large amounts of spent fuel on site at nuclear power 
stations, the sources said. They said the commission has 
decided to introduce sweeping changes in the fuel recycling 
system, a main pillar of Japan's energy policy, because of 
international disapproval over increased use of plutonium. 
  The sources said the commissioning of a second recycling 
plant planned in addition to one being built by the Japan 
Nuclear Fuel Ltd. at the village of Rokkasho in Aomori 
Prefecture will now be delayed by about 20 years from around 
2010 until 2030. The timing of a third recycling plant would be 
decided around 2010, they said. 
  Delaying the commissioning of the second plant until 2030 
will not affect demand for a plentiful supply of plutonium for a 
fast breeder reactor expected to be operational by that time, 
the sources said. 
  The plant now under construction at Rokkasho is designed to 
handle 800 tons of uranium annually, but spent fuel from the 
nation's power plants annually exceeds this amount and is 
expected to reach around 1,600 tons by 2010. 
  With the postponement of the second plant, Japan's 
reprocessing capacity will be significantly less than the supply 
of spent fuel. The sources said this will necessitate long-term 
storage of spent fuel that cannot be processed at the Rokkasho 
site. 
  Due to the consequent shortage of storage space at nuclear 
facilities, the revised plan suggests that space be sought 
outside the facilities and that existing space be expanded, the 
sources said. 
  Japan's plutonium policy has been a subject in the United 
States Congress. President Bill Clinton has expressed 
understanding of the policy, but has also written to 
congressional opponents of plutonium use to say he shares their 
opinion. 

