Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Global TV News" newscast] </F>
  [Text] Paraguayan President Juan Carlos Wasmosy returned to 
his country this afternoon at the end of his two-day visit to 
Peru. Peruvian President Alberto Fujimori bid farewell to his 
colleague in a formal ceremony at the headquarters of the 8th 
Air Group. Before leaving, the Paraguayan president held a news 
conference in which he said relations between the two countries 
will be strengthened and that the fight to eradicate poverty and 
drug trafficking can only take place with the unity of our 
countries. 
  Pleased to have paid a two-day official visit to Lima, 
Paraguayan President Juan Carlos Wasmosy told the media the 
following about the fight against drugs: 
  [Begin Wasmosy recording] This scourge cannot be fought 
alone. All countries must join forces. These include producing 
countries, which must seek alternative crops; countries used for 
trafficking drugs; and countries that serve as drug markets, 
which represent the most serious problem. The countries that 
are drug markets are the ones that encourage drug traffickers to 
seek this trade to earn a living. 
  I would like to take this opportunity to send a fraternal 
hug 
to the Peruvian people from this brother Paraguayan, who loves 
you and who hopes to get to know you better. United, we can all 
work for a better America, including Central and North America. 
Thank you very much. [end recording] 
  At the end of the news conference, the Paraguayan president 
went to the 8th Air Group, where President Fujimori was waiting 
for him. Both presidents reviewed the troops stationed in the 
area. After the playing of both national anthems, the 22 
members of the official Paraguayan delegation bid farewell to 
President Fujimori; the Armed Forces and police generals; and 
the foreign, economy, and education ministers. 
  At 1730, Wasmosy, accompanied by Fujimori, ascended the 
stairs of the Paraguayan Airlines plane, where both presidents 
gave each other a fraternal hug. Finally, just before entering 
the plane, a smiling Paraguayan president waved and bid farewell 
to our country for the last time. 

