Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From "The News" newscast] </F>
  [Text] Apparently, it will take Congress longer than 
expected to pass an emergency bill to resolve the Banco Latino 
crisis. A disagreement between the Finance Commission and the 
Central Bank of Venezuela was evident on Friday. 
  The emergency bill, after it was passed in the first debate 
by the Chamber of Deputies, is now in the hands of Finance 
Commission members. The commission has declared itself in 
permanent session to prepare a report that will mark the 
beginning of the second debate. On Friday, Betsaida Vera [not 
further identified] attended the Finance Commission's meeting 
but disagreed with some of the bill's articles. She says that if 
the bill is passed exactly as it was drafted, it could conflict 
with the General Banking Law and other financial institutions. 
  [Begin Vera recording] Article 4 of the bill violates the 
General Banking Law's stipulations on intervention because this 
is no longer an emergency situation. Each of the pertinent 
aspects must be considered. Otherwise, enforcement of the law 
would be troublesome because the enforcers would not be sure of 
what to do. And the enforcers are human. Each of them has his 
own opinion and will interpret the law as he understands it, as 
he pleases, or as he sees fit. [end recording] 
  The Finance Commission members met with their legal advisers 
to try to present a report with the consensus of all political 
factions, considering that the idea is to correct the 
ambiguities and gaps in the bill's original form. 
  Senator Haydee Castillo, who heads the bicameral commission 
that handles the Banco Latino case, also attended the Finance 
Commission meeting because she believes this will prompt the 
Senate to speed up the discussion once the proposal reaches the 
Senate. 
  [Begin Castillo recording] The Chamber of Deputies' Finance 
Commission is working at present and plans to meet tomorrow and 
on Sunday to polish off the bill for its second debate. Some of 
the senators, members of the commission handling the Banco 
Latino case, are here trying to prevent the bill, as it is 
released by the Chamber of Deputies, from undergoing any changes 
in the Senate so it can be expedited according to the 
Constitution and not have to be returned to the Chamber. [end 
recording] 
  Despite the differences of opinion between the Central Bank 
of Venezuela delegate and the members of the Chamber of 
Deputies' Finance Commission, the deputies will keep working so 
they can present, no later than next Monday, a report for the 
second debate of the special bill on Banco Latino. Gustavo 
Rossen, president of the auditing commission, and Finance 
Minister Julio Sosa Rodriguez have been invited to come to the 
Chamber on Saturday. 

