Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By staff reporter Cho Chae-hyon] </F>
  [Text] Korea will continue to modernize and open its 
financial market to effectively cope with the rapidly-changing 
world economy, Korea Institute of Finance President Pak 
Yong-chol said yesterday. 
  In a luncheon meeting with foreign bank general managers 
here, Pak said that Korea is pressing ahead with its plan to 
liberalize the financial market and will not retract from its 
commitment to further deregulate the market in the days ahead. 
Pak explained to the foreign financiers about the Korean 
economy and financial industry. 
  "The on-going liberalization steps reflect the Korean 
government's intention to upgrade the efficiency of the 
financial industry in order to accommodate the expansion of the 
economy, its growing structural complexity and changes in the 
international economic environment," said the former senior 
presidential secretary for economic affairs. 
  Pak told foreign bankers that the Korean government has made 
financial sector liberalization a key priority. 
  In June 1993, the government presented a comprehensive plan 
for financial sector liberalization and capital account opening, 
with a detailed timetable for phased implementation in three 
steps for the period of 1993-1997. 
  This plan covers the liberalization of interest rates, the 
introduction of a system of indirect monetary control, the 
removal of credit controls and lending guidelines, the 
development of the money market, and the liberalization of 
foreign exchange and capital transactions. 
  Stressing that the financial market will be opened further 
to 
foreign competition, he said foreign banks here will be allowed 
to do business in such new areas as bank payments and 
remittances, and clearing system. 
  Pak said that the areas the government is committed to 
easing 
rules on in 1994 and 1995 are; the limit on foreign certificates 
of deposit (CDs) issuance volume, limit for over-sold position 
in spot foreign exchange deals, the foreign stock ownership 
ceiling for Korean stocks and limit on equity participation by 
foreign investment trusts in domestic trust firms. 
  As for the liberalization of foreign exchange transactions, 
he said "The government will deregulate foreign exchange 
controls and also invigorate the domestic foreign exchange 
market to assist domestic business activities abroad and to 
upgrade conveniences for the people." 

