BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Jacques Bihozagara, deputy prime </F>
minister-designate in the Rwandan transitional government, by 
announcer Bililian; with recorded remarks by Foreign Minister 
Alain Juppe -- live] 
  [Text] [Bililian] Mr. Juppe, the minister of foreign 
affairs, spoke about France's relative isolation in operation 
Turquoise this morning. He considers that our isolation has 
been exaggerated, even if for the moment only Senegalese troops 
have been announced on the ground. The OAU is not as strongly 
opposed as is claimed, said Mr. Juppe, and as for the rebels of 
the Rwandan Patriotic Front [RPF] -- I am still quoting Mr. 
Juppe -- their hostility is not so radical. Mr. Juppe said: 
  [Begin recording] [Juppe] I myself received Mr. Bihozagara, 
the deputy prime minister designate in the transition government 
and one of the most important people in the political bureau of 
the RPF, here in Paris yesterday. He had a working session of 
nearly three hours. I myself spoke to him for more than an 
hour. Naturally, I did not remove his objections to the 
operation, but I would like to quote two things he said to me in 
the presence of some dozen people, who can bear witness. 
  First of all, he told me that in his view France is a 
trustworthy partner -- I quote -- for the RPF in the coming 
months and years. It is trustworthy because it was behind the 
Arusha process, which met the complete approval of the RPF. It 
is a trustworthy partner because the RPF knows that when Rwanda 
has to be reconstructed, France will have a full role to play. 
  The second thing Mr. Bihozagara said, which I want to quote 
word for word: He told me that France's initiative is a 
praiseworthy one, but that for reasons of principle connected to 
the past and to their ideas -- namely, UNAMIR [UN Assistance 
Mission in Rwanda], yes; other intervention, no -- he could not 
give his approval. [end recording] 
  [Bililian] Mr. Bihozagara, you heard what Mr. Juppe just 
said. He referred to you as the deputy chairman of the 
transition government, which is supposed to be established in 
your country, Rwanda. Has your position toward France changed 
over the past few days? As Mr Juppe said: You were overtly 
hostile to this intervention, you talked about the French in 
terms of invaders, and you were opposed and even ready for your 
troops to fight the French if they met them. 
  [Bihozagara] I must say first of all that I was not alone 
in this (?mission). I was with the secretary-general of our 
organization. What Alain Juppe said is quite right. France 
will be a trustworthy partner, but not in the military domain. 
We need France for development projects, for the reconstruction 
of the country, and for other things, but in a clearly bilateral 
framework, where there is mutual respect. 
  [Bililian] So that means that initially nothing has changed. 
The operation, as you heard -- you heard the reports from our 
special correspondents as I did -- your position has not 
changed: You are opposed to French intervention, and there is a 
danger of clashes between the troops under you and the French, 
if they meet. 
  [Bihozagara] Yes, we are still very strongly opposed to the 
French military intervention. However, we have simply said that 
we support humanitarian initiatives in the framework of the 
agreements, first the Arusha agreement, but also UN Resolution 
918, which entrusted this mission to UNAMIR 2, which is to be 
made up of neutral countries. We consider that France is not 
neutral in this game. 
  France was in Rwanda for three years, and saw massacres 
happening and could not stop them. Why is it now intervening to 
stop the massacres? 
  [Bilalian] Nevertheless, France is intervening, first of 
all, 
as you heard, to save the Tutsi minority -- that is to say, your 
people -- who are facing difficulties under the control of the 
current government. You must be sensitive to that, and no one 
has really come forward to help you. Now France is saying: We 
will go, because everyone is sitting there, everyone is shocked, 
but no one is making up their minds to do anything. 
  [Bihozagara] First, I think that France is getting involved 
in a political game. Why save the Tutsi minority? They are not 
the only ones in danger from the crime. There are moderate 
Hutus, there is the opposition, there are Hutu intellectuals 
being targeted. I would like to make it clear that the groups 
in danger are not only Tutsis. 
  So, as for intervention now, first of all we say that it is 
late in coming, because the RPF has already committed itself to 
saving the people. We think that France, which is up to its 
neck in this policy, which armed the people who are doing the 
killing, and which gave them military training -- we think that 
it is going to form a (?corridor), a wall, to give a breathing 
space of last resort to those people, I mean to those fascists 
who are now on the run and (?are going to) Zaire. 
  [Bililian] So you think French intervention is really to 
give 
a respite to the government forces fighting you. Nevertheless, 
the neutral countries, your African brothers, and other African 
countries, are not intervening. 
  [Bihozagara] Yes. You know the OAU adopted a position 
against it. 
  [Bililian] Against it, yes, but it did not decide anything 
specific. So who should intervene, or should no one intervene 
in the end? Are you saying no one should intervene? 
  [Bihozagara] I am telling you that there are African troops, 
African countries, which have already made a positive response 
for intervention, but they do not have the means. 
  [Bililian] They were there and they did nothing at the start 
of the fighting last month. They were in Kigali. We saw them, 
because some of them even left. 
  [Bihozagara] But there weren't only African groups. You know 
that the UNAMIR force was a multilateral force also consisting 
of Africans and Europeans, notably Belgians. 
  So what we are surprised at is that when the Rwandan people 
needed international assistance, people packed their bags, and 
after 500,000 deaths they are now thinking about them. That 
really is cynical. 
  [Bililian] Thank you. 

