BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview via satellite with President Gonzalo Sanchez de </F>
Lozada in La Paz by reporter Jacobo Zabludovsky in Mexico City; 
from the "24 Hours" newscast -- live] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] [Zabludovsky] Mr. President, I 
would like to take this opportunity to speak a bit about your 
country and your government. How have you, as a philosopher and 
politician, a man torn between certainty and doubts, dealt with 
your government program? 
  [Sanchez] Well, 10 months have gone by and my first year in 
office is about to end in two more months. This year has been 
very difficult because it has been a year spent sowing and 
paving the way. We have been able to enact significant legal 
measures. These measures, however, are still somewhat abstract 
since the people have not yet been able to see the end results. 
Obviously, we must first pave the way. We have been able to 
carry out capitalization measures, a very innovative course of 
action that entails rescuing failing state enterprises and 
encouraging the private sector and Bolivian people to become 
shareholders in these enterprises. In addition to encouraging 
new investments, we have also been able to implement an 
initiative to acknowledge the contribution of the indigenous 
community after 500 years and to grant them self-government in 
the form of territorial municipalities, urban as well as rural. 
In addition, we have been able to distribute 20 percent of the 
state's revenues among the regions, according to each region's 
population. These are some very innovative measures. We are 
currently struggling to implement in-depth education reforms. 
Just like all other countries, what our country really needs 
are jobs and education. Education represents the passport to the 
future, and jobs are the best way to promote activity, more 
jobs, dignity, and taxes in order to satisfy the people's needs. 
  [Zabludovsky] It would seem to me that it is not an easy 
task 
to govern a country such as yours which is embedded in the 
Andes. At any rate, I am not sure whether the phase -- they may 
take away the adventure, but not attempts from the heart -- 
means anything to you. 
  [Sanchez] Yes. Once my grandfather asked a Bolivian 
president what it is like to be president of Bolivia. At the 
time my grandfather was foreign minister. The president 
answered that everything is fine when there is money, but that 
he would not recommend the job when there is no money. 
Unfortunately, I have had the misfortune to become president at 
a time when there is no money. Nevertheless, there is a lot of 
goodwill and consensus. Bolivia is a country that has undergone 
tremendous shocks. The prices of the raw materials we 
traditionally export such as tin, gas, and hydrocarbons have 
dropped to practically nothing. The country has also been able 
to control its tremendous 25,000 percent hyperinflation. 
Currently we have single digit inflation. There is a lot of 
confidence that we will be able to forge ahead. Nevertheless, it 
is very difficult because everyone is calling for adjustments, 
yet no one wants them once they are implemented. I am quite 
sure that deep down, Bolivia knows it must change and improve. 
I am convinced that my second year in office will be a year of 
performance, and we anticipate results during the third year. 
These results might be good, average, or bad, but I am very sure 
that the Bolivian people's sacrifice will be well rewarded. 
  [Zabludovsky] How has drug trafficking influenced or 
interfered in Bolivia's political life? 
  [Sanchez] Drug trafficking is one of the most pressing 
problems confronting Bolivia. No one can explain why we do not 
have narcoguerrillas or cartels similar to the ones in Cali, for 
example. It is possible it is because social cohesion is very 
strong in Bolivia. Family and community ties are very strong; 
at any rate, the issue is one of concern because we are a very 
fragile nation. Our institutions are very vulnerable, and we are 
apprehensive about this drug-trafficking issue. 
  We are struggling hard against drug trafficking and seeking 
strategies to convince the peasantry to become involved in other 
activities. It is not an easy task because there is poverty, 
and one of the few things that produces revenue is the coca 
plant, especially when it is refined into drugs. Despite all 
this, we believe that if we can create enthusiasm for 
industrialization or an alternate economic activity, we will be 
able to find ways for the Bolivian people to abandon this 
activity. It is not an activity we are interested in promoting, 
given that it is so dangerous. 
  Undoubtedly, this is one of the greatest challenges 
confronting us, and we are all searching for solutions, not only 
the government but society as whole because it is undermining 
our youth. We are concerned that tomorrow it might undermine 
our stability as well as our social harmony. 
  [Zabludovsky] The living conditions of the 10,000 or more 
Guarani Indians have been highly criticized. It is said they 
live in extreme poverty, something that is not true only in 
Bolivia. What could be done to combat this issue? 
  [Sanchez] We have made profound reforms. We have changed the 
entire executive branch. We have created ministries, one for 
human resources, which has a secretariat for ethnics, races, and 
generations. We have, for the first time in Latin American 
history, recognized the Indian community by allowing them to 
participate. Two-thirds of Bolivia's population has Indian 
roots and one-third has Western roots; thus, there are very 
powerful dynamics at play here. 
  Actions are stronger than words. The Bolivian vice president 
is the first Indian to occupy this post. He was born near the 
shores of Lake Titicaca. He is a very educated man, a 
professional linguist. This shows that this administration and 
our society are accepting an important fact: Unity is built on 
diversity and it is possible for all these currents to be 
present and yet have a stronger country and a more balanced 
society. [passage omitted] 

