Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Mexico City, 6 Jan (AFP) -- The Zapatista National 
Liberation Army (EZLN) has accused the Mexican Army of taking 
prisoners, torturing them, then executing them with a shot to 
the head, according to a communique sent to the daily LA JORNADA 
and published today. 
  The communique, signed by the Mexico City Urban Front of the 
EZLN, stated that "we are struggling against the violence of 
poverty and hunger, against the violence of the electoral farce 
and unemployment, and against the disease of the poor. We are 
fighting for socialism." 
  The communique added that "we are considered outlaws because 
we are doing this," but one "cannot consider it legal when our 
demands for a better future are massacred with bombs. We also 
have a right to speak, but unfortunately the government only 
understands the language of weapons." 
  After making its accusations against the Army, the EZLN 
urged 
the Mexican soldiers not to kill innocent people. "If you have 
any courage, you must admit that you can no longer tolerate the 
look of hunger on the faces of our children. If you commit 
murder, we will be implacable. Refuse to kill honest Mexicans," 
the communique stated. 
  The rebels said they will not carry out any attacks in 
Mexico 
City, then asked: "Have you not yet seen that economic 
liberalism has failed? Do you not yet understand that other 
brotherly peoples of the hemisphere will follow us?" 
  The EZLN also sent a public message to Guatemalan Indian 
leader Rigoberta Menchu, winner of the 1992 Nobel Peace Prize, 
indicating that it is aware of the problems afflicting the 
Guatemalan refugees in Mexico and that "perhaps now the Mexican 
state will no longer be interested in keeping up the facade of 
protecting refugees in its efforts to implement its repressive 
policy in the fields of Chiapas and throughout Mexico." 
  The communique added: "Do not be surprised if the government 
withdraws its support from the refugees, begins to repress them, 
and accuses them of participating in our struggle. That 
irresponsible rumor is already circulating among the 
authorities, who are always ready to seek obscure and disguised 
enemies where there is only one answer to hunger and oppression." 
  The Mexican Government had circulated the rumor that there 
were Central Americans among the rebels. On Wednesday the 
National Defense Secretariat announced that one Guatemalan had 
been arrested, and Deputy Government Secretary Socorro Diaz read 
a communique stating that the guerrillas are directed by 
"foreign and national" experts. 
  The EZLN reiterated that it bases its uprising on the 
Constitution and advised Rigoberta Menchu "to consider our 
struggle as nothing but a desire to rid ourselves of 500 years 
of poverty and oppression." 

