Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] 
<H6>  THE CITIZEN </H6>
  De Klerk Loses White, Afrikaner Support -- The world is "in 
awe" that South Africa "could change so dramatically in less 
than four years without a shot being fired, without a revolution 
taking place, without civil war breaking out," declares the page 
6 editorial in Johannesburg THE CITIZEN in English on 31 
December. Yet, "by acting swiftly, Mr de Klerk has not been 
able to take his people along with him, polls showing that he 
has lost White, and particularly Afrikaner, support. And by 
acting so quickly, he may have sparked a resistance that could 
endanger the whole carefully structured change to a new South 
Africa." 
<H6>  THE STAR </H6>
  National Reconciliation Major Task of Country -- "National 
reconciliation" will be the "major test" before South Africa in 
1994, says Johannesburg THE STAR in English on 3 January in a 
page 8 editorial. "Much progress" was made in 1993, but "with 
political violence leading to more than 3,000 deaths in 1993, a 
great deal of work remains to be done to bring peace to this 
country. Reconciliation is not, however, incompatible with 
political competition, provided the rivalry is tempered by 
tolerance and permeated by a democratic ethos. We do not want 
false reconciliation, a saccharine fraternity which denies 
differences." The African National Congress, ANC, has a "special 
responsibility" in the months ahead, because with its allies it 
is the "dominant political force and its influence is especially 
strong in the numerically important black community. The ANC's 
unofficial status as the government-in-waiting brings with it a 
proportionately heavy burden. By discharging it wisely, the ANC 
can help secure the future and facilitate fulfilment of its 
declared mission of reconstruction and reconciliation." 
  Labor Party Colored Adjunct to ANC -- Allan Hendrickse, the 
leader of the Labor Party, is "amply entitled to be sour about 
the Nats, whether or not his vitriol relates to an embarrassment 
over the pension his co-operation with the Nats has given him," 
says a page 8 editorial in Johannesburg THE STAR in English on 
31 December. "But it was odd to use an (intended) valediction to 
virtually wish his party into oblivion. The Labour Party has 
become a kind of coloured adjunct of the ANC, not quite a real 
party, not quite a mere branch. It should make up its mind, and 
preferably it should decide to fight on its own right. Small 
parties should be allowed to flower." An alliance is good but 
"a real alliance requires two parties with two identities." 
<H6>  BUSINESS DAY </H6>
  1994 Promises Democracy, Challenges -- Johannesburg BUSINESS 
DAY in English on 3 January in a page 6 editorial says a new 
government must, among other things, "set in motion a long-term 
plan to disarm the country." This should be done by "tightening 
controls and imposing heavier penalties on people with 
unlicensed weapons." As important to the country will be the 
economic policies of the new government. "On monetary policy, 
the status granted to the Reserve Bank, given the ambiguous 
wording on the matter in the new constitution, will be the 
critical determinant of economic confidence. An independent 
Reserve Bank is crucial." Besides its economic policies, the 
new government will need to restructure the civil service, "if 
only to correct past racial imbalances. If that leads to 
appointments being made on merit, we score a bonus. If, 
instead, jobs are allocated as rewards for service to the 
'struggle', we face disaster." The year ahead promises a new 
democratic society, "but it also guarantees challenges which, 
depending on how they are met, will determine whether that 
promise materialises." 
<H6>  SOWETAN </H6>
  Pub Massacre Path to Civil War -- Johannesburg SOWETAN in 
English on 3 January in a page 6 editorial refers to the weekend 
attack on a pub in Heidelberg, in which four people died and 
five were seriously injured, saying "It will be very easy for 
the perpetrators of this horror and their supporters to argue 
that blacks are dying daily in the political violence in this 
country and that the response is never as prompt and loud. They 
may argue that they are avenging those killed in the townships. 
This would be a puerile argument because, instead of solving 
the problem, it worsens it. The massacre is one step down the 
path to civil war." 
<H6>  RAPPORT </H6>
  Stronger Moderate Middle Ground Needed -- "The horror attack 
on defenseless civilians in a Cape Town tavern is a cruel 
contradiction to South Africa's so-called Year of Peace which 
began yesterday," says an editorial on page 16 of Johannesburg 
RAPPORT in Afrikaans on 2 January. "Judging from this atrocity, 
and similar earlier ones, and the continuing violence taking 
place on the Reef and in Natal in particular, there are clearly 
still segments of the population which do not see peace as the 
top priority in this election year. Brutal violence is still 
viewed by some as a necessary political instrument." The death 
of hundreds "underlines the fact that not everyone is committed 
to peaceful politicking within the framework of the new 
constitution. And the urgent talks with the Freedom Alliance in 
the days and weeks ahead confirm that those on the outside 
number more than just the roving bands of murderers." Of 
course, "not everyone can ever be bound by any new constitution, 
and for the foreseeable future there will be militants who will 
have to be held in check mercilessly. But atrocities such as 
the one in Cape Town conjure up a frighening specter of much 
more extensive violence if we fail to negotiate a more inclusive 
constitution on time." "For that reason all right-minded South 
Africans are focussing their hopes on the leaders involved to 
intensify and broaden even further their search for solutions, 
because we cannot afford the alternative." RAPPORT concludes: 
"One can rightly says that South Africa will stand or fall by 
the emergence of an even stronger moderate middle ground which 
will do everything to eradicate radical violence totally from 
our society." 

