Language: <F P=105> Cambodian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Report on the preparations for offensives against 
the Democratic Kampuchea [DK] liberated zone in a gross manner 
of the cat's-paws of the Vietnamese communists and their allies. 
  1. The king has advised all sides to meet, talk, and 
reconcile so as to move toward achieving peace in Cambodia and 
to build the national economy and people's livelihood. 
  2. Democratic Kampuchea and the Cambodian nation and people 
acclaim the king father's national reconciliation policy, 
support the king father's five-point political line, and keep 
persuading Prince Krompreah Norodom Ranariddh to set up the 
technical group for communicating and discussing the national 
reconciliation issue, and so forth. 
  3. Hun Sen and the two-headed government keep calling for 
attacks to continue the war to smash the Khmer Rouge to pieces. 
This continued bellow by Hun Sen and the government with two 
heads and three eyes has resounded throughout the world. 
Various newspapers, news agencies, and radio-television 
broadcasts across the world have echoed this uproar by Hun Sen 
and his colleagues. 
  According to reports in various parts of the world, the two- 
headed government sent its co-ministers, Tie Banh and Tea 
Chamrat, to beg the Vietnamese communists' puppets in Laos to 
coordinate their attacks on the Khmer Rouge from Lao territory 
-- from the northern border. 
  4. The Cambodian nation and people and the world ask: Who 
is attacking whom? Is the war which is being kindled in 
Cambodia not the continuation of the Vietnamese communists' war 
of aggression? Is this an endeavor to solve the Cambodian 
problem so as to bring peace to Cambodia and enable Cambodian 
people to live peacefully or is it an attempt to kill the 
Cambodian nation and people and to destabilize the situation in 
the region? From where does this fuel to spark the war come? 
Does it come from the Cambodian people; or does it come from 
the Vietnamese communists, who are implementing their strategy 
to annex Cambodia, and from the idiotic allies who are serving 
the Vietnamese strategy? 
  5. Who are responsible for the current attempt to continue 
war in Cambodia? It is the Vietnamese communists and their 
allies. It is no-one else but the Vietnamese communists' 
People's Party with Hun Sen and Chea Sim as (?ringleaders) and 
the two-headed-three-eyed government which must be held fully 
responsible for the nation, people, the current and next 
generations to come, and history. 

