BFN 

  [Text] The rift within the communist movement stretched 
even wider as a flurry of statements marked the 21st anniversary 
yesterday of the National Democratic Front (NDF). 
  A spokesperson for two breakaway communist factions in 
Mindanao said groups who oppose the leadership of exiled 
communist leader Jose Maria Sison have been branded by forces 
loyal to him as counter-revolutionaries who should be treated 
accordingly. 
  Europe-based critics of Sison also sent a statement 
declaring 
they now represent the real NDF, indicating that the rift has 
extended to the continent. 
  Sison, believed to be founding chair of the Communist Party 
here, is in self-exile in Utrecht, The Netherlands. 
  Ike de los Reyes, speaking for NDF-Central Mindanao and the 
Moro Revolutionary Army, said members of the breakaway groups 
now fear liquidation not only by the military but also by former 
comrades who still acknowledge his [Sison] leadership. 
  De Los Reyes, who represented NDF-Northwest Mindanao in the 
1986 peace talks between communist rebels and the administration 
of President Corazon Aquino, said the NDF is virtually doomed 
because of the divisions wracking it. 
  "Our friends in the movement who are reaffirmists (loyal to 
Sison) tell us we are still their friends but no longer 
comrades," said De los Reyes. 
  "Others say we should be treated neither as friends nor as 
enemies but as counter-revolutionaries," he added. 
  He said breakaway rebels in Mindanao were warned by the 
Edilberto Djanggo Canoy Command, a supposed pro-Sison hit squad 
based in Davao City, that "if you cannot help the revolution, 
you should not help destroy it." 
  The differences between the opposing camps appeared 
irreconcilable after Sison announced recently that breakaway 
leaders, in collaboration with the Philippine military, have 
sent a hit squad to Utrecht to kill him. 
  Lt. Gen. Arturo Enrile, Armed Forces chief, has denied 
Sison's charge. 
  Ricardo Reyes, former communist leader in the Visayas, 
called 
the INQUIRER to clarify that he was not among those named by 
Sison as behind the alleged slay plot. 
  But a statement from Sison's base in Utrecht said Reyes, 
together with Romulo Kintanar, former head of the New People's 
Army, Benjamin de Vera and Marguerite Manalo, took part in a 
purge of suspected military agents inside the communist 
movement, which led to the killing of more than 950 rebels. 
  From the Visayas, a group of breakaway rebels said in a 
statement that Sison's charges are "nothing but a pack of lies 
and a ridiculous figment of (his) mind. 
  "The problem with Sison is that from his distant retreat in 
Utrecht, he relies solely on fax reports from his local robots," 
said the statement signed by Indio Pluma, supposed spokesperson 
of the Visayas breakaway group. 
  "(Sison) suffers from a dearth of information...and he now 
appears to be cracking under the weight of his own paranoia," 
the statement added. 
  For their part, Rose Cheung and Byron Bocar, who claim to be 
from NDF-Europe, said in yet another statement that Sison is 
"locked in a world where principle is dogma and not a guide to 
action...where revolutionary practice is not given the premium 
value it deserves." 
  The Europe-based group said Sison refused to heed the 
lessons 
which the Philippine communist movement can learn from the 
collapse of the Soviet Union and communist regimes in Eastern 
Europe. 
  "Learning from the negative example of the encroachments of 
Eastern European states on the civil and political liberties of 
their citizens, many Third World revolutionary movements now 
affirm and uphold such liberties and no longer just dismiss 
these as bourgeois," the group said. . 
  It added that breakaway rebels in Europe welcome the 
decision 
of local breakaway leaders to organize a panel to negotiate for 
possible peace with the administration. 
  Justice Secretary Franklin Drilon, however, said late last 
week that the government maintains its policy of negotiating 
only with the mainstream Left represented by Sison and Luis 
Jalandoni, who is also based in The Netherlands. 
  Drilon, who serves as adviser to the government peace panel 
negotiating with the NDF, said the administration is not 
encouraging the formation of a separate panel by breakaway rebel 
factions. 
  The statement from NDF-Europe said that "by usurping the 
powers of duly elected leadership bodies of the NDF through an 
executive coup last year the Utrecht troika of Messrs. [sentence 
as published] Sison, Jalandoni and (Antonio) Zumel have ceased 
to be the legitimate representatives of the NDF, and they now 
speak only for themselves." 

