CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Katalin Bossanyi: "Bekesi's Battles"] </F>
  [Text] Laszlo Bekesi is a very good economist. In addition, 
he has a sense of humor and a healthy dose of cynicism, which 
are necessary to make life tolerable. Now he has also 
demonstrated that he is not motivated by ambitions of high 
office and considerations of personal prestige. Lately he has 
declared repeatedly that he would prefer to stay out of the 
future government if it is not a coalitional one. For only with 
such wider social support does he see any chance for the 
realization of the MSZP's [Hungarian Socialist Party's] economic 
program--and let us add immediately: at least to the same 
extent, for the realization of the SZDSZ [Alliance of Free 
Democrats] economic program as well. 
  That is a very honorable position of principle. But, in the 
opinion of many people, it is not good politics. 
  After all, the MSZP and the SZDSZ will be making their final 
decision only this weekend on whether to start coalition talks 
and, if so, with whom. The government program, including its 
economic conceptual plan, will be the decisive element in the 
negotiations, and the subsequent bargaining over organizations 
and appointments will follow from it. But it does not seem to be 
a good tactical solution to make public in advance that one is 
not in the running. Moreover, it smacks a bit of blackmail, just 
as Balint Magyar's much publicized declaration did earlier. That 
is why many people, both within and outside the MSZP, tend to 
regard Bekesi's move as desertion. 
  I believe that Bekesi's present, kamikaze-like move deserves 
to be judged on the basis of its local worth. That is why I am 
inclined to regard the renowned economist's statement as a 
warning cry of danger, rather than a selfish excuse. 
  The persons to whom this warning cry is being addressed can 
be found in the leadership and among the rank and file of the 
Free Democrats, as well as of the Socialists. For what was 
Laszlo Bekesi's actual "message"? That the economy cannot be 
stabilized without a coalition. 
  That is plain speech. For the point here is not who gets 
which post or what the relationship between the two parties will 
be. It is the state of the economy today and tomorrow--or to 
make it more readily understandable, the future of each and 
every one of us. Of course, we might be skeptical of anyone who 
cites a wider horizon of interests in support of his case. But 
insincere pathos is not typical of the renowned economist. He 
does not want to use the people as an excuse or to reason in 
their stead, because he believes that not even the ample vote 
the MSZP received empowers it to do so. He presumably recognized 
long ago that the people are unwilling to simply accept further 
fiscal restraint, curtailment of demand, or the social sphere's 
direct exposure to market forces. They are willing to tolerate 
such necessary measures only if they get something in exchange. 
For instance, controllable guarantees for the reconciliation of 
interests, and some compensation for the most vulnerable social 
groups. With a large degree of simplification, that is Bekesi's 
economic program. It is neither liberal nor a collection of 
social solutions. Instead, it is crisis management based on 
harsh reality. Specifically in the interest of maintaining 
social peace, however, the program would (socially) cushion to 
some extent the impact of painful economic measures. That would 
not yet make the program more popular, but merely more tolerable. 
  It could be argued, of course, that Bekesi has not assessed 
the situation correctly; that the state of the economy is not so 
ominous, and therefore there is also a softer, easier, and 
socially more tolerable way of putting the economy in order than 
what Bekesi is offering. But not even Bekesi's opponents are 
resorting to this argument. Today the outgoing finance minister 
already admits that he has confidence in Bekesi. And the SZDSZ 
program for crisis management, discounting minor differences, 
urges the same solutions as "the program hallmarked with 
Bekesi's name." Consequently, if the SZDSZ refuses to join the 
coalition and rejects economic cooperation with the MSZP, then 
it also refuses to accept responsibility for the realization of 
its own economic conceptual plan (either because it has no 
confidence in the plan's success or is afraid of its 
consequences). This is what the Socialists' leading economist is 
calling to the Free Democrats' attention now, before the 
decision that is to be made this weekend. 
  And how can Bekesi's message be decoded within his own 
party? 
  My interpretation of the message is as follows: Bekesi does 
not fear that, if there should be no coalition in spite of 
everything, the MSZP would come under the influence of Sandor 
Nagy. A deal could be struck with the trade union leader; after 
all, the chairman of the MSZOSZ [National Federation of 
Hungarian Trade Unions] is a political realist. But Bekesi does 
fear--and not without cause--that, under one-party rule, a 
government of technocrats would not evolve. Several well-known 
economists, who could come into consideration, have already 
indicated that they would be willing to accept public office 
only if there is a coalition. Their motives are similar to 
Bekesi's: Crisis management requires the widest possible public 
support. Under a shaky government it would not be possible to 
implement long-overdue reforms that cannot be delayed any 
longer. And if the team were recruited from the "second string," 
or perhaps from truly "old cadres," the government could wobble 
along for a time, but the economy's decline could not be 
stopped, and an MSZP government would travel essentially the 
same road as the failed MDF [Hungarian Democratic Forum]. 
  I fully understand that the economic expert does not wish to 
assist in this. And if the SZDSZ refuses to shoulder the 
responsibility of government, then I agree with his decision. 
Even in the economy, the coming years will not be the era of 
solitary heroes. What we need now is teamwork. Within the 
framework of a coalition. Under well-balanced conditions, in 
other words. 

