Language: <F P=105> Polish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by B.I.W. and P.W.R.: "Solidarity: Government </F>
Declared War"] 
  [Text] "The Government of the Republic of Poland has 
declared war on members of the Independent Self-Governing Trade 
Union `Solidarity' working in the railroads"--this according to 
the Solidarity National Committee [KK]. Repressive measures 
used against the railroad Solidarity were seen as similar To 
martial law, "similar to the one imposed on 13 December." 
  Unionists cited the consent for trains to run red lights on 
the day of the strike, which was denied by the minister's 
spokesperson. "A group of strike breakers has been prepared, 
which consists of former members of the Voluntary Reserve of 
Citizens Militia," claims Solidarity. "Despite that, from 0900 
to 1900 on Friday [11 March], trains will not go anywhere," 
declared the union. 
  The KK, which held a session in Lodz, threatens a general 
strike and protest to international organizations if the 
authorities do not stop taking repressive measures. The power 
plant and the mine in Belchatow are ready to go on strike; these 
enterprises have placed themselves at the disposal of the 
protest headquarters. Today there will be a warning strike in 
all mines. 
<H5>  Furious Unionists </H5>
  KK members were infuriated when railroad workers informed 
them about the repressions. A Solidarity spokesman said that, 
in mines and telecommunication centers, Solidarity members are 
intimidated. Railroad workers complained that directors cut off 
communications for plant committees, do not allow Solidarity 
members to perform their tasks on the day of the strike, 
strengthen police patrols and the Railroad Protection Services, 
and threaten layoffs. 
  Marian Krzaklewski said that the union can wait two or three 
days for the government to stop violating the rights of the 
unionists. After that time, a general strike may break out. 
Asked whether Solidarity will be able to stage such a protest 
because the strike fund is still accumulating, Krzaklewski 
answered: We will see. 
<H5>  Today Mines and Shipyards </H5>
  Participating in yesterday's strikes were five plants in the 
Koszalin region and a few dozen plants in the Lodz Voivodship 
(90 plants were assigned to take action; 21 are ready for a 
general strike). Strikes were also staged in 150 plants of the 
Silesian-Dabrowa branch of Solidarity--that is, in 50 more than 
the authorities of the region had assigned. Between 0600 and 
0800 today, all 64 pit-coal mines are supposed to strike. 
Regional Solidarity Head Marek Kempski told us that the 
situation in the region is so tense that in approximately six 
mines the break in work may last as long as 24 hours. It is 
also possible that some of them will want to begin a continuous 
strike. 
  The national demands of Solidarity will also be supported 
today by over a hundred plants in and around Gdansk, including 
most probably the Gdansk seaport, the Gdansk and Gdynia 
shipyards, and the Repair Shipyard. 
  Marian Krzaklewski stated that the next culmination point of 
the Solidarity action will come after 15 March. 

