BFN 

<F P=106> [TA SR Washington dispatch: "Arpad Goncz and Michal Kovac </F>
Want To Contribute to Building Good-Neighborly Relations"] 
  [Text] Washington--"We have managed to introduce a certain 
calm into society in Slovakia. The government has started to 
work systematically and more conceptually, without regard for 
the fact that its mandate expires by the time of the elections 
in September," Slovak President Michal Kovac told the TA SR 
correspondent after his arrival in Washington. 
  He said that the first five months of the year indicate a 
certain economic growth, even though this phenomenon could be 
only temporary. An agreement with the IMF has been reached, and 
an agreement with the World Bank is in the offing, which bears 
out that the experts of these institutions have become convinced 
that the internal political stability is positively reflected 
also in the government's economic work. 
  Commenting on the intensification of relations between 
Slovakia and the United States, Michal Kovac said that he 
perceives them within the framework of the U.S. interest in the 
Central European region [sentence as published]. According to 
the president, the increased domestic stability in Slovakia also 
contributes to this because it was precisely after the change in 
government that a number of important bilateral visits were 
realized. 
  "I see the Institute for East-West Studies [IEWS] prize as a 
token of appreciation from an important international 
institution for the fact that the Slovak president, aside from 
dealing with various domestic political problems, initiated a 
dialogue with representatives of the Hungarian minority and 
Hungarian President Arpad Goncz," President Kovac told the TA SR 
correspondent. 
  "It is a token of appreciation for not only my policy but 
also the policy of all of the political forces that currently 
seek the establishment of good, friendly relations between 
Hungary and Slovakia. I am thinking also of the present 
coalition government, which has already taken a number of 
accommodating steps in this direction," Kovac said. 
  The president went on to say that, together with Hungarian 
President Arpad Goncz, they realize the great importance of 
achieving historical reconciliation between Hungary and 
Slovakia. "As long as we hold our present posts, we will do 
everything within our power so that Hungarian-Slovak relations 
become relations between two good, friendly neighbors," the 
Slovak president stressed. 

