Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Yinchuan, March 14 (XINHUA) -- A massive 
afforestation campaign in north, northwest and northeast China 
(the "three-north" region) has stifled the encroachment of 
deserts in the region and helped form an economic belt there, 
official sources said. 
  Rows of desert-defying forest greenbelts, orchards, newly 
developed farmland and tourist attractions with a taste of the 
wild desert have diminished the ferocity of the desert that once 
dominated the region. 
  Many of the country's desert areas are scattered over more 
than 260 counties in 13 provinces, municipalities and autonomous 
regions in the "three-north" region, which has plus-1.9 billion 
mu (about 12.7 million ha [hectare]) of desert and desertified 
land. 
  The lingering desert problem, compounded by the arid 
climate, 
frequent wind storms and a vicious cycle of escalating wind and 
desert, has harmed farmland, devoured pastureland, buried 
houses, disrupted transportation and overall severely affected 
the lives and production of some 35 million local people. 
  Since a comprehensive "three-north" afforestation campaign 
was launched 15 years ago, more than 70 million mu (4.67 million 
ha) of desert land has been planted with various species of 
trees, in addition to afforestation of 56 million mu (3.73 
million ha) of enclosed desert land and aerial seeding of some 
7.5 million mu (500,000 ha) of land. 
  The figures have combined to help raise the region's total 
area with tree cover to over 200 million mu (13.3 million ha). 
  So far some 12 percent of the "three-north" desertified land 
has been improved and around 20 million mu (1.33 million ha) of 
farmland has been developed in the former deserts. 
  In the region's 164 million mu (around 11 million ha) of 
farmland whose yields were perenially poor and unstable because 
of storms and the advance of the desert, grain output has been 
hiked by 10 to 30 percent. 
  And grass output in the 134 million mu (8.93 million ha) of 
pastoral land threatened by desertification and salinization has 
increased by more than 20 percent. 
  The green drive has meanwhile spurred the local forestry and 
fruit tree planting industries. The region's commercial 
orchards now produce more than six billion kg of fresh and dried 
fruits annually, bringing in an additional six billion yuan 
(about 690 million U.S. dollars) in output value. 
  In Inner Mongolia's Chifeng city and Jirem League, both open 
to the unbridled assault of desert storms in the past, a 
seven-million- mu-sized production base for mountain almonds has 
been established, yielding six million kg of such almonds a 
year. The output of apples and pears in the specialized 
production base in Bayannur League is 10 million kg annually, 
and the Wuhai Grape Production Center produces five million kg a 
year. 
  North China's Shaanxi Province has set up a six-million-mu 
willow production and processing zone, which annually earns more 
than 20 million yuan (2.3 million U.S. dollars) in profits and 
2.8 million U.S. dollars in foreign exchange. 
  Officials said that the planting of commercial forests has 
become one of the mainstay industries in the local economy. 
  They said that the forest belts, reservoirs and newly-built 
houses on the most extreme frontiers of deserts have marked the 
turning point of man's fight against deserts. 
  In Yulin of Shaanxi Province, four desert forest belts add 
up 
to 1,500 km in length, covering an area of 1.8 million mu 
(120,000 ha). The belts have effectively halted desert 
expansion, officials said. 
  Neighboring Gansu Province has so far improved and 
afforested 
some five million mu (333,000 ha) of desertified land as well as 
protected 4.7 million mu (310,000 ha) of farmland and orchards 
from the intrusion of desert and 1,400 villages from being 
swallowed up by drifting sands. The arid area has now emerged 
as a major grain producer in north China. 
  Northeast China's Jilin Province has planted eight million 
mu 
(530,000 ha) of trees and claimed a total of four million mu 
(367,000 ha) of farmland from the desert. The province has 
virtually controlled the spreading of deserts, officials said. 
  North China's Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region has considered 
the exploration of desertified land and sand mountains as a 
major source to increase farmers' income. 
  The successful experiences of the "three-north" region of 
China in containing desert expansion and improving desertified 
land has caught attention worldwide. Officials and experts from 
more than 40 countries, regions and the United Nations have 
inspected the afforestation project in China's "three-north" 
region. 

