BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Commonwealth Update" program] </F>
  [Text] The board of directors of the Russian ministry for 
emergency situations [Ministry for Civil Defense, Emergencies, 
and Natural Disasters] has held an open session to report on 
preparing an expedition to the Norwegian Sea, where the 
Komsomolets nuclear- powered submarine sank in deep waters. 
More from our correspondent Irina Korneyeva, and here is what 
she writes. 
  I shall remind our listeners that the two torpedoes with 
nuclear warheads, each containing 3,200 grams of plutonium-39, 
were most dangerous environmentally. The torpedo launchers were 
partially demolished due to the submarine's depressurizing. 
There is an imminent danger of radioactive leakage into the 
environment due to a free water exchange in the afore sections 
of the atomic submarine. According to some reports, this can 
become a reality in 1995. Therefore, a decision was taken in 
Moscow to carry on rescue works at the site of the Komsomolets 
wreckage this summer. 
  The director of the Main Board for Underwater Rescuing 
Missions, Mikhail Talokolnikov, describes the forthcoming 
mission as follows: 
  [Begin Talokolnikov recording, in Russian with superimposed 
English translation] To minimize radioactive leakage we have 
entrusted the mission with the following tasks. Firstly, the 
mission should try to partially seal the afore sections of the 
submarine, using deep water submersible apparatuses. Secondly, 
it should monitor the radio-ecology at the wreckage site in an 
an attempt to pinpoint most likely directions of the plutonium 
products' diffusion due to corrosion. Thirdly, it would examine 
the hub of the submarine and the floating rescue camera box, 
which has broken up and now lies at the bottom six km to the 
west of the submarine. 
  I shall recall that the final pressurizing of the submarine 
hub is due to take place in 1995. This will be a second stage 
in implementing the safety of the submarine. Special rubber 
seals were developed to block a possible radioactive leakage due 
to a corrosion. The first consignment is already aboard a 
research vessel, Academician Keldysh. These rubber seals will 
be mounted from the Mir manned deep submersibles, equipped with 
manipulators. An expert analysis shows these works will present 
no dangers to pilots or to the environment. Besides, the 
submersibles are relatively cheap. Their manufacturing costs 
will exceed the monitoring costs only by 15 or 20 percent and 
will amount to 4.6 billion rubles, $4.1 million. 
  As to the ecological monitoring, a wide-ranging program is 
envisaged. Diverse and novel types of equipment are to be 
tested during the pending mission. One of the appliances will 
stay at the bottom of the sea to register medium radiation for 
one year after the mission is over. This will be done for the 
first time in the history of underwater works. Now a wide 
ecological monitoring is necessary, for real background readings 
at the site of the wreckage are particularly important if taken 
this year. If this is done experts will be able to monitor the 
changes in the environment pollution. [end recording] 

