Language: <F P=105> Lithuanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Passages within quotation marks recorded] </F>
  [Text] Two statements were made by Russian Foreign Minister 
Andrey Kozyrev about the Baltic states this week. The Baltic 
states, continually referred to as the near abroad by the 
Russian minister and other politicians, are accused of violating 
the rights of the Russian speaking population. 
  Looking at the development of the events in Russia and the 
foreign policy that is being pursued, the Lithuanian Seimas 
states with concern that of late Russian expansionism toward the 
Baltic states has become absolutely undisguised. 
  This was said in the official statement made by the Seimas 
members. Here is Ilona Rukiene with her report. 
  [Rukiene] The statement made by the Lithuanian Seimas reads 
that the withdrawal of the Russian troops from Latvia and 
Estonia was to end the abnormal situation that is the result of 
the 1940 aggression by the Soviet Union. These troops had to be 
withdrawn swiftly and unconditionally, especially after the 10 
July 1992 Helsinki summit meeting and the political document 
adopted by all the European countries, including Russia, as well 
as in compliance with the UN resolution of 1993. 
  However, the withdrawal is being suspended and protracted 
and 
ultimatum type conditions are being imposed. In addition, the 
protracted illegal presence of the Russian troops in Latvia is 
used for provocations and conflicts with threats to use 
immediately the huge Russian military force against the 
powerless neighbor. 
  The Russian foreign minister now makes statements and 
attacks 
the Baltic states several days after Bill Clinton's visit to 
Moscow. 
  This was also noted by Justinas Karosas, chairman of the 
ruling Lithuanian Democratic Labor Party Seimas faction. 
  [Karosas] "The point is that the above-mentioned statement 
by 
Kozyrev, regardless of how it may be interpreted, caused my 
concern because it nevertheless appeared after the meeting of 
Yeltsin and Clinton in Moscow. 
  "At that time, on Monday, I was in Copenhagen at the meeting 
of the European Assembly. The European reaction to these types 
of Russian actions and statements is negative. I mean the 
reaction of the European states. I think that the three Baltic 
states will also react to this accordingly." 
  [Rukiene] The evident wish of the Russian politicians to 
divide the Baltic states can also be seen in the statement made 
by Andrey Kozyrev. While making threats to Latvia he proposes 
that Latvia should get in line with Lithuania and conclude 
treaties. 
  [Karosas] "Besides the Russian efforts to divide the Baltic 
states, which is understandable, we ourselves have contributed 
to this as well while competing over who will be the first to 
declare independence and so on. I am very glad indeed that of 
late mutual relations between the three Baltic states are 
becoming normal. It goes without saying that we will help 
Latvia politically and morally; we are undoubtedly standing with 
Latvia and Estonia. This is an unofficial concord of the three 
Baltic states." 
  [Rukiene] Algirdas Saudargas, member of the Lithuanian 
Seimas 
and former foreign minister, noted that there was nothing new in 
the Russian foreign policy and that Russia was successfully 
proceeding towards its objective. 
  [Saudargas] "Indeed, this a diplomacy that strongly defends 
Russia's interests and is carried out very well indeed. 
Essentially what they are doing --including such activists as 
Zhirinovskiy -- is testing Western reaction. You can call this 
screening [preceding word in English] as it is said in English. 
They make various statements that contradict one another 
measuring the reaction from the West. Until decisions and 
changes are established in the Russian policy (?this will 
continue)." 
  [Rukiene] In the opinion of Algirdas Saudargas, negotiations 
are taking place between Russia and the Western states on 
spheres of influence. 
  [Saudargas] "A natural division is taking place because 
Russia has withdrawn from the occupied territories and now this 
boundary is being established. [as heard] Russia will allow the 
Visegrad states to join NATO for a certain payment and it will 
be permitted to establish its influence on the territory of the 
former Soviet Union. I think that negotiations concerning the 
Baltic states are still going on." 
  [Rukiene] Gediminas Kirkilas, member of the Seimas 
Democratic 
Labor Party faction, is of the opinion that Andrey Kozyrev's 
statements are linked with his wish to remain on the post of the 
minister in the new Russian Government, and his statements, 
followed in quick succession, are called by Gediminas Kirkilas a 
political theater taking place after certain agreements with the 
United States. 
  [Kirkilas] "Recent events in Lithuania and the unexpected 
handing over of two criminals to Lithuania compel one to think 
that, maybe, the way is being paved for alleged violations of 
rights, which must be defended, and show to the whole world what 
is happening in Lithuania [as heard]. On the other hand, we 
must not [passage indistinct]." 
  [(Rukiene] Gediminas Kirkilas is for good neighborly 
relations and cooperation with Russia. 
  Romualdas Ozolas, Seimas member and leader of the Center 
Union, is of the opinion that after threatening statements by 
the Russian foreign minister to Lithuania and other Baltic 
states a dilemma must be solved: open aggression or a compulsory 
military alliance with Russia because, in his opinion, Russia 
did offer any other possibilities [as heard]. 

