Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 20 KYODO -- China's Foreign Ministry 
downplayed Japanese Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's statement 
urging China to make human rights improvements Saturday [19 
March], offering a different version of the comment. 
  According to Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Wu Jianmin, 
Hosokawa "expressed his view that it is not sensible for Western 
countries to impose their own values of democracy upon other 
countries." 
  "He also pointed out that various countries in the world 
should make joint efforts to realize the principles and spirit 
enshrined in the Declaration (on Human Rights)," Wu quoted him 
as saying. 
  The prime minister, however, at a press conference Sunday 
said, "I told him (Li) with the declaration on human rights the 
international community accepts human rights as a universal 
issue and each country should make efforts." 
  "I don't think China has any objections to this view," 
Hosokawa said. 
  The statement by Hosokawa came at a welcoming banquet given 
by Premier Li Peng on Saturday night after Li briefly introduced 
details of a visit to Beijing by U.S. Secretary of State Warren 
Christopher earlier this month. 
  During those talks the United States insisted on the 
universality of human rights and strongly urged the Chinese to 
make improvements in the area as a condition to renew China's 
most-favored-nation trading status. 
  China, however, refused to accept linkage of human rights 
conditions to trade and lambasted the U.S. for interfering in 
China's "internal affairs." 
  Japan's Foreign Ministry had its own version of the matter, 
opting to strengthen the prime minister's statement. 
  "Prime Minister Hosokawa told Mr. Li Peng that the Japanese 
Government considers that human rights is a universal question," 
Japanese Foreign Ministry spokesman Kishichiro Amae said. "Each 
country has to endeavor to respect human rights." 
  In a related matter, a group of Chinese calling themselves 
the "Association of Chinese Patriots" sent an open letter Sunday 
to Hosokawa urging him to place human rights and democracy on 
Japan's foreign policy agenda. 

