BFN 

  [Text] Arusha, Tanzania, April 23 (AFP) -- Rwandan rebels 
threw talks planned here Saturday [23 April] and aimed at ending 
an ethnic bloodbath into turmoil by refusing to negotiate with 
the government delegation. 
  Interior Minister Faustin Munyazesa, accompanied by two 
senior military officers, were due to arrive late Saturday 
aboard a United Nations plane. But they had failed to turn up 
by eight p.m. (1700 GMT), two hours after the talks were 
scheduled to open. 
  The rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front, which issued a unilateral 
ceasefire declaration earlier Saturday, sent only one 
representative, secretary-general Theogene Rudasingwa. 
Rudasingwa told reporters that he was willing to discuss 
ceasefire conditions with military officers, but rejected talks 
with members of the interim government which the rebels do not 
recognise. "I came here with two objectives, to talk to the 
secretary-general of the Organisation of African Unity Salim 
Ahmad Salim, and to talk to Tanzanian officials," Rudasingwa 
said. 
  He expressed pessimism about the likelihood of the 
government 
acccepting rebel conditions for a ceasefire starting at midnight 
(2100 GMT) Monday, including an end to violence that has cost 
tens of thousands of lives, and an international investigation 
into the massacres. "Based on their track record, I don't think 
their response is going to be positive," Rudasingwa said. 
  A Rwandan diplomat meanwhile declared there would be no 
official government reaction to the ceasefire proposals because, 
he said, the rebels were responsible for the violence. He 
accused the rebels of boycotting the talks by sending only one 
representative. 
  A spokesman for the UN Assistance Mission in Rwanda 
meanwhile 
declined to comment on the ceasefire declaration because the 
world body had been informed of the proposals directly but had 
learned of them from reporters. 
  The death of President Juvenal Habyarimana in a mysterious 
April 6 plane crash rekindled a three-year civil war between the 
rebels, mainly from the minority Tutsi tribe, and the army, 
drawn mostly from the majority Hutus. 

