BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondents Sevindzh Abdullayeva and Viktor </F>
Shulman] 
  [Text] Baku, 22 Apr -- The new Russian draft plan for 
solving the armed Armenian-Azerbaijan conflict and the 
transition to eliminating its consequences "is not acceptable to 
the Azerbaijan side." This is the opinion of the members of the 
National Assembly (parliament) of Azerbaijan who examined the 
draft plan this evening. 
  Although the issue was not included on the agenda, it was 
proposed to National Assembly Speaker Rasul Guliyev that it 
should be discussed. The latter had stressed that "it was not a 
question of adopting any kind of specific decision, but of the 
deputies expressing their attitude to the new Russian 
initiatives." In the opinion of the absolute majority of 
parliamentarians, "the interests of Azerbaijan were not 
reflected" in them. In the view of the deputies, the adoption 
of the draft plan "would in fact set the seal on the occupation 
of the lands captured earlier by the Armenian side, and would 
mean a loss of 35 percent of the republic's territory." It is 
known that at the present time the Armenian armed formations are 
in control of 20 percent of Azerbaijan's territory. 
  At the same time, it is stressed at the session, that such a 
stand by the National Assembly "by no means signifies that the 
National Assembly is opposed to a peaceful solution to this 
problem." The parliamentarians believe that "the Azerbaijani 
side should draw up an alternative draft plan for a settlement 
of the Armenian-Azerbaijan conflict and submit it to its Russian 
mediators." 
  The Foreign Affairs Ministry of Azerbaijan has been charged 
with doing this. Hasan Hasanov, the head of the republic's 
foreign policy department, himself thinks that "without 
rejecting the Russian draft, they should work on it to make it 
correspond to the national interests of Azerbaijan." 
  A number of parliamentarians have expressed the view that it 
is necessary to return to the "tripartite initiative" variant 
that envisages Russia, the United States, and Turkey 
participating as mediators, which would allow a mutually 
acceptable variant to be found for settling the conflict 
surrounding Nagorno-Karabakh. They also think that 
disengagement forces should operate with a UN mandate. 

