Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Husayn-'Arafat Meeting"] </F>
  [Text] The meeting which took place between His Majesty 
King Husayn and His Excellency Palestinian President Yasir 
'Arafat at the International Queen Alia Airport yesterday has 
revived Jordanian-Palestinian coordination. This coordination 
has had its ups and downs throughout the peace process. 
  Yesterday's two-hour talks between King Husayn and 'Arafat 
come at a time when the Israeli intentions have been exposed in 
a blatant and contemptuous way and when it has become clear that 
Israel was obstructing the Gaza-Jericho First accord. In fact, 
Israel is intentionally following the course of maneuvering, 
procrastination, and deception in an attempt to torpedo the 
entire peace process now that it has achieved political, 
diplomatic, and economic gains from its alleged concern for 
peace and interests in launching a new stage of coexistence in 
the region. 
  The Jordanian and Palestinian sides assert the need to 
embark 
on a new stage of a long-term and clear earnest coordination 
between Jordan and Palestine. Such coordination will guarantee 
the Palestinian people's legitimate rights on their national 
soil, enable the Palestinian people to remain steadfast, 
alleviate the suffering of this people under occupation, and 
help them live an honorable life. Such coordination will also 
lead to a just, lasting, and comprehensive peace. Asserting 
this coordination is a return to the normal course that has 
always governed the historical relationship between the two 
twins. It is also an exact reflection of existent facts that 
cannot be denied, ignored, or bypassed. 
  The coordination between Jordan and Palestine in the battle 
for peace will have great effects on the two fraternal people, 
their interests, and their rights. It also constitutes a pillar 
and support for each part in its confrontation against the 
Israeli maneuvering and attempts to bypass the Palestinian 
people's legitimate rights to their land and homeland. This 
coordination -- in addition to accomplishing coordination with 
the cordon states as well as on the Arab and Islamic levels -- 
is a real guarantee to achieve a just, permanent, and 
comprehensive peace. 

