Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Stewart Tendler and Philip Willian: "Suffolk </F>
Cocaine Seizure: Mafia Muscles in on Britain's Drug Smuggling 
Trade"] 
  [Text] The Mafia has for the first time been directly 
linked to drug-smuggling into this country after the seizure of 
250kg of cocaine at Felixstowe, Suffolk, last week. 
  A Mafia presence had already been established in Britain, 
used as a base to launder profits from crime or as a transfer 
point for drugs being smuggled to other countries. The seizure 
will call into question the view that the Mafia would probably 
be attracted to softer targets in eastern Europe, rather than 
London, as a destination for drugs. 
  In Italy earlier this month, Paul Condon, the Metropolitan 
police commissioner, met the judge supervising the drive against 
the Mafia. Although he is understood to have been advised that 
the Italian authorities believe the Mafia was working to expand 
into Russia and Hungary rather than the UK, he was warned that 
it was using London to launder money. 
  Two years ago British embassy staff in Rome issued a warning 
that this country could become a target for the Mafia. The 
authors of the report, a senior diplomat and a Scotland Yard 
officer on secondment with the Italian police, were accused of 
exaggerating the risks. Now, with the first evidence that the 
Mafia could be targeting Britain with big drugs consignments, 
that view might have to be revised. 
  Police and Customs officers have long accepted that the 
Mafia 
has a presence in Britain but its size and influence has been 
unclear. Intelligence had also suggested this country was being 
used principally to launder profits or as a transfer point for 
drugs on their way to other countries. There were few overt 
signs of the Mafia although the death of an Italian cocaine 
dealer in west London over a decade ago raised the possibility 
of a Mafia-style killing. Investigators in another case also 
uncovered an agricultural fraud stretching from Sicily to 
Britain. 
  The first evidence that the presence might be more potent 
came in the 1980s when Customs officers broke up a heroin 
smuggling ring linked to Montreal. 
  Francesco Di Carlo, who had been living under cover in 
Surrey, was jailed for 25 years in 1987 as the head of a racket 
moving heroin worth &pound;75 million. 
  Di Carlo, who had lived undisturbed in Woking after being 
exiled from Sicily after being demoted from the island's Mafia 
leadership, had been able to build up a series of businesses and 
other smuggling interests in Britain, apart from the heroin 
trade. The investigators discovered that an even more powerful 
figure had been living in luxury in a country mansion and had 
fled before he could be arrested. 
  Police believe Di Carlo's mantle passed to another chieftain 
who remains in London. A second Mafia figure operates as a 
successful businessman and also still works in Britain. 
  The thrust of Mafia operations had hitherto been identified 
as harnessing London's huge financial markets to move or conceal 
Mafia cash. Scotland Yard recently detected what it believes are 
attempts by the Mafia to buy works of art as long-term 
investments for dirty money. 
  Earlier this year, a colonel from the anti-Mafia squad in 
Rome visited London to examine files on suspected Mafia fraud 
and laundering operations. He was sufficiently concerned by his 
findings to recommend the appointment of an Italian officer to 
work full-time with the unit in London. 
  The cocaine cache now raises new dangers. Since the 
beginning 
of the 1990s, American and European experts on the Mafia have 
been concerned that the Sicilian network of gangs which makes up 
the modern Mafia could be seeking to expand. 
  Italian investigators said that the Mafia would capitalise 
on 
the reduction of frontier controls and trade restrictions within 
the European Union. In the United States, federal agents issued 
warnings about alliances between the Mafia and the Colombian 
cartels. 

