BFN 

<F P=106> [B.M., Lj.C. report: "Mt. Ozren Remains Serbian"] </F>
  [Text] "Mt. Ozren will remain forever Serbian," were the 
words that Radovan Karadzic, president of the republic of 
Srpska, spoke two nights ago in Vozuca, a village from which 
Serbian forces are defending the approach to the mountain's 
southern slopes. 
  Dr. Karadzic was accompanied by General Ratko Mladic, 
commander of the Serb republic army, General Momir Talic, 
commander of the 1st Krajina corps, and Mr. Vasilije, bishop of 
Zvornik-Tuzla. Dr. Karadzic also visited Doboj. 
  In stressing that "Mt. Ozren will remain forever Serbian," 
Dr. Karadzic was effectively denying rumors that the republic of 
Srpska leadership had accepted the surrender of this territory 
to the future Muslim-Croat federation. These rumors about the 
alleged surrender of Mt. Ozren have been particularly widespread 
after the fall of Vijenac, one of the most important strategic 
points on the mountain. Vijenac was captured by the 117 Lukavac 
Brigade of the Muslim Bosnia-Herzegovina Army during a brief 
clash, in which most of the members of the Krnjinska Brigade did 
not even try to defend it properly! 
  According to the reports of the Muslim radio of 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, the capture of Vijenac must have been one of 
the greatest, if not the greatest, victory of Alija 
Izetbegovic's army so far in the war against the Serbian forces. 
The Command of the Bosnia-Herzegovina Army's 2nd Corps claims 
that its troops on Vijenac captured 70 and killed 21 fighters of 
the Krnjinska brigade. According to Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
the Muslim Bosnia-Herzegovina Army captured a tank, a Bofors, 
eight mortars, several antiaircraft guns and some machine guns. 
  In capturing Vijenac, the Muslim Bosnia-Herzegovina Army is 
now in a position to attack Serb villages on the eastern slopes 
of Mt. Ozren, particularly Orahovica, Badinovici, and Savicici. 
At the same time, by capturing Vijenac the Muslim 
Bosnia-Herzegovina Army has removed the pressure from this 
direction from the Serbian forces on Alija Izetbegovic's troops 
in Lukavac, Zivinice, and other places in the Tuzla basin. 
Simultaneously, the Muslim troops have now created the 
conditions for a "spread" in a possible wider attack on Mt. 
Ozren from its southeastern side. 
  Considering that the people of Mt. Ozren had resisted all 
the 
attacks on Vijenac by the Muslim Bosnia-Herzegovina Army for two 
years, and that it fell at a time when it was supposed to be 
defended by the Krnjina people, the rumors about surrendering 
this region to Alija Izetbegovic could easily turn Mt. Ozren 
into another Bilogora: To make the people flee the region, and 
the Serbian fighters desert their positions! That would allow 
the Muslim Bosnia-Herzegovina Army to achieve more than it has 
achieved in the entire war so far against the republic of Srpska 
army! 
  The Serbian forces did suffer defeat on Vijenac, but the 
loss 
of this significant point does not mean that they have lost Mt. 
Ozren, let alone the war! 

