CSO 

  [Text] The winner last Ramadan was the Egyptian satellite 
channel. This was confirmed by our study of the Egyptian and 
Arab expatriate community in Paris. The channel succeeded 
throughout the days and evenings of the blessed month of Ramadan 
in regaining the trust of the Egyptian and Arab people. For its 
transmission was well-organized and its programs diversified, 
and it won in its competition with the other Arab channels, 
especially after its "dish" price decreased, and it became 
within everybody's means. 
  The truth is that this evolution that the Egyptian satellite 
channel is currently witnessing, and that everyone recognizes, 
started several months ago, not just in the month of Ramadan. 
This channel was studied from all sides, both transmission and 
programs. They were able to define its problems, and identify 
the reasons for the interruption of transmission or its 
weakness. These efforts began with the visit the minister of 
information, Safwat al-Sharif, took to France recently, and his 
signing of an agreement permitting the transmission of the 
Egyptian satellite channel to some French cities. 
  The odd thing is that the Egyptian satellite channel has 
become--with regard to the Arab and Egyptian expatriates--strong 
competition for the French channels, in the sense that most 
families kept on gravitating towards the Egyptian channel's 
programs, and they don't watch French television. It is to blame 
for the anxiety of some mothers. Ms. Hanan Muhammad Al-Said, 
mother of two children aged ten and six explains: 
  "My children are no longer interested in watching French 
television, just as they have refused to have anything to do 
with the cartoons that children usually love. They remain tied 
all the time to the satellite channel broadcasts. 
  "I don't deny that "our sons" have improved their Arabic and 
especially the Egyptian dialect because of their constant 
following of the satellite channel, but what makes me concerned 
now is that they have stopped following their favorite programs 
on French television." 
  Ms. Hanan confirmed that the Egyptian satellite channel has 
succeeded in attracting all the Egyptians during Ramadan, just 
as it was able to break through the sense of exile. The sad 
atmosphere that was born in our souls and that carries all our 
good memories with it in our souls appears especially on big 
religious occasions like Ramadan. 
<H5>  Breaking Through the Sense of Exile </H5>
  Ms. Kawathir Hassanein--mother of two children and one older 
boy, their ages ranging between five and 15 years, says: 
  "The satellite channel has made us feel that we are living 
in 
Egypt, for we see everything, just as if we were living there. I 
hardly feel that I am living in France except when I go out into 
the street, and I interact with others. 
  "The only problem we have with the cartoons on the satellite 
channel is that their dialogue is in Modern Standard Arabic and 
that makes it hard for my children to follow because they know 
colloquial and not Modern Standard." 
  Dr. Ahmed Gamal (father of two children) believes that the 
satellite channel, with its improved programs has became a 
better tool of awakening and feeding feelings of belonging. For 
Egypt is present in the souls of our sons day and night, and our 
family joins in all the religious and national occasions. There 
is also great passion among the Egyptian expatriates for the 
ball games and their scores. They talk about them all the time 
just as if we were sitting in the popular coffee houses of Cairo. 
  He adds: "As for the most important improvements of the 
satellite channel, they are that it made Egyptian families 
refrain from searching for a special teacher to teach the 
colloquial language to the children, as Egypt made them teach it 
in history books present in front of them during every 
broadcast." 
<H5>  The Distance of the Channel From the Interests of the </H5>
Expatriates 
  But another person, Abd al-Hamid Muhassan, who has lived in 
Paris for 15 years, thinks that what the satellite channel is 
deficient in is its lack of approaching the interests of the 
expatriate Egyptians, for it doesn't offer them through its 
programs enough information relating to the customs laws or talk 
to them about new Egyptian products. 
  He adds: "This information will benefit us greatly because 
it 
will make us avoid some of the problems that confronted us at 
the airport at the time of our visit to Egypt just as it will 
prompt us to buy Egyptian products instead of returning carrying 
gifts from Paris." 
  Abd al-Hamid does not deny that the Egyptian satellite 
channel eliminated his feelings of loneliness because he lives 
alone in Paris while his wife and his children live in Egypt, 
and because he keeps on feeling that he sees what they see and 
he lives in their atmosphere. Likewise, it has become within his 
capability to send them his greetings through articles earmarked 
for receiving the correspondence of expatriates. 
  Another remark that another expatriate, Mr. Uthman (he has 
lived in Paris for 10 years and he is the father of two 
children) cites is this. He says: 
  "We are suffering from a deficiency of information that the 
satellite channel broadcasts especially with what relates to the 
recent occurrences of violence in Upper Egypt. While the 
broadcasts and other means of media are keen on broadcasting 
them, there are many occurrences of exaggeration in them. We 
find ourselves scattered, lost between what we hear from these 
broadcasts, and the condensed news that the satellite channel 
broadcasts. 
  "Likewise, we want it to cover a larger area of local and 
regional news, because most of us want to know what is happening 
in the governorates and the centers in Egypt. For we follow the 
international news on French television, and we are not 
deficient in anything except the regional news that seems 
marginal to some but is in reality of the utmost importance to 
the expatriates." 
  Mr. Uthman offers another observation concerning the program 
"Arabian Evening." He says that it is a splendid program, but 
most of the songs that it offers are resumed more than once in a 
week, and he wonders why Egyptian television does not try to 
broadcast new songs and passages. 
  Finally, the Arab and Egyptian expatriates in Paris agree on 
the distinctness of the programs that the satellite channel 
offers and particularly the program "Words of Gold," the program 
"Very Frank Dialogue," which invited as its guest the first time 
Mr. Ibrahim Nafia', editor-in-chief of Al-Ahram, and a cartoon 
program, in addition to the other series like the series "No," 
which Mustapha Amin wrote, and the series "Arabesque," whose 
starring role was undertaken by the gifted artist Salah 
Al-Saadani. 
  The expatriates are requesting an increase in the space 
designated for cultural programs so that the satellite channel 
is not transformed into merely entertainment. Likewise, some of 
them suggested that the channel undertake the identification of 
the Egyptian and Arab expatriates respectively during the 
conducting of civil investigations that involve the life of the 
expatriates in different countries, then broadcast them. 

