Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Hernan Mena Cifuentes] </F>
  [Text] The bands that traffic in illegal aliens struck a 
new blow in the past few hours with the illegal entry at the 
international airport of Maiquetia of some 30-odd Chinese and 
Iraqi citizens, less than a week after the arrest of eight 
Indians, who also lacked the necessary visas. 
  The report, confirmed by authorized spokespersons of several 
state security organizations assigned to the airport, states 
that due to the rapid intervention of police intelligence and 
investigative services of the DIEX [Directorate of 
Identification and Alien Affairs], the band has been virtually 
destroyed. However, two of its members, who were identified as 
officials of Interpol and of Immigration, escaped when they were 
about to be arrested. 
  The first group of illegal aliens--six Iraqi 
citizens--arrived last Saturday, 5 February, on board an 
Alitalia flight from Rome and, after paying $18,000, were taken 
from the transit section to the outskirts of the airport, where 
an automobile awaited them that took them to Caracas. 
  On the following day, according to the source, 28 Chinese 
citizens, all illegal aliens, arrived on board a British Airways 
flight from London in transit to Cartagena. They were held at 
the airport and taken to the offices of DIEX, in the customs 
area. 
  Once inside the DIEX offices, there began a scramble among 
several employees of DIEX and Interpol over the division of the 
thousands of dollars that the Asians offered to pay so as not to 
be deported. 
  A dispute the following day, provoked by the alleged contact 
or abettor (naturalized Chinese) of the illegal Asians, who 
argued heatedly with a member of the band (a DIEX official known 
as "El Maracucho"), insisting that he not demand more money for 
the "service," sparked an investigation by DISIP [Directorate of 
Intelligence and Prevention Services], carried out by personnel 
of the Immigration Investigative Service in Maiquetia. 
  As a result of the investigation, two officials were about 
to 
be arrested who were suspected of being implicated but, 
presumably warned by their accomplices, they "disappeared" and 
are now fugitives. 
  As is widely known, the traffic in illegal aliens at 
Maiquetia is an old story, and many scandals have been uncovered 
that involved senior officials in the Immigration Service in 
this commerce in human beings. 
  Because of the activities of these bands of traffickers and 
mafia-like organizations that operate at Maiquetia, the DIEX 
offices at the airport have been investigated several times in 
recent years, which makes it probable that a similar 
investigation could take place, in an effort to destroy these 
organizations. 
  The entry of illegal aliens through Maiquetia is said to 
have 
produced millions in profits in U.S. currency for the groups 
that engage in this traffic. It is estimated that, between 
Arabs, Chinese, citizens of India and other countries, they have 
brought in thousands of people from various parts of the world. 

