Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Bratislava STV 1 Television Network in 
Slovak at 2105 GMT on 15 March carries in place of its usual 
"Press Club" program a 60-minute program entitled "May We Enter, 
President?," which is usually scheduled for other days. The 
program consists of a live discussion between President Michal 
Kovac and journalists Marian Lesko and Ivan Horsky. The 
anchorman is not identified. 
  The first 40 minutes are devoted to a discussion of the 
president's report on the state of the country presented to 
parliament on 9 March and Meciar's speech in parliament on 11 
March. The president agreed that reactions to his report may 
vary. This was the first ever report of its kind, and he tried 
his best to present the real state of affairs. The president 
then quotes some parts of his report to show that former Prime 
Minister Meciar misinterpreted him in his speech. The president 
also responds to other accusations made by former Prime Minister 
Meciar in the past. 
  After that, all three participants speculate on whether any 
government other than that of Meciar could have done better. 
One of the journalists opines that too much power became 
concentrated in the hands of one or two politicians. The 
president then recalls the history of his views on the need for 
a government of a broad coalition as well as his talks with 
Prime Minister Meciar related to this issue. He points out the 
danger of one or two people holding power and being 
indispensable to the nation. He expresses his belief in the 
possibility of a broad coalition of several parties because 
their programs do not differ too much. According to him, this 
coalition is possible on the condition that the politicians 
involved are personalities who are able to cooperate. Asked 
about the names of the nominees for ministerial posts, the 
president declines to make them public. 
  Answering a question on what the future government can 
achieve before the next elections, the president says: "I think 
we are aware that, first of all, it is necessary to create a 
calm atmosphere in society, a calm atmosphere in parliament, and 
good conditions for the work of the government. 
  "Second, we have to realize that this is a temporary 
government, a government for a certain period. Assuming that 
the elections will be held in September or October, the 
government will work until then. Every realistic person knows 
what can be achieved in this time." 
  The president also says that it will be necessary to deal 
with the memorandum signed between the previous government and 
the IMF. "It will be necessary to continue some talks. It will 
be necessary to say quite unambiguously which policies the 
government will continue to pursue and to give a signal both 
abroad and at home that the transformation process will 
continue. The process of developing democratic institutions and 
creating conditions for our gradual integration into West 
European structures will continue as well. It will be necessary 
to express and confirm again our policy toward neighboring 
countries, to confirm our foreign policy priorities. Most of 
all, in cooperation with the trade unions, the Association of 
Employers Unions, and the others, we need to rethink the 
inevitable measures to stop some negative phenomena in the 
economy. We have information that the ministries are, I would 
not want to call it a disarray, but they certainly are not in 
good shape. They are not quite prepared for peaceful work. 
Therefore, as far as the work of state bodies is concerned, we 
need to take steps in the personnel sphere. We need to give 
people security." 
  At the end of the program, the president appeals to the 
citizens to reassess their behavior in connection with the 
incidents in which journalists were beaten up. 
  A journalist asks him: "Certain things happened in the 
streets of Bratislava yesterday. Four journalists were beaten 
up. Deputies of ethnic Hungarian parties were attacked the day 
before. What is your view of these things?" 
  Kovac replies: "This is obviously aimed at making the 
president fed up with the situation inasmuch as all this was 
happening right under my windows. It is very difficult to work 
under such circumstances. However, I would like to say to those 
of our citizens who frequent these places that they will not 
discourage me. They will not force me to resign. On the 
contrary, this encourages me to hold out. I am ready to go on 
persuading these groups of citizens as well. 
  "Still, I would like to appeal to them as well as to other 
citizens and say to them that, if their goal is to distress the 
president, their effort is in vain. They will not succeed in 
achieving that. 
  "However, in order not to damage the good name of the 
Movement for a Democratic Slovakia [HZDS], not to harm the HZDS 
chairman [Vladimir Meciar], and not to be a disgrace to the 
country, they should really try to show both to our people and 
to foreign journalists that we are a civilized nation, and they 
should reconsider the culture of their behaviour. They should 
realize that we have certain mechanisms and constitutional 
institutions through which a citizen can express his or her 
will. Elections are one of these institutions. In elections, 
people can really express their liking for one politician or 
another. 
  "I would also like to ask for something else. I do not 
understand why love, respect, trust, and liking for one 
politician is linked to hatred for another politician. Why do 
they have to show disrespect to the president merely because 
they like Mr. Meciar? There is nothing wrong with their liking 
Mr. Meciar. I am glad to see that we have people who respect 
our politicians. However, this does not mean that they have to 
hate the president or other politicians who have different 
views. In my opinion, all of this should be taken into account 
by both the HZDS chairman and other officials of the HZDS. 
Perhaps they have the opportunity or the influence to address 
these citizens and to ask them for a better political culture." 

