BFN 

<F P=106> [Station editorial: "Why Did the Hanoi Communist Vietnamese </F>
Blatantly Declare That They Want To Negotiate the Problem of 
Cambodian-Vietnamese Border with Their Lackey, the Two-Headed 
Government? This Is To Legitimize Their Actions of Cutting Off 
and Turning Tens of Thousands of Square Kilometers of Cambodian 
Territory Into Their Territory Between 1979 and 1990"] 
  [Text] It should be recalled that the Cambodian-Vietnamese 
border, like those with Cambodia's other neighbors, has been 
legally defined in accordance with international law. The 
1/100,000 map drawn between 1933 and 1953 established Cambodia's 
border and territorial integrity that can be in no way subject 
to violation. Between 1963 and 1969, the border was 
internationally recognized. Nguyen Huu Tho, chairman of the 
South Vietnam Liberation Front, and Pham Van Dong, SRV prime 
minister, issued statements on 31 May 1967 and 3 March 1967 
declaring their solemn recognition of Cambodia's territorial 
integrity within its boundary defined by the 1/100,000 map. 
That being the case and according to international law, the 
communist Vietnamese have no right whatsoever to propose talks 
to review the Cambodian-Vietnamese border issue. They can never 
review it. They have to abide by international law, observe the 
border between Cambodia and Vietnam, and respect Cambodia's 
territorial integrity of land and sea. 
  The 23 October 1991 Paris agreement clearly reminded Vietnam 
and other countries of their duty and commitment to respect 
territorial integrity. The accord unambiguously defined that 
all agreements or treaties that affect Cambodia's territorial 
integrity and sovereignty should be considered null and void. 
So now, why has the communist Vietnamese called for talks on 
the Cambodian-Vietnamese border issue with the two heads 
[Ranariddh and Hun Sen]? The communist Vietnamese's goal is to 
legitimize the tens of thousands of square kilometers of 
Cambodia's land and maritime territories that they have cut off 
and occupied between 1979 and 1990 in accordance with treaties 
and agreements they concluded with their lackey puppets. Should 
they be able to legitimize their actions of cutting off and 
occupying part of the Cambodian territory, then they will 
continue this stratagem to swallow and incorporate Cambodia into 
the late Ho Chi Minh's federation in a legal fashion and through 
a demographic war. Vietnam has employed all manner of maneuvers 
to achieve its strategy of turning Cambodia into a second 
Kampuchea Kraom. 
  The Cambodian nation and people are fully entitled to 
declare 
all agreements and treaties the traitorous communist Vietnamese 
puppets concluded with the communist Vietnamese between 1979 and 
1990 as null and void. They earnestly demand that the communist 
Vietnamese return all the land and maritime territories they 
have cut off and occupied to Cambodia. 

