BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with King Husayn by unidentified Japanese NHK </F>
television correspondent in Amman on 13 April -- recorded, in 
English] 
  [Text] [Correspondent] Your Majesty, first of all, I would 
like to express my heartful gratitude for giving me this kind 
opportunity of receiving me today. 
  [Husayn] It is a pleasure, sir. 
  [Correspondent] The time is limited, sir, so let me start. 
First of all, I would like to focus on the peace. As you see, 
today is the deadline for Israeli forces withdrawal, and it is 
not met, after all. What is your feeling at this moment? 
  [Husayn] I am worried and concerned that, unfortunately, the 
hopes of so many people on either side of the divide are 
suffering a setback in terms of the delays and the lack of 
progress in implementing agreements and in dealing with the 
problem as a whole, comprehensively, on all the tracks that are 
there to be dealt with. 
  [Correspondent] Would you give me some general comment on 
the 
peace process itself? 
  [Husayn] It is so very, very important, sir. It is the 
difference between disaster overtaking this area and the rest of 
the world, and the future that we seek to give future 
generations from both sides of the divide; to live in peace and 
in security, and in an entirely different region characterized 
by peace and cooperation, a peace based on justice, a peace that 
future generations can live with and protect. And if this 
chance is lost, I really don't know what would happen, except 
disaster. So, we will be slipping towards it very, very 
rapidly. So, something has to be done. Everyone has to 
realize their responsibilities and move much more with 
determination to achieve it as soon as possible. 
  [Correspondent] How do you assess the possibility of this 
peace process and the Declaration of Principles? Can you become 
optimistic? 
  [Husayn] I have faith and a feeling that those in positions 
of responsibility, wherever they are, must respond to the 
genuine desire of the overwhelming majority of people in this 
region; to see it live a life worthy of it and worthy of its 
people in conditions of peace and security, and I hope that this 
will compel us to realize that we cannot waste more time, and 
that the Palestinian problem has to be addressed in terms of 
Palestinian rights on Palestinian soil, but also there has to be 
real, genuine progress on all tracks to achieve a comprehensive 
peace. It has been suggested, at times here, for example, that 
we should ratify a piece of paper, then negotiate its contents. 
I would believe that this is not the right approach. The right 
approach is to negotiate seriously about every matter that has 
been outlined in an agenda that we ratified in support of the 
Palestinian stand, in terms of Palestinian rights, following 
their agreement with the Government of Israel in Washington, and 
which is now there, but without much movement. We have to move 
to reach agreement on every point so that the crowning 
achievement is a state of peace and a peace treaty. [words 
indistinct] 
  [Correspondent] Well, I'd like to pick up Jordan-Israel 
track. What kind of stage is it on now? 
  [Husayn] Some movement, but nothing as serious as we would 
wish it to be, as yet. There are areas, sir, that concern 
occupied territories and these have to be addressed very, very 
rapidly. We have to know that we have arrived at a satisfactory 
conclusion in regard to defining, delineating, and demarcating 
these borders. These negotiations, to do so, could be held even 
in the region that is affected directly, and the question of 
water is an important issue to realize what the share of each 
participant is going to be, and beyond that, we want to create 
the conditions, sir, for the world to come out and help us when 
we can present a state of peace to the world. So, if those who 
are able can join us in doing everything possible to effect a 
change of the quality of life here, but also to be our partners 
in ventures that could not come to being except in a state of 
peace, ventures that would be mutually beneficial to us and to 
all those who partake in rebuilding this entire region in a 
state of peace. [sentence as heard] 
  [Correspondent] Well, about the relationship with Iraq. I 
think Jordan changed its favorable stands toward Iraqi President 
Saddam Husayn to not so favorable stands. Is it true? 
  [Husayn] Sir, the unfortunate result of all our efforts 
before the Gulf war and during the Gulf crisis was failure, 
failure to prevent the war, failure to reverse the occupation of 
Kuwait peacefully, and I believe that our concerns were 
legitimate and our motives were honorable; to try to, within the 
Arab context, achieve a withdrawal by the Iraqis from Kuwait and 
the resolution of the problem peacefully and to avoid the wounds 
that have been created since, which have affected many, many 
people and will continue to affect them for a long period of 
time. Unfortunately, my efforts with both sides to that 
confrontation failed. But, as far as the Iraqi people are 
concerned, I am worried and concerned with their continued 
suffering in a manner that cannot be accepted. 
  [Correspondent] Recently, I've heard that Jordan said that 
unless the United Nations lift the blockade of al-'Aqabah, 
Jordan will not return to the peace process. Is it true? 
  [Husayn] We have said that any further moves will be 
contingent on resolving this problem because we would like to 
know who is causing it. We would like to know under what 
authority, and for what purpose. If we have moved to enable the 
peace process to make all the achievement that was possible 
until now, including going to Madrid and providing the 
Palestinians an opportunity to engage in and try to resolve 
their problems with Israel, directly following the Rabat summit 
decision that the PLO is the sole legitimate representative of 
the people of Palestine. We did all that not because of 
pressure, not because of intimidation. We did that because of 
conviction. So, we see no reason for Jordan's treatment in the 
way it has been over the years that have passed, in regard to 
al-'Aqabah and freedom of navigation and shipping to al-'Aqabah 
and from it. So, things have reached a point where the 
situation is intolerable and we try to rectify it and to point 
out to the world that if it is pressure, we do not succumb to 
pressure. If we moved on the peace process, we moved because we 
have always been dedicated to the cause of peace. If it is 
Security Council resolutions as they affect Iraq, we have 
implemented them, although we are deeply worried and deeply 
concerned about the people of Iraq, suffering as they have, so 
far. So, this problem cannot continue the way it is, 
indefinitely. 
  [Correspondent] Would you give a brief comment on the role 
of 
Japan in this region and on the peace process? 
  [Husayn] The role of Japan is very much appreciated, sir. We 
are friends and have been over a long period of time, and the 
friendship has grown. The cooperation has grown between us. 
Japan is very important to us. It is an example. It is, at 
the same time, a major power in the world and I hope very, very 
much indeed, that its role will be constructive one in the times 
ahead, and that we will also be able to provide the 
opportunities in a context of peace for Japan to play a major 
role as a partner in reshaping the future in this region and 
addressing the area in terms of the requirements for peace as 
they affect the people in the times ahead. 
  [Correspondent] Thank you very much. 

