Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 3 (XINHUA) -- A non-governmental 
horizon market survey and analysis company has opened a 
subsidiary in Los Angeles in a move to expand its business 
worldwide. 
  The subsidiary is the first of its kind ever opened by a 
Chinese investigation company in other countries. 
  Yuan Yue, president of the Beijing-based Horizon Company, 
who 
has just returned from the U.S., said that his company's 
subsidiary in Los Angeles will help Chinese businesses 
investigate the credibility of American investors in China and 
assess the value of these investors' equipment. 
  "Our subsidiary will also make feasibility studies of 
investment projects in America and conduct U.S. market surveys 
for Chinese clients," he said. 
  The company can also investigate the credit ratings of Hong 
Kong and Taiwan investors in the mainland and conduct market 
surveys for mainland clients, he added. 
  Shortly after its founding in September 1992, the company 
conducted a survey of the growth of major private companies in 
China, together with the All-China Federation of Industry and 
Commerce and other organizations. 
  The company became known all over China for the survey of 
100 
private companies in 15 provinces, each with assets exceeding 
one million yuan. 
  By the end of 1993, the company had conducted 46 market 
surveys and polls and opened subsidiaries in the big cities of 
Nanjing, Shenzhen, Dalian and Chengdu. 
  According to President Yuan Yue, the investment projects for 
which the company has made feasibility studies involve a total 
investment of 200 million yuan. 
  "Expanding our business worldwide is our company's goal," he 
said. 
  To this end, it has forged cooperative relations with market 
survey companies in Hong Kong, Singapore, Switzerland and Japan, 
he said. 
  It is now discussing with a number of American universities 
and survey companies the possibilities of conducting market 
surveys in China, which will cost hundreds of thousands of U.S. 
dollars. 
  The company has decided to invite foreign experts to serve 
as 
its advisers on technological progress in a bid to better serve 
overseas customers, he said. 

