Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by G. A. Gorokhov, division director, </F>
Giproniselprom, and G. T. Fatuyeva, microbiologist and process 
engineer, Biozar TOO] 
  [Text] Interest in ecological clean microbiological 
preparations that are relatively safe to use has grown in recent 
years both in our country and abroad. According to estimates of 
foreign specialists the market for biopreparations used in plant 
protection has increased annually by 4-5 percent since 1984. The 
outlays of the leading chemical companies of the USA, Great 
Britain, the FRG, Denmark, the Netherlands and Brazil on 
developing the procedures of acquiring biopreparations are from 
2.5 to 12.5 percent of the total expenses of the companies. What 
is significant is that the outlays on developing biopesticides 
are 3-5 times lower than on research and development of chemical 
preparations. We can also add to this the relatively less 
expensive and faster registration of biopreparations ($500,000 
and a testing period of up to 3 years) as compared to chemical 
ones (from $10 million to $20 million and a testing time of up 
to 7 years or more). 
  Besides by ecological problems, development of this 
alternative method of protection is stimulated in Russia and CIS 
countries by the shortage of even chemical pesticides in the 
market. 
  However, analysis of the situation that has established 
itself in the domestic biopreparation market revealed a totally 
unfavorable state of affairs. Development of modern production 
processes for microbiological plant protection resources, 
creation of new biopreparations, improvement of existing ones, 
and the problems of their mass production and use for integrated 
protection of agricultural crops remain behind the needs of 
practice. Much of the research ends right after the producer 
strains are studied, or in the best case it gets as far as 
developing the laboratory procedures of their acquisition. For 
these and a number of other reasons only four out of all of the 
biopreparations recommended for use are presently being produced 
by industry. 
  Current high-volume production of microbiological plant 
protection resources, which is based on subsurface procedures, 
is not adapted to the needs of agriculture because of the 
absence of feedback between consumers and manufacturing plants. 
The possibility of transition to the production of new 
biopreparations, especially those requiring changes in the 
production process, is limited. 
  The idea of organizing regional low-volume operations 
producing microbiological preparations is fully justified not 
only because this makes it possible to create flexible 
all-purpose lines capable of quickly saturating the market with 
new biopreparations, but also from the standpoint of reducing 
the ecological load upon the environment and bringing production 
into the direct proximity of the consumer. At this moment the 
list of microbiological plant protection resources currently 
produced by industry is limited to bacterial preparations with a 
spectrum of action that does not encompass a significant part of 
the most dangerous diseases and pests. Despite the high demand 
for fungal preparations, their industrial production has still 
not been organized. Difficulties arising in organizing their 
industrial production are rooted in the particular features of 
the production process, which includes a stage of solid-phase or 
surface cultivation. 
  In distinction from bacterial preparations, fungal 
preparations may be produced both by subsurface and by 
subsurface-solid phase procedures. In this case the latter is 
preferred because it simulates the natural means of existence 
and reproduction of fungi in nature. But it is precisely for the 
solid-phase stage that equipment is still unavailable. 
Laboratory models of such systems are unsatisfactory when the 
process is scaled up. These are engineering problems, and to 
biologists they are an insurmountable barrier to designing the 
equipment. 
  From our point of view, when we organize production we need 
to shift the accent in the direction of solving the engineering 
problems of providing industrial facilities to support the stage 
of solid-phase cultivation. This approach to the problem is all 
the more necessary because the solid-phase stage exists in 
production processes found in contiguous fields of biotechnology 
(protein enrichment of feed, enzyme production etc.) that are 
experiencing similar difficulties in technical support. 
  An exchange of opinions among specialists on the 
biotechnology of microbiological plant protection resources at 
the latest meeting of the bureau of the plant protection 
division of the Russian Academy of Agricultural Sciences (29 
September 1992) confirmed that progress in commercializing 
fungal resources has in fact come to a standstill because of the 
absence of facilities for industrial production. Scientific 
research on creating, testing and producing these preparations 
requires creation of its own aseptic, automated, ecologically 
clean industrial-scale testing stand combining both directions 
of acquisition of fungal preparations--subsurface and 
solid-phase. 
  The first stage of organizing such a stand (a pilot 
facility), and in the future a network of regional small 
enterprises on its basis, requires that we determine the volume 
of fungal biopreparations actually needed by agriculture. This 
will make it possible to substantiate the terms ``regional'' and 
``low-volume'' production not only qualitatively but also 
quantitatively, and to determine the productivity of the pilot 
facility on this basis. 
  From our point of view the problem of providing fungal 
preparations should be considered initially in relation to 
sheltered ground. The range of use of fungal plant protection 
resources in greenhouses is considerable, and it will grow in 
the future. In order to determine the possible market we need to 
consider the actual distribution of greenhouse complexes, their 
area, the transportation systems and the possible contributions 
by farms to production development, and strive to maintain an 
antimonopoly policy and ecological safety of land adjacent to 
the enterprise. 
  The CIS countries presently have around 5,000 ha under glass 
and 11,000 ha under film, with around 6,600 of these hectares 
being in nursery greenhouses (in Russia there are around 2,000 
ha of glass greenhouses in 137 sovkhozes and 11 kolkhozes). In 
this case the concentration of greenhouse area is extremely 
nonuniform in different regions of CIS countries: For example 
over 250 ha are scattered among farms in the form of greenhouses 
with an area less than 3 ha, while on the other hand around 400 
ha are concentrated in the Moscow vicinity, and in Stavropol 
Kray, the single Yuzhniy Sovkhoz has an area of 144 ha. 
  If we orient ourselves on production of biopreparations 
already permitted for use (trichodermin, boverin and 
verticillin), and consider the accumulated experience of their 
use and the actual distribution of sheltered ground area, the 
following productivity of an industrial-scale stand would be the 
most suitable: for trichodermin preparation--66,000 kg, for 
boverin concentrate--4,000 kg, for verticillin 
concentrate--2,400 kg per year. 
  These figures make it possible to tentatively estimate the 
quantity of regional low-volume production operations. In Moscow 
oblast for example, which has a sheltered ground area of around 
400 ha, two facilities producing trichodermin, one facility 
producing boverin and three facilities producing verticillin 
need to be established. Given the designated productivity, a 
minimum of three facilities producing different preparations 
will have to be established in each of the oblasts possessing 
the largest area of sheltered ground. On the whole, the 
tentative number of facilities for vegetable greenhouses, 
including film and nursery, will be 157. 
  However, it is impossible to consider series production of 
facilities of this type right away. There are a number of causes 
retarding organization of production: The results of fundamental 
research are insufficient to permit establishment of the initial 
requirements on equipment for the production processes; the list 
of equipment available for solid-phase cultivation is limited; 
there are few enterprises capable of producing nonstandard 
equipment; the procedure of using biopreparations has not been 
perfected. Therefore we need to gather together all of our 
knowledge and create at least one ``pioneer'' pilot facility. 
This will not only concentrate the results of scientific 
research but also reveal those design offices and plants that 
will be able to continue this work. Moreover in addition to 
engaging in scientific activity associated with introducing new 
production processes, a scientific and technical center 
established on the basis of this first facility will also 
involve itself in producing and distributing biopreparations in 
the season of their use, this bringing in financial resources to 
partially support itself. 
  Work on new equipment foresees evaluating the shortcomings 
and merits of developments of previous years. Enzyme industry 
studied the issue of creating instruments for the solid-phase 
cultivation stage seriously and deeply back in the 1960s-1970s 
using, as its initial models, highly productive equipment 
created in the chemical sector of industry. In the final stages 
of the work it gradually became overwhelmed by a large quantity 
of diverse attachments, mechanisms, devices and life-support 
systems, which had a negative effect on acquisition of high 
concentrations of the target product. This forced them to 
abandon the solid-phase method of cultivation at the production 
scale and switch to the subsurface method, which permits more 
effective control of the production process and use of 
previously created standard equipment. It is now recognized that 
this approach failed to justify itself in application to fungal 
preparations, and a return to the solid-phase method of their 
acquisition is occurring abroad. Consequently we need to offer 
the corresponding equipment to practical workers in the new 
stage of technical development. 
  However, while the problems of organizing subsurface 
production have been studied sufficiently well, it is difficult 
to trust the results of developing industrial procedures of 
solid-phase cultivation because not enough research has been 
carried out on heat and mass exchange in the fermentation 
process. In the meantime it is precisely the hydrodynamic and 
the heat and mass exchange processes that do not yield to 
upscaling by extrapolation, and require modeling in real 
conditions. And this is something a pilot facility would be able 
to do. 
  Analysis of existing technical concepts and of the priority 
directions of designing equipment permits us to adopt, as our 
basis, a continuous production process based on production lines 
built according to the modular unit principle. According to this 
principle the structure of a line is formed out of separate 
modules of particular output dependent upon the output of the 
facility as a whole. The modules are interlinked on the basis of 
material flows. This principle makes it possible to reduce time 
outlays, resetting the equipment is simplified, and the 
preconditions are created for raising the level of automation, 
unification and standardization of particular modules, units and 
the facility as a whole. 
  We proposed a general plan for a pilot facility producing 
fungal pesticides on a modular unit basis. This single facility 
brings together a number of technical concepts qualifying as 
inventions, beginning with electrically driven containerized 
pipeline transport, electrophysical methods of sterilizing the 
material flows and the airtight circuit, and use of an aerosol 
working medium in the air conditioning system to support heat 
and mass exchange during fermentation, and ending with 
electrolytic liquid waste treatment. 
  Research ordered by the Giproniselprom [not further 
identified] (Orel) was conducted by the VNIIbiotekhnologiya 
[All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Biotechnology] 
(Moscow) to create the above-described pilot facility for 
subsurface-sold phase cultivation of fungal pesticides. The 
initial requirements on developing production lines were 
prepared and technical concepts were developed on the basis of 
these requirements as a result. 
  The complex of scientific research and experimental design 
work carried out by us (Giproniselprom, VNIIbiotekhnologiya and 
other institutes) in 1988-1990 and the practical experience of 
the Biozar Enterprise, established at the Belaya Dacha Sovkhoz, 
demonstrated the solvency of the decisions. 
  However, unique experimental research and implementation of 
these decisions were halted because of the absence of financing. 
It would be desirable to continue the work, before the 
researchers move on to other forms of activity. Steps must be 
taken to finish working up the program as quickly as possible, 
and to coordinate its individual sections associated with 
development of different directions of biological protection. 
  Creation of complex biological production equipment will 
require the joint efforts of specialists in different sectors of 
science and industry. The daily grind of organizing research, 
financing and planning, and bringing the results together into a 
single system must go on. Such work cannot be done in breaks 
between principal activities; it must be carried out by a 
collective of like-minded individuals, since otherwise it would 
be difficult to count on the anticipated effect of development 
as a whole. But under our system the situation is promoting not 
consolidation but disintegration of creative collectives, and 
namely because of the absence of financing. 
  State programs on biotechnology have been adopted in all 
developed countries, chiefly because the practice of financing 
large problems by private companies has not justified itself. 
Private clients are interested, after all, in a quick return 
from realization of a project. And this is not always possible, 
especially in the case of long-term programs. Greenhouse 
complexes in Russia and other CIS countries, which are potential 
orderers of biological resources, are unable to pay for large 
scientific developments in the situation as it is today. The one 
thing they can do is fund construction of facilities, and even 
so, not always. 
  The exploratory nature of future scientific research and 
experimental design work presupposes the need for state 
financing. 
  COPYRIGHT: ``Kolos'', ``Zashchita Rasteniy'', 1993 


