BFN 

  [Text] Yangon [Rangoon], June 26 (XINHUA) -- Myanmar 
[Burma] Home Minister Mya Thin said here today that his country 
is making efforts to put an end to the danger of narcotic drugs 
abuse as soon as possible. 
  The remark was made by Lieutenant-General Mya Thin, Myanmar 
minister for home affairs and chairman of the Central Committee 
for Drug Abuse Control (CCDAC), in his speech at a ceremony of 
the International Day Against Drug Abuse and Illicit 
Trafficking, which was held here today. 
  Mya Thin stressed in his speech that illicit poppy 
cultivation is related to the existence of armed groups, and an 
end to the armed groups will pave the way for eliminating the 
poppy cultivation and production of opium. 
  Since the Myanmar State Law and Order Restoration Council 
(SLORC) took the power of state in 1988, 11 anti-government 
ethnic armed groups have returned to the legal fold in Myanmar 
and the government is making efforts to hold peace talks with 
the remaining anti-government armed groups. 
  However, the government will never make peace negotiations 
with Khun Sa, who is a drug warlord in the notorious Golden 
Triangle region where Laos, Myanmar and Thailand meet, local 
sources said. 
  It is learnt that Yangon has been amassing government troops 
to fight Khun Sa and has decided to eliminate the Khun Sa's 
armed forces in the near future. 
  The government has not disclosed yet the details of the 
battles against Khun Sa's armed forces. 
  The "Golden Triangle" is the region from where a huge amount 
of opium and heroin is produced in the world. 
  According to official figures today, over 1,470 kilos of 
heroin and over 11,800 kilos of opium were seized from 1988 to 
May 31, 1994 in Myanmar and over 3,300 hectares of poppy fields 
and 28 opium refineries were destroyed from 1990 to 1994 in the 
country. 
  The narcotic drugs law was promulgated in 1974 and the 
Central Committee for Drug Abuse Control (CCDAC) was formed in 
1975 in Myanmar. 
  After Myanmar became a signatory to the United Nations 
Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psycho 
Tropic Substances in 1991, the new law on drug control was 
enacted in Myanmar in 1993. 
  In order to eliminate the drug abuse and illicit 
trafficking, 
Myanmar has made a program for development of border areas and 
national races and nearly two billion kyats (about 300 million 
U.S. dollars) has been spent since 1989. 
  Myanmar paid attention to international cooperations on drug 
control and Myanmar, China, Laos, Thailand and the United 
Nations Drug Control Program (UNDCP) signed a memorandum of 
understanding to control illicit drug trafficking and abuse in 
New York in 1993. 
  Similarly, the first ministerial level meeting among Laos, 
Myanmar and Thailand was held in Bangkok in February, 1992, and 
the second meeting in Yangon in February, 1994. 

