Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Fourth of seven installments: Report on interview with Hu </F>
Angang (5170 7254 6921) and Kang Xiaoguang (1660 2556 9342) 
specialists of the Group for Analyzing the National Situation, 
under the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, by staff reporter 
Liu Lu [0491 7216]; place, date not given: "Officials Must 
Avoid `Increasing Incomes by Various Means,' and System of 
`Keeping Clean and Honest Officials With High Salaries' Must be 
Implemented"] 
  [Text] On the question of party members and government 
officials "increasing their incomes by various means," a 
corruption phenomenon currently prevailing over the mainland, Hu 
Angang and Kang Xiaoguang said: "We maintain that officials 
have to live on `imperial funds' rather than engage in trade or 
`seek higher incomes' under all sorts of pretexts. It is 
necessary to `maintain government officials mainly by taxes.' 
To put it another way, through mandatory tax collection, the 
government pays the wages of government officials and working 
personnel with state expenditures. In developed industrialized 
countries, this portion of wage is called the `bureaucrat [guan 
liao 1351 0297] wage,' which is usually higher than, or the same 
as, the average wage level offered by the departments in the 
private sector to their employees." 
  Both of them stressed: Adopting a high-wage system, which is 
in line with the theory of manpower capital investment returns, 
will help continuously absorb outstanding social elements into 
the contingent of government bureaucrats. At the same time, as 
government bureaucrats enjoy relatively ample wage incomes and 
relatively handsome standards of living and will lose the 
temporary benefits of corruption for all their lives, the risk 
of the benefits of "bureaucrat wage" will become greater. On 
the contrary, if a low-wage system is adopted, on the one hand, 
this will cause a drain of outstanding talented people in large 
quantities and a drop in the quality of personnel and, on the 
other hand, as wage remunerations are lower than the amount of 
manpower officials invest as capital and labor they contribute, 
they are bound to seek new self-compensations through illegal 
revenue channels. Under the current low-wage system, officials 
are now enjoying "stable incomes" in forms such as covert 
housing allowances, special vehicles and planes, confusion of 
public and private incomes, and in rules and regulations. 
  The report on national conditions entitled "Remedy 
Corruption 
Permanently by Institutional Upgrading" suggested: 
  --Practicing a bureaucrat high-wage system. The 
average wage level of the cadres of government organizations 
should be increased by a wide margin so it will be higher than 
that of the nation's employees. The average wage level of the 
cadres of central government organizations should be set a 
little higher. The wage level of cadres at the ministerial 
level should reach a high-income level, which should be 
determined and made public by the Standing Committee of the 
National People's Congress once a year. 
  --Scrapping all kinds of covert subsidies for 
officials. Subsidies in such areas as housing, driving 
compact cars, and health care, should be directly counted as 
part of wages. All "special supply" avenues and free-of-charge 
or low-charge special services should be abolished. Officials' 
various incomes should be transferred, paid, recorded, and 
supervised through bank accounts, and at the same time, they 
should pay income and property taxes according to law. Leaders' 
income, property, and tax payments, which judicial and taxation 
organs are entitled to verify and check, should be made public 
at non-regular intervals if necessary. 
  --Cutting the number of government administrative 
levels and the size of working personnel by one third or 
more. Regional-level administrative setups, ministries of 
various industries, and other regional industrial bureaus should 
be replaced by industrial associations. Party and government 
organizations should be strictly prohibited from engaging in 
trade and operate companies of various types. 
  --Prohibiting cadres at provincial and ministerial 
levels to hold any posts or concurrent posts in companies of 
various types after retirement. 
  --Firmly checking sons and daughters of senior cadres 
from engaging in trade during the period of transition to a 
market economy. It is necessary to reaffirm the decision, 
which the CPC Central Committee and the State Council made on 28 
July 1989, that the spouses of members of the Central Political 
Bureau, the Secretariat, and the Executive Committee of the 
State Council, their sons and daughters and their sons' and 
daughters' spouses are prohibited from carring out business 
activities in the distribution sector and from holding any posts 
or concurrent posts in companies engaged in the sector. This 
decision must be applicable to the spouses of retired leaders of 
the Central Committee and the State Council and their sons and 
daughters and their sons' and daughters' spouses. 

