Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by C. Doonan] </F>
  [Text] Ulundi March 4 SAPA -- The Inkatha Freedom Party 
[IFP] on Friday [4 March] said it would register for the April 
elections but would only contest the poll pending mediation on 
amending the constitution and rationalising electoral timetables. 
  This emerged after a six-hour IFP Central Committee meeting 
in Ulundi during which IFP Chairman Frank Mdlalose was 
authorised to travel to the World Trade Centre in Kempton Park 
to register the party in terms of the electoral act before 
midnight on Friday. 
  But, the IFP stressed, registration did not imply any change 
in its basic negotiation position and should not be construed as 
acceptance of the amended interim constitution. The party would 
only contest the elections after mediation on constitutional 
differences and the electoral process and timetables. 
  The IFP was not demanding a postponement of the April 26-28 
elections, but wanted mediation on this deadline to ensure all 
parties could contest elections on an equal footing, said 
Central Committee member Mr T C Memela. 
  IFP President Mangosuthu Buthelezi told reporters at a 
briefing he would only begin electioneering once there had been 
mediation. "There's no point in campaigning under this 
constitution, which we reject, before it's amended. 
  "We have stated categorically we are not prepared to 
participate in the election under this constitution as it 
stands, without amendments being accepted." 
  An IFP resolution said the party would inform leaders of its 
Freedom Alliance partners about its decision and seek their 
agreement and co-operation in developing a satisfactory way 
forward. 
  It was also decided that mediation should also be related to 
Zulu King Goodwill Zwelithini's demands for sovereignty and the 
party assured the monarch it would not prejudice any of his 
negotiation position during mediation. 
  While Mr Buthelezi said the process leading to mediation had 
not yet got off the ground, he noted that the African National 
Congress [ANC] had accepted the principle and was ready to begin 
discussion with the IFP as soon as possible. 
  To this end, ANC Deputy Secretary General Jacob Zuma would 
lead a delegation in talks with the IFP. 

