Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial by Akbar Nabavi] </F>
  [Text] 1. In the last few months the Voice and Vision 
organization has done things that are clear and prominent 
examples of what can be called despotism and law breaking. 
  Apparently the management of the Voice and Vision 
organization does not realize that one of the genuine and 
emphatic demands of the people of Iran in the years before and 
after the triumph of the sacred Islamic revolution was and is 
preservation of the sanctity and greatness of human beings. One 
of the great benefits that the revolution brought for the 
patient and heroic people of Iran is the Islamic Majles, which 
has taken shape with their votes, their views and their demands. 
A responsible Majles is based on the nation's Constitution and 
guarding the nation's rights, and no official has the right to 
violate the lawfulness prevailing over the words and deeds of 
the deputies and the Majles. 
  In reality, the experts who wrote and approved the 
Constitution wrote articles and paragraphs about the rights of 
the nation's deputies, which would bring national maturity, and 
under which the ones chosen by society would be able to exercise 
careful and comprehensive supervision over all society's affairs 
in the light of a mass movement. With the cooperation and 
assistance of the judiciary, they would be able to prevent any 
kind of abuse of social or government position and 
responsibility, and to lead the nation's law-making process 
towards vindicating the rights of the people. 
  The recent acts by the Voice and Vision organization are a 
serious warning, and ignoring this warning will lead to more 
frightening and fearsome consequences. In reality, what has 
happened during this period is a warning about the danger of 
destroying the human sanctity and greatness and the nation's 
social rights. Some people, in doing these things, have shown 
their astonishing talent for continuing their obstinate and 
dictatorial activities. 
  The truth is that what is more worrying and frightening than 
anything else is the social developments, and especially the 
effects of the acts on the social spirit, maturity, and thought. 
Truly, if the people see that the nation's most extensive media 
deals in this way with their deputies, and if the judicial 
authorities do not deal with their lawbreaking seriously and 
quickly, won't the people be right in thinking that their 
freedom and social security are in danger of being assaulted by 
lawbreakers? 
  Aren't the newspaper writers concerned, and aren't they 
asking themselves, if the attitude and behavior of the 
supervisor of the Voice and Vision organization spreads to the 
nation's other sectors, what will happen to the right to think 
and the sacred freedom that the revolution, the Imam and the 
martyrs have given them? 
  2. After the heroic nation of Iran shook off years of 
domination by despotic and selfish shahs, its back wounded by 
the lashes of the shah's oppressive henchmen, it found a new 
awakening under the influence of the religious and peaceful 
thought and ideas of Seyyed Jamal al-Din Asadabadi. After this, 
led by great people such as Sheykh Shahid 'Alameh Fazlollah 
Nuri, it established the "house of justice" movement, but 
unfortunately that seed did not bear fruit. It was beset by such 
a plague that in a short time it was barren and dry. 
  The Islamic revolution gave the people a house of justice, 
and the blood of great ones such as Sheykh Fazlollah and 
Sattarkhan bore fruit after several decades and brought forth a 
Majles that forms every four years with a vote of the people. 
  Therefore, the supervisor of the Voice and Vision 
organization must realize that this nation has never lost its 
historical memory, and it will never allow its own house (the 
Majles) to be attacked through acts that are not worthy of a 
manager in the Islamic government. Our path has been rocky from 
the house of justice to the Majles, and we will never go back. 
  3. There is now no doubt that the acts of the supervisor of 
the Voice and Vision organization were noting more than an 
effort to deter the nation's deputies from the performance of 
their duties as deputies and especially to deter them from 
keeping the vow they have taken. Apart from the fact that the 
brave deputies of the people are the heirs of the freedom, 
bravery and steadfastness of the great martyr Modarres and Imam 
Khomeyni (peace be upon him), public controversy and assaults on 
honor such as these cannot deter them from their critical 
mission as deputies. 

