Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Nadim Kawash] </F>
  [Text] Abu Dhabi, Jan 26 (AFP)--The strong economic 
relationship between the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and Iran has 
remained intact despite worsening political ties due to a 
dispute over three strategic Gulf islands. 
  Official Iranian figures released at a regional exhibition 
in 
al-Shariqah showed the UAE has remained the top Gulf commercial 
partner of Iran, while Tehran's exports to the Emirates have 
even increased. 
  UAE exports and re-exports to Iran stood at around three 
billion dirhams (817 million dollars) in 1993 and imports at 800 
million dirhams (218 million dollars), creating a surplus for 
the UAE of 599 million dollars. The figures were slightly 
higher than in 1992, when exports stood at around 800 million 
dollars and imports at 163 million dollars. 
  Most of Iran's imports from the UAE come from Dubai, the 
main 
commercial centre in the region. Hundreds of traders in Dubai 
are of Iranian origin, who assist businessmen from their country. 
  Most of the trade between the two countries is hauled by 
traditional Arabian wooden boats, dhows, hundreds of which ply 
the Gulf waters daily. 
  Iran's exports to the Emirates include mainly carpets, nuts 
and other foodstuffs while its imports include sugar, rice, cars 
and electronics. 
  Iranian businessmen said actual trade with the UAE was much 
higher as those figures do not include Iranian exports through 
the five free ports set up in the Emirates over the past few 
years. 
  Hundreds of Iranian boats converge on such ports loaded with 
home made products such as furniture, foodstuffs, clothes, home 
appliances, handicrafts and other light items. Trade through 
those ports, where the Iranians pay only token tariffs, is 
estimated at millions of dollars a month. 
  "Iran is an important commercial partner of our country as 
it 
takes nearly one third of our re-exports," a Dubai trade 
official said. "Its exports to us are also increasing and most 
of them are being re-exported to other countries. Iran relies 
mainly on Dubai to reach other markets." 
  Iran and the UAE have been locked in a dispute over the 
islands of Abu Musa, Greater Tunb and Lesser Tunb, which control 
the vital Hormuz Strait through which nearly one fifth of the 
world's crude exports pass. 
  But the dispute has not affected their ties in other 
sectors. 
More than 150,000 Iranians stil live in the UAE and Iran has 
even boosted its participating in trade fairs in Dubai, 
al-Shariqah and other UAE emirates. 
  Such participation is part of Iran's attempts to boost 
non-oil exports to offset a decline in crude prices and revive 
its economy, wrecked by accumulating debts and the 1980-1988 war 
with neighbouring Iraq. 
  The latest participation was in an Arab-Asian exhibition 
being held in al-Shariqah and Iranian officials have already 
reported deals worth more than 1.5 million dollars in addition 
to negotiations for more sales. 
  "Some of the 28 participating Iranian companies are also 
conducting contacts to find trade agents in the emirates," said 
Ibrahim Khodai, spokesman for the Iranian pavilion at the fair. 
  He said the items displayed at the Iranian pavilion were 
worth more than 140 million dollars and included handicrafts, 
home appliances, furniture, chemicals, carpets, farming 
equipment and electronics. 
  "Iran is considering expanding its presence at such 
exhibitions given the large demand for our products," he said. 

