BFN 

<F P=106> [By Rain Ren] </F>
  [Text] Two exiled Chinese scholars living in the United 
States have been refused visas to attend a seminar in Hong Kong. 
  Liu Binyen and Ruan Ming, who went to the U.S. in 1988, were 
to come to Hong Kong at the beginning of next month to speak at 
a seminar organised by the Democratic University, an 
organisation preaching democratic theory. 
  Both men have been told by British consular officials in New 
York that their visa applications have been rejected. 
  Liu was told by the consul ate on Wednesday that his visa 
application had failed. He was not given any explanation. 
  Liu and Ruan said they both had U.S. re-entry permits -- a 
travel document issued by the U.S. government to enable green 
card holders to travel abroad. 
  Ruan, who was secretary to the former secretary-general of 
the Chinese Communist Party, Hu Yaobang, and a visiting scholar 
at Columbia University, said he obtained his re-entry permit on 
May 18 and went to the British consulate two days later. 
  A British official told him they had been informed by the 
Hong Kong Immigration Department that his Chinese passport had 
expired, so he would not be given a visa. 
  Both Liu and Ruan believe they were not granted visas 
because 
of pressure from China, which has repeatedly warned against Hong 
Kong becoming a "subversive base". 
  "This shows that the Hong Kong government's deceptive and 
cynical nature is the same as the Chinese government's," Ruan 
said. 
  "They only want to please the Chinese authorities. 
  "It is an act of duplicity and double standards, violating 
both the freedom of academic exchange and human rights. 
  "This is a bitter irony to Chris Patten's political reform 
and his calls for freedom. Even before 1997, Britain is already 
conniving with China to abuse people's rights." 
  Liu, a renowned journalist, said this incident meant China 
was taking over Hong Kong even before 1997. He said he believed 
his application was rejected because his visit coincided with 
the fifth anniversary of the Tiananmen Square massacre. 
  A senior government official denied last night the territory 
had succumbed to pressure from Beijing. "We are determined not 
to turn Hong Kong into a subversive base or a platform for the 
engagement of subversive activities," the official said. 
  "Why don't they give their speech in New York or Paris?" 
  On Wednesday, China attacked Hong Kong for allowing the 
exiled dissident Han Dongfang to remain in the territory. 
Another dissident, Wuer Kaixi, has also scheduled a visit to 
the territory for next month. 

