CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "In the Wake of Scandal: Moscow </F>
Criminal Investigation Without a Chief"] 
  [Text] The Moscow City Duma's Commission on Law and Order 
and Anti-Crime Efforts has met to discuss the resignation of 
Yuriy Fedoseyev, chief of the Moscow Criminal Investigation 
Department. 
  The official reason given for the resignation, which was 
signed by Minister Brin, was retirement on account of age. The 
unofficial and, of course, primary reason was poor relations 
with General Pankratov, head of the capital's Internal Affairs 
Main Administration. That version, the city Duma's press center 
confirmed, was the subject of discussion by the commission 
members, who determined to "get to the bottom of the reasons 
behind this firing." 
  It is true that Fedoseyev has given 11 years "too much" 
service to his country. It is also true that the head of 
Moscow's Criminal Investigation Department is only a colonel -- 
something that does not happen if relations with those higher up 
are good. A general's rank is usually guaranteed. But the dual 
subordination of the Moscow Criminal Investigation Department's 
chief -- directly to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and only 
secondarily to the Moscow Internal Affairs Main Administration 
-- gives him many opportunities to become disliked. 
  There was also an official reason: just prior to Fedoseyev's 
resignation General Pankratov issued new quotas for arrests and 
successful investigations in Moscow, quotas that exceed former 
ones by 50 percent. For example, whereas when it comes to 
arrests made by public safety offices or the highway police it 
is enough to "make an effort," while this mania for percentages, 
which the years of perestroyka and democracy have been enough to 
partially erase from our memory, will hit the Moscow Criminal 
Investigation Department particularly hard. Rumors are 
circulating that Fedoseyev expressed negative opinions of the 
new quotas to the militia leadership. 
  For now the colonel, now in disfavor, has resigned, and no 
one knows whether he will become just another pensioner or file 
a lawsuit. In the latter case the capital can expect another 
carnival of militia/police disguises and ambitions. 

