Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Sofia, March 16 (BTA) -- Organized crime is 
involved in the incident with the Bulgarian ship "Khan Kubrat" 
which in early March transported 6,000 tonnes of diesel fuel to 
Serbia in violation of the Yugoembargo, Mr. Reiner Beussel, head 
of the Sanctions Assistance Mission (SAM) in Bulgaria, told 
journalists today at the Government's Press Office. 
  On the night of January 30 "Khan Kubrat" was detained by a 
team of the Western European Union after the captain did not 
stop for inspection. The ship was sailing upstream very slowly 
with its lights off and was suspected of attempting to violate 
the embargo. According to Mr. Beussel, an inspection showed that 
the shipping documents were in order and that the destination of 
the convoy's cargo was Romania. When on March 6 the ship left 
Bulgarian territorial waters in the direction of Serbia it was 
not stopped by force because it was believed to have been 
hijacked. What is more, the hijackers, or the people who 
presented themselves as such, threatened to blow up the barges 
or to leak fuel into the Danube which would have led to an 
environmental catastrophe. The investigation is still working 
on the case and the possibility of the hijacking being a sham 
one has not been ruled out. According to Mr. Beussel some shady 
circumstances indicate a sham hijacking but the possibility that 
the crew was forced to sail at gunpoint also remains. 
  The incident with the "Khan Kubrat" can be repeated any 
time, 
Mr. Reiner Beussel told the press conference. According to him, 
this is because the customs authorities cannot stop suspicious 
deals, the law does not allow them to confiscate goods or 
vessels because the law does not consider a violation of an 
embargo a crime. All other countries enforcing the embargo are 
experiencing similar problems. Mr. Beussel expressed 
satisfaction with the cooperation of the Bulgarian Government 
and authorities in monitoring and enforcing the embargo. 
  The SAM mission disposes of information about 200 attempts 
at 
violating the embargo from the Bulgarian side which are now 
being investigated by the competent authorities. These are 
cases of forged documents, attempts at bribing etc. However, 
Mr. Beussel said he had no information on how many of these 
cases constituted actual violation of the embargo. Mr. Beussel 
believes that in Bulgaria corruption has not reached the higher 
echelons of power but it strikes one that civil servants of 
lower ranks are driving quite expensive cars. At the same time 
the SAM missions have registered about 1,000 attempts at embargo 
busting from the side of Bosnia and as many from the side of 
Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- FYROM]. 
  Five people are now in custody in the investigation of the 
incident of the "Khan Kubrat," Mrs. Ani Kruleva, Director of the 
National Investigative Service told BTA today. They have been 
charged with exceptionally large size smuggling. 
  Asked of his opinion on the case, Prosecutor General Ivan 
Tatarchev told BTA that he believes the hijacking to be a sham 
one. 

