Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["ban" report: "Federal Government Intends To Discuss </F>
Deportation Agreement"] 
  [Text] Bonn, 25 Mar -- Before negotiations are held with 
the Turkish Government about an agreement on the deportation of 
violent Kurds from Germany, the Federal Government intends to 
discuss the legal wishes and possibilities. In this spirit, 
government spokesman Vogel interpreted statements by Interior 
Minister Kanther (Christian Democratic Union) on Friday [25 
March], who had called an agreement with Turkey desirable, in 
which the government in Ankara should commit itself to adhering 
to international human rights standards in potential trials of 
the people affected. The day before, Kanther explained that he 
had "contacted Foreign Minister Kinkel so that we could come to 
something like a deportation agreement with Turkey, in which 
Turkey promises under international law that Kurds who committed 
acts of violence and who are deported from Germany are not 
sentenced to death in Turkey because of the prior deed." On 
Friday morning (local time) Kurds occupied the German Consulate 
General in Melbourne, Australia, for 30 minutes; then they 
withdrew. No damage was caused, it was said in Bonn. 
  Spokesmen of the Federal Government insisted on Friday that, 
in any case, it will remain so that Kurdish demonstrators must 
not be deported if they are threatened with a death sentence or 
with torture in Turkey. Kanther's statements caused problems of 
interpretation in the Federal Government since, by making them, 
the minister recognized that Turkey is violating human rights. 
Interior Ministry spokesman Dauke said that the goal of the 
considerations could be a "binding promise" by Turkey to abolish 
obstacles to deportation that exist in Germany. With a view to 
the international human rights conventions, which have also been 
signed by Turkey, government spokesman Vogel said that the 
Federal Government "assumes" that Turkey is adhering to the 
agreements. Potential additional agreements were given 
primarily domestic importance by Vogel; these could increase the 
acceptance of decisions for deportation. 
  In the Federal Government it is still unclear what a 
deportation agreement with Turkey could look like. Foreign 
Minister Kinkel (Free Democratic Party of Germany) ordered 
officials of his Ministry to examine the matter. Following the 
violent demonstrations, at the beginning of the week the FRG 
Interior Ministry, the FRG Justice Ministry, as well as the 
Foreign Ministry were ordered by the Cabinet to examine the 
existing legal situation; they are also supposed to examine 
whether new laws are necessary. The Federal Cabinet will discuss 
a draft on this matter at the end of April. The government 
spokesman said that, even though the principle of reasonableness 
is to be observed in decisions concerning deportations, it is 
primarily the government's task to ensure security and order. 
However, valid laws and practice obviously do not deter from 
committing acts of violence. 
  With a view to human rights violations in Turkey, Vogel said 
that the Federal Government has repeatedly told the Turkish 
Government "tactfully but also very clearly" that it must adhere 
to the norms of the Council of Europe, which it has signed. 
However, no pressure should be exerted on Turkey. The "Workers 
Party of Kurdistan" (PKK) is a terrorist organization. 
Terrorism must be and may be fought also in this case. 
Referring to the situation reports by the Foreign Ministry, its 
spokesman said that the Federal Government is "concerned" about 
the observance of human rights in Turkey. Kinkel has repeatedly 
made this clear to his Turkish interlocutors. 
  The government's commissioner for foreigners, 
Schmalz-Jacobsen (Free Democratic Party of Germany), said in a 
newspaper interview that one must not react with the slogan "All 
Kurds out!" to the demonstrations. The aliens' law regulates 
the conditions for deportation. "Wherever it is necessary and 
possible deportations must be carried out." It is not necessary 
to amend the laws. 
  Social Democratic Party of Germany Deputy Bernrath also 
warned against amending the aliens' law. Greens European Deputy 
Roth said that her party supports "the peaceful demonstrations 
of Kurds in the FRG." As long as Turkey violates the principles 
of a rule-of-law state and of human rights, Kurds must not be 
deported from Germany. 
  On the previous day, the Turkish ambassador to Bonn had 
called reports about reprisals against Kurdish separatists 
propaganda. In contrast, Seelig, a Berlin Party of Democratic 
Socialism deputy who is currently in Diyabakir, said that last 
week "eight villages were destroyed just in the area of Lice, 
many people were kidnapped, and at least two young men were 
killed." His group, which wants to examine the conditions in 
the region, has repeatedly been threatened and hindered by the 
Turkish military. 

