Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tallinn, Feb 02, BNS -- Several Estonian companies 
have expressed interest in producing 5.56 mm, 9 mm and 7.62 mm 
ammunition that conforms to the NATO standards, but BNS has 
information the Defense Ministry hasn't yet made a final 
decision. 
  Former Defense Minister Juri Luik told BNS at the end of 
last 
year that his ministry is looking into three possibilities to 
produce NATO standard cartridges in Estonia, and that 
negotiations with some companies are in progress. 
  Toomas Noorem, director of the Tartu-based Tarkon company, 
told BNS it is possible to produce cartridges at Tarkon. 
  "For this, only a couple of machine tools and some skilled 
men are needed," he said. "We haven't so far been approached, 
however, nor have we held any talks, but we would certainly be 
interested in such an offer." 
  Noorem said Tarkon is capable of producing other equipment 
for the defense forces, including communications systems. He 
told BNS, however, that it seems to him Estonian officials are 
at present not sufficiently interested in local production of 
necessary equipment. 
  "Estonia has until now tried to buy everything from other 
countries, although we could manufacture some things locally," 
he said. 
  BNS has information the Turi-based Arbalett joint-stock 
company approached the Defense Ministry with a proposal for 
manufacturing cartridges. The Defense League Foundation is one 
of the partners in the company. 
  Leonid Pivovarov, commercial director of Narva's Balti ES 
firm (former Baltiyets), told BNS the Defense Ministry has made 
no concrete proposals to his company. 
  "Six months ago the factory submitted its offers to the 
Defense Forces general staff," he said. "The factory produces 
dosimeters and radiometers that are used by the Estonian customs 
officials. 
  "Balti ES could make also armored doors, electronic locks, 
security systems, medical equipment, and simulators for training 
soldiers," Pivovarov said. 
  Vladimir Galkin, Dvigatel's director general, also told BNS 
nobody has approached his factory with a proposal to produce 
cartridges. 
  "We are considering cooperation offers from more than 40 
companies," he said. "We need clarity on who places the order 
and who pays, what the scope of the project is and what experts 
think, but we expect to iron out all problems through 
negotiations." 

