BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 11 May (PL) -- Cuba will apply only legal 
and constitutional measures in its declared war on illegal 
wealth, but without permitting a "witch hunt" or corruption, an 
authorized source told PRENSA LATINA today. 
  The Attorney General's Office is putting the final touch to 
Decree-Law 149 after it was promulgated following 
recommendations by the National Assembly of the People's 
Government and the demands of 80,000 workers assemblies held 
throughout the country. 
  A source close to the Attorney General's Office has reported 
to PRENSA LATINA that the procedure to be applied envisions, 
after the corresponding information is received and analyzed, 
taking cautionary measures on the assets of individuals known as 
"money hoarders" and giving them a 10-day deadline to prove the 
legal origin of their money. 
  Money hoarders have amassed huge sums of money and purchased 
properties with profits obtained through black market dealings 
in staples, scams, or fraudulent transactions, all of which are 
being continually criticized by the population. 
  The seizure, which could even mean that the properties 
remain 
in the hands of the suspects but under control of the 
corresponding authorities, will be accompanied by the drafting 
of a report addressed to the Finance and Price Ministry, the 
agency authorized to order the seizure. That is to say, the 
assets whose legitimate origins are in doubt are not 
automatically seized because this penalty is just the 
culmination of a process. It is possible to file an appeal with 
the finance and price minister. 
  This is to prevent errors in enforcing the decree and 
strictly obey the law, respecting the rights of those eventually 
accused, and applying administrative measures only as a general 
standard. 
  There is no intention to send individuals found guilty of 
acquiring illegal wealth to prison. The intention is to deprive 
them of their illegally obtained assets and return the assets to 
society. 
  Of course, as the same source confirmed, this does not mean 
the authorities will be weak in the presence of activities 
widely criticized by the people and which further negatively 
affect the economic difficulties the country faces at present. 
  It is necessary to reaffirm the duty to respect the ethical 
and moral concepts that exist in Cuban society. The law will be 
applied to anyone who attempts to ignore these principles, the 
source said. 
  All of the dispositions stipulated in the decree and its 
bylaws will comply with the current constitutional precepts. 
Those who hamper the investigations of the Attorney General's 
Office will be penalized. 
  Another aspect to be taken into consideration is that the 
current campaign will only be part of the permanent fight 
against the aforementioned illegal activities, some of which 
have increased in the country's current situation and which will 
never be seen as a chance happening. 
  Finally, it was reported that any legal actions to disguise 
the illegal acquisition of wealth will be regarded as null and 
void. In the battle against these offenses will participate 
  All state agencies, the rank-and-file organizations, and the 
current special vigilance and protection system will participate 
in the battle against these offenses. 

