BFN 

  [Text] Kuala Lumpur, June 23 (OANA/BERNAMA) -- Malaysian 
Primary Industries Minister Dr. Lim Keng Yaik left for a six-day 
visit to Myanmar [Burma] Thursday at the head of an official 
delegation to enhance bilateral trade relations between the two 
countries. 
  Priority areas for discussions during the visit would be 
palm 
oil, forestry, timber and minerals, he said in a statement 
issued here. 
  While there, he would be calling on the trade minister, 
finance and revenue minister, forestry minister, agriculture 
minister and minister for mines as well as meet public and 
private sector organisations. 
  Dr. Lim said he would also take the opportunity to seek 
business and investment ventures in other areas that could be 
explored by the private sector. 
  Myanmar was becoming an important market for Malaysian palm 
oil since exports of the commodity to that country had increased 
from 78,355 tonnes in 1990 to 146,752 tonnes last year, he added. 
  Palm oil, which constituted 40 percent of Myanmar's oils and 
fats consumption, was wholly imported. 
  Dr. Lim said there were at present no joint ventures in the 
palm oil sector between Myanmar and Malaysia. 
  With the signing of the U.S.$25 million credit under the 
palm 
oil credit payment arrangement (POCPA) and increasing 
consumption of palm oil in Myanmar, there is a potential for 
some kind of collaborative and joint venture arrangements in the 
area of palm oil to be established, he added. 
  This included the setting up of refineries, bulking and 
packaging of palm oil products for local consumption as well as 
distribution to neighbouring countries. 
  Dr. Lim said Malaysia could also explore the possibility of 
establishing joint ventures with Myanmar in developing its 
mining industry since the country was well known for its rich 
mineral resources such as petroleum, coal, tin, zinc, iron and 
precious stones. 
  Malaysian exports of mineral-based items to Myanmar 
increased 
from RM7.5 million [Malaysian currency] (U.S.$1; RM2.5) in 1990 
to RM55.6 million last year while Malaysia's imports from 
Myanmar had remained static at RM14.8 million last year. 

