Language: <F P=105> Urdu </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] At the UN Human Rights Commission in Geneva, 
Pakistan has deferred voting on its resolution condemning human 
rights violations in occupied Kashmir for one year, while India 
has expressed willingness to allow a fact-finding team of Muslim 
ambassadors to visit occupied Kashmir. A three-point package 
has been worked out after high-level contacts among Pakistan, 
Iran, and China. Sixteen countries supported the formula. 
  Iranian former envoy in Geneva, Naseri, pledged to continue 
to pressure India to alleviate the hardships of Kashmiris and 
improve the human rights situation. Other countries supporting 
the package are Syria, Indonesia, Malaysia, Tunis, Australia, 
Guinea Bissau, Libya, Colombia, Malawi, Mexico, Brazil, Costa 
Rica, Nigeria and Mauritania. 
  The foreign minister told newsmen in Islamabad that Pakistan 
has achieved its objective to awaken world opinion about the 
plight of the Kashmiri people. He said despite the deferment of 
the resolution, the Kashmir issue will be raised at other world 
forums. Sardar Asif Ali described the package as a success of 
Pakistan's diplomacy. He said we have not agreed to an offer by 
some countries to delete a paragraph in the resolution about 
sending a fact-finding mission to occupied Kashmir. He said 
almost all member countries at the commission expressed concern 
on the grave human rights violations by Indian troops in 
occupied Kashmir. 
  Khalid Ahmad Khan Kharal, federal minister for information 
and broadcasting, who was present on the occasion, recalled U.S. 
President Clinton's statement deploring human rights abuses in 
Kashmir. He said the European countries have also deplored the 
worsening situation in occupied Kashmir. This reflects an 
achievement of our foreign policy, the minister added. The 
information minister said no government in the past moved such a 
resolution. 
  Iqbal Akhund, Pakistan's ambassador to the United Nations, 
told a news conference that Pakistan has succeeded in pressuring 
India to an extent that it has gone on the defensive on the 
Kashmir issue. He hoped that India will respond positively to 
demands made by Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto in her address to 
the UN Human Rights Commission last month. The demands include 
the freedom of human rights agencies and international media 
representatives to visit occupied Kashmir without any 
hindrances, freeing of the jailed Kashmiris, revocation of 
inhumane rights given to Indian security forces, and the 
reduction of troops in the held-valley. 

