BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 14 Mar (XINHUA) -- To regulate its 
antismuggling efforts at sea and to strictly crack down on 
smuggling according to law, the General Administration of 
Customs [GAC] has amended the "Procedure Governing Customs 
Antismuggling Tasks at Sea" [the "Procedure"] and has further 
specified the regulations governing its antismuggling work at 
sea. 
  The new regulations stipulated: Customs departments will use 
antismuggling vessels and motor boats as their principal tools 
in conducting antismuggling tasks at sea. A customs 
antismuggling vessel has a gray hull and a white pilot-house. 
"Chinese Customs," written in Chinese calligraphy, is painted 
in red on both sides of the pilot-house. The PRC national flag 
will be at the top of the mast. A registration number 
consisting of two properly written Chinese characters and a 
three-digit number, such as "Customs 9xx (or 8xx, 7xx, 5xx, 
2xx)," is painted on both sides of an antismuggling vessel. 
Additionally, "Chinese Customs," written in Chinese, and a 
four-digit number are painted on both sides of an antismuggling 
motor boat, which has a warning light at its stern. While 
conducting official tasks at sea, customs antismuggling 
personnel will wear customs or marine antismuggling uniforms. 
Customs uniforms are black in color during spring, autumn, and 
winter. A customs official will wear black uniform pants and a 
white short-sleeved shirt during summer. He will also wear a 
white hat with a logo that bears the national emblem, wheat 
head, and the customs insignia. He will wear a black tie. 
Marine antismuggling work uniforms are blue-gray in color. A 
marine antismuggling official will wear an armband on the left 
arm of his jacket; and the armband has the customs insignia and 
"Chinese Customs" written in Chinese and English. He will wear 
a gray felt cap with a logo that is identical to the white hat, 
bearing the same national emblem, wheat head, and customs 
insignia. Antismuggling personnel carry customs work identity 
cards and investigation cards and will show them when conducting 
inspection duties. 
  It has been learned: The GAC urged all China's customs 
departments to strictly uphold the "Procedure" while conducting 
antismuggling tasks at sea. The GAC emphatically pointed out: 
Chinese and foreign vessels and crewmen may refuse an inspection 
at sea if a customs vessel conducting antismuggling examination 
has violated the above stipulations. 
  The customs regulations stipulate: While conducting 
antismuggling duties at sea, customs personnel can open fire, 
according to law, on smuggling suspects and vessels that disobey 
orders and try to escape, shield smuggling activities with arms, 
violently resist examination, or try to recover their 
confiscated contraband or other smuggling evidence. 

