Critiqued 

<F P=102>   944F0520A Vladivostok VLADIVOSTOK in Russian 16 Mar 94 p 5 </F>
<F P=103> 944F0520A </F>
<F P=104>  Vladivostok VLADIVOSTOK </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Viktor Karytko: "Foreign Companies as Engines </F>
for Our Conversion? Are the Japanese Really So Selfless in Their 
Desire To Help Clear the Maritime Region of Radioactive Wastes?"] 
  [Text] The problem of recovering low-level liquid 
radioactive waste (ZhRO) accumulated as a result of repair and 
preventive work on nuclear submarines of the Pacific Ocean Fleet 
up until now, as we know, had only one solution in our country: 
The waste waters were simply poured into the sea. The country 
had no developed technology for purifying these waste waters. 
Last fall, when they were last poured into the Sea of Japan, it 
evoked an extremely negative reaction from the opposite shore. 
The Japanese are also very uneasy about the two tankers filled 
to the brim with liquid radioactive waste in the form of 
radioactive ice which are moored at the dock of the Zvezda 
Plant. Therefore it is no accident that the Japanese have 
expressed their readiness to render assistance in solving this 
problem which, of course, is purely our own, and not only to 
provide us with tankers (which we are refusing) but also to 
allot financial funds for the construction in the kray of a 
plant for disposing of liquid radioactive waste under the 
condition that some of these funds will be transferred to 
Japanese firms so they can place orders there. It would seem 
that this option would be completely acceptable to us. But 
events related to this project which would seem to be free of 
charge for Russia show that this is not so. 
  Representatives of two Japanese firms were in Vladivostok on 
a "prospecting" mission in December. For their government's 
money they wanted to "do a great favor for these unreasonable 
Russians who do not know what to do with their radioactive 
waste".... In the kray administration there was a conference to 
which for some reason nobody thought of inviting scientists from 
the Far Eastern Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences. 
Nonetheless they were subsequently able to look over the 
Japanese plan and make judgments about it which, briefly, 
consist in the following. 
  In the first place, the technology proposed by the foreign 
firms would require extremely large expenditures of electric 
energy when compared to the output from a thermal electric power 
plant with average capacity.... And this when the region is in a 
deep energy crisis to begin with. If we keep in mind the many 
billions spent to pay for electric energy, for this reason alone 
combining the Japanese project with our "harsh" conditions looks 
problematic to say the least. Second, after the plant is built, 
its subsequent operation will cost the region $300,000-$450,000 
annually (purchasing consumable materials, spare parts, 
conducting repair work, etc.). Finally, in the third place, the 
Japanese specialists, as it turns out, are suggesting 
"purifying" the radioactive waste with the formation...of other 
waste (highly active salt solutions and solid radioactive waste, 
and subsequent disposal of these is not envisioned by the 
Japanese technology). In general, our scientists came to the 
conclusion, substantiated in all respects, that the Japanese 
version for disposing of liquid radioactive waste in the 
Maritime region is unacceptable mainly because of its 
obsolescence and its extremely high cost. 
  As a counterproposal the scientists and specialists of the 
Far Eastern Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences put forth 
their own alternative plan. It consists in using sorption 
technology, taking advantage of many years of work and the 
latest achievements in this area which happen to be from Far 
Eastern scientists. Its advantage over the Japanese version 
consists in its considerably lower (1,000-fold) proportional 
expenditure of electric energy; the utilization of unique and 
inexpensive materials (multi-composite sorbents produced from 
local raw material--Chuguyevskiy zeolites); the significantly 
lesser capital-intensiveness of production and the independence 
of its operation from deliveries of imported spare parts and 
batching items. 
  The deputy chairman of the Far Eastern Branch of the Russian 
Academy of Sciences, Doctor of Chemical Sciences V. Sergiyenko, 
presented these conclusions in a report sent on 16 December of 
last year to the governor of the kray, Ye. Nazdrantenko. He also 
pointed out in it that the Far Eastern Branch of the Russian 
Academy of Sciences was prepared to take the initiative for 
creating an interdepartmental creative collective which could in 
a short period of time, literally within a month or two, present 
a detailed plan for disposing of low level liquid radioactive 
waste in the Maritime region for technical-economic and 
ecological expert evaluation. At the same time he emphasized the 
insistent need to conduct such an expert evaluation before 
making a decision or signing any documents with Japanese firms. 
The kray administration was asked to allot 5 million rubles [R] 
for conducting the expert appraisal. 
  This report was followed by a note of clarification sent to 
the same address. It discussed the real possibility, within 
three or four months (under the condition that proper financing 
is available), of creating a domestic experimental industrial 
installation based on sorption technology with a capacity for 
"processing" 10-15 tonnes of liquid radioactive wastes a day 
directly at the enterprise where the radioactive waste is 
accumulated. What was the result from these reports? 
  On 6 January the Committee on the Utilization of Nature of 
the Kray Administration held a conference devoted to this 
question at which emphasis was once again placed on the need to 
conduct a comprehensive expert appraisal of all versions of 
disposal of liquid radioactive waste and the development of an 
alternative Russian plan in response to the one proposed by the 
Japanese. But that is all. Money for conducting this expert 
appraisal, not to mention funds for creating an experimental 
industrial installation (about R2 million rubles) was not 
provided on the grounds that the problem of disposing of liquid 
radioactive wastes in the Maritime region was not a kray problem 
but a federal one and so the financing should come from the 
corresponding budget. 
  Still our scientists considered the fact that they live not 
in Moscow but in the Maritime region and, in order to reinforce 
their conclusions with concrete results, at the end of February 
they conducted a series of laboratory experiments on sorption 
technology for purifying real radioactive waste from the Zvezda 
Plant. Their results turned out to be more than promising: After 
purifying liquid radioactive waste in sorption columns, the 
content of artificial radionuclides was significantly lower than 
the natural radioactive background and 10-1,000 times less than 
the norms for maximum permissible concentration. That is, after 
purification this water could be poured directly overboard 
without any ill effects. 
  Is this not an indicator of how well our technology can 
compete with any foreign one? And are our scientists asking too 
much by insisting on a competition of plans so that the Russian, 
Japanese, American, and any other installation will be placed 
side by side and then the results will be compared. This is what 
is done throughout the entire world when putting various plans 
up for bidding, when people indeed want to end up selecting the 
most advanced technology which is the most economically 
effective in all respects. 
  But, as it turned out, this approach does not fit in with 
our 
reality. What kind of competition of plans or bidding can there 
be when for three months the kray bureaucrats will not even 
allow the Vladivostok scientists, the creators of the most 
advanced technology for disposing of liquid radioactive wastes 
in Russia (and, probably, in the world as well--a competition 
would show that), in on the discussion of the problem. Yet, as 
we learned, not so long ago in the presence of the governor but 
in the absence of the scientists and specialists from the Far 
Eastern Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, in the kray 
administration there was a conference, as a result of which it 
seems to have been decided to give preference to the technology 
for disposing of liquid radioactive waste proposed by the 
Japanese corporation Marubeni.... 
  Corresponding Member of the Russian Academy of Sciences 
Viktor Glushchenko was extremely candid and, it seems, 
justifiably harsh in his evaluation of this situation. "To me 
and my colleagues who are specialists in this area this whole 
episode seems simply shameful," he said. "Why is the fate of a 
plan placed in the hands of kray bureaucrats? So that later they 
can again, on invitation from the Marubeni firm, travel as 
'experts' (as some have already done) to Japan and bring back 
presents from there, probably for a job well done? Apparently 
the same aspirations motivate the pro-Japanese lobbies in 
Moscow, where they have already created a concern which, from 
all appearances, can more efficiently 'divide up' the $100 
million allotted by the Government of Japan for nuclear 
disarmament in Russia and the problem of disposing of 
radioactive wastes which is related to this. For the money, of 
course, we thank you, but who said that this had to be invested 
only in foreign firms when we have much better domestic 
scientific developments and technologies that are essentially 
already prepared but which require a little money to bring them 
to completion? After all, we are not a Lower Volta [as 
published] and we ourselves are ultimately in a position to 
solve our own problems. I tell you as a scientist," V. 
Glushchenko said in conclusion, "that if our multi-composite 
sorbents are not needed, and they are the basis of the 
technology we propose for disposing of liquid radioactive 
wastes, I will make every effort to make sure that all our 
'know-how' in this area is patented abroad. Apparently nobody in 
Russia needs our developments...." 
  I do not think that Viktor Yuryevich will do exactly 
that--after all he is a Russian man and a resident of the 
Maritime region, but a fact is still a fact: Dozens if not 
hundreds of developments, many of which are up to the world 
level, by Far Eastern scientists remain unused, and financing 
for current research is practically frozen. And putting domestic 
sorption technology to work for disposing of liquid radioactive 
wastes could be a first step in the development in the Maritime 
region of a whole number of science-intensive productions for 
producing industrial and medical sorbents that are in extremely 
short supply in the world and for which, our scientists are 
convinced, there are no analogues yet. By investing a minimum 
today, when the orders for manufacturing equipment can be placed 
with our defense enterprises which are now standing idle, in the 
near future it would be possible to obtain a maximum, and in 
foreign currency. 
  These are the kinds of "selfish" goals pursued by our 
scientists in their desire to clear the kray of radioactive and 
any other kind of pollution without the participation of the 
Japanese "uncle," who is certainly not selfless and who would 
seem to want to build for us a plant for disposing of liquid 
radioactive wastes free of charge using obsolete technology and 
then for a long time receiving "dividends" in the form of income 
from operations. In a word, our conversion in their fashion. 
  Before going abroad to sign the contract with Marubeni (I 
will not mention others) it would be a good idea for our 
bureaucrats to think about this and perhaps learn from their 
neighbors how to look after national interests. 

