BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, April 22 (YONHAP) -- Prime Minister Yi 
Hoe-chang has caused quite a political stir by announcing that 
he will increase his control over state affairs. 
  On Thursday, Yi unleashed a stream of reproof and 
instructions regarding the way state affairs are conducted -- 
which analysts are calling "the wrath of Thursday" -- prompting 
Chongwadae [presidential office] to re-examine the premier's 
role and status under the presidential system while pretending 
not to be astonished at the premier's ire. 
  Yi's instructions that all decisions made by the Unification 
and Security Policy Coordinating Council should be put into 
practice only after meeting his approval apparently led to the 
cancellation of a council session slated for Friday. The orders 
are considered by analysts as an expression of Yi's anger at his 
exclusion from the council. 
  It is not certain whether his expression of discontent with 
Chongwadae, the Agency for National Security Planning and 
certain cabinet ministers is intended to tighten his grip on the 
cabinet or is simply an overture for steps he will take in the 
future. 
  But many observers agree that the wrath of Thursday 
demonstrated Yi's unique and strong personality, saying his next 
course of action deserves keen attention. 
  Chongwadae believes that since state affairs must be 
conducted under the president's responsibility in the current 
presidential system of government, the cabinet should be united 
instead of making a great din. 
  But Chongwadae officials have avoided comment on Premier 
Yi's 
wrath of Thursday, seemingly because it is related to a 
sensitive issue that has caused ripples in political circles. 
  When Yi explains his wrath during his weekly meeting with 
President Kim Yong-sam Friday afternoon, the president will 
stress the need for cabinet unity, one of them observed. 
  "The Unification and Security Policy Coordinating Council is 
not an executive agency but an adviser to the president, and the 
premier is represented by his chief secretary in the council," 
said a ranking Chongwadae official. "I can't understand why he 
has made an issue of the council. 
  "The decision to drop the demand for an inter-Korean envoy 
exchange as a precondition to further U.S.-North Korean 
high-level talks was announced by the council, but the decision 
was made in the course of policy coordination by related 
agencies, not by the council." 
  Touching on the cancellation of the weekly council meeting 
usually held on Friday, he said, "the meeting was held on 
Thursday because of the need to coordinate policy before U.S. 
Assistant Secretary of State Robert Gallucci left the country. 
The cancellation of Friday's meeting has nothing to do with 
Premier Yi's instructions." 
  Chongwadae officials appear to view Premier Yi as a man who 
sticks too much to the spirit and principle of the law. 
  One official said, "he tries to tackle all problems 
according 
to the spirit of the law, seemingly because of his long bench 
career. I think he needs a flexible approach, such as a 
political approach to political problems." 
  Pointing to Yi's failure to report to President Kim on his 
recent instructions about discontinuing government subsidies to 
several civic organizations, he quipped: "He wants the cabinet 
to obtain his approval for everything, but he doesn't seek the 
president's approval for what ought to be approved by the 
president." 
  Premier Yi's attempt to expand his sphere of influence in 
the 
government and some cabinet ministers' discontent with Yi have 
been reported to President Kim, prompting the response: "Don't 
say such a thing." 
  Cabinet ministers consider Premier Yi's instructions 
regarding Unification and Policy Coordinating Council decisions 
as an expression of his intent to get a firm hold on the cabinet. 
  They are apparently nervous about the instructions' 
consequences because Premier Yi knocked the way a presidential 
council is run. 
  Some ministers have reportedly complained about Yi's demand 
that they go through him when making a report to the president. 
The economic planning, unification and defense ministers, who 
have things which must be reported directly and quickly to the 
president, must be unhappy about Yi's meddling, officials said. 
  Yi has a weekly luncheon meeting with the two deputy 
premiers 
every Thursday, but he cancelled this week's session without 
giving any specific reasons, raising speculation on discord. 
  A ranking cabinet official said, "the president and the 
premier can be compared to the father and the mother of a 
family, and cabinet ministers may directly tell their problems 
to the president as children do to their father. The premier 
playing the mother's role should overlook father-child relations 
from time to time." 
  Officials from the prime minister's office, stressing Yi's 
instructions were made so he could get a good grip on the 
cabinet, are worried about their repercussions. They are 
particularly perplexed at press reports that Yi is feuding with 
presidential secretaries and officials of the Agency for 
National Security Planning. 
  The ruling Democratic Liberal Party generally regards 
Premier 
Yi's wrath as "an expression of his will to work as a man of 
conviction," but is unhappy about the way the press is handling 
the matter. 
  Secretary-general Mun Chong-su said, "it's quite natural 
that 
cabinet ministers report everything to the premier, and Premier 
Yi expressed his desire to work to the full of his convictions 
in the instructions in question, didn't he?" 
  He added, however, that it would have been better if Yi had 
held prior discussions with related ministers, suggesting 
disapproval of the way Yi deals with problems. 
  Spokesman Ha Sun-pong, asked if Yi's instructions were not 
an 
expression of his discontent with Chongwadae and the 
government's foreign affairs-security team, replied, "I don't 
think he is discontented and I think by giving instructions he 
wanted to remind everyone that he has an interest in diplomatic 
and security issues affecting national interests." 
  A close aide of Chairman Kim Chong-pil supported Yi, saying, 
"Premier Yi gave proper instructions. He has the right to give 
such instructions because the president and the premier are 
ultimately responsible for the conduct of state affairs." 
  The opposition Democratic Party fully supports Premier Yi's 
instructions. 
  Supreme Councilor Kim Won-ki, speaking for Chairman Yi 
Ki-taek while he tours the United States, said, "Premier Yi's 
instructions are quite right and lawful," noting the 
Constitution gives the premier considerable responsibility in 
conducting state affairs. 
  Spokesman Pak Chi-won said, "when he took office the people 
expected much of him as a man of conviction, but he has failed 
to meet such expectations because he has become a premier making 
an apology to the people." Yi's wrath "compels us to pin further 
hope on him." 

