BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by OAS Secretary General Joao Clemente Baena Soares </F>
at the opening ceremony of the 24th OAS General Assembly at the 
Peace Theater, Belem, Para State -- live] 
  [Excerpts] Your Excellency Mr. Brazilian President, Your 
Excellency Mr. Haitian President, Your Excellency Mr. Brazilian 
Foreign Minister, Your Excellencies Messrs. Foreign Ministers 
and heads of delegations, Your Excellencies Messrs. Ministers, 
Your Excellency Para State Governor, my friends: 
  Your Excellency's presence at this opening ceremony honors 
us 
and fills us with pride. We realize that your gesture, for which 
we thank you very much, represents Brazil's confidence in the 
OAS' actions and destiny. It also represents the brotherly 
welcome of the Brazilian Government and people to the 
illustrious representatives of the American continent countries 
gathered here. [passage omitted] 
  I also want to thank Mr. Brazilian Foreign Minister 
Ambassador Celso Amorim, who is my friend, for his permanent and 
longlasting interest for, support of, and collaboration with the 
OAS' work, which has culminated with the preparations for this 
OAS General Assembly. [passage omitted] 
  Now, it is time for democracy. The last 10 years in the 
Americas have marked a time of political progress, restoration 
of peace, economic readjustments, and the beginning of an 
economic recovery. These processes, however, have been 
accompanied by an ever-increasing social dissatisfaction and 
unrest resulting from persistent inequalities and increasing 
poverty. Tough obstacles have been overcome but dramatic 
challenges must still be faced. 
  The peoples of this hemisphere have performed a prodigious 
institutional reform. This reform must now have the economic and 
social conditions to become stable and improved. To preserve and 
increase the participation of the people in the democratic 
process, we now must rescue and make a reality the humanistic 
concept of overall development adopted by the OAS. It is not 
enough to grow. Countries must grow to correct unfairness and 
neutralize frustrations and hopelessness that limit and threaten 
the exercise of democracy. [passage omitted] 
  It is true that ideological confrontation has given way to 
unexpected opportunities of understanding and cooperation 
between antagonistic groups. Disputes and conflicts of a 
nonideological nature, however, have appeared or reappeared. 
They are historic, cultural, racial, and tribal. The 
international system has yet to discover its new configuration 
because it is conditioned by the interaction of 
state-disintegrating forces and associative forces that create 
economic spaces that shelter political integration tendencies. 
Meanwhile, our region -- the most peaceful in the world despite 
some episodes of violence -- has given examples of its capacity 
to respond and act dynamically. The American states have updated 
the inter-American system. From 1985 to 1994, from Cartagena de 
Indias to Mexico City, the OAS has been transformed. I know of 
no other international organization to adapt and transform 
itself so profoundly and in such a short period of time. I know 
of no other organization to readjust so consistently its own 
nature, purposes, and basic principles. Ten years ago in 
Brasilia, we defended the idea of reinvigorating confidence in 
the OAS. We considered it an indispensable condition for 
fulfilling its specific function of serving as a natural forum 
for the hemisphere's countries. This confidence has been 
restored and ensured by the member countries through a judicious 
and cooperative dialogue. 
  It is now the time for participation. I have the pleasure 
to point out the immediate and positive reaction of the member 
countries' governments to President Clinton's opportune 
invitation for a Summit of the Americas in December. For many 
years, there had not been such propitious conditions to promote 
a broad and creative exchange among the chiefs of state and 
government. I can see the OAS' effective presence in this 
occasion. Its organization and mechanisms can support the 
summit's preparation and cooperate in putting its results into 
practice. 
  Now is the time for dialogue. Interest in the OAS' 
performance, which was awakened at the national congresses held 
in the member countries, makes us think about ways of 
associating them more closely with our activities. The member 
countries' representativeness is, undoubtedly, ensured by their 
governments. It is appropriate, however, to think of situations 
in which delegates from the congresses of this hemisphere's 
countries can regularly gather to support this regional 
organization. This would be a step forward in the path already 
opened by the OAS secretariat general and the several congresses 
associated in regional and subregional groups. I believe this 
issue should be considered. 
  The OAS continues to be, above all, an expression of 
confidence in the importance of laws. It acts within the 
framework of the first principle contained in its charter, which 
I will now cite: International laws are a norm of behavior the 
states must adopt in their reciprocal relations. Respect for the 
laws is an essential ingredient of democracy. The implementation 
of this principal is the basis for domestic and international 
peace. Nothing contributes more to hemispheric security than 
respect for precepts resulting from a decision-making process of 
participatory qualities, particularly if it can harmonize 
different interests and balance asymmetrical forces. It is now 
the time for full respect for international laws. 
  The new conditions reigning in the hemisphere led the member 
countries to adopt bold and unprecedented decisions to defend 
and promote democracy. The instruments created for this 
objective have proven adequate, but the economic resources to 
ensure their implementation still are limited and cannot be 
accurately foreseen. I believe it is necessary to establish a 
special fund, independent of the regular OAS budget, to finance 
the activities related to the consolidation of democracy in the 
hemisphere. This fund will allow an equitable distribution of 
the expenses resulting from these actions. [passage omitted] 
  It is now the time for solidarity. Belize, Canada, and 
Guyana 
have joined the OAS as full members in recent years. All 
sovereign countries in the hemisphere enjoy the same situation. 
Not all governments, however, participate in the common tasks. 
As everyone knows, I have been asking for some time whether it 
is the right time for the member countries to reexamine the 
decision they made more than 30 years ago to suspend the Cuban 
Government from OAS activities. The 1990's are different from 
the 1960's. 
  Mr. President, my farewell to this General Assembly is not 
an 
agreement for separation but a pact for presence. There is a 
time to arrive and a time to leave, but one's entire life is the 
time to work. I will not abandon my ties, solidarity, and 
commitment toward liberty, democracy, justice, laws, and peace 
that mark the dreams of all of us. 
  Messrs. Foreign Ministers and heads of delegations, please 
allow me to address these final words to my fellow countrymen 
and the people of my state. I convey to them my most tender 
greetings and my most profound thanks. I have lived in many 
distant countries during my professional life. The memories and 
love of my people have always been a strengthening factor in 
adversity and a joy in the happy moments. Thank you very much. 

