BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Focus on Africa" program] </F>
  [Text] As it has been repeated often enough, but now it 
looks like becoming a reality, Nelson Mandela can only be a few 
hours away from being elected president of the new Republic of 
South Africa. Our southern African correspondent Fergal Keane 
talked to Mr. Mandela earlier today in Johannesburg and asked 
him first for his reaction to the initial [election] results. 
  [Begin recording] [Mandela] They are encouraging, because 
they reflect the feelings, the hopes, and aspirations of our 
people. I think the best way of looking at the results is not to 
do so from the point of view of which party is winning and which 
is losing. We must look at them from the point of view that, 
for the first time in the history of the country, the people of 
South Africa, have had the opportunity to exercise the most 
important right of a citizen. That is the approach, and I think 
if one looks at it from that angle, we will all be excited by 
the results. 
  [Keane] Nevertheless, it looks like the ANC will have a 
comfortable majority. You will be the president, while your own 
supporters will be pleased by that. There are frightened 
minorities out there, particularly white people, who fear that 
they may be marginalized or punished by an ANC government. What 
do you say today to reassure those people? 
  [Mandela] If one looks at our record, he will find that 
there 
is no real basis for those fears and concerns, because we have a 
long record, stretching over years, over decades, of nation- 
building, of promoting the spirit of reconciliation, and that 
has become even more clearer since I was released from jail. 
Therefore, we are concerned with the fears of the minority. If 
one looks at our record, he will find that there is no basis for 
those fears, although we acknowledge that they are genuine? 
  [Keane] But you would say to whites that South Africa is a 
home for them in the future? 
  [Mandela] We have said that repeatedly in the meetings that 
we have addressed in the run-up to these elections [words 
indistinct] our basic priority on which we are not compromising 
is to address the basic needs of the masses of the people. To 
be specific: the creation of jobs; [words indistinct] provision 
of a free, compulsory, universal quality education; the 
introduction of electricity, running water, flush toilets, paved 
roads, those are our basic priorities and we cannot compromise 
on that. But at the same time, we are keen not to lower the 
standards of the minorities in this country, in particular the 
whites. 
  [Keane] Now, this election has been a terrible emotional 
time 
for many people, particularly the black majority. Your own 
parents grew up and died without ever having the vote. What do 
you think they would feel now if they saw their son on the verge 
of becoming president? 
  [Mandela] They would feel very excited as much as we do that 
our people at last, after many sacrifices, during which many 
people have paid with their own lives. Nevertheless, we are now 
there, we have realized our dreams and aspirations. 
  [Keane] My final question to you. Following you around the 
country for the past four years since your release from prison, 
I have heard you say again and again to large crowds of people: 
I love each and every one of you and you said you want to put 
them in the pocket of your shirt so that you can look at them 
every day. Just tell me something about that, about the love you 
feel for the people in this land? 
  [Mandela] Before I went to jail, during my life in jail, and 
afterward, I have come across great South Africans from all 
population groups -- Africans, Coloreds, Indians, Afrikaners, 
English-speaking South Africans, who love their country and 
their people. What I am saying, I am expressing something which 
is in the hearts of every South African. That is one of the 
things that has encouraged all of us about the future of our 
country. We have got a wonderful country. We have got a bright 
future. [end recording] 

