BFN 

<F P=106> [By Sofia Wu and Edward Chen] </F>
  [Text] Managua, Nicaragua, May 5 (CNA) -- Republic of 
China [ROC] President Li Teng-hui and Nicaraguan President 
Violeta Barrios de Chamorro signed a joint communique here 
Thursday [5 May] reaffirming their determination to promote 
bilateral cooperation. 
  Chamorro said in the communique that President Li's visit 
has 
ushered in a new era in relations between the Republic of China 
and Nicaragua. Li is the first ROC president to visit Nicaragua 
and Latin America. 
  Chamorro said she appreciates the assistance the ROC has 
given to her country over the past years. "We hope the ROC will 
continue encouraging its businessmen to invest in Nicaragua to 
help boost our economic development," Chamorro said. 
  She also pledged continued Nicaraguan support for the ROC's 
bid to join the United Nations. "The 21 million residents of 
Taiwan are entitled to be represented in the world body," 
Chamorro said. Moreover, she added, Taiwan's economic strength 
should not be ignored. 
  President Li lauded Chamorro for her outstanding 
achievements 
in leading Nicaragua towards a stable, reliable environment for 
economic development. 
  Li also thanked Chamorro for her firm support for the ROC's 
UN bid. Chamorro twice spoke in the UN General Assembly in 1992 
and 1993 to support Taiwan's entry to the world body. 
  Li said the ROC will continue collaborating with 
international financial organizations to provide financing for 
major Nicaraguan economic development projects. In 1993, the 
ROC and the Inter-American Development Bank offered a US$30 
million syndicated loan to assist Nicaragua's agricultural 
reforms. 
  Li said the ROC will encourage its state-run and 
privately-owned enterprises to invest in Nicaragua and help 
boost the development of small and medium-sized industries in 
the Central American country. 
  Earlier in the day, the Nicaraguan National Assembly 
conferred on Li the Order of Pedro Joaquin Chamorro with Grand 
Cross in recognition of his contributions in producing 
understanding and friendship between the two countries. 
  Luis Humberto Guzman, president of the Nicaraguan Assembly, 
said Li was the fourth recipient of the honor. President 
Chamorro was the first recipient of the order, which was named 
after her late husband. Spanish King Juan Carlos and former 
Venezuelan President Carlos Andrez Perez also received the order. 
  Following the decoration ceremony, Li delivered a speech to 
the Nicaraguan congress. Li said he noticed that the people in 
Nicaragua are friendly and kind and live in a society full of 
vitality. He also lauded the Assembly for its role in promoting 
reforms and development in Nicaragua. 
  Li arrived in Managua Wednesday for a three-day state visit. 
Nicaragua is the first leg of Li's two-week four-country tour 
which will also take him to Costa Rica, South Africa and 
Swaziland. Li will leave here Friday for Costa Rica, where he 
will attend the inauguration of president-elect Jose Maria 
Figueres scheduled for Sunday. 

