BFN 

  [Text] Federal Deputy Prime Minister Zeljko Simic held 
talks with Yasushi Akashi, the UN secretary general's special 
envoy, in Geneva today. Here is how Deputy Prime Minister Simic 
commented on these talks in a statement for Radio-Television 
Serbia. 
  [Begin Simic recording] Mr. Yasushi Akashi is resolved to 
persevere in his post of completely objective and unbiased 
mediator -- or better yet, negotiator who is not inclined to 
give in to pressure and ultimatums of any one factor on the 
international political scene, including those who consider 
themselves to be absolute arbiters and interpreters of new 
regulations in international relations. 
  In these talks, he quite directly stressed that he was 
against employing force to solve any type of conflict and that 
he would remain a consistent advocate of all diplomatic and 
political means at his disposal for calming the malignant 
tensions in the civil and religious war in the former Yugoslav 
republic. In this respect, he also spoke about the topical 
problems between Knin and Zagreb and stressed quite openly that 
the war option would not only be hasty and precipitant, but that 
it would also be absolutely unacceptable for the international 
community. According to him, all the known problems should be 
solved in three phases: first, the establishment of a lasting 
and unconditional cease-fire; second, the revival of 
indispensable communication that would pave the way for finding 
a just, pragmatic political agreement acceptable to both sides. 
[as heard] 
  When we acquainted him with the continued efforts that the 
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has been undertaking for 
restraining the winds of war that, due to the open and very 
dangerous aid extended to the Muslim extremists, are threatening 
to escalate into a conflict of greater proportion with 
unforeseeable consequences, Akashi retorted that, without 
Yugoslavia's active mediating role, neither the war in the 
former Yugoslavia nor the crisis on the entire Balkan peninsula 
could be solved. What is more, he added that the agreement that 
was signed in Belgrade at the initiative and under the patronage 
of Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic was decisive for the 
continuation of negotiations on the cease-fire and for the 
revival of the entire negotiating process. 
  We remarked that it was difficult to expect more from a 
country that is not involved in the civil war and that is, above 
all, defending its survival while burdened with the repressive 
sanctions. Akashi answered that he agreed with our assessment 
but that the international community's approach to the Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia was a lot more balanced and objective 
precisely because of the policy of peace that it is conducting 
and that is absolutely transparent to all the participants, so 
he said. 
  Since the talks were joined by the chief of the UN 
Protection 
Forces [UNPROFOR] civilian sector, (De Mallo), also discussed 
were the Yugoslav delegation's serious remarks regarding the 
behavior of certain members -- or better said, certain parts of 
UNPROFOR -- and evident violations of the principles of 
objectivity and unbiased approach, which, in our opinion, could 
be extremely dangerous to the international community's fate and 
to its role in international relations. 
  It is understandable that the talks with the economic 
working 
group, headed by academician Kosta Mihajlovic, were overshadowed 
by the negotiating events that I have just discussed. According 
to the chairmen, the Yugoslav Government has taken a series of 
positive measures toward reviving the market economy. [end 
recording] 

