BFN 

<F P=106> [Comments by Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk edited by </F>
Nikolay Zakrevskiy: "Leonid Kravchuk: `I Support the Idea That 
Land With Facilities Be Traded'"] 
  [Text] A president's word is not a decree yet, and even 
not a request for action. Leonid Kravchuk's position, however, 
as well as his viewpoint eventually have an impact on decisions 
and resolutions we adopt. Therefore, there is a great interest 
in Leonid Kravchuk's statements and comments, primarily, with 
the media. 
  This time, an unofficial meeting with our country's leader 
has been held at the House of Cinema at the initiative of the 
"Market Reform" press club affiliated to the Union of Ukrainian 
Journalists Kiev branch. Here are certain opinions of the 
president: 
<H5>  On the Current Government... </H5>
  I cannot say that I am ashamed of Yukhym Zvyahilskyy's 
government, because, despite the whole complexity of the 
situation, the first steps toward stabilization have just been 
taken. We have started to earn hard currency to pay for energy 
resources. Additionally, preparations for the monetary reform 
and other transformations have already begun. The government 
must not be blamed now. Every government does what it can. The 
next government will do the same in a better and a different 
manner. I am convinced of this. Taking into account the 
situation on the eve of the parliamentary elections, we 
considered it inexpedient to change the government for just six 
months. 
<H5>  On Economic Federalization... </H5>
  I support greater economic freedom for the regions in such 
areas as collecting and spending revenues, budget relations, and 
dividing and administrating property. This requires appropriate 
sources of revenues, which would be in line with the law. My 
decree on granting powers to four oblasts confirmed this 
viewpoint. To avoid contradictions, however, these powers 
should be amended by laws. The question of full federalization 
of the country is, primarily, objectively unachievable; second, 
it would obstruct reforms and even threaten our country's 
existence. The issue of federalization is thus far premature. 
Although I do not rule out the possibility that it can be 
addressed in the future, it should be based on elaborated 
mechanisms of economic independence and perfection of political 
institutions. 
  For example, I have met with miners. They are ready for 
independent management. In such a case, however, a problem 
arises before them and the state. To grant greater or full 
independence means to halt subsidies. If the government stops 
subsidizing the coal industry, coal prices will increase 
considerably, since the conditions of coal mining in Donbass are 
extremely complex. Higher prices for coal will trigger an 
increase in all prices. These problems cannot be resolved at 
one time and taking into account only one factor. In Ireland, 
which I had an opportunity to visit, the process of closing 
certain mines lasted 10-12 years, in order to find new 
workplaces and create social conditions. We cannot but 
subsidize miners, pay them wages, or give other branches 
depending on miners such as metallurgy or chemical industry the 
opportunity to develop. It is now very hard to radically change 
the situation. 
<H5>  On Private Capital... </H5>
  If we do not have private capital, we can forget about the 
market economy. A civilized market without private property, 
capital, or financial and banking organizations is impossible. 
All the talk about the state regulating or predicting 
consequences is only talk. One can talk and act, but one can 
also hamper business by talking. I support more decisive 
reforms. I would like the Supreme Council to adopt a resolution 
according to which land with facilities could be traded. 
However, when I issued the decree on selling uncompleted 
constructions with land, they adopted an amendment canceling the 
decree. Until the parliament, the Executive Branch, and local 
administrations receive clear-cut decisions regarding this 
issue, we will not be able to avoid mistakes and swindles in 
economic policy. 
<H5>  On Western Aid... </H5>
  The $700-million aid granted by the U.S. Congress is 
absolutely not connected with our budget and its deficit; nor 
even with our movement toward the market economy. These funds 
are connected with special assistance in disarmament. Regarding 
IMF loans for economic reforms, they stick to a firm stance -- 
show us your budget and economic programs. Those who grant 
loans want to know where the money will be directed and whether 
it will be returned. Will the money be spent on wages or on a 
new Volvo? In the United States, I was told openly: Show us 
your laws regarding investments. Who will act as a guarantor of 
the loans? In what way are you forming your market? 
<H5>  On Introducing the Hryvnya... </H5>
  I believe that an operation such as the monetary reform must 
not be secret. This decision should be understandable to all 
people and carried out openly in all aspects concerning citizens 
and their banking accounts, enterprises, company staffs, and 
property. The mechanism should be worked out in detail and 
promulgated. Of course, not everybody will be happy. Such 
things do not happen in the world. But, we cannot allow a 
situation similar to the one that occurred before: People get 
up in the morning; all stores are closed; and they are told that 
there will be a new currency. I, as the president, will never 
allow this to happen, since this would mean nationwide turmoil. 
Reforms should be for the people, not for certain individuals 
in secret offices. The problem, however, lies not here, but in 
a stabilizing fund. When we manage to reach an agreement on 
budget issues and obtain a stabilizing loan from the IMF, we 
will be on the verge of solving the problem of introducing the 
hryvnya. 

