Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on regional guerrilla activities and clashes with 
government military units monitored through 9 March. 
<H5>  Colombia </H5>
  FARC, Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, 42d Front 
guerrillas kidnapped French citizens Stephan Delerce, 24, a 
teacher, and Sylvie Demouline, 25, a nurse, in a rural area in 
La Macarena Municipality, Meta Department. In an unrelated 
case, Linares Municipality, Narino Department, Mayor Gerardo 
Idelfonso Jurado Calpa was kidnapped on 1 March by ELN, Army of 
National Liberation, guerrillas on the road between Linares and 
Samaniego. Municipal contractor Hermes Diaz was also kidnapped 
along with the mayor. The guerrillas' message read: "The 
mayor's kidnapping is politically motivated. Do not fear for 
his life, which we shall respect." In yet another case, about 
30 heavily armed FARC guerrillas interrupted a meeting between 
Venadillo Mayor Alfonso Zarate Vargas and Piloto peasants. The 
guerrillas addressed the villagers and asked them not to vote 
for "enemies of the people." (Santa Fe de Bogota EL TIEMPO in 
Spanish 3 Mar 94 p 9a) 
  A three-year-old girl died on 2 March in crossfire between 
FARC guerrillas and the Army in Paloquemao on the road between 
Isnos and Paletara, Huila Department. The Army's Magdalena 
Battalion surprised the guerrillas when they were about to set 
up a road block. In a separate incident, Guerrilla Coordinating 
Board members set a bus on fire on 2 March in reprisal for the 
owner's alleged collaboration with the Armed Forces. The bus 
operated on the Bucaramanga-Barrancabermeja route. (Santa Fe de 
Bogota EL TIEMPO in Spanish 4 Mar 94 p 8a) 
  Urban guerrillas on motorcycles took advantage of the 
political campaign in Cali to attack several political 
headquarters and a police station. Three policemen on duty were 
seriously wounded. There were two other attacks on political 
centers, but no one was injured. (Santa Fe de Bogota Inravision 
Television Cadena 1 in Spanish 1730 GMT 7 Mar 94) 
  At 1740 on 7 March about 100 ELN guerrillas attacked and 
destroyed the police headquarters in Tasco. The policemen on 
duty bravely defended citizens for four hours. One policeman 
was killed during the clash, and two cadets were wounded. In 
addition to the police station, the local library, the 
registrar's office, the municipal offices, and the court and all 
its files were destroyed. The guerrillas seemingly suffered no 
casualties. (Santa Fe de Bogota Emisoras Caracol Network in 
Spanish 1200 GMT 8 Mar 94) 
  At 0540 on 8 March two high-power bombs exploded in Pereira 
and Dos Quebradas. It seems the target was Senator Juan 
Guillermo Angel's political center in downtown Pereira, but the 
presence of guards forced the terrorists to place the bomb 
across the street outside Citibank. In Dos Quebradas the target 
was the offices of congressional candidate Rafael Amador. No 
personal injuries were reported, only property damage. 
Meanwhile, in Cali, security was increased after a car bomb 
with 14 kg of dynamite and plans for various political centers 
was found near the Alfonso Bonilla Aragon Airport. Authorities 
blame the Guerrilla Coordinating Board. (Santa Fe de Bogota 
Inravision Television in Spanish 1730 GMT 8 Mar 94) 

