Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Column by Amir Tahiri: "The Club of Paris and Iran's </F>
Economic Woes"] 
  [Text] The so-called Club of Paris will convene in a 
special meeting this week to discuss Iran's economic situation. 
The club, comprised of 18 nations ranging from Japan and South 
Korea to Germany and France, has extended credit facilities to 
Iran over the past four or five years. 
  The meeting will be held in absolute secrecy and its 
organizers insist on denying the information media access to its 
proceedings. It is obvious, however, that it will discuss a 
matter of critical importance: Should it be officially declared 
that Iran has stopped paying back its debts? The diplomatic 
phrase "Stopped paying back" is a delicate way of saying that 
the country is bankrupt. Only a few countries, including Zaire 
and North Korea, have so far earned that distinction. 
  It seems that Club members are divided among themselves over 
what to do next. Some say that the worst is over for Iran and 
that it should be allowed new credit in order to begin 
rebuilding its economy and repay old debts. They describe Iran's 
current problems as short term and believe that most of them 
have more to do with monetary liquidity than with deeper 
economic ills. 
  Other members of the Club, however, insist that Iran should 
accede to total reform of its economic system. They say that a 
large portion of Iran's foreign indebtedness, amounting to $40 
billion, is in short-term credit that is difficult to 
reschedule. Those huge amounts were spent largely on the 
purchase of arms and on financing burgeoning imports that 
primarily served the interests of the "parallel economy" 
controlled by Revolution Guard enterprises headed by the ruling 
mullahs. 
  It is significant to note that the acquisition of foreign 
debt is totally prohibited by Khomeyni's constitution and that 
official propaganda has frequently spurned allowing the country 
to become "a city of infidels" since that would be the epitome 
of shame. President Rasfanjani and his dismissed minister of the 
economy, Mohsen Nurbakhsh, take most of the credit for getting 
the ruling mullahs to generally accept the notion of obtaining 
loans abroad, even though they did so without fanfare. 
  Iran's foreign debt problem can be properly dealt with only 
if the constitution is reformed to eliminate the bare threat it 
poses. Until this is done, the government will always be forced 
to deal with that problem in roundabout ways since it must 
continue to deny the existence of Iranian indebtedness in the 
first place but also must, at the same time, raise taxes and 
allocate budgetary appropriations for the repayment of debt 
which is not supposed to exist in the first place. 
  Regardless of what decision Club members reach this month, 
the persisting facts are that Iran's economic problems are a 
function of its political problems and that it is unlikely for 
the Iranian economy to regain health and prosperity without 
radical overhaul of the political system. 
  Iran no doubt has advantages over other Third World 
countries 
in the area of economic development. It does not have the 
problem of runaway overpopulation that burdens such countries as 
Bangladesh, India, and even Pakistan. Nor must it spend large 
amounts of foreign exchange annually in order to purchase oil. 
  Quite the contrary. It in fact has had a foreign-exchange 
source in oil exports amounting to some $200 billion in the past 
14 years. At the time the mullahs took power, the country had 
some $25 billion in foreign currency reserves and deposits 
abroad. Iran also generated additional revenues of $20 billion 
from nonoil exports over the past 14 years, not to mention $40 
billion in foreign loans. The picture thus painted is clear: 
Iran had some $300 billion at its disposal during the past 14 
years and yet its per capita national income declined by 17 
percent from its 1977 levels. 
  A single comparison: Pakistan, whose population is double 
that of Iran and which has no oil revenues, doubled its per 
capita national income during the same period and yet its 
foreign indebtedness stands today at one third of Iran's. 
  Another comparison: South Korea's per capita national 
income, 
which was on par with Iran in 1977, is now triple that of Iran. 
South Korea has no oil and its size is only 1/17th of Iran. 
  [Only] a few countries suffered the economic deterioration 
that befell Iran during the past 14 years and these countries 
include Afghanistan, North Korea, Cuba, Zaire, Ethiopia, the 
Sudan, Liberia, and post-Kuwaiti-invasion Iraq. 
  There is no doubt that Iran's poor economic performance is 
partly attributable to the dislocations caused by the revolution 
followed by the eight-year war with Iraq. The mullahs did not 
gain absolute hold on power until mid-1981 by which time Iran 
was involved in a full-fledged war with Iraq. Furthermore, many 
transgressions took place during the early stages of the 
revolutions. Tens of thousands of Iranian managers, experts, and 
businessmen were executed, exiled, or imprisoned. It did not 
take but one or two years to destroy or deliberately dissipate 
half of the expertise [Iran] accumulated over half a century. A 
comparison with other countries may not reflect a complete 
picture. 
  Rasfanjani announced a policy of normalization because he 
wanted to close the chapter on revolutionary dislocation. His 
was a pragmatic strategy meant to bring an end to executions and 
arbitrary arrests, to allow businessmen to reappear, and to shed 
the government's economic burden through privatization and by 
clipping the wings of the mullahs who drive the black market. 
  The problem, however, was that Rasfanjani was unable, or 
perhaps unwilling, to mobilize populist support for 
normalization containing established interests that benefit from 
a system of political suppression and economic domination. 
  Iran's creditors therefore face a dilemma. They could 
further 
weaken Rasfanjani's position if they continue to supply credit 
facilities without demanding political reform. They make wake up 
one day and realize that they squandered good money after bad as 
they did for years in a number of African and Latin American 
countries. 
  Should Iran be put under credit pressure, as Washington is 
wont to want these days, it may be driven to more extremism and 
any hope of bringing it back into the fold of the world 
community as a "normal member" would be lost. It is easy to 
pursue a policy of imperialistic adventurism whereas it is 
difficult to adopt and implement constructive policies. 
  Iran today is in no position to make a positive contribution 
to world developments. It lacks both the leadership and the 
means necessary. But it still can create a great deal of trouble 
for a large number of nations because it has the means and 
expertise to do so. 
  The situation therefore calls for treating Iran with a mix 
of 
firmness and good will. Future assistance must be linked to 
progress on the road to normalization as explained by Rasfanjani. 
  This is no hope in an early improvement in the Iranian 
economy without changes in its political climate and in the 
general direction of its domestic and foreign policies. 

