Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Virginie Coulloudon in Moscow: "Russia: Chemical </F>
Threat, The Terrible Secret"] 
  [Text] Is the Russian chemical bomb a state secret or is it 
an open secret? In Moscow, professor Vil Mirzayanov is paying 
with his freedom his attempt to break the sacrosanct laws of 
secrecy and reveal to the general public what the experts have 
known for a long time. This is a curious fate for this Doctor 
Strangelove-type character, yesterday an honored scientist and 
today sharing his cell with common murderers! 
  The scandal came from where it was least expected. For 
decades, a handful of scientists have been working to develop 
the most lethal neuroparalysis gases that boast an effectiveness 
greater than that achieved by American experts. Guardians of 
the destructive formulae, they are now however threatening to 
reveal all in response to a sudden philanthropic impulse and the 
feeling that they have been conned and exploited by their 
superiors. The first revelation is that Russia has many more 
toxic substances than it officially admits to. At the Paris 
convention on chemical weapons signed last year, the Kremlin 
undertook to release the figures for its arsenal. It admitted to 
storing 40,000 tonnes of various substances, 32,000 tonnes of 
which were neuroparalytic. Vladimir Uglev, one of the three 
protesting scientists and one of the fathers of the binary bomb, 
states, however, that Moscow has already produced 80,000 tonnes 
of mustard gas alone -- the gas used for the first time at Ypres 
in Belgium and which was the terror of the infantrymen gassed by 
the Germans. 
  For these dissidents of military chemistry, the proof that 
Russia lied about the amount of chemical weapons it has is to be 
found at Chikhaniy, in the Saratov region not far from the 
Volga. Away from prying eyes, a constant stream of explosions 
releases thick clouds of toxic substances into the atmosphere. 
It is here that the army destroys its excess of chemical 
weapons before Western observers can notice the deception. All 
this occurs to the detriment of the most basic safety rules. 
  It is claimed that whole vats of toxic substances are buried 
or burned without any safety measures taken whatsoever. No 
surprise then, that it is at Chikhaniy that the highest number 
of ophthalmic lesions and eye cancers are recorded -- twice as 
many as in the rest of the country. 
  State secrecy means that medical information for the regions 
concerned also remains a closely guarded secret. However, we do 
know that a number of soldiers who took part in the destruction 
of mustard gas at the Kambark base in the sixties have since 
died of cancer. Near the Novocheboksariy region of central 
Russia, almost 90 percent of the population suffers from various 
types of pathological illness. In 1993, the 12,000 children of 
Chikhaniy developed twice as many respiratory illnesses as in 
the previous year while the number of complications 
quadrupled.... 
  In the east, the largest threat posed by the military 
chemical industry does not, however, lie simply in this 
half-truth. Russia has two powerful binary weapons capable of 
wiping out entire populations when their internal membrane 
splits to mix two individually inoffensive gases. The first of 
these weapons, named VX, is produced using chemical substances 
that are banned by the Paris convention and which should soon be 
destroyed. The second weapon, on the other hand, is the most 
fearful arm ever dreamed up in this domain -- fearful because it 
is untouchable. 
  According to Vladimir Uglev, the developer of the gas 
code-named A-232, the weapon's originality lies in the 
simplicity of its components which are used in civilian industry 
and which cannot therefore be regulated by international 
experts. "We know that the chemical parameters of such a weapon 
cannot escape the clutches of the generals or terrorists for 
long," Vladimir Uglev accepts. "The question is whether to make 
its composition public knowledge and so demand strict 
international control, or else wait for a "leak" to occur, 
despite our vigilance." 
  By concealing the results obtained during the A-232 research 
and accusing the developers of these weapons of "violating state 
secrecy," the Kremlin seems to have opted for the latter 
solution. 

