CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Krisztina Koenen: "Migration of Nations on New </F>
Paths; Smugglers of Illegal Immigrants in the Sight of the 
Hungarian Border Protection Service"] 
  [Text] Budapest, Spring -- A group of about 20 Russians 
some time ago caught the eye of the Hungarian border protection 
authorities in the vicinity of Miskole in the northeast border 
area: They seemingly had traveled aimlessly back and forth by 
railway. When the group had found accommodations in a cheap 
hotel, surveillance was begun. It was observed that one man in 
the group--evidently in expectation of a call--appeared every 
day at the same time at a public telephone capable of receiving 
incoming calls. The border protection service also determined 
that the passports of the suspicious Russians without exception 
were issued at the same time and by the same agency. The group 
had entered from Ukraine by hitch-hiking, because no pedestrians 
are cleared at the border crossing that it used. Little by 
little all members of the group left the hotel in the direction 
of western Hungary; they drove to Gyoer, the largest city in the 
vicinity of the Austrian border. There, together with their 
observers, they continued to wait. Ten days later the 
impatiently awaited escorters turned up. Their vehicles, a Lada 
and a minibus, bore license plates from the Czech city of 
Teplitz. The group prepared to continue its journey when at last 
the Hungarian border protection service intervened and brought 
to light some surprising things. The leader of the escorters was 
a Georgian, the remaining smugglers of illegal immigrants were 
Czechs and Hungarians. One of the Czechs had been known to the 
border protection service for a long time. He had already been 
expelled from the country once, not quite a year ago, because of 
smuggling human beings and illegal border crossings. In the end, 
32 adults were arrested, to whom belonged more than 20 children. 
Not one of them was a Russian: All of them came from 
Afghanistan. They had purchased the Russian passports in Moscow 
for 200 marks [DM] each from a Georgian at Vnukovo Airport--no 
forgeries, but originals with fictitious names. The destination 
of the group was Germany. North of Teplitz they were to be 
infiltrated into Bavaria. 
  This story from the Hungarian magazine MAGYAR NARANCS shows 
how quickly and fundamentally border protection organizations of 
the former socialist countries had to change their way of 
thinking. Before the change, the chief occupation of the 
Hungarian border protection service, which at that time 
consisted of conscripts, was securing the western border against 
escape attempts from Hungary in the direction of Austria and--to 
a lesser degree--Yugoslavia. Today prospective Hungarian 
travelers have a passport issued to them, and the Austrian 
border is watched by the Austrians themselves. On the Hungarian 
side there are no longer protective strips or electronic alarm 
fences. 
  Today the Hungarian guards control and protect first of all 
the borders of the former socialist camp, which previously were 
not borders at all. "Here is the border of Europe," says Colonel 
Krizsan, media spokesman of the border protection service, and, 
in a dramatic gesture, traces with his forefinger the red line 
that separates Hungary from the former Yugoslavia, Romania, and 
Ukraine on the map. 
  The fact is that the paths of the migration of nations to 
the 
West (to Sweden and Germany, above all) from the southeast lead 
essentially through Hungary. The war in the former Yugoslavia 
has shifted the traditional routes to the north, and the change 
of German asylum laws makes it appear advisable to go to Germany 
across the green border. Austria has increased the security of 
its borders. So now the traffic goes across the green borders of 
the Czech Republic, Slovakia, or in another direction through 
Slovenia and Italy. Hungary, a country with many neighboring 
states, offers itself geographically as an ideal corridor. 
  This is also known by the smuggling gangs who in the 
meantime 
have become East European-international in composition and, in 
addition to the business in human misery, also pursue such 
lucrative activities as trafficking in drugs and arms, as well 
as car smuggling. They work professionally, confirms Border 
Guard Lieutenant Colonel Szoeke, the director of the department 
for smuggling of human beings. One should merely imagine, he 
said, the organizational achievement embodied in a plan, which 
determines the interrupted path from a Chinese or Turkish 
province through five or six countries all the way to Germany. 
For the first time, the border guard smirks, the extinct CEMA 
[Council for Mutual Economic Assistance] functions smoothly. The 
departure points for those who want to go to the West, as a 
rule, he says, are Moscow, Kiev, or Bucharest, since the former 
Soviet Union and Romania, thanks to the socialist foreign policy 
of the former years, let most of the Third World citizens enter 
without a visa. 
  The smugglers pick up their clientele at Vnukovo or Otopen 
airports and take them to cities close to the border, such as 
Arad or Temesvar. There they are taken over by natives 
acquainted with the locality and led across the green border to 
Hungary. Another "collaborator" of the smuggling organization, 
who has valid travel documents, drives a car or, still better, a 
bus quite legally across the border and then collects the 
refugees on Hungarian territory in small groups along the 
country road. The same process is used when passing into the 
Czech Republic or into Slovakia. The border protection service 
must have a great deal of luck or good informants if it wants to 
track down such a group. It is equally difficult to find people 
among peanuts, fruit and vegetables, or in furniture in trucks 
that are apparently properly sealed. In Hungary, Budapest is the 
take-off point of most of the migrants. At the eastern railway 
station the Arabian traders offer original Hungarian travel 
documents for as little as 10,000 forints (approximately DM170). 
  Hungary is squeezed as in a vice: As soon as the Western 
countries find out that the immigrants came through Hungary, 
they send them back at once. At the same time, the migration 
pressure from the east is growing. The estimates of the stream 
of immigrants to be expected vary, but it is presumed that, 
around Moscow, Kiev, and Bucharest each, several tens of 
thousands of people are waiting for smugglers. Among those 
waiting there are hardly any natives; for the most part they are 
people from Afghanistan, Pakistan, Bangladesh, China, or 
Vietnam. In 1993 more than 27,000 border violations and illegal 
border crossings became known to the Hungarian border protection 
service, and within two years more than a million people were 
turned back at the borders. The illegal border crossings are on 
the increase: For this year an increase of about 30 percent is 
expected. Not only is there an increase in the number of border 
violations that have become known, but also in their danger: The 
share of punishable offenses has increased. How many punishable 
offenses or trespasses have remained undiscovered no one dares 
to estimate. 
  The foreigners traversing Hungary increasingly destabilize 
Hungarian society. The incidence of crimes in the southeastern 
border regions--caused by the war in the former Yugoslavia--has 
assumed disturbing dimensions. Increasingly one can hear the 
view that Hungary, at high costs and the use of immense human 
resources, must solve problems with whose origin it has nothing 
to do. The border protection service has been modernized; 
instead of persons liable for military service, attempts are 
being made to employ civil servants. Beginning in 1995, it is 
planned to do completely without persons liable for military 
service. Assistance with the training and information exchange 
came from the target countries, which are being shielded by 
Hungary. A modern computer network was developed with American 
assistance; from Germany came, above all, professional and moral 
support. Material assistance, on the other hand, remains 
limited. But how should a border protection service function 
which does not even have at its disposal mobile telephones in 
sufficient number and quality? 
  A further difficulty is the administration of justice of the 
Hungarian courts. Smugglers who have been caught, even if they 
are not in court for the first time, can count on light 
sentences. As a rule, they are warned and deported. The social 
danger of smuggling human beings is for the most part rated low 
by the courts, although the consequences, for Hungary, too, are 
incalculable. So it can happen that the smugglers get away with 
lesser penalties and fines than their victims. Bad prospects for 
the future--if the expectations of the border guards should come 
true. 

