BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Ismet G. Imset from the "Being (Too) Vocal" </F>
column: "The DEP Closure Case: Which League Are We In?"] 
  [Text] There is no doubt that last week's Constitutional 
Court decision to close down Turkey's one-and-only Kurdish based 
legal party, Democracy Party (DEP), is both constitutional and 
legal. The decision was taken after the court concluded that 
two speeches made by the party's former chairman and a statement 
issued last year by DEP executives were in violation of the 
Constitution and the Political Parties Law. 
  The verdict is, only because of these, both constitutional 
and legal. 
  It is also a verdict which further shows, leaving no room 
for 
doubt, that the crime of opinion exists in Turkey and that there 
is little freedom of conscience or expression in this 
NATO-member country. 
  Opening the United States Institute of Peace conference 
which 
was held in Washington for two days, starting on June 1, one of 
the American speakers had called on the audience to listen to 
what was being said about Turkey only after forgetting that it 
was a NATO member and an American ally. 
  "Evaluate what you hear as you would evaluate developments 
in 
a Muslim country which is neither an American ally nor a member 
of NATO," he had said. 
  The complex relationship between countries of the world, the 
greater business and defense interests as well as future plans 
of influence would indeed make this very difficult. But if for 
a second one could forget Turkey's claims of being a democratic 
country and its business-defense related interests, the picture 
that comes out could be frightening. 
  For one, the DEP ordeal shows how backward the current 
Turkish laws and Constitution are. The Constitution under which 
Turkey is being administered is a constitution which was 
prepared under a military transition period, only two years 
after the 1980 military coup. It is a constitution which was 
forced on the people with the threat that if they did not vote 
in favour for it, they would be losing a major chance. It is a 
constitution which gives lifetime immunity for coup leaders and 
executives and which for years banned the Turks from electing 
their own politicians. 
  It is a military constitution and one which hardly fits in 
with the democratic standards this country has agreed to meet 
under international accords and the Helsinki Final Act. And, as 
the recent verdict has shown, both Turkey's Political Parties 
Law and the Turkish Penal Code are based on the assumption that 
"crimes of opinion" exist and bring about the harshest 
punishment for such crimes. 
  In other words, the recent development has shown that 
Turkish 
democracy is substandard and that civil rights in this country 
are subject to the harshest repression one could imagine. This 
is one. 
  Secondly, through the decision which has banned the DEP and 
the prosecution of all DEP deputies, Ankara has unwillingly 
served the PKK [Workers Party of Kurdistan] argument that Turkey 
"has closed its doors on any legal struggle and has no 
tolerance." 
  Having banned the DEP, Turkey has shown to the world that 
indeed it has no tolerance even to legal movements on the 
Kurdish platform. That under current laws and the Constitution, 
to imagine a legal movement for the Kurds or a political 
struggle on their behalf is only a dream. 
  The doors to a legal Kurdish struggle in Turkey have been 
closed down and it is certain that the PKK will benefit the most 
out of this. Not only will it use this opportunity to expand 
its influence in foreign countries and propagate, but it will 
also effort [as published] to use this "substantial evidence" in 
legitimizing its own status as an illegal movement. With 
decisions like this, what more could the PKK have wanted? Who 
now, in the West, is in a position to insist that illegality can 
not be approved and that the PKK does not have a valid reason to 
exist? 
  How can we further this argument any longer with six elected 
members of Parliament in jail, two others under constant 
surveillance and six more in exile in Europe, facing now charges 
of "terrorism?" 
  Indeed, the PKK has been served in such a great way over the 
past months and especially last week that it is difficult to 
believe those persecuting Kurdish activists are actually enemies 
of those activists. 
  But this is not all. 
  Husamettin Cindoruk, in a highly interesting statement to 
the 
daily HURRIYET, said on Sunday that wherever he travels abroad, 
he is challenged to explain statements made by State Security 
Court prosecutor Nusret Demiral. 
  When it comes to letters, he says, he can answer them. 
"But," 
adds the Parliament speaker, "it is difficult to say things face 
to face." 
  Turkey has many laws inhibiting the freedom of expression 
and 
perhaps the strongest of these are related to remarks or action 
made abroad which could discredit Turkey or Turkish security 
forces. Any statement to be made abroad, for instance, could be 
punished with severe prison terms if the "suspect" is found 
"guilty" of speaking against the country's best interests or if 
he or she says something that could discredit the country. 
Looking back into the past, one could easily recall an Istanbul 
military tribunal prosecutor who persecuted anyone with a 
controversial opinion over a period of many years. Wherever one 
looks, his signature is still there. He was the mastermind of 
the peace association persecution and threw hundreds of people 
behind the bars. 
  It was soon understood that his relations extended beyond 
the 
limits of the court rooms, into the dark corridors of the 
"Mafia." It was also understood and put on the record that 
whenever Turkey's relations with Western countries started to 
improve, he would open a new case casting further shadows on 
Turkey's human rights record. 
  It's almost as if he was actually trying to discredit Turkey 
or spoil relations with the West. 
  According to the law, we are not at liberty to judge current 
prosecutors and their motives--and in reality they are too 
powerful in all ways of life to challenge them. Furthermore, 
there is always the constant threat. The threat that HE gets 
frighteningly upset when criticized, that HE should be treated 
with care and that HE never forgets. I was told last week not 
to anger HIM, on the grounds that HE would not forgive. 
Changing the subject, the fact is that the State Security 
Courts have been established to prevent crimes against the 
state. In the words of President Suleyman Demirel, the aim of 
creating these courts was to take swift action against criminals 
who had targeted the state. 
  "The normal courts were in a bottleneck," he explained in a 
recent interview. "Criminals were just walking out," Then one 
can assume that the DGMs [State Security Courts] are not 
"normal" courts and that they have been created to prevent 
"criminals from walking out." In other words, although 
officials argue that the DGMs are as impartial as other courts, 
they also confess that they have a special duty. "To keep the 
criminals in." 
  And, since the crime of opinion exists in Turkey and the 
people themselves have little tolerance to others with different 
opinions, such courts have been extremely successful in keeping 
opinion criminals inside. 
  Such crimes, technically, can be committed in only two forms 
and at that, Turkey has something to be proud of. For instance, 
one cannot be charged or imprisoned for only "thinking" of 
something without expressing it. Thus the crime can be 
committed in the verbal and written form. 
  Putting such opinions into writing can be a crime. Voicing 
such opinions can also be a crime. Mehdi Zana, a former mayor 
for Diyarbakir, is in jail for speaking at the European 
Parliament in 1992. Two Turkish MPs of Kurdish origin face 
possible capital punishment for speaking before the Helsinki 
Commission and so on. 
  Demiral himself explained last week in another HURRIYET 
interview when asked whether he read books, that they mostly 
read obscene books. According to him, the DGM prosecutors read 
the books word by word "to see whether the opinions behind those 
words" constituted a crime. That is when the charges are 
brought up. Charges at a State Security Court, established 
mainly to prevent crimes against the state. 
  The authority of DGMs is indeed too vast and widespread. It 
can be exploited in every way depending on the individuals in 
charge of the prosecution. 
  Meanwhile, speaking of independent justice, one needs to 
note that at least one of Ankara DGK's chief prosecutors is a 
military officer--with all personnel records attached to the 
Chief of Staff. And there are politics. Demiral, for instance, 
makes it no secret that he personally believes the Turkish race 
comes from the Grey Wolves--a symbol used by the extreme 
rightists and so on. 
  Politically speaking, one has also to ask how the 
Constitutional Court took last Thursday's decision and under 
which circumstances. 
  Why, for instance, did everyone in the TDN [TURKISH DAILY 
NEWS] already know hours in advance on Thursday morning that the 
decision "for closure" would be passed that day and that the 
court was under pressure to do so as soon as possible. How did 
we know this? How come the information which reached us seems 
to be true? How impartial is such a decision which carefully 
maintains the parliamentary status of four deputies, thus 
closing the doors for a by-election? The coincidences are too 
great. 
  It is not very long since Parliament acted in a similar 
haste 
and although it had the files for one and-a-half years, lifted 
the immunity of eight deputies in a matter of hours. It is 
worth remembering that the action was taken only after Gen. 
Dogan Gures pointed the finger at Parliament and said "why 
should we look for the bandits on the mountains while they are 
in Parliament." 
  Never before, aside from military coup regimes has the 
credibility and respectability of the Turkish Parliament been 
eroded so much by state officials. 
  Think of a country where an army general can publicly go on 
the record accusing an elected parliament of banditry, where a 
police chief can order a besiege of this almost-holy compound 
and where a prosecutor can call members of parliament, who still 
maintain their MP status, as "terrorists" and ban their exit 
from Turkey. 
  Moreover, think of this country where security forces have 
evacuated and burned down over 900 villages, where at least 50 
journalists are in prison, where writers, publishers and newsmen 
are arrested almost every week, where economists and 
academicians are placed behind bars only for expressing their 
views and where death- squads roam the streets to abduct, 
torture and kill Kurdish origin businessmen and activists. 
  The "nation's assembly" is the Turkish expression we use to 
describe our parliament. An assembly where the people send 
their elected representatives to speak on their behalf. An 
assembly in which when we hear things we don't want said, we 
move against those people these days. 
  It appears that through some people's actions Turkey's 
credibility abroad is at stake and their movements are a black 
mark against the whole nation. Meanwhile, Parliament itself is 
losing its remaining influence. 
  Recent remarks made by some very high level state officials 
imply that they have lost all faith in parliamentary democracy 
themselves. That they neither respect nor give any value to 
Parliament. 
  More important though, is that the behaviour of some of 
these 
officials is hurting Turkey abroad, overshadowing its 
credibility and helping the terrorists. Under normal 
circumstances, these could be regarded as serious crimes as well. 
  For years, I have argued that Turkey's policy in the 
Southeast has helped recruitment for the terrorists and that the 
PKK's strength is owed mainly to policy mistakes more than 
anything else. For years I have argued with DEP politicians and 
those on the "legal platform" that their withdrawal from 
politics would hurt Turkey, that the only legal alternative to 
the PKK should be given the chance to survive and that this 
historical opportunity should not be wasted. Now, there is no 
need to argue anymore. 
  These days, it appears that a new step is being taken. One 
which is not only incredibly serving to give legitimacy to 
illegality but one which, in a crucial post-August era where 
Turkey's overall fate is attached, will further boost the crisis 
Turkey faces. 
  Looking at the recent developments, the only hope one can 
have is for two separate political efforts continuing outside of 
the DEP to gain momentum--and at least be tolerated. 
  Currently, former minister Serafettin Elci is trying to 
establish a conservative party. Another Kurdish 
activist-turned- poet, Kemal Burkay, is also trying to set up an 
independent political party. 
  The DEP closure may have given way to further arguments on 
Turkish democracy but whatever has happened, this does not mean 
all doors are closed. 
  Everyone is aware of how provocative the DEP has been and 
how 
much it has fanned Turkish anger against the Kurdish movement in 
general. Even Sedat Yurttas spoke of these "mistakes" over the 
weekend. 
  Now, however, there is a chance for those people without 
"mistakes" to make an appearance on the political scene and this 
has to be regarded as a last-minute-chance for Turkey as much as 
the activists in this field. 
  What fate these new--and extremely moderate--activists will 
have is another issue and one which appears to closely depend on 
international reaction to the DEP case. If those ruling Turkey 
behind the scenes are given the correct messages, this could at 
least create the beginning of an atmosphere of tolerance. The 
hard liners for some time have argued that the DEP brought 
trouble on itself and that it was the preference of a majority 
of Turks to "punish" the party which had not only failed to 
condemn PKK terrorism but gave the impression that it actually 
supported it. 
  The same argument cannot have any grounds where Elci and 
Burkay are concerned. To be more clear, there could be a chance 
for a fresh start despite all of the pain which has been 
witnessed and despite the PKK's own threats to any movements it 
cannot control. 
  The question is whether Turkey can be made to tolerate this 
fresh start for its own benefit, at the cost of amending its 
constitution and laws. 
  It appears to me that such a chance exists and that Turkey's 
allies will be playing a vital role on what happens in the 
future. 
  No one should be expected to accept a country, claiming to 
be 
democratic, continuing to judge and punish opinion. As no one 
should expect human rights violations of any sort, committed by 
either side of the conflict, to be forgotten. 
  Only this way can Turkey truly argue against what will be 
portrayed as the legitimacy of illegality. 
  Thus, action must be taken immediately. Action must be taken 
to insure the safety of new politicians who will appear on the 
scene of legal activities--both against the PKK and their 
persecutors. Action also has to be taken to voice concern on the 
freedom of expression in Turkey. 
  There appears to be no ground whatsoever to the argument 
that 
this issue is only Turkey's domestic in-house affair. 
  For, through the efforts of certain individuals who 
currently 
exploit power in the absence of a strong civilian regime, the 
affair has been turned into an international one with very 
serious humanitarian interests. 
  Also, unfortunately for those behind the intolerant campaign 
we now witness, Turkey has signed international accords and is 
obliged to meet certain international criteria. 
  If we cannot meet these terms regulated mainly by the 
International Declaration of Human Rights, Paris Charter and the 
Helsinki Final Act, and if we continue to insist on punishing 
the "crime of expression," at least we should show the decency 
to withdraw our signature from such accords and make the world 
know openly where we stand and which democratic league we are in. 
  Then, at least, we can freely fight it out among ourselves. 

