BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chris Yeung and Beverly Chau] </F>
  [Text] Journalists and China's key advisers in Hong Kong 
yesterday kept up the pressure for Beijing to free or at least 
publicise details of the conviction of reporter Xi Yang for 
"stealing state secrets." More than 100 journalists staged a 
demonstration outside the local headquarters of XINHUA (the NEW 
CHINA NEWS AGENCY) as the New York-based Committee to Protect 
Journalists condemned the conviction as a "flagrant violation" 
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 
  Xi's father pleaded with local deputies of the Chinese 
National People's Congress (NPC) and the Chinese People's 
Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) for their help in 
calling on the Government to reconsider the case. Xi Linsheng 
has been in hospital for treatment of a heart complaint since 
hearing that his son had been jailed for 12 years. 
  In a letter published in Ming Pao, Xi's employer, the elder 
Mr Xi wrote: "The (heavy sentence) is a severe blow to me and my 
family. It will ruin the whole life of Xi Yang." 
  Local NPC deputies Ng Hong-mun and Cheng Yiutong said they 
would liaise with colleagues, CPPCC deputies and Hong Kong 
Affairs Advisers to jointly seek clarification from the Ministry 
of Justice on what grounds the 12-year sentence had been given. 
They would then decide what to do next. 
  In Beijing, British Ambassador Sir Robin McLaren admitted 
that getting more information through diplomatic channels might 
be the most they could do. There were "limits of what we could 
do" because Xi was not a permanent resident of Hong Kong, he 
said. "We have to be realistic about that." 
  A veteran CPPCC deputy, Xu Simin, said "it was probably 
true" 
that Vice Premier Zhu Rongji, head of the People's Bank of 
China, might have insisted on stiff punishment for Xi in a bid 
to defend the authority of the central bank following the 
leakage of bank reform stories. "Not a single banking official 
has been punished for the illegal raising of funds during the 
fiscal chaos last year. If he could give leniency to the banking 
cadres why can't he be lenient towards Xi Yang?" Mr Xu asked. 
"I will certainly grill him if I'm able to see him," he said. 
  In a letter addressed to the Supreme People's Court 
President 
Ren Jianxin, the pro-China Democratic Alliance for the 
Betterment of Hong Kong urged Beijing to publish the text of the 
verdict and details of his case quickly to help dispel anxiety 
and worries of people from all walks of life. Signed by 
chairman Tsang Yok-sing, the letter called for leniency towards 
the reporter if he was found to have erroneously violated the 
law in his work. 
  Justice authorities, they said, should also issue guidelines 
on the definition of state secrets given the fact that Hong Kong 
journalists might be able to obtain "state secrets" from proper 
channels while reporting in China. 
  Shocked and saddened by the stiff penalty against Xi, about 
100 local journalists -- about 20 of them from Ming Pao -- 
voiced their concern for a free press in a petition outside 
XINHUA. They demanded the immediate release of Xi in a letter 
addressed to premier Li Peng. 
  An organiser, Lam Manchung from Ming Pao, said the 
encouraging turnout showed that journalists were concerned about 
press freedom and willing to speak up for the victims. Some 
said they wanted to express their fears over the "unjustifiable" 
measures by Beijing to control local press. 
  Ming Pao reporter To Fook-leung said he could not tell what 
was a "state secret" even after seven years of China reporting 
experience. "It is better to have written guidelines," he said. 
The journalists' plea was echoed by the newly-formed 123 
Democratic Alliance. Eighteen members of the group protested 
against the secret trial of Xi. 

