Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article based on a report in NANFANG ZHOUMO (SOUTHERN </F>
WEEKEND): "State Asset Losses Amount to 100 Million Yuan a Day"] 
  [Text] Our switch from the old to the new system, in which 
our state assets management organs are incomplete and divided, 
has left our state assets in an awkward plight of "all managing 
them, but no one being liable for them." Our current management 
sector's lack of responsibility and authority has created a 
situation in which state assets suffer from ineffective 
oversight and severe losses. Authoritative figures 
conservatively estimate that our state asset losses are 
averaging 100 million yuan a day. 
<H5>  Property Rights Adjustments Have Devalued State Assets </H5>
  While international practice requires assets appraisals 
before enterprises set up joint or contractual joint ventures, 
project appraisals were conducted for only a little over 2,100 
of the up to 10,000 Sino-foreign joint and contractual joint 
ventures by state enterprises approved by the pertinent sector 
in 1992, leaving nearly 8,000 to be set up without assets 
appraisals. 
  Investigation shows that in the over 2,000 enterprises for 
which project appraisals were conducted, the assets appreciation 
rate averaged a high of 75 percent. Projecting from this, state 
asset losses for the 8,000 enterprises that were not appraised 
topped 30 billion yuan. 
  Many enterprises either do not conduct assets appraisals or 
deliberately undervalue assets in the course of setting up 
joint or contractual joint ventures, which is due largely to 
local administrative interference. 
  In the conversion to the shareholding system, arbitrarily 
undervaluing or essentially not appraising state assets creates 
a quite severe situation of differing profits for similar shares 
among state shares and other share types. Some regions provide 
individual and corporate shares with matching and gift shares, 
while certainly not granting such rights to state shares. The 
data for 1992, excluding state shares that were not listed, show 
state-share returns losses reaching 300 million yuan. 
  In the contracting and leasing process, nonstandard actions 
of contractors and leaseholders also create a loss of state 
assets. 
<H3>  Unclear Property Rights Have Left Small Fish Eating From the 
Big One </H3>
  When state enterprises first set up so many collective 
enterprises to resolve the matter of jobs for dependents, this 
was actually a case of state enterprises giving state assets to 
collective enterprises as free gifts, with the returns going to 
collective enterprise ownership. But while setting up these 
collective enterprises undoubtedly resolved the jobs 
difficulties, the loser was certainly the state as to who 
invested and who benefited. 
  Administrative institutions taking over state assets free of 
charge to set up tertiary industries and create earnings has 
also gobbled up state assets to varying degrees. 
  Arbitrary fundraising and apportionment have also created a 
great loss of state assets. The list of arbitrary 
apportionments against enterprises can reach up to 100 items, 
including a host of charges by the center, localities, and 
even neighborhoods, causing enterprises unspeakable problems. In 
recent years, up to 10 billion yuan a year of state assets have 
been lost through such apportionment. 
  State enterprise oversight is ineffective, with unclear 
property rights, all units indulging in their own wishful 
thinking, and profits being seized where seen, resulting in all 
eating off of the state's "big fish." 
<H5>  Enterprise Losses: The Black Hole of State Assets </H5>
  State enterprise losses represent a severe problem in 
China's 
economic activities that has never been solved. The data from 
investigations by pertinent sectors shows that by the end of 
1991, budgeted state enterprise losses throughout China had 
topped 100 billion yuan, which when added to the 104.5 billion 
yuan in accumulated enterprise bad debts and the 50 billion yuan 
in hidden losses, probably topped 250 billion yuan. 
  In addition to state industrial enterprises, state 
commercial 
enterprise losses are also severe. In 1991, state commercial and 
supply and marketing cooperative enterprises sustained losses of 
31.972 billion yuan. And while foreign trade enterprises cut 
their losses somewhat through foreign trade system reform, they 
still sustained a record 11.97 billion yuan in losses in 1992. 
  This sharp increase in enterprise losses has severely eroded 
state assets, with such erosion being most severe due to hidden 
losses. In 1992, our budgeted state industrial enterprise fixed 
assets net value was less than 800 billion yuan, which 
considering hidden losses of 50 billion yuan, gave us an asset 
loss of 6.25 percent. If we let such an abnormal situation 
continue, some state assets will be faced with the danger of 
being eaten up entirely. 
  What is incomprehensible is that enterprises are sustaining 
severe losses on one hand, while great waste exists on the 
other. As much as 70-80 percent of the banqueting at restaurants 
and hotels is entertainment at public expense. Concerned 
parties estimate that at least one-third of the 80 billion yuan 
so banqueted away in 1992 was illegal. 
  Resource-type state assets have also been sharply damaged 
through illegal operation and leased management, with severe 
losses. Illegal land transactions alone cause the state losses 
of over 10 billion yuan in income a year; whole mineral veins 
are regularly destroyed by illegal mining of particular 
sections; and the arbitrary stripping of forests seems even more 
unstoppable. 
  Thus, tightening state asset oversight is of great urgency. 
It has been disclosed that the pertinent State Council 
departments are now drawing up regulations on tightening state 
asset oversight. 

