BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by "C.G": "Bonn Prepares To Assume EU Presidency"] </F>
  [Text] The government is preparing to take over the 
presidency of the European Union [EU] for the next six months. 
The cabinet will discuss this subject on Wednesday [22 June], 
and Chancellor Kohl will report on the cabinet's conclusions to 
the Bundestag Foreign Affairs Committee on Thursday. Next 
Monday, Swedish Prime Minister Bildt will discuss Sweden's EU 
admission with Kohl in Bonn. Next Wednesday, after the EU 
Council meeting on the Greek island of Corfu, Foreign Minister 
Kinkel will make a government statement to the Bundestag. On 5 
July, the European Commission and German cabinet will hold a 
joint meeting in Bonn. 
  Apart from the prime ministers and foreign ministers of the 
12 EU member countries, the Corfu summit, taking place on Friday 
and Saturday, will also be attended by the prime ministers of 
Austria, Finland, Norway, and Sweden, future members of the EU. 
Government spokesman Vogel confirmed in Bonn on Monday that the 
admission documents to the EU would be signed on Friday. The 
partnership agreement upon between the EU and Russia is also 
supposed to be signed in Corfu, provided that matters concerning 
the translation of the documents have been settled by then. In 
Bonn, it is expected that President Yeltsin will travel to 
Corfu, but, says Vogel, Moscow has not yet confirmed this. 
Vogel said that the EU countries hope to be able to notice an 
economic improvement in the individual countries when making 
their assessment of the general economic situation. They cannot 
come to terms with the continuing structural difficulties there. 
An "interim report" on efforts to safeguard Europe's 
competitiveness and jobs, as set out in EU Commission President 
Delors's white book, is to be presented in Corfu. Germany is in 
favor of an integration of railroads, telecommunications, and 
energy supply lines to form a "trans-European network." But, 
said Vogel, a method of financing that does not threaten 
stability is necessary for this. Competition with private 
suppliers must also be kept intact. 
  Germany and Great Britain have agreed to present a joint 
motion in Corfu aimed at simplifying the multiplicity of 
regulations in the EU. That should serve to simplify 
competition. After initial hesitation, the EU Commission seems 
to have agreed to this motion, said Vogel. Germany will seek to 
expand Europe's systems of training and education. A start 
should finally be made on the reduction of bureaucracy, so that 
small and medium-size enterprises are relieved of unnecessary 
pressure in their work. Bonn views this as a condition for 
Europe's industrial stability and for Japanese and U.S. 
investment. 
  Germany wants to encourage an opening of the European market 
to products from Central and East European countries, with the 
exception of agricultural goods. These countries should be 
given the impression that the EU welcomes them politically and 
psychologically first as partners, and later as as members, said 
Vogel. Germany wants the EU Commission to suggest regular 
meetings of EU heads of government, also attended by the prime 
ministers of East European and Baltic countries. France sees 
Germany as a partner in its calls for greater support for the 
frail countries in the southern Mediterranean. Kinkel and the 
remaining EU foreign ministers want to include in the Corfu 
summit a group of personal assistants to the prime ministers, 
who will subsequently prepare a report to be considered at the 
1996 government conference deciding on institutional reforms. 
In Corfu and at the world economic meeting in Naples in July, 
Kohl and Mitterrand want to reiterate their desire for 
additional funds to safeguard nuclear power stations in the 
East. Finally a resolution condemning xenophobia and racism 
should be adopted in Corfu. 
  Vogel said no personnel decisions are likely to be made in 
Corfu, but the government considers it an urgent matter to reach 
a consensus concerning the next president of the EU Commission 
and other Commission members, because the process of approving 
the newly elected European Parliament will take time; the terms 
of office of the new parliamentary members begin in January. It 
would be good for Germany's EU presidency, beginning on 1 July, 
if the relevant resolutions are passed in Corfu, said Vogel. 
But there are no guarantees of that. It is possible that the 
government will appoint a member of the Christian Democratic 
Union and a representative of the Social Democratic Party of 
Germany to succeed the two German EU Commission members 
Bangemann (Free Democratic Party of Germany) and Schmidhuber 
(Christian Social Union). 

