Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Improper U.S. Pressure"] </F>
  [Text] The pressure being exerted by the United States on 
the PLO by linking the expected UN Security Council resolution 
on the massacre at the holy al-Ibrahimi Mosque with the 
resumption of the talks arouses dismay and amazement. By 
adopting this position, the United States, which is supposed to 
play the role of "honest broker" in the peace process, is 
playing the role of a party that is biased in favor of Israel. 
It is this role which so far has delayed the Security Council's 
approval of a resolution on a horrible massacre on which the 
entire world has commented. Nothing justifies all this 
procrastination or the delay in adopting this resolution. 
  Moreover, this U.S. stance enhances the conviction about 
dual 
U.S. approaches and positions regarding issues of international 
legitimacy and international law. It seems this time too, as in 
previous times, that when talk is over resolutions in the 
Security Council against the Arab nation or against any Arab 
state, the United States promotes such resolutions in no time. 
However, when talk is over resolutions in favor of the Arab 
nation on the basis of international legitimacy and 
international law, the United States immediately begins raising 
conditions and formulas and involves the Security Council in 
endless foot-dragging. It goes so far as to hint using its veto. 
  Of course, news agency reports about Washington's objection 
to referring to Jerusalem as part of the occupied territories, 
and the reservations and conditions which it is voicing 
regarding the issue of international protection affirm that 
Washington adopts the Israeli position and tries to evade 
international resolutions because of this bias. 
  Such positions, with which the United States continues to 
deal with Arab issues, affirm the "honest broker" role's lack of 
credibility and disqualifies the United States from fulfilling 
such a role as long as it continues to pursue a policy of bias 
and double standards and evades international resolutions 
relating to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. 
  In conclusion, if the United States is really concerned 
about 
the peace process in this region and interested in the 
resumption of a serious and genuine peace process, it should 
stop pressuring the party that is the victim in the equation and 
stop alluding to the "U.S. veto" against international 
legitimacy's resolutions. It should pursue the same standards 
in dealing with the various issues on the international arena. 
Without such an approach, it is a grave mistake to believe that 
the continuation of the present U.S. position might promote the 
peace process. 

