BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Thai Military Has Credibility Problem on KR </F>
Issue"] 
  [Text] Since 1962, when the World Court awarded the border- 
straddling temple of Preah Vihear to Cambodia, it has become as 
much a symbol of strained Thai-Khmer relations as a monument to 
a once great culture. 
  Today, the hill-top temple is under the control of the Khmer 
Rouge and along with patches of other Cambodian territory will 
remain so, Phnom Penh charges, as long as elements within the 
Thai military continue to provide the reviled rebel group with 
support. 
  The controversy surrounding Thai assistance to the Khmer 
Rouge goes back some 15 years. But what started as a 
justifiable, if nakedly self serving, national security policy 
in the wake of Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia, is now rapidly 
spiralling into a dangerous bilateral issue. 
  In the past week, Phnom Penh has threatened to launch 
crossborder attacks against Khmer Rouge armoured units it says 
are hiding in Thai territory and Thai and Cambodian gunners 
exchanged shellfire. Cambodia is also threatening to take its 
charges to the UN security council. 
  When Phnom Penh launched its military drive to recapture 
Khmer Rouge held territory late last year, it also opened a 
scrappy diplomatic campaign to focus international attention on 
allegations that the guerrillas are still receiving support from 
across the border. 
  While the military offensive has born mixed results, the 
diplomatic push has been a stunning success. Many of the 
allegations emanating from Phnom Penh have been wild and 
unsubstantiated -- such as Ranariddh's claim he had photos of 
guerrilla leader Pol Pot escaping from the besieged Khmer Rouge 
base of Pailin into Thailand -- but, nevertheless, Thailand has 
been forced on the defensive. The US ambassador called on 
Thailand to clarify its relations with the Khmer Rouge. 
Visiting Australian Foreign Minister Gareth Evans said he had 
no doubts Bangkok's expressions of support for Phnom Penh were 
sincere but then, echoing almost every other diplomat and 
international observer of the border situation, said, "There may 
be some individuals who continue to play some kind of supporting 
role in the Thai business community and some areas of the Thai 
military." 
  In the spotlight of international scrutiny that surrounded 
the attack on Pailin, Thai authorities did not react well. 
After hurriedly pushing refugees back across the border, and in 
some cases into Khmer Rouge-held areas, Prime Minister Chuan 
Likphai callously answered a rebuke from the UN High Commission 
for Refugees by saying, "We didn't invite them to come here." 
Army chief Wimon Wongwanit told Geneva to look after the 
refugees in Switzerland if they were so worried about their 
welfare. 
  The responses were unbecoming of the country's highest 
officials and only served to enhance an international perception 
that Thailand was indifferent to the suffering of the Cambodian 
people. 
  After Cambodian soldiers seized Pailin, photos surfaced of 
Thai military officers embracing Khmer Rouge cadres. Worse, 
Thai Rangers admitted that the 838 unit, which was set up to 
handle covert shipments of arms to the Khmer Rouge during the 
resistance war against the Vietnamese was still up and running. 
Military officials had claimed earlier this year that the unit 
had been disbanded. 
  Belatedly the government embarked on a course of damage 
control. The foreign press corps in Phnom Penh, the main 
mouthpiece for Cambodia's accusations were invited on a border 
tour. But the journalists were denied access to areas of 
contention. Returning from the all-expenses-paid trip, the 
reporters said the only thing they noted of any interest was 
that the Thai military was still using maps marked Democratic 
Kampuchea, the name the Khmer Rouge used for the country during 
their violent rule. 
  Accusations of Thai support have continued to flow from 
Phnom 
Penh this week. On Friday, Bangkok officially protested what it 
said were "continued groundless accusations". 
  Earlier in the day, Armed Forces spokesman Lt-Gen 
[Lieutenant- General] Anuson Krisnaserani denied the tank 
charges saying: 
  "Tanks are big, it's impossible to hide them in Thailand and 
send them to Cambodia. If we were to do that, we would be 
condemned by the international community," he said. 
  But Anuson's remarks reflect a failure to understand that as 
long as this controversy rages Thailand is being condemned -- 
even if silently. 
  It is not enough for Thailand to merely issue verbal denial 
after denial. On the issue of support of the Khmer Rouge, the 
Thai military needs to understand it has a major credibility 
problem. Why should the rest of the world believe it is not 
possible for the Khmer Rouge to keep tanks in Thailand when only 
five months ago 1,500 tonnes of war weapons were found on the 
Thai side of the border under Cambodian guard? If the Thai 
government wants this damaging affair to go away it must do more 
to refute Phnom Penh's charges. Unfair though it may be, the 
way the world's sympathies lie, the onus is on Thailand to prove 
it is innocent, not on Phnom Penh to prove its charges have any 
real foundation. 
  If there is nothing to hide, why not open the border areas 
to 
the local and international press and disprove the widely held 
belief that Pol Pot maintains a residence in Trat, that Khmer 
Rouge general Ta Mok runs a service station in Sisaket and that 
some segments of the Thai military along the frontier continue 
to maintain close links with the group. 

