Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lt Col Vladimir But, correspondent: "The Army </F>
Needs Discipline and Organization and Not the Passions of 
Political Rallies"] 
  [Text] Frequent business trips by General of the Ukrainian 
Army Vitaliy Radetskiy, the Ukrainian defense minister, to 
military garrisons and military units have become a noteworthy 
feature of his leadership style. The defense minister's routine 
business trip to Vinnitsa and his visit to major aviation and 
missile formations located there could be singled out here with 
special grounds. The fact is that an edict signed by Ukrainian 
President Leonid Kravchuk, supreme commander-in-chief of the 
armed forces, appointing Lieutenant General Vladimir Antonets as 
commander of the air forces, was one of the reasons for the 
defense minister's meeting with the aviators. The new commander 
was presented to the personnel at this time. 
  It must be said that this appointment evoked far from a 
uniform reaction among generals and officers of the Ukrainian 
Air Force. The mass media reacted to this immediately. In 
particular, citing some mysterious "reliable source," the 
newspaper KIYEVSKIYE VEDOMOSTI hastened to communicate to its 
readers that seven air force generals submitted their 
resignation papers in response to General Antonets's appointment. 
  However, this assertion does not correspond to reality, to 
put it mildly. During his visit to a major aviation formation 
the minister of defense and his working group, which consisted 
of deputy defense minister Colonel General Ivan Bizhan, chief of 
the Main Directorate of Educational, Social and Psychological 
Work of the Ministry of Defense Lieutenant General Anatoliy 
Kobzar, and chief of the Main Personnel Directorate of the 
Ministry of Defense Lieutenant General Grigoriy Dyachuk, 
established that none of the generals were intending to retire. 
  Though as was mentioned above, far from all air force 
generals and officers approved of Lieutenant General Vladimir 
Antonets's appointment as commander; earlier, he was an active 
proponent of merging the air forces and air defense troops into 
a single armed service. As we know, this unification was 
legalized by an edict of the Ukrainian president, and was 
implemented over the course of several months. However, noted 
defense minister General of the Ukrainian Army Vitaliy Radetskiy 
in his speech to the aviators, reality demonstrated the 
premature nature of such a decision. Unification of the air 
forces and air defense troops required a strong economic base, 
considerable financial outlays, and creation of a single system 
of control. None of this exists as yet. 
  This is why a recent presidential edict recognized the 
existence of two armed services--the air forces and air defense 
troops. The earlier presidential edict was voided. 
  Shedding light on this issue, the defense minister dwelled 
in 
detail on the key problems of service by the aviators. They are 
well known to the leadership of the Ministry of Defense. The 
main ones include the shortage of POL and spare parts (as a 
result of which combat readiness is suffering), a low level of 
discipline, a high rate of injuries and deaths among the 
personnel, and of course, the poor social protections afforded 
to servicemen. 
  The leadership of the Ministry of Defense is seeking and 
finding the ways of solving the currently existing problems. It 
is precisely owing to such efforts that officers and warrant 
officers have started receiving a food ration, and 
appropriations for housing construction and to cover other 
social needs of the servicemen are being "wrested out." In this 
case the resources for this are being obtained not only from the 
state budget but also through increasingly more active 
attraction of foreign credit, on the basis of which entire 
residential districts have been and are being built. 
  In order that servicemen could begin receiving their pay and 
allowances on time in the future, and the military units could 
make their various payments, a decision was made to revive field 
institutions of the State Bank. 
  During a meeting held this day with officers of a certain 
major missile formation, the defense minister emphasized that 
Ukraine must become a missile and space power. This will require 
retaining the specialists, equipment and the command and control 
systems now present in the missile forces. This process must be 
carried out consistently, in a civilized way, without pressure 
and without causing harm to people. And this is in fact the way 
it is proceeding. No one is being forced to take the Military 
Oath of Allegiance to the people of Ukraine, which is what an 
article carried by a certain major newspaper of the 
near abroad asserts. Much in it was distorted. The officers are 
making their choice consciously, and they are serving the state 
of which they are citizens. 
  General of the Ukrainian Army Vitaliy Radetskiy replied 
exhaustively and effectively to the numerous questions from 
aviators and missilemen. A business-like discussion was 
conducted on raising the prestige of the office corps, manning 
the units and subunits, supplying equipment and POL, raising the 
level of combat readiness and discipline, and providing social 
protections to servicemen. No independent sovereign state has, 
or can have, its own armed forces without all of this. Their 
development--and not their reform, which is something the 
defense minister emphasized--must proceed under the conditions 
of real and not imaginary democracy. The army is strong in its 
discipline; it does not have, and cannot have, room for 
all-permissiveness, for a political rally mentality, or for 
disregard of orders. 

