CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Chao Hsiao-lei (6392 2556 7191), associate </F>
professor at Shanghai Finance U's Asian Economics Studies 
Institute: "Heroes From All Walks of Life Are Converging on 
Wuhan"] 
  [Text] Editor's note: In February 1994, the New 
World Group, one of Hong Kong's 10 major [financial] 
consortiums, announced in Wuhan that it would invest 10 billion 
RMB in Wuhan within the next three to five years, with its 
investment to top 24 billion RMB by the year 2004. 
  In 1993 alone, the New World Group invested over 2 billion 
RMB in Wuhan, building more than 20 projects, including large 
ones, such as the Guobao Tower, the Taipei Hotel, the Dong-Xi Hu 
Development Zone, the Kai He Airport, and a second bridge over 
the Chang Jiang. 
  The New World Group is investing in the first half of 1994 
in 
project starts in Wuhan, such as the Xin Cheng Prototype Zone, 
occupying 137 mu of land, with a construction area of 260,000 sq 
m; the large-scale construction of a small housing district in 
the Dong-Xi Hu Zone; and over 80 km of road-building around 
Wuhan. The New World Group has indicated that by the end 
of 1994, 1.5-2 billion RMB of funds will be in place, and that 
it will be using the income profits and capital plus interest 
from its projects already in operation for expanded 
investment. 
  Meanwhile, another Hong Kong consortium, the Kowloon 
Warehouse Group, has confirmed that it is going all out to 
develop 27 sq km of land in Yangluo, Wuhan, mainly to build a 
transshipment center with a handling capacity of 1.5 million 
standard containers a year, and a 3.6-million-ton bulk cargo 
dock, to develop businesses, such as through Chang Jiang-sea 
transport, railways, waterways, highways, through air transport, 
and duty-free entrepot trade. In 1994, the Yangluo Container 
Transshipment Center project planned by this group for Wuhan is 
already under construction. 
<H5>  Hung Ta Buys Into the "No 2 Printing and Dyeing Mill," </H5>
Turning Losses Into Profits 
  In June 1992, Hong Kong's Hung Ta Corporation bought 51 
percent of the shares in one of Wuhan's big losers--the Wuhan No 
2 Printing and Dyeing Mill, organizing in holding company form 
with "No 2" a joint venture, the "Wuhan Rongze Printing and 
Dyeing Industrial Corp Ltd." As Hong Kong investment 
controlled over one-half of its shares, "Rongze" set a precedent 
to become China's first large or midsize state enterprise to be 
share-controlled and managed by a Hong Kong partner. The 
original "No 2's" internal mechanisms were grafted and upgraded 
through thorough remolding. Before "No 2" became a joint 
venture, it had liabilities of nearly 90 million RMB, or 2.7 
times its assets. But once "Rongze" had been in operation for 
a year and a half, conditions had changed sharply with its daily 
output up from 60,000 yards to 2.3 million yards, and its top 
quality rate up from 60-70 percent to over 95 percent. While it 
had sustained annual losses exceeding 10 million RMB before it 
became a joint venture, it has earned profits topping 10 million 
RMB a year since. By the end of 1993, "Rongze" had an output 
value of 150 million RMB, with export earnings of $15 million. 
  The enormous difference between "No 2" and "Rongze" has had 
a 
sharp impact in Chinese business and economics circles. Many 
hold that as introducing foreign investment alone cannot 
solve the "serious and longstanding" problems involved in 
converting the operating forces of state enterprises, the 
effective way to do so is to combine the introduction of foreign 
investment with the transformation of enterprise property rights 
relations and management patterns, to genuinely adapt 
enterprise operations to market economy needs. 
<H5>  The Business Iron Triangle's Largest-Scale Investment Site </H5>
  As a "nine-province thoroughfare," Wuhan has always been 
China's communications hub and commercial metropolis. The 
development of Shanghai's Pudong and the Chang Jiang economic 
strip have made Wuhan's key status even more evident. Hong Kong 
firms favor Wuhan precisely because of its exceptional economic 
and geographic advantages. Hong Kong's New World Group has 
actually invested more than 2 billion RMB in Wuhan, which is the 
largest-scale investment site of this group's 
"Guangzhou-Shanghai-Wuhan" business "iron triangle" construct. 
The group's board chairman, Dr. Cheng Yu-T'ung [6774 5940 
1749], sees Wuhan as uniquely advantaged, with 
water-transport advantages, a rich industrial base, and a host 
of S&amp;T talent. 
<H5>  Efforts To Turn Wuhan Into a Container Center </H5>
  Mr. Li Wei-jen [2621 0787 0088], vice president and CEO 
of the Kowloon Warehouse Group, makes his economic "iron 
triangle" concept Shanghai-Wuhan-Hong Kong. Li Wei-jen 
emphasizes that as Wuhan is located in inland China, linked to 
Beijing in the north, Guangzhou in the south, Chongqing in the 
west, and Shanghai in the east, putting it at the center of a 
geographic "cross," investment in Wuhan means that a slight move 
in one part may affect the situation as a whole, which will be 
bound to earn higher investment returns. 
  Another outstanding investment decision of these two Hong 
Kong groups is to go all out to build infrastructures. The 
Kowloon Warehouse Group holds that to develop central 
China, the key matter is to open up its arteries to achieve the 
greatest possible flow of goods. Wuhan needs to build a set 
of modern transportation, communications, and management 
systems. On these grounds, this group has invested billions of 
Hong Kong dollars to implement a development plan for a 
transportation system stretching from southern China's coastal 
cities to the middle reaches of the Chang Jiang in central 
China. This transportation system will be linked to the 
Beijing-Guangzhou and Beijing-Kowloon railways, turning China's 
inland industrial zone into an interior port, and turning Wuhan 
into a a large container transshipment center, so that it can 
function as an inland economic center. 
<H5>  Wu Kuang-cheng Holds That Wuhan Is a Strategic Place </H5>
  Mr. Wu Kuang-cheng [0702 0342 2973], board chairman of 
the Kowloon Warehouse Group, holds that: Wuhan is the Chang 
Jiang's key point, which can spur the economic development of 
the coastal zone. Once we acknowledge that Wuhan is a 
strategic economic-development place, we should establish the 
concept of Hong Kong, Guangzhou, Shanghai, and Wuhan as an 
economic axis, with all investment in this axis by the Kowloon 
Warehouse Group directly or indirectly increasing the value of 
Hong Kong. Mr. Cheng Chia-chun [6774 1367 4783], 
president of the New World Group, also emphasizes that 
development of Wuhan needs to be focused on infrastructures, 
such as transportation and energy, instead of simply on 
bubble-economy fields, such as real estate. This group has 
signed contracts for projects in Wuhan, such as communications 
and transportation, industrial zone development, housing 
construction, highways, and airports, as well as the upgrading 
of aging state enterprises. 
<H5>  The U.S. Morgan Corporation Also Comes To Invest </H5>
  With publicity and promotion by Hong Kong consortiums, 26 
famous consortiums from throughout the world, such as the U.S. 
Morgan Consortium, have also come to investigate Wuhan. So it 
can be visualized that Wuhan will very quickly become a foreign 
investment and economic development hot spot. 

