BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, may 23 KYODO -- Japan and the United States 
are "at a delicate stage" in their bid to reopen stalemated 
"framework" trade talks, Chief Cabinet Secretary Hiroshi Kumagai 
said Monday [23 May]. 
  "We are vigorously trying to break an impasse in the 
negotiations," the top government spokesman told a news 
conference after Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata met with senior 
government officials Monday morning on the protracted trade 
talks. 
  Kumagai, trade minister in the last government, refused to 
comment further on the ongoing efforts to resume the talks for 
setting up a new framework for bilateral trade. 
  Japan and the U.S. have held three rounds of exploratory 
talks to weigh terms and conditions for resuming the 
negotiations under the framework agreement concluded last July. 
  The trade talks, which are aimed at widening foreign access 
to the Japanese market and paring down Japan's vast trade 
surplus, broke down in February after Tokyo rejected 
Washington-proposed yardsticks to gauge progress in Japanese 
imports. 
  Among the industry sectors covered under the framework 
accord 
are Japanese Government procurement of medical and 
telecommunications equipment, trade in autos and auto parts, and 
the Japanese insurance market. 
  The U.S. wants Japan to open its market wider in these 
"priority" areas and stimulate domestic demand to reduce its 
trade surplus. 
  The trade imbalance was underscored by fresh U.S. Government 
data released last week showing the U.S. trade deficit with 
Japan leaped 25 percent in March to 5.8 billion dollars. 
  The trade gap came to 15 billion dollars in the first three 
months of this year, well ahead of the same period last year, 
when the figure stood at 13.3 billion dollars. 
  Meanwhile, Finance Ministry officials said the ministry has 
dispatched Eisuke Sakakibara, vice chief of its international 
finance bureau, to washington to help with talks aimed at 
resuming the framework dialogue. He is in charge of 
negotiations on the insurance market. 
  Unofficial vice ministerial-level talks to unblock the trade 
stalemate are under way in Washington, but no senior 
high-ranking officials from the Finance Ministry have attended 
the talks so far. 

