BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" interview with Russian Federation President </F>
Boris Yeltsin by unidentified RIA-NOVOSTI correspondent, 
"especially for ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA": "Boris Yeltsin: To 
Achieve Accord"] 
  [Text] Russia's President Boris Yeltsin has given an 
exclusive interview to an RIA-NOVOSTI correspondent: 
  [ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA] Boris Nikolayevich, how is the work on 
the Agreement progressing? 
  [Yeltsin] The work on the Agreement on Civil Peace is 
entering its final stage. Its concept, its basic provisions, 
and the mechanism for its implementation have been agreed. 
Representatives of diverse political streams have been 
participating in the document's preparation, and right from the 
very first stage at that. Representatives of State Duma 
factions are playing an active part. The draft has now been 
released to the mass media and each citizen can see it for 
himself. 
  [ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA] What, in your opinion, will our country 
gain from the signing of this Agreement? 
  [Yeltsin] First of all, it should mark Russia's entry in a 
period of political stability. 
  This is extremely important now. The situation in our 
country remains complex, and our own experience shows that it 
can be easily destabilized. We face a multitude of problems and 
we need to find a solution to each and every one of them, we 
need to find mutual understanding. If the Agreement 
materializes, we will acquire guidelines as to how this should 
be done. 
  Society will acquire clear-cut criteria to appraise the 
actions of all political forces, including the extremist forces. 
This will act as a powerful restraint on those who preach the 
principle of "all is allowed." 
  It is, of course, by no means easy to prepare a strong 
document -- which is exactly what Russia needs now. Especially 
in a country like ours, where the ideology of struggle dominated 
for many years on end. The importance of the work on the 
Agreement is that much greater. I will do everything to 
complete it so as to achieve accord in society. I will meet 
with various political forces, parliamentary factions and 
committees, and public figures primarily because the Agreement 
on Civil Peace is a condition governing the subsequent steps 
toward strengthening Russian statehood, as outlined in the 
Message. 
  [ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA] When do you think the Agreement will be 
ready? 
  [Yeltsin] I expect that the work will be finished by the end 
of April. It is scheduled for signing 28 April. 

