BFN 

<F P=106> [Address by Prime Minister Yitzhaq Rabin to the Knesset </F>
plenum presenting the Gaza-Jericho autonomy agreement with the 
PLO -- live] 
  [Excerpts] Mr. Speaker, distinguished Knesset: In three 
weeks the State of Israel will mark the 27th anniversary of the 
Six-Day War. A generation has passed since that summer morning 
of 5 June 1967 when the code words "Red Sheet" launched the 
planes, tanks, and infantry troops on a just war of defense 
whose military achievements were some of the greatest in 
Israel's history. At the end of the war, in which 800 of our 
best sons and daughters were killed, IDF [Israel Defense Forces] 
troops were stationed on the bank of the Suez Canal, the border 
of the Jordan River, and on the Golan Heights. As the saying 
goes, failure is an orphan, while victory has many parents. The 
great victory of the Six-Day War was shared by thousands of IDF 
soldiers, and even today each one of them deserves our gratitude 
and appreciation for repelling the danger of extinction from our 
doorsteps. [passage omitted] 
  Mr. Speaker, distinguished Knesset, about half of Israel's 
citizens today were not with us in the Six-Day War. They were 
either born or immigrated into a new map of Israel, which was 
drawn by the IDF soldiers in the war, and to new and different 
relations with the Palestinians, the Arab countries, and the 
countries of the world in the aftermath of that war. At the end 
of the Six-Day War, Israel's defense lines were drawn along the 
Suez Canal, on the Golan Heights, and along the Jordan River. 
In our capacity as a military government, we are today also 
responsible for running the lives of 1.8 million Palestinians 
who never wanted us to rule over them and did whatever they 
could to hurt us. Twenty-seven years we ruled over another 
people without making any serious effort to solve the problem. 
Nevertheless, we tried to provide its needs and we ran its 
life, while protecting our own. 
  Through all those years, all Israeli governments, both those 
led by the Alignment and Labor and those led by the Likud, did 
not deem proper to annex the Gaza District, Judaea, and Samaria. 
The late Levi Eshkol, Golda Me'ir, and Menahem Begin, as well 
as -- may they live long -- Shim'on Peres and Yitzhaq Shamir did 
not annex the areas of Judaea, Samaria, and the Gaza District to 
the State of Israel. At the end of the Six-Day War, in July 
1967, Jerusalem was reunited and Israel's law and jurisdiction 
was applied to united Jerusalem, the eternal capital of the 
State of Israel and the heart of the Jewish people, which we 
commemorated this week. 
  It is no coincidence that the territories were not annexed, 
even when the state and the government were led by advocates of 
the notion of a greater Israel. Alignment and Labor governments 
knew then, just as they know today, that through the annexation 
of 1.8 million Palestinians the State of Israel would lose its 
Jewish and democratic nature. 
  Mr. Speaker, the current government led by Labor ran in the 
elections and won, with the promise to make a serious peace 
effort, rather than a verbose one; to terminate wars; to try to 
put an end to 100 years of enmity. The current government 
decided to take the first important and courageous step to solve 
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict; to give a chance to peaceful 
coexistence. We believe that the two nations can live together 
with security and peace alongside each other on the same piece 
of land. This was our belief, this is what we talked about, this 
is what we promised, and this is what we will do. 
  On 13 September 1993, a Declaration of Principles [DOP] was 
signed in Washington between the Israeli Government and the PLO 
to establish a Palestinian self-government -- it may also be 
called an autonomy -- in the areas of Judaea, Samaria, and the 
Gaza District. This, as an interim arrangement for five years 
and as a preamble to negotiations about the permanent 
arrangements. The DOP stipulated that in the first stage the 
interim agreement would apply to the Gaza Strip and the Jericho 
area. A month after the DOP was signed, negotiations began in 
Taba between Israeli and PLO delegations on the implementation 
of the first stage, the Gaza and Jericho stage of the interim 
arrangement. 
  The negotiations on Gaza and Jericho centered on four types 
of issues: The security sphere, on which I will dwell at 
length; the civilian sphere -- the transfer of powers from the 
Civil Administration to the Palestinian authority; the legal 
sphere -- defining the legal infrastructure, legislative 
procedures, and legal powers in the areas of the Palestinian 
authority and relations in this sphere with Israel; and the 
economic sphere, on which deliberations were held in Paris, to 
determine the economic relationship between the Palestinian 
self-government authority and the State of Israel. 
  The negotiations on Gaza and Jericho were fraught with 
difficulties, mainly in the security sphere and due to Israel's 
insistence on arrangements which would enable it to exercise its 
responsibility for external security, the security of Israelis, 
the security of Jewish settlements. We insisted on it! No 
settlement will be uprooted! Does this remind you of something? 
  The negotiations were completed after seven months of talks, 
and the Gaza-Jericho agreement was signed in Cairo last week, on 
4 May 1994. The government today placed on the desks of the 
members of the Knesset [MK] the Hebrew and English versions of 
the agreement and its attendant maps. Of course, an arrangement 
has been made whereby the maps will be displayed in the meeting 
hall of the Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee and a senior 
officer will give explanations. There is no secret agreement, 
there are no unpublicized appendices; everything is in the open 
and on the table. 
  To the MK's, and through them to Israel's citizens, I must 
say: In the long and tiring discussions into the wee hours and 
during long weeks, we meticulously and primarily insisted on the 
security needs of the State of Israel and its citizens, out of a 
desire to be free of running the lives of the Palestinians and 
endangering the lives of IDF soldiers in the streets of Gaza. 
This was our main concern. 
  Members of the Knesset, what does this agreement contain? 
The DOP stipulates that during the interim period the State of 
Israel will continue to be responsible for defense against 
external threats and for the general security and public order 
of Israelis wherever they may be, and of the Israeli settlements 
in the Gaza Strip. It further stipulates that the powers of the 
Palestinian authority will not include external security, the 
security of Israelis, the security of Israeli settlements, 
foreign relations, and other issues. 
  How will we go about implementing it? We will do it through 
various means: through control and supervision mechanisms along 
the borders and the roads, at the crossing points between the 
areas of the autonomy -- or Palestinian authority -- and Israel, 
and at the border crossings; through control of the air and sea 
spaces, joint patrols, a liaison and coordination mechanism, and 
through the redeployment of the IDF in and near the Israeli 
settlements. All these controls are anchored in the 
Gaza-Jericho agreement. They leave in Israel's hands all the 
tools necessary to meet our security needs in the best possible 
way in the new reality that will emerge in the field. All this, 
in addition to the mutual interest and commitment contained in 
the DOP and in the Gaza-Jericho agreement to peaceful and secure 
coexistence; to prevent terror, crime, and violence; and to 
coordination and cooperation arrangements. 
  Where does the agreement apply? The Gaza-Jericho agreement 
applies to the entire Gaza Strip and to a defined area around 
the city of Jericho. The territory to remain under Israel's 
responsibility in both areas has been demarcated. The maps of 
the Gaza Strip and the Jericho area, which are appended to the 
agreement and are an integral part of it, demarcate the various 
areas of jurisdiction. According to the agreement, the IDF will 
begin pulling out its troops from the autonomy area -- or 
Palestinian authority -- in the Gaza Strip and the Jericho area 
upon the signing of the agreement and will complete its 
redeployment shortly afterward, within three weeks or even less. 
In order to meet this tight schedule, the IDF began preparing 
for a pullout and a redeployment even before the negotiations 
were wrapped up. The redeployment will apparently be completed 
within a few days. 
  Members of the Knesset, the agreement does not exist that 
pleases everybody. There is no agreement that does not entail 
compromises and concessions on both sides, if one wants the 
agreement to be fulfilled by the two sides. There is no 
agreement that does not entail certain risks. Such is the 
agreement placed on your desks. Nevertheless, we are convinced 
that in the new conditions we attained the maximum possible as 
far as security is concerned. Anybody who reads the details of 
the agreement and is honest with himself will at least have to 
admit that the concern for Israel's security and the security of 
the Israelis and the settlements is evident in every line and 
word. 
  What is in the agreement? With your permission, I will 
give some details. The agreement gives Israel absolute 
authority regarding a response to external threats. Let us not 
forget -- external threats, foreign military threats, are the 
only threat to Israel's existence. Israel continues controlling 
an uninterrupted military territory along the border with Egypt. 
This strip remains under our exclusive authority. The Jericho 
area is not close to the Israeli security zone, under the IDF's 
control, along the Jordan River. We maintain full control over 
the airspace and military control over the territorial waters is 
in our hands. 
  The Palestinians will have a policing authority regarding 
civilian issues, subject to several constraints. Israelis will 
manage the international border crossings. Israel will be able 
to supervise the entrance of persons into the territories 
through the Palestinian terminal as well. 
  What else is in the agreement? The agreement includes 
arrangements which allow reasonable protection of the 
settlements and the settlers. Placing the settlements in blocs, 
that is, demarcating the settlements that can be put in blocs, 
allows blanket protection of most of the settlements in the Gaza 
Strip, with the exception of two isolated settlements. 
Naturally, the IDF is being deployed along the fence erected 
for the protection of the bloc, for its safety. Israel has full 
powers of operation, which allow it to do whatever is necessary 
to provide for the security of Israeli traffic on the main 
routes to the settlements and the adjacent areas. In the blocs 
of settlements there is also Palestinian territories adjacent to 
the settlements over which Israel has full security powers. 
They are called, by us and on the maps, yellow territories. 
Constraints on Palestinian building and other issues will 
prevail in those territories. Undisturbed Israeli movement was 
secured in parts of the routes under Palestinian security 
authority through the employment of joint patrols; for example, 
the routes crossing Jericho and the Qatif Bloc-Netzarim axis. 
  What else does the agreement include? It includes an 
arrangement ensuring effective protection of the borders of 
Israel and Israeli settlements in the Gaza Strip. Security 
criteria were defined in which construction and introduction of 
arms were placed under constraints and supervision in those 
regions as well. Furthermore, the Palestinian police has no 
authority over Israelis. The size, types of arms, and 
deployment of the Palestinian police were agreed on. Bringing 
in arms others than those allowed was banned. We will screen 
the Palestinian policemen and only those we approve of will be 
allowed to enter the territory. An apparatus of cooperation and 
coordination with the Palestinian police was set up. The 
Palestinians made a commitment to act and prevent terror against 
Israel from, naturally, the area under their control. 
  We are aware of the fact that terror has not stopped and 
continues to harm us. We hope that, upon the assumption of 
control by the Palestinians in the regions of Gaza and Jericho, 
they will take measures to prevent terror, or at least 
significantly reduce the damage it causes. We regard this as a 
main test of the Palestinian police and authority established by 
the agreement. 
  I will present to you and perhaps elaborate on several 
points of the agreement: The agreement includes clear 
instructions regarding the duties of the Palestinian police in a 
bid to prevent friction and to make sure that the Palestinian 
police -- in terms of the number of its men and types and 
quantities of arms and equipment in its possession -- indeed 
functions solely as a police force and prevents attacks against 
Israelis to the extent possible. A coordinated network of local 
and regional liaison committees, which are being set up these 
very days, will ensure cooperation and coordination between the 
parties on a long-term basis. They will work around the clock 
to immediately handle any problem and to allow for coordination 
between the Palestinian police and the Israeli security 
authorities in charge of overall security and the protection of 
Israelis who reside in the settlements. 
  The Gaza-Jericho agreement contains instructions regarding 
the Temporary International Presence [TIP] in the regions of 
Gaza and Jericho. The instructions will be detailed within a 
given amount of time. This body will be made up of no more than 
400 men from five or six countries. The TIP will be financed by 
the donor countries and will function for an initial period of 
six months. 
  True, in a bid to create a positive atmosphere and a basis 
of 
confidence between the parties, Israel agreed to release or hand 
over to the Palestinian authority some 5,000 Palestinian 
prisoners and detainees, but only those who have not caused 
Israeli casualties. There will be none among them who were 
arrested for engaging in hostile terror activities after the DOP 
was signed on 13 September 1993. Members of the rejectionist 
organizations who will be released will have to sign a 
declaration of support for the DOP and abstention from violence 
and terror. So far, more than 400 such prisoners have not 
signed the documents and were not released. We will not free 
prisoners who belong to organizations that declare their 
opposition to peace, such as Hamas and the Islamic Jihad. 
  Members of the Knesset, the agreement is very complex and 
very detailed. It is almost impossible to absolutely prevent 
misunderstandings and friction at the beginning. In time, we 
will learn how to live together from the reality created on the 
ground. The civilian appendix to the agreement speaks of the 
establishment of a joint committee for cooperation and 
coordination, which is designed to coordinate the transfer of 
civilian authorities and allow daily contacts between the 
civilian authorities of both parties. This committee will solve 
problems that might emerge regarding the joint use of roads, the 
electricity and telephone lines, the crossing points into the 
territories of Gaza and Jericho, the areas beyond the borders, 
and travel to and from Israel. 
  Members of the Knesset, in hundreds of pages, hundreds of 
clauses and subclauses, the agreement tries to encompass all 
aspects of the relations between the two nations. For example, 
the civilian appendix covers 38 areas in which civilian 
authorities are being transferred from the Israeli Civil 
Administration to the Palestinian authority in the Gaza Strip 
and Jericho region. In some of those areas, the management and 
administrative authorities will be fully transferred. In others 
areas -- such as religion, archaeology, water, electricity, 
construction and planning, telecommunications, postal services, 
and population registration affairs -- the transfer of powers 
will be subject to certain constraints in order to secure 
essential Israeli interests and ensure the orderly supply of 
energy, water, and means of communication and to provide free 
access to the Israeli settlements. 
  Members of the Knesset, in view of recent events, I must 
stress that freedom of worship at and access to sites sacred to 
the Jews was secured. The protection of all archaeological 
sites in the Gaza Strip and the Jericho region was secured. 
Furthermore, there will be free access to those sites. A joint 
committee of archaeology experts will be set up. It will deal 
with matters of common interest regarding any issue that may 
impact on the Jewish sites. Naturally, very high standards, 
equaling our national standards, were set regarding protection 
of the environment, and I will not elaborate. 
  If this is not enough, the agreement also stipulates that 
the 
Palestinian residents of the Gaza Strip and the Jericho region 
will be issued identity cards in Arabic and Hebrew, based on the 
existing population registry, which, with Israel's assistance, 
will be updated on an ongoing basis and computerized. I will 
stress here, and return to this issue later, that the 
registration of Palestinians residing abroad and the issuance of 
tourist permits for them is subject to Israel's agreement. 
  What else can you find in the agreement? The maintenance of 
the electricity, water, and telephone infrastructures in the 
Israeli settlements and IDF camps in the Gaza Strip and the 
Israeli infrastructure in the Jericho region will remain in 
Israel's hands. The maintenance will be performed by the Israel 
Electricity Company, Meqorot, and Bezeq. The supply of those 
services to the Israeli settlements and the IDF camps will, 
therefore, be independent of the Palestinian authority. 
  The third appendix to the agreement deals with legal and 
judicial issues. It deals with matters pertaining to criminal 
and civilian judicial authorities and with reciprocal assistance 
between the Israeli and the Palestinian legal authorities. The 
legal appendix stipulates that the Palestinian authority will 
not have -- I repeat, will not have -- powers with regard to 
Israeli citizens, Israeli settlements, and the area where the 
military installations will be located. This means that the 
Palestinian police will not be able to detain Israelis, and the 
Palestinian courts will not try them. Israel alone will have 
this power, as before. Furthermore, Palestinians who harm or 
attempt to harm Israelis in the regions under Israeli authority 
and who are captured by the Israeli security authorities will be 
questioned by Israel. The decision on whether such criminals 
will be tried by Israel or the Palestinian authority will be 
determined by both parties, which will consider each case on an 
individual basis. I must note here that even if an Israeli 
commits a crime in the area under the authority of the 
Palestinian authority -- for example, on the streets of Gaza -- 
it is the duty of the Palestinian authority to detain the 
suspect and call the Israeli authorities, which alone have the 
power to arrest him and keep him in custody. 
  The fourth and last appendix to the agreement deals with 
the economic relations between Israel and the Gaza and Jericho 
regions. It details import policy; import taxation; monetary 
and financial policy; direct and indirect taxation; and the 
economic aspects of labor, agriculture, industry, tourism, and 
car insurance. For example, the entry of goods into the 
territories through the border crossings with Jordan and Gaza 
will be controlled jointly by Israeli and Palestinian customs 
officers. The entry of personal luggage of travelers coming to 
the territories through these crossings will be controlled by 
Palestinian customs officers under the unseen presence of 
Israeli customs officers, who will be entitled to request to 
check it. The Israeli shekel will continue to be one of the 
legal tenders in the territories to be used for any purpose, and 
the Palestinian authority and its institutions, local 
authorities, and banks will have to accept it as a means of 
payment. Deliberations about minting a Palestinian currency will 
continue in the framework of the economic committee, and at this 
point, such a currency does not exist. 
  I will not elaborate on the arrival of tourists, to which I 
attach great importance, because tourism may serve as a good 
means for getting to know each other better. Both sides are 
interested in it. 
  As far as labor is concerned, there will be normal movement 
of laborers between the two sides, subject to our and their 
right to determine their numbers and subject to legislation. 
The placement of workers in Israel will be done only through 
the Israeli Employment Service. 
  Many reports, words, and headlines have been written in the 
last few days about one clause in the agreement: that which 
deals with the return of displaced persons to the territories. 
I heard and read many inaccurate -- I would say even false and 
misleading -- reports, and I can only blame those who 
consciously misused and misrepresented the facts. Here is the 
truth, the whole truth, on everything pertaining to the return 
of displaced persons: The Gaza- Jericho Agreement stipulates 
that a liaison committee consisting of Israel, the Palestinian 
authority, Jordan, and Egypt will be established to deal with 
issues of common interest and to decide on the principles 
concerning the entry of persons who left Judaea and Samaria in 
1967. Take note: We are not talking about refugees from 1948 
but about people displaced in 1967. 
  Now, I will reveal a secret to the Knesset and to those 
Israeli citizens who do not know it: This clause was copied 
verbatim from the Camp David accords, written and signed by the 
late Israeli Prime Minister Menahem Begin. 
  This clause does not stipulate how many people will be 
allowed to return to Judaea, Samaria, and Gaza, and all the 
figures floated this week were totally unfounded. This clause 
stipulates that all the decisions on this issue must be made 
unanimously by all the members of the committee. In other 
words, without Israel's agreement, the committee will not be 
able to determine how many people will be allowed in and in what 
stages. The clause further states that the committee must 
decide on the necessary means to prevent pandemonium and 
disorder. This addendum, which was also copied from the Camp 
David accords -- for which we owe our gratitude to the prime 
minister at the time, the late Menahem Begin -- is meant to be a 
means of control to ensure that people are not allowed to enter 
the area without being assured in advance of proper housing and 
livelihood. 
  Members of the Knesset, I would like to bring to your 
attention that an attendant letter from the chairman of the PLO 
to the Israeli prime minister was appended to the Gaza-Jericho 
agreement. In this letter, the PLO undertakes, among other 
things, to make sure that the Palestinian authority and all the 
institutions subordinate to it act in accordance with the 
agreement. The PLO also undertakes to cooperate in locating the 
whereabouts of Israeli MIA's. Further on in his letter, the 
chairman of the PLO reaffirms his intention to present the 
changes in the Palestinian Covenant for the approval of the 
Palestine National Council at its next session, as he undertook 
to do in the DOP. In this exchange of letters, the two sides 
also undertake not to change the status of Gaza and Jericho in 
the interim period and to abstain from incitement and hostile 
propaganda against each other. In the same letter, the sides 
agree to pursue the negotiations on outstanding issues, 
including the size of the Jericho autonomous area, the 
stationing of a Palestinian official on the Allenby Bridge, and 
other arrangements at the Rafah terminal. 
  Mr. Speaker, distinguished Knesset, all parts of the 
agreement have been placed on your desks. We believe it is a 
good agreement -- good for us and good for the Palestinians. 
Therein lies the chance for its success. 
  Members of the Knesset, this is the time to thank from the 
bottom of our hearts thousands, perhaps hundreds of thousands, 
of IDF soldiers in all branches, the Shin Bet, the Border 
Police, Israel Police personnel, and generations of Civil 
Administration workers, who for decades did a faithful and hard 
job, a tiring and dangerous task in Gaza and Jericho. I hereby 
proclaim without any hesitation whatsoever that no other people 
in the world, no other nation or tribe, has engendered such sons 
and daughters and elicited from them such valor and tenacity to 
defend all of us in a situation of unparalleled complexity. The 
right word does not yet exist in the lexicon to express so much 
gratitude and appreciation to these wonderful people. I will 
derive great pleasure from seeing the IDF soldiers getting out 
of the streets of Gaza, Jabalyah, al-Shati', the al-Nusayrat and 
al-Burayj refugee camps, Dayr al-Balah, Khan Yunus, and Rafah. 
They have nothing to do there, and nobody has the right to 
endanger their lives just to be there! Nobody! I am proud that 
this government is bidding farewell to al-Shati', Jabalyah, 
al-Nusayrat, al-Burayj, and Gaza. 
  This is also the time and place to treasure the memory of 
dozens of soldiers and civilians, male and female, who died in 
Gaza and Jericho; fighters who were there to fulfill their 
duties and civilians who paid with their lives only because they 
were Jews and Israelis. We remember them with love: the 
children of Pretty and Bob Arroyo, Amnon Pomerantz, Rahel Weiss 
and her three children, Shahar Ginosar and Ibrahim Shabal, Me'ir 
Mintz and Gal Avino'am, Doron Shorshan and 'Adnan Bu'ad, Rabbi 
Shim'on Biran and Asad Wafa, Barukh Ben-Shim'on and Doron 
Derezi, and many others whose names were not mentioned today. 
For them and their families, who will not forget till their 
dying day; for the fathers and mothers; the wives and children 
they left behind, this agreement came too late. We cherish 
their memory with love and believe and hope that their terrible 
sacrifice was not in vain. Amen! 
  This is the place to wish a speedy recovery to those injured 
and maimed in the last decades, many of whom are to this day 
struggling with their pains and scars. [heckling by Likud MK 
Limor Livnat about the fate of Israel's MIA's] 
  I do not want to talk about the MIA's from the al-Sultan 
Ya'qub battle, because if I did I would have to disclose why 291 
Syrian soldiers were handed back unconditionally. I do not want 
to deal with this subject today. 
  Mr. Speaker, distinguished Knesset, in a bid to break the 
cycle of murder, end the endless bloodbath, and bring security 
to us and to them, we did something. We took the first step, 
which we believe and hope will lead us and our Palestinian 
neighbors to peace and tranquillity, even if there is still a 
long way ahead of us. We did not do it frivolously or 
carelessly. We believed and we continue to believe today that 
we did the right thing for the sake of children and 
grandchildren on both sides, for the sake of the peace to come. 
I am hereby asking the Knesset to take note of the government's 
announcement. 

