BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Yun Pyong-son: "The New War Provocation </F>
Maneuver That Has Reached a Grave Stage"] 
  [Text] According to reports, U.S. nuclear submarines have 
been strengthening espionage activities near our country's 
coast. The U.S. nuclear submarines are frantically engaged in 
espionage on us by frequently going in and out of the White 
Beach base of the U.S. Navy in Okinawa, its Sasebo base in 
Nagasaki Prefecture, and the Yokosuka port of Japan. 
  Foreign media reported that the U.S. nuclear submarines, 
which are navigating along the shores of our county, specialize 
in collecting information about the communications network of 
our Armed Forces and eavesdropping on radio communications. 
This is an extremely dangerous military move. 
  As everyone knows, the United States has persistently 
carried 
out espionage against for a long time. Reconnaissance 
satellites and planes were the major means of their espionage in 
the past, but they are now mobilizing nuclear submarines as an 
additional means. 
  This clearly proves that U.S. espionage against us has 
become 
more active and the scale of its activities has been 
extraordinarily extended. It also hints that the U.S. new war 
provocation maneuver against us has reached a very grave stage. 
  The United States has systemically extended and strengthened 
its military threat and pressure against us in the past by using 
the nuclear suspicion of us as a pretext. The United States has 
recently deployed Patriot missiles and Apache attack helicopters 
to South Korea, despite the world's strong protest and 
denunciation; strengthened U.S.-Japanese-South Korean military 
conspiracy and collusion against us; and carried out various war 
exercises, including the Rimpac war exercise. 
  Meanwhile, U.S. hard-liners, conservatives, and bellicose 
military circles have been strengthening adventurous military 
maneuvers, openly talking about military measures, under the 
pretext of the so-called nuclear suspicion about us. 
  As has been reported, U.S. Secretary of Defense William 
Perry 
ordered the aircraft carrier Independence to remain in waters 
where it can intercede in a war on the Korean peninsula. In 
addition, the U.S. Department of Defense has increased special 
strike armed forces -- including squadrons of aircraft carriers, 
tactic planes, and B-52 strategic fighter-bombers -- in South 
Korea and in the region around it in preparation for a possible 
war on the Korean peninsula. It also ordered U.S. tactical 
plane squadrons in Germany and Alaska to assume a stand-by 
posture so they can immediately arrive at the Korean peninsula 
at any time. 
  These military maneuvers by the U.S. warmongers and their 
frenzied espionage against us by mobilizing even nuclear 
submarines, proves, leaving no room for controversy, that they 
have intentionally accelerated a new war provocation maneuver to 
crush us by using the suspicion of our nonexistent nuclear 
development as a pretext. 
  The current situation on the Korean peninsula is entering a 
very dangerous phase and a breaking point because of the U.S. 
adventurous war maneuvers. 
  The United States should contemplate the grave consequences 
that will result from its worthless new war provocation maneuver. 
  We are not afraid of any pressure or military adventure by 
the United States. As we declared on many occasions, we are 
ready for both dialogue and war. If the United States continues 
to adhere to its adventurous military maneuvers and seeks to 
provoke a new war on the Korean peninsula, in spite of our 
repeated warnings, that will bring it ruin far more miserable 
than the Korean war did. 
  Our people value peace, but do not beg for it in return for 
having the country's sovereignty and the national dignity be 
infringed upon. If the United States conducts a military 
adventure to crush us under the pretext of the nuclear issue, 
our people, who regard independence as their lives, will sternly 
counter it and give it a due punishment. 

