Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Havana Radio Rebelde Network in Spanish 
at 1255 GMT on 3 February features, during its "Doing Radio" 
program, four reports on the issue of emigration to the United 
States: 
  Reporters Roberto Cavada and Roberto Gili engage in a 
six-minute conversation in which they point out that emigration 
is a normal, worldwide phenomenon and that there are Cubans 
living in many countries besides the United States. The 
reporters note that Foreign Minister Roberto Robaina has 
discussed this issue and that most Cuban emigration has been of 
an economic nature -- with the exception of the exodus of 1959, 
when hundreds of professionals and political henchmen and other 
kinds of criminals left for political reasons. In conclusion, 
the reporters note the way the United States, by giving a hero's 
welcome to those who make such a trip while denying visas to 
ordinary Cuban citizens, encourages dangerous attempted 
departures by rafters. 
  Next, reporter Tony Gonzalez Martin conducts a five-minute 
telephone interview of Cuba exile Nicolas Rios, who lives in 
Miami, publishes the magazine CONTRAPUNTO, and received PRENSA 
LATINA's 1993 journalism award. 
  Asked how people in Miami feel about the rafters in light of 
the recent deaths of nine people -- five of whom were minors -- 
Rios stresses that it is a known fact that the Cuban Government 
grants anyone with a visa and the money to buy a ticket 
permission to leave Cuba. However, despite having signed an 
accord to that effect, the U.S. Government fails to grant the 
20,000 visas a year for which the accord calls. This is why 
rafters take to the seas -- adds Rios. 
  Rios points out that official U.S. and Miami stations 
encourage people to do this by giving rafters a hero's welcome. 
He stresses that responsibility lies with those, both in Miami 
and within the U.S. Government, who control public opinion. 
  In conclusion, Rios stresses that the Cuban community's 
opinion cannot be perceived properly because there is no room in 
the media for those whose opinions differ from the official 
position. He adds that many reject such oppression but have no 
means for saying so. 
  An announcer conducts a telephone interview with a relative 
of one of those who died recently at sea. The relative stresses 
that the idea of leaving in a raft "got just stuck" in the 
deceased's head. 
  The announcer plays a 1967 recording of a Radio Havana Cuba 
program entitled "Our Leaders Respond" in which former Cuban 
Foreign Minister Raul Roa Kouri addresses the issue of 
emigration from Cuba. In this recording, Roa says the Cuban 
Government's policy has always been to let people go freely; 
that the United States, which blocks legal departures, is 
responsible for the plight of the rafters; and that all of that 
is part of a smear campaign against Cuba. 
  The announcer reiterates that Cuba continues to abide by the 
1984 immigration accords. 

