BFN 

  [Excerpts] Arusha, Tanzania, April 23 (AFP) -- Planned 
talks Saturday [23 April] between Rwanda's rebels and government 
aimed at ending an ethnic bloodbath were called off as the 
government delegation failed to show up, Tanzanian officials 
said. 
  The sole rebel delegate meanwhile refused to negotiate with 
members of the interim government, proclaimed after the death of 
President Juvenal Habyarimana plunged Rwanda into frenzied 
bloodletting which left tens of thousands dead. 
  Rwandan Interior Minister Faustin Munyazesa, accompanied by 
two senior military officers, reportedly drove to Goma in 
eastern Zaire and boarded a UN plane for Arusha. But they had 
not arrived in this northern Tanzanian town by 10 P.M. (1900 
GMT). 
  Tanzanian foreign ministry officials said the talks might go 
ahead Sunday if the government delegation arrived. [passage 
omitted] 
  UN special envoy to Rwanda, Jacques-Roger Booh-Booh, 
meanwhile declined to comment on the ceasefire declaration 
because the world body had not been informed of the proposals 
directly, but had learned of them from reporters. [passage 
omitted] 
  Ten Belgian UN peacekeepers were killed, and the UN 
Assistance Mission in Rwanda scaled down its force from 2,500 to 
270 troops. 
  Booh-Booh said earlier that UN peacekeepers evacuated from 
Rwanda might return if the talks produced a ceasefire. "I have 
been authorised by the (UN) secretary-general to keep 1,000 
troops in Nairobi so that if we get a ceasefire they can be 
brought back quickly," Booh-Booh said. 
  Organisation of African Unity secretary-general Salim Ahmed 
Salim, also here for the talks, expressed outrage at the UN 
decision to withdraw almost all its peacekeepers from Rwanda. 
Aid agencies have also condemned the pullout of about 1,000 
peacekeepers which they said left Rwandan civilians 
unprotected. But Salim said the UN peacekeepers could return 
and would "have an important role to play" if a ceasefire was 
agreed by both sides. 
  He said the massacres should be investigated and the 
responsibility of both sides determined. But he added: "Some of 
these massacres were committed by elements of the security 
services." 

