Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] In a bid to reduce Japan's current account surplus, 
the government plans to announce a macroeconomic policy and a 
package of measures to relax regulations around 29 March. In 
this connection, Chief Cabinet Secretary Masayoshi Takemura met 
separately with Finance Minister Hirohisa Fujii, International 
Trade and Industry Minister Hiroshi Kumagai, and seven other 
ministers on 24 March to urge them to make further efforts to 
formulate the macroeconomic policy and map out the package of 
measures to relax regulations. He is scheduled to meet Koshiro 
Ishida, director general of the Management and Coordination 
Agency, and Manae Kubota, director general of the Economic 
Planning Agency, on 25 March. 
  The United States has asked Japan to cut taxes for many more 
years and increase public investment. At the meeting, Chief 
Cabinet Secretary Takemura and Finance Minister Fujii exchanged 
their views on ways to continue tax cuts after 1995 and increase 
basic plan for public investment which envisions a spending of 
430 trillion yen by the year 2000. It appears that Finance 
Minister Fujii indicated that it would be hard for the Finance 
Ministry to cut taxes for a longer period and increase public 
investment because of financial difficulties. Administrative 
Vice Finance Minister Jiro Saito, who was present at the 
meeting, later told a news conference: "Moves are afoot to cut 
taxes and increase public investment, but in fact, however, it 
is more or less difficult to cuts taxes for a longer period and 
further increase public investment." In this way, he expressed 
the view that it would be difficult for the Finance Ministry to 
indicate specific figures of amount in the macroeconomic policy. 
  In this connection, Chief Cabinet Secretary Takemura told a 
news conference on the afternoon of 24 March: "The Tax System 
Reform Consultative Council of ruling parties is now holding a 
debate on (the issue of cutting and raising taxes). The council 
will take time before it draws a conclusion and it is expected 
in June. Nonetheless, the government has no intention of 
excluding the tax issue from the macroeconomic policy." 
  Chief Cabinet Secretary Takemura asked Construction Minister 
Kozo Igarashi to relax regulations on imports of construction 
materials and Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Minister 
Eijiro Hata to simplify the current inspection of imported food. 

