To   Meet Electric Energy Demand for 21st Century 

<F P=102> 94FE0020A Tokyo TRIGGER, in Japanese Aug 93 pp 92-97--FOR 
OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94FE0020A </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo TRIGGER, </F>
<F P=105>  Japanese </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Shudo Iguchi] </F>
  [Text] Tokyo Electric Power Technical Research Laboratory 
announced in November 1992 and May 1993 the development of high 
temperature superconducting cable using two different methods. 
It is predicted that electric energy demand will more than 
double by the year 2010. If the utility company is to satisfy 
such a growing demand while paying full attention to the cost 
performance of the new technology, it will have to consider the 
high-temperature superconducting cable, which generates 
superconductivity at a liquid nitrogen temperature, as an 
excellent candidate. 
<H5>  Market Forecast Value After Long Silence </H5>
  International Superconducting Technology Center (ISTEC) held 
the second International Superconductor Industry Summit in May 
1993 in Hakone. During the summit, a forecast for a worldwide 
superconductor market was announced. 
  The world market for superconductor business is currently 
worth $1.5 billion (&yen;165 billion). According to the 
forecast, the market is expected to reach the $8-$12 billion 
(&yen;880 billion-1 trillion) level by the year 2000 and $60-$90 
billion (&yen;6-9 trillion) by 2020, and will continue to grow 
until it reaches the $150-$200 billion level(&yen;16-22 
trillion). 
  When this forecast is looked at in terms of growth rate, the 
annual rate ranges from 18 to 19 percent. Through the year 2010, 
however, unless a high annual growth ratio of 33 percent can be 
achieved, the $150 billion market will not emerge. Unless the 
estimates for superconductivity application products or total 
systems are included, the superconductor market growth, indeed, 
is a question mark. 
  No matter how we look at it, the forecast number for the 
future economic growth will not top a few percent. All 
indications are that the current sluggish economy will continue 
for some time to come. Then inevitably we must ask a question as 
to whether the superconducting business has the potential of 
achieving the kind of growth which can top prevailing economic 
growth. 
  It is true that superconduction R&amp;D has a history of 
over 80 
years. However, if we are to attempt a horse analogy, viz., a 
prospective winner, rival horse, and dark horse, it had not been 
a history always embellished by episodes of dark horses. 
Although it had the potential of pulling off something 
spectacular, it has not been able to replace powerful 
conventional technology and products. 
  It is doubtful that the emergence of the high-temperature 
superconducting technology will open up a profitable market in a 
matter of 20 to 30 years. 
  Now take the market forecast recently published in the 
Ministry of International Trade and Industry's (MITI) report, 
"Toward the Creative Era of Innovations," prepared by its 
administrative vice minister's private research forum and 
mid-term industrial economic prospect research forum, in the 
latter part of May 1993. 
  Basically, the report points out the absolute necessity of 
creativity in industrial development. Although this has been 
done many times in the past, what is new this time is the use of 
[Schunpeter]'s "creative destruction" as its basis. 
  If the [Schunpeter]-like supporting column is to emerge, 
then 
each business's unique originality will become the minimum 
condition for its survival. A side-by-side stance characterizing 
Japanese businesses, summarized as "If we all cross together, 
then we need not be afraid of red signals," will need to be 
reexamined. We must assume then that this report has taken 
another look at the Japanese production method, which thus far 
has been regarded as a virtue. 
  A good example of this new approach is evidenced in the 
report's statement, "limitations on the type of industrial 
development dependent only on further improvements in 
manufacturing technologies." 
  Continual development of manufacturing technology was the 
slogan which had pushed Japanese industry forward in the past. 
The report warned the industry that the times had changed and 
that it should establish a new goal. 
  For this reason, the report deals with newly created items 
which should be selected by the industry and government in order 
for them to take steps in the direction of creative industrial 
development. Each discussion reveals an industrial policy of a 
nation built on the basis of industries. In other words, the 
report gives out a strong impression that its new general 
approach does not square with the materials dealing with each 
item; and then inexplicably, the report inserts market 
forecasting of technologies considered promising. 
<H5>  General Remarks Agreed But Each Specific Remark Rejected </H5>
  Superconducting technology is positioned as a promising 
technology, and among those which will be impacted by this 
technology are opto-electronics and fine ceramics industries. 
The field of fine ceramics, which will be affected by 
superconducting technology, including those dealing with 
high-temperature conduction, is predicted to grow from the 
&yen;1 trillion market in 1987 to the &yen;6 trillion market by 
the year 2000. This is equivalent to the annual growth rate of 
13 percent. In order to achieve growth of this magnitude, an 
application field involving structural materials must be able to 
expand. 
  One example of a new application area is automobile engines 
manufacturing. In addition, its suitability for use in 
bioceramics-related field is under consideration. Would it be 
realistic to hope for such a considerable growth in a structural 
material application field? 
  Using structural materials as a main field, the report is 
building up high expectations, or is it wishful thinking, for 
high-temperature superconducting materials. No new area of 
application, however, has been added because it has yet to reach 
the stage where new viewpoints can be introduced. Under such a 
condition, it is doubtful that the use of superconducting 
material in the fine ceramics field will produce the kind of 
growth forecast by the report. 
  In the foregoing, we examined two forecasts; however, a 
forecast is a forecast. In view of the collapse of Japan's 
bubble economy today, we question the validity of the report's 
method, designed to pulling technology and industry in by 
showing forecasting figures. Will such a method most likely 
produce agreement with the report's general outline but not with 
specific items? 
  In the report, superconductive power storage, 
superconductive 
computers, and integrated devices are listed as possible 
application areas. It is a collection of rather flashy fields. 
However, in order for the superconducting technology to become a 
driving force of business, it will need an applications field 
which can be established as an industry, even if at first glance 
it may not be as showy as those mentioned above. 
<H5>  3000 Km Underground Transmission Cable </H5>
&lt;graphic&gt; 
&lt;capt&gt; Sumitomo Electric Industries' Bi Group Silver Sheath 
Method Cable 
&lt;annot&gt; Key: 1. Ceramic superconductor A 2. Overall diagram of 
ceramic superconductor 3. Structural diagram 4. 
Superconduction diagram 4'. Cross-section diagram 5. Voltage 
terminal 6. Current lead terminal 7. Ceramic superconduction 
line 7a. Ceramic Superconductor 8. Pipe (copper) 9. 
reciprocal winding 10. Silver&lt;/graphic&gt; 

&lt;graphic&gt;
&lt;capt&gt; Furukawa Electric's Bi-group Silver Sheath Method Cable 
&lt;annot&gt; Key: 1. Ceramic superconductor B 2. Ceramic 
superconductor - overall diagram 3. Voltage terminal 4. 
Current lead terminal 5. Pressing ring 6. Pipe (stainless 
steel) 7. Structural diagram 8. Multilayered ceramic 
superconducting line 9. Ceramic superconductor 10. Silver 11. 
Superconductor cross-section diagram&lt;/graphic&gt; 

  Let us now look at application fields which are making the 
most of the special quality possessed by high-temperature 
superconductors. 
  An example is drawn from its application to underground 
transmission cables. This is an attempt to replace copper wire 
cables with high-temperature superconducting cables. It is a 
power microelectronic application, and, in comparison with an 
application area related to the microelectronic devices, it is 
far less spectacular. However, we feel that this is the field in 
which the high-temperature superconductor can be achieved first. 
  In November 1992 and May 1993, Tokyo Electric Power 
Technical 
Research Laboratory announced in succession the development of 
high-temperature superconductive transmission cable models based 
on two manufacturing methods. One employs a Bi-system silver 
sheath method and the other a Y-system thin film method to build 
cable models. 
  Both are over 1-meter long. The silver sheath method was 
developed jointly by Sumitomo Electric Industries and Furukawa 
Electric Co., while the thin film method was developed solely by 
Sumitomo Electric. At the liquid nitrogen temperature, the 
5-meter-long Sumitomo model has the critical current value (IC) 
of 1130A (currently, 2030A), while Furukawa Electric's model is 
1 meter long and has IC2025A. The thin film method-based model 
is 5 meters long and its critical current density (JC) is 
18000A/cm[.sup]2[/]. 
  The thin-film method cables are being produced using a vapor 
deposition method at a speed of 30 minutes per 1 meter. This 
represents the fastest preparation time. Moreover, this method 
achieves the highest Jc, thereby demonstrating the effectiveness 
of the thin-film method in producing cables. This is quite 
remarkable. The silver sheath method has both high IC's and the 
ability to produce a long cable with ease. 
  Thus Tokyo Electric Power has demonstrated through 
construction of models that it would be possible to produce 
cables using two different types of methods and materials. The 
reason why Tokyo Electric Power has been devoting its efforts in 
developing high-temperature superconductive cable is because 
"electric energy demands will double in the 2010's." 
  This is how Mr. Hideo Ishii, deputy chief of Tokyo Electric 
Power Technical Research Laboratory's electric power research 
section, estimates energy demand and supply situation within the 
areas served by Tokyo Electric Power. In order to solve the 
problem of demand which will be doubled in 16 years from now, it 
will be necessary not only to increase power generation capacity 
but also to bolster power transmission systems. 
  At present, 275kV underground cable circuits are supplying 
550,000kVA electricity. This amount is estimated to be doubled 
to 1 MkVA in the 2010's. 1 MkVA is the amount of electricity 
equivalent to the amount of power generated by one nuclear power 
reactor. The cables, therefore, will be able to support the 
transmission of a huge volume of electricity, sufficient to meet 
the need of a city of one million people. 
  In order to meet energy demand which will be doubled in 
coming years, the company is developing the high-temperature 
superconductive cables, and, at the same time, it is working on 
improving copper wire cables as well. 
  One example of this is the development of a method designed 
to cool with water the interior of a three-phase alternate 
current. In this case, all one has to do is to transmit 2000A at 
275kV; however, existing cable conduit lines do not have the 
capacity to accommodate such a large volume of current. 
&lt;graphic&gt; 
&lt;capt&gt; Conceptual Diagram of Ceramic Superconductor Produced by 
Thin Film Method 
&lt;annot&gt; Key: 1. Current terminal 2. Current lead (silver tape) 
3. Ceramic superconductive line 4. Terminal end 5. Voltage 
terminal (silver tape) 6. Entire diagram 7. Conductor (outer 
diameter: 40mm) (six-layer structure) 8. Distance between 
voltage terminals 9. Length of conductor 10. Six-layered 11. 
Enlarged diagram 12. Structural diagram 13. Stainless steel 
pipe 14. Ceramic superconducting line (outside of substrate 
surface) 15. Superconductive layer (ceramics) 16. Middle layer 
(ceramics : Yttria-stabilized zirconia) 17. Superconducting 
line structural diagram 18. Table substrate (nickel 
alloy)&lt;/graphic&gt; 

<H5>  Use of Existing Conduit Lines Possible </H5>
  "If high-temperature superconductors can be put to practical 
use, we can use the existing conduit lines without any 
modifications. This will not only bring down construction costs 
but also result in effective use of underground space in the 
center of the city." 
  Mr. Tsukushi Hara, chief researcher of a division at Tokyo 
Electric Power Technical Research Laboratory, enumerated 
advantages of using high-temperature cables as compared with 
water-cooled copper wire cables. 
  The inner diameter of the 275K circuit conduit lines, 
running 
right and left underground extending to 3000 km in the large 
power consumption region of the metropolitan area, is 15 cm. It 
will not be possible, therefore, to meet doubling demand without 
expanding the existing conduit lines if copper wire cables are 
to be used. 
  The problem accompanying such an expansion is the problem of 
container space. For instance, even if they are to be placed 
underground, in the metropolitan area where land prices continue 
to rise, expansion of underground space means an increase in 
cost. If at all possible, use of existing facility without any 
modifications will be an ideal way of handling this. 
  Only the use of high-temperature superconductors to replace 
existing cables will make it possible to double the amount of 
electric power transmission using existing conduit lines. 
  According to calculations attempted by Tokyo Electric Power, 
when the high temperature superconductive cables are used, even 
if a refrigerant liquid nitrogen is used, the diameter can be 
held at 13 cm. This means that existing conduit lines with inner 
diameter of 15 cm can be used without any modifications. When 
the high-temperature superconducting cables are replaced by 
metallic superconducting cables, a double cooling system becomes 
necessary, increasing the size of the conduit diameter to 36 cm. 
This meant that the conduit lines presently in use could not be 
utilized. Moreover, the company encountered the problems of the 
cooling system and insulation materials. Application of metallic 
superconducting cable to underground transmission cables is 
essentially a near impossibility. 
  As Mr. Hara said, "we will have to use high-temperature 
superconductors," if the company is to meet a growing electric 
energy demand while giving full consideration to cost 
performance of a technology involved, one which will emerge as a 
promising candidate capable of meeting such cost and technical 
requirements. The high-temperature superconducting cables, from 
which superconduction can be achieved at the liquid nitrogen 
temperature, meet these requirements. 
  Noticing the high level performance and compact size of the 
high-temperature superconductors, including a cooling system, 
Tokyo Electric Power Technology Research Institute began 
high-temperature superconduction application research in 1987, 
and, in 1988, R&amp;D of the thin-film method was begun. R&amp;D 
spending thus far recorded is approximately &yen;590 million (of 
which, &yen;300 million is to be defrayed by Tokyo Electric 
Power). R&amp;D of the Y-group system thin film method began a 
little later in April 1989. Approximately &yen;360 million was 
allocated to this development (of which &yen;180 million was 
defrayed by Tokyo Electric Power). 
  The reason why the thin film method preceded the other was 
that the Bi-group came later, and its performance at one time 
was evaluated as unsatisfactory. 
&lt;graphic&gt; 
&lt;capt&gt; Developmental Goals of Various Cables With 1 Million kW 
Transmission Capacity 
&lt;annot&gt; Key: 1. Category of Cables 2. Ceramics Superconductive 
Cable 3. Metal Group Superconductive Cables 4. Copper Wire 
Cables 5. Cross-section Structure 6. Pipe 7. Superconductive 
wire 8. Liquid nitrogen 9. Adiabatic material 10. Insulation 
material 11. Superconductive wire for shielding 12. Liquid 
helium 12a. Copper wire 13. Aluminum corrugate pipe 13a. 
Protective material 14. (Example of cable with internal water 
cooling system) 15. Water 16. Voltage 16a. Current 17. 
Material of electric wires in use 17a. Refrigerant 18. 
Ceramics 19. Bismuth 20. Metallic group superconductive wires 
21. Niobtitanium wire 22. Niob-3-tin wire 23. Refrigerant 
24. Features 25. a) Target development in the near future b) 
Since cooling is simple, a cross section becomes compact. c) Use 
of superconductive wires makes large flow of current feasible. 
26. a) Since cooling is difficult, both liquid nitrogen and 
liquid helium must be used, and this double structure enlarges a 
cross section thereby making it impractical for use in actual 
situation. b) Use of superconductive wires makes possible a 
large flow of currents. 27. a) Practical cables currently under 
development. b) Because of heat generated by wires, a current 
flow is restricted; consequently, a cross-section must be 
enlarged in order to have a large flow.&lt;/graphic&gt; 

<H5>  Connection of 500m-Long Cables Assumed </H5>
  What, then, will be the future application of 
superconductive 
technology? 
  As stated, "we are assuming that we will use 500m-long 
cables 
and connect them to cover distances," Mr. Hara is considering 
use of 500m-class cables. At present, underground cables connect 
substations separated by the distance of approximately 1 to 3 
km. In order to replace these cables with high-temperature 
superconductive cables, placement of a cooling station at a 
mid-distance so that 500m-class cables can be used. 
  The company is considering the level of cable voltage at 
around 66kV and current at 9000A, approximately four times that 
of copper wire cables. This is aimed at making the most of the 
superconductive characteristics allowing a large volume of 
current to flow with no resistance. Another advantage is that 
this lowers insulation pressure, thereby making it possible to 
produce more compact cables. 
  Now let us examine how the performance of the 
previously-announced cable models will compare with that of the 
500m-class cable. 
  Calculations show that compared with copper wire cables, the 
high-temperature superconductive cable models have from 100x to 
200x the amount of current flowing. Mr. Hara and his associates 
want to raise this figure by one digit, in order to persuade the 
company to make an in-house use of the high-temperature 
superconductive cables, because it will be necessary to 
establish their technological superiority. To achieve this, 
they must keep raising Jc. 
  If the high-temperature superconductivity is to be applied 
to 
cables, aside from electric characteristics, flexing 
characteristic is absolutely essential. Since ceramic is used in 
high-temperature superconductors generally, some felt that they 
lacked the necessary flexing property. However, the models 
developed by Tokyo Electric Power can be bent without lowering 
Jc. Currently, a flexing test is being conducted using a cable 
with a 2.6 m diameter, which is equivalent to the maximum 
diameter of a drum used in shipping. 
<H5>  Conditions of IMkVA Cables </H5>
  Another crucial characteristic of practical cables is 
whether 
alternate current can flow in them. The Jc values mentioned 
above are the numbers obtained by using direct current. Insofar 
as alternate current is concerned, no data has yet been made 
available. The laboratory is currently studying a method of 
evaluating the AC characteristic of a long high-temperature 
superconductive cable. 
  Although the company claims that thus far no data has 
pointed 
to the infeasibility of using the high temperature 
superconductive cables, the problem lies in the method of 
obtaining quantitative data, as it has yet to be established. In 
an attempt to capture high-temperature superconductive cable's 
AC characteristics, the company is broadening the scope of 
research. 
  At that time, a ceramic material, of which the cables are 
made, will create the problem because of its complex magnetic 
properties. The focal point will be the question of how the 
company will deal with the quantification of data given this 
extremely difficult problem. If this problem can be solved, the 
company will be able to establish the standard necessary for 
basic designs, including a spiral pitch. 
  Problems, however, continue to pile up. The models thus far 
announced range from 1 m to 5 m in length. This means that the 
company must actually manufacture a 100-m-long cable with a 
current flow capacity of a few thousand A, so that it can 
validate the practicality of high-temperature superconductive 
cables. 
  "We must achieve this early next century," said Mr. Hara, 
raising his target once again. 
  Problems are numerous--performance improvement, longer 
cables, verification of characteristics at the AC level, and 
improved characteristics--they all must be solved. We wonder 
what manufacturers' thinking is regarding these problems. 
According to Mr. Kenichi Sato, head of Superconduction 
Application Research Department, Osaka Research Laboratory, 
Sumitomo Electric Industries, "Even if we have no significant 
breakthrough, it still may be possible to achieve the 9000A 
cables." 
  Although he expresses his feeling on the future of the 
superconductive cables in this term, the Sumitomo Electric 
Industries' superconductive cables just now have "emerged from a 
beaker and reached a small plant stage." Sumitomo Electric's 
target is to achieve a 66kV 1000A-class cable by 1998 and a 
1Mkva-class cable by 2010. 
  Mr. Hara's modest target is to be achieved "In the 2010's, 
if 
the partial implementation of superconductive cables in a system 
can be achieved..." However, in order to reach that stage, the 
features of the cable must be improved, and one of the two 
methods of producing cables currently in progress must be 
selected. 
  Further down the road, there is the problem of establishing 
reliability of a cooling system, which has yet to be resolved. 
Only when these problems are cleared can the company stand at 
the gate of the road to commercialization. 
  In spite of what has been suggested by the report, a few 
hundred billion yen market in the 21st century will not readily 
materialize. However, it is now possible to hope for the 
beginning of a commercialization effort in the field of 
superconductive technology. 

