BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, May 12 (XINHUA) -- The Chinese Labor 
Ministry is formulating a system of guidelines for enterprise 
wage increases, which will be put into force in the near future. 
  The system is aimed at ensuring proper wage increases in 
enterprises and further strengthening the government's 
supervision and macro control over wages, said Wang Dongyan, a 
senior Labor Ministry official in charge of the wage affairs. 
  According to Wang, the guidelines will be determined by a 
wage committee composed of three parts from the state's labor 
departments, trade unions and the associations of entrepreneurs. 
  The guidelines will be fixed upon in light of the yearly 
increase rate of social labor productivity and changes in the 
cost of living index for urban residents. 
  At the same time, the guidelines will take into account 
multiple factors which have an impact on wages, such as price 
increases, the standard of labor costs, the labor supply and 
demand in markets as well as foreign trade. 
  The official said that the guidelines will function in terms 
of wage increase ranges and absolute increase amounts. The 
guidelines will be issued in April every year, with an effective 
term of one year. 
  Wang holds that the guidelines for wage increases will help 
to maintain a rational, coordinated proportion between wage 
increases, economic growth and price rises. 
  The effort is one of the important contents of the ongoing 
wage reform in which the market mechanism determines the wages, 
the enterprises enjoy self-determining power in distribution and 
the government practices supervision and macro control over 
wages. 
  According to the official, Chinese workers are now enjoying 
higher wage levels, due to the transformation of the ways the 
enterprises operate and the deepening reform of the enterprises' 
wage system. 
  Official statistics showed that in 1993, the average per 
capita wage of Chinese workers had risen to 3,236 yuan, up 19.4 
percent over the previous year. 

