BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Clear Need for Change"] </F>
  [Text] The clarification of the Anglo-lrish declaration 
offered to Sinn Fein by the Northern Ireland Office yesterday 
was pointless rather than outrageous. Though little in the 
document could be counted a concession, Sinn Fein will doubtless 
consider the exchange a propaganda success. In anticipation of 
this, British officials have sought to justify the response as 
"commentary" rather than "clarification -- a semantic 
distinction which may be less than obvious to the anxious 
Unionist community. The more important point is that Ulster 
seems not an inch closer to peace as a result of this sterile 
correspondence. 
  The stern language of the statement -- which warned Sinn 
Fein 
to stop "playing for time" and to realise that "there is no 
conceivable justification for continuing to rob people of their 
lives" -- masks its tactical significance. On balance, the 
contacts between John Major and Gerry Adams, president of the 
IRA's political wing, were probably ill-advised. 
  Sinn Fein's strategy since the Prime Minister and Albert 
Reynolds, the Irish Prime Minister, signed the declaration in 
December has been to cultivate a specious legitimacy without 
fulfilling the preconditions for exploratory talks. Mr Adams 
has encouraged the view that his movement is ready to lay down 
its weapons and join the political process. Trips abroad, the 
stagemanaged Sinn Fein conference in February and the three-day 
Easter truce have all played a part in this relentless public 
relations campaign. 
  Meanwhile, the IRA has shelled Heathrow airport, a British 
helicopter has been shot from the skies in Armagh, and troops, 
policemen and civilians have continued to be targeted 
ruthlessly. The Government may claim that yesterday s response 
has laid the troublesome ghost of "clarification" to rest once 
and for all. Sinn Feins interpretation will surely be just the 
opposite: that the preconditions required by the declaration are 
not absolute and that negotiation by stealth remains an option. 
  Regrettably, Mr Major's faith in the five-month-old peace 
process has not been vindicated. While ministers agonised over 
Sinn Feins demand this week, blood was flowing in the province 
as if the declaration had never been signed. A teenager died in 
Armagh yesterday from injuries suffered in a Loyalist sectarian 
attack on Wednesday; earlier this week, two Catholic building 
workers were shot dead by the Ulster Volunteer Force. The 
determination of the men of violence to continue their work 
could not be clearer. Against this background, the tired 
reiteration of the declarations principles seems increasingly 
irrelevant. 
  The fact of yesterday's response is more illuminating than 
its detail. It confirms that the Prime Minister has yet to 
accept the need for a new strategy in Ulster. On security 
matters, he should begin by considering the intelligent 
amendments to the Criminal Justice Bill proposed by David 
Trimble, the Unionist MP for Upper Bann. In the constitutional 
field, he should press ahead with the stalled plans for an 
administrative assembly in the province. Wooing Sinn Fein has 
done nothing but raise the party's profile and alarm the 
Protestant community in Ulster. If his wish to be remembered as 
a peacebroker in Ireland is sincere, Mr Major will have to think 
again. 

