BFN 

    [Editorial Report] 
<H8>  THE STAR </H8>
  National Party Picks Up Support at ANC Expense -- 
Johannesburg THE STAR in English on 5 April in a page-8 
editorial refers to an opinion poll commissioned by THE STAR and 
carried out by Marketing and Media Research, shows that the "NP 
[National Party] has picked up support, largely at the expense 
of the ANC." THE STAR concludes that "the assumption that the 
ANC will win a two-thirds majority -- and thus be able to impose 
a constitution of its own choice, subject only to constitutional 
principles hammered out at the multiparty negotiations -- is not 
justified. Whether the ANC can win two-thirds of the vote 
depends on the final phase of the election campaign." 
<H8>  BUSINESS DAY </H8>
  Natal Emergency `Harsh Signal' to Buthelezi -- Johannesburg 
BUSINESS DAY in English on 5 April in a page-6 editorial 
comments on the state of emergency imposed in Natal saying, 
"April 27 will dawn with hundreds of people being held in 
detention without trial, subject to interrogation and with only 
limited protection from security force excesses." "No official 
of the government, the South African Defence Force or the 
Transitional Executive Council has answered the point made by 
both the PAC [Pan-Africanist Congress] and the Human Rights 
Commission: that remedies other than the emergency declaration 
exist to bring stability to Natal. Though not all of their 
suggestions seem appropriate, it is worth asking why, for 
example, tighter controls on meetings and bans on the training 
of private armies and the carrying of weapons require emergency 
rule. This leaves the impression that one important motive for 
the emergency is psychological: that government and the ANC 
decided it was necessary to send a harsh signal to Inkatha 
leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi." 
<H8>  CAPE TIMES </H8>
  Skepticism Over ANC, NP Economic Growth Promises -- Cape 
Town 
CAPE TIMES in English on 29 March in a page-8 editorial says the 
economic growth stimulation plans by the NP and the ANC for the 
Western Cape should be evaluated "with more than a pinch of 
electioneering scepticism." Both parties are "offering jobs and 
houses by the thousands" in the Western Cape. "Promises which 
will, by and large, prove as good as the national economy 
allows. The converse of that fact, of course, is that the 
national economy in the new dispensation is a reflection of 
relative regional performance. So while there can be little 
doubt over which party will run the country, it will have to 
co-ordinate efficiently with the provincial administrations to 
ensure maximum overall development." 
  ANC Quiet on `Undemocratic' Actions of Candidate Holomisa -- 
A second editorial on the same page notes that Transkei leader 
Bantu Holomisa maintains that the NP cannot open an office in 
the homeland "until the NP and his thoroughly unrepresentative 
government have discussed `security'." Holomisa is using 
"illegitimately gained powers" to deny the NP access to a 
significant element of the voting population. "These are not 
merely the antics of a whacky dictator. They are the actions of 
one of the ANC's leading candidates." "Yet the ANC, which 
justly waxes so lyrical in condemning the undemocratic actions 
of a Lucas Mangope or an Oupa Gqozo, keeps quiet. The message 
is clear: An authoritarian dictator is easily tolerated as long 
as he or she is on the ANC side." 

