BFN 

  [Text] Paris, May 27 (CTK) -- Foreign Minister Josef 
Zieleniec said today the Czech Republic would help strengthen 
stability in Central and East Europe as well as across the 
continent, and would take part in a Central European 
"roundtable" discussion if it embraces the whole spectrum of 
regional cooperation. 
  He addressed the Conference on Stability in Europe which had 
proposed the round-table discussion. 
  Zieleniec stressed the best way of solving the problems of 
ethnic minorities and borders was the strengthening of 
democracy, the free market economy, the law-abiding state and 
respect for human rights, the means which had been tested by 
Western countries. 
  On the other hand, the Czech Republic has always taken a 
critical stand on a "selective solution" to the above problems 
in the conference's final document, Zieleniec said. 
  He expressed the wish that "the stability pact" did not 
double the existing European instruments and institutions, 
particularly the Conference on Security and Cooperation in 
Europe (CSCE) and the Council of Europe (CE) which, on the 
contrary, should implement it. 
  He pointed out that the Czech Republic had greatly 
contributed to the completion and final tuning of the final 
document's text so that it comply as well as possible with the 
needs of Central and East European countries. 
  Prague has welcomed especially the fact that these states 
are 
no longer presented as states haunted by a number of problems, 
but as clear candidates for membership of the European Union on 
the basis of "their own achievements," Zieleniec said. 
  He came out in defense of applying flexibility and "variable 
geometry" in European politics. According to him, the conflict 
in Yugoslavia has taught all Europeans a lesson -- it has made 
it clear that stiff Cartesian thinking need not be generally 
applicable in the current complex situation on the continent. 
  "In other words, I am not sure at all that the `Sarajevo 
optics' should be used in dealing with problems in other parts 
of the European continent," Zieleniec stressed. 

