BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Seven O'Clock Newscast"] </F>
  [Text] The most tumultuous debate in recent times in 
Colombia was unleashed today after the Constitutional Court 
decided to legalize the personal consumption of drugs such as 
marijuana and cocaine. The debate has reached a point that, 
going against the tradition of not speaking publicly, the 
Constitutional Court justices who opposed the decision are 
expressing their dissent. Here is a report by Juan Roberto 
Vargas: 
  [Begin recording] [Vargas] Good evening. We are here with 
one of the justices who dissented from the majority decision 
adopted by the Constitutional Court yesterday to decriminalize 
the consumption of drugs, that is to say, the use of the 
infamous personal dose of drugs. Dr. Jose Gregorio Hernandez, 
why did you dissent from this decision? 
  [Hernandez] I disagree with the decision because I believe 
the standard, or standards, declared unconstitutional by the 
Constitutional Court were, in fact, not unconstitutional. Just 
the opposite is true. Far from violating the Constitution, they 
extended it. The advancement of personal freedom [libre 
desarrollo de la personalidad] has limits within the 
Constitution. These limits basically involve the well-being of 
others and the maintenance of juridical order. This is because, 
to the extent that a person who has consumed drugs acts under 
the influence of a substance that prevents him from being fully 
aware of the reality around him, he is capable of causing 
enormous harm, even committing crimes, which obviously would 
threaten public interest, harm society, and should therefore be 
penalized. 
  [Vargas] Thank you, Dr. Jose Gregorio. We should point out 
that this is the most significant and controversial decision the 
Constitutional Court has made. We must remember that the vote 
was 5-4 among the justices who decided to decriminalize personal 
drug use. The dissenting justices say this will have serious 
international repercussions as far as Colombia's image in the 
fight against drug trafficking is concerned. This will create 
grave legal problems because it opens the doors to the definite 
legalization of drug trafficking and will create serious 
psychiatric and psychological problems among the youths who 
consume these substances. 

