BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: ``The Numbers Game Kingpins''] </F>
  [Text] Castor de Andrade--According to the district 
attorney he is the head of the gang. A law graduate, he was 
disbarred by the Brazilian Attorneys Association. He is the 
honorary president of the Mocidade Independente de Padre Miguel 
samba school and a sponsor of the Bangu Atletico Clube soccer 
club. Before being sentenced last year by Judge Denise 
Frossard, he had been arrested by the Federal Police and by 
Interpol for making illegal profits, for being involved in video 
poker games, and for his participation in managing casinos. 
Regarding the numbers game, his area of influence is the West 
Zone, in the neighborhoods of Bangu, Marechal Hermes, Realengo, 
Senador Camara, and Mangaratiba, where he operates with his son 
Paulo Roberto de Andrade e Silva, who is also known as Paulinho 
da Mocidade. Andrade has been free thanks to a writ of habeas 
corpus granted by the Rio de Janeiro Superior Court. Paulinho 
remains under arrest at Interpol. 
  Anis Abraao David--He is better known as Anisio da 
Beija Flor. He patronizes the Beija Flor samba school. He 
controls the numbers game in Nilopolis and Nova Iguacu, in the 
Baixada Fluminense district. In 1978, he was charged with 
having ordered the murder of wall painter Misaque Jose Marques 
and of advertising expert Luis Carlos Jatoba. He was tried and 
acquitted. In 1991, his former wife Eliana Muller was murdered. 
The police found a letter written by Eliana in which she holds 
her former husband accountable for anything that should happen 
to her. Eliana also held Anisio responsible for the murder of 
Misque and Jatoba. Based on this evidence, District Attorney 
Antonio Carlos Biscaia has requested that the case be reopened. 
Anisio is being held in the Ferreira Vieira Neto prison in 
Niteroi, where he receives privileged treatment. 
  Ailton Guimaraes Jorge--He demands to be called 
Captain Guimaraes because he was an Army officer, but was 
expelled from the force over smuggling charges. He is listed by 
human rights groups as a torturer at the Doi-Codi [International 
Operations Department-Internal Defense Operations Center]. He 
is a former president of the Independent League of Samba Schools 
(Liesa). He controls the numbers game in Niteroi and in the 
Lagos Region, but his businesses extend to Espirito Santo State 
and even to Paraguay. He has already been fined by the Federal 
Revenue Secretariat [SRF] in the amount of $120,000. He was 
also sentenced to six years in prison by Judge Denise Frossard 
on charges of belonging to an armed gang. At present he is 
serving time at Interpol, one of the various police 
organizations having taken graft from the illegal game operators. 
  Waldemir Paes Garcia--He is nickamed Miro. He is 
the richest among the numbers game kingpins. He is so rich that 
his colleagues only call him Bradesco [Brazilian Discount Bank]. 
He patronizes the Unidos do Salgueiro samba school and controls 
the numbers game in Tijuca, Vila Isabel, and Andarai. He owns 
casinos and ranches in Paraguay. He gained power and money when 
he inherited the businesses of his then partner Angelo Maria 
Longas, known as Uncle Scrooge, who died in 1987. In 1988, he 
was arrested by federal agents who broke into the Barao de 
Drumond Casino in the Baixada Fluminense. Miro is the father of 
Waldemiro Garcia, nicknamed Maninho, who was almost expelled 
from the numbers game leadership for having opened fire on actor 
Tarcisio Meira Filho and Carlos Gustavo Santos Moreira, aka 
Grelha, whom he left paralyzed. Father and son were sentenced 
last year to six years in prison. They are both serving time at 
the Ferreira Vieira Neto Prison in Niteroi. 
  Raul Correa de Mello--Raul Capitao is 84 years 
old. In addition to being the oldest, he is also one of the 
richest among the numbers game kingpins. He controls the game 
downtown, in the Ilha do Governador, and in other states. Marco 
Aurelio, a son of Raul Capitao, was murdered in 1987, presumably 
on orders of the other kingpins. This incident shook the 
numbers game structure. Because of his old age and poor 
health--he suffers from Parkinson's disease--the Superior Court 
granted him a writ of habeas corpus so that he may stay free 
while his appeal of the sentence of Judge Denise Frossard--who 
sentenced him to six years in prison on charges of belonging to 
an armed gang--is heard. 
  Carlos Teixeira Martins--A Portuguese citizen, 
whose nickname is Carlinhos Maracana, patronizes the Portela 
samba school and the Bangu soccer club. He owns a chain of 
supermarkets and is, among the kingpins, the one who has had 
most contacts with politicians. During the administration of 
Moreira Franco, he was decorated with the Pedro Ernesto Medal, 
the highest honor conferred by the Rio de Janeiro City Council. 
He controls hundreds of game points in the suburbs, especially 
in Madureria, Pavuna, and Rocha Miranda, as well as in Brasilia. 
He was also sentenced to six years in prison and is serving 
time at the Vieira Ferreira Neto Prison in Niteroi. Their ward 
is known as the Place of the Yellow Woodpecker [Sitio do 
Pica-pau Amarelo]--a reference to the comfort enjoyed there by 
the inmates. Unlike the other kingpins, Carlinhos Maracana has 
no direct heirs. Thus, his businesses are being administered by 
advisers. 
  Antonio Petrus Kalil--In addition to being a 
numbers game kingpin, Turcao is also a prosperous owner of 
restaurants. He controls hundreds of numbers game points in 
Alcantara, Niteroi, Rio (the port area), Minas Gerais, and 
Bahia. He was charged with having ordered the murder of Bahia 
numbers kingpin Luis Carlos Teles de Lima three years ago to 
take control of the game in Salvador. He was fined $5,000 by 
the SRF on charges of tax evasion. Castor de Andrade, Captain 
Guimaraes, and Turcao make up the golden trio of kingpins in Rio 
de Janeiro. Turcao could replace Castor, who has lost face 
after his ``oversight'' that enabled the Rio de Janeiro district 
attorney to disclose the numbers game accounting records. Turcao 
is serving a six-year term at the Ferreira Vieira Neto Prison in 
Niteroi. 
  Jose Petrus Kalil--He is nicknamed Zinho. He is 
the self-styled spokesman of the numbers game kingpins. He is 
an economist and a brother of Turcao. He used to patronize the 
Mangueira samba school, but now patronizes the Estacio de Sa 
school. He controls points in the downtown area. He is the 
most discreet among the kingpins because he has been rarely seen 
in parties or in the company of distinguished people. A former 
partner of kingpin Manuel Nunes Cid, known as Manola, Zinho 
became a member of the select group of commanders of the numbers 
game after the death of his partner. Today, he owns several real 
estate properties and runs game points throughout the city. 
Last year, he was sentenced to six years in prison on charges 
of belonging to an armed gang. Because he is a university 
graduate, he has been remanded to custody at a special section 
of Interpol until his appeal against Judge Denise Frossard's 
sentence is heard. 
  Jose Caruzzo Escafura--He is also known as 
Piruinha. He controls the numbers game in the northern zone of 
Rio de Janeiro, especially in the neighborhoods of Meier, 
Engenho de Dentro, and Abolicao, where he resides with his 
entire family. In 1992, car thieves stole a car at gunpoint 
from a woman, but they returned the car to her as soon as they 
found out that she was related to Piruinha. A few weeks ago, 
one of his grandsons was kidnapped, but he reappeared a few days 
later. Sentenced with the other kingpins, Piruinha is serving 
time at the Ari Franco Prison. He owns entertainment places and 
a chain of motels--including one in Jacarepagua, in the western 
zone, which was meant to become a large, luxurious casino. The 
SRF found out that he owns more than 100 real estate properties. 
He has had 14 children by 12 women. He is often visited in 
prison by his women (together). 
  Haroldo Rodrigues Nunes--In the numbers game 
underworld, he is known as Haroldo Saenz Pena. He owns 
lucrative game points in Tijuca, a traditional neighborhood in 
northern Rio de Janeiro. He claims to be just ``a simple 
citizen living on an INSS [National Social Security Institute] 
pension,'' a retired cab driver. He recently sold a shiny 
Mercedes Benz and a boat, even though he has not had financial 
problems for several years. A discreet man, he is one of the 
most powerful numbers game kingpins. Like Carlinhos Maracana, 
Haroldo does not have a direct heir and, while he is serving 
time for six years at the Niteroi prison on charges of belonging 
to an armed gang, his businesses are being run by his managers. 
  Luiz Pacheco Drumond--He is known as Luizinho da 
Imperatriz, in reference to the Imperatriz samba school of 
Leopoldina, which won the latest carnival samba parade. He 
controls the numbers game in the entire Leopoldina area. In 
1991, the SRF concluded that he could not justify his wealth and 
imposed on him a $24,000 fine. His son Marquinhos Drumond is 
president of Imperatriz and is a councilman for the Liberal 
Party. Marquinhos also served as vice president of the Botafogo 
soccer club during the tenure of kingpin Emil Pinheiro. 
Luisinho is considered to be one of the most violent numbers 
game kingpins, and is suspected of having ordered the death of 
one nephew. He is serving a six-year prison term at the 
Ferreira Vieira Neto prison. 
  Emil Pinheiro--He owns a fortune, including a 
princely mansion in Angra dos Reis, outside of which he used to 
anchor a huge yacht. A passionate soccer lover, he decided to 
assume control of the Botafogo soccer club. He bought several 
players for the club and managed to have the team win a 
championship after 21 years. He controls game points in the 
southern zone. Nearly five years ago, he was accused of causing 
the death of a manager of the numbers game in Jacarepagua. It 
should also be noted that his partner mysteriously disappeared 
in 1976. He owns several real estate properties in the Barra da 
Tijuca area. He had health problems while serving time at 
Interpol. He was then taken to the Army Central Hospital, where 
he has been staying for 10 months. Last week the Superior Court 
turned down a petition for him to go free while his appeal of 
Judge Denise Frossard's sentence is heard. 
  Jose Carlos Monassa--He controls the game in 
Niteroi and Sao Goncalo in Greater Rio. He shares some points 
with Turcao. He is president of the Unidos do Viradouro samba 
school which, thanks to his sponsor, has made it to the special 
group for the past two years. One of his sons is married to the 
daughter of a criminal judge. He was the only numbers game 
``kingpin'' who was not sentenced by Judge Denise Frossard, but 
he was sentenced in March to six years on charges of belonging 
to an armed gang. In Minas Gerais State, he is charged with a 
count of murder. He remains at large. 

