Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Fritz Wirth: "Somalia's Distant Effects Reach </F>
as Far as Bosnia"] 
  [Text] Bertrand Russell once wrote that "extreme hopes are 
children of extreme misery." For George Bush, this statement 
turned into an order 15 months ago. He sent 26,000 U.S. troops 
to Somalia for Operation Restore Hope to stop one of the world's 
most terrible famines. More than 2,000 people used to die each 
day under the eyes of a world that had basically been standing 
idly by until then. 
  Hunger has been defeated. These days, the last U.S. troops 
are leaving the country. Still, what remains is not gratitude, 
hope, and relief, but a question mark, fear, and foreboding. 
These troops are leaving as the refugees of an "impossible 
mission." Nothing shows the dubious and problematic nature of 
their withdrawal more clearly than the recent hasty Somalia 
mission by Chief of Staff Shalikashvili. It was a psychological 
morale-boosting trip, intended to dispel the feeling among the 
withdrawing soldiers that they are pulling out as losers. 
  Nevertheless, it remains a withdrawal without a victory 
parade and the most dismal, most dubious, and most dissatisfying 
U.S. military disengagement since the pull-out of Beirut 11 
years ago. The tragic price of the Operation Restore Hope are 37 
dead and 181 wounded U.S. soldiers. It was this price and not 
the fulfillment of the high hopes that dictated the order to end 
Operation Restore Hope. 
  As noble and urgent the motives for this operation have been 
-- it was an operation of aberrations from the very beginning. 
It started with George Bush's extreme hopes that he could 
successfully end the operation even before the end of his 
presidency, that is to say within six weeks. It reveals that 
these 26,000 troops were sent to Somalia on the basis of a most 
deficient appreciation of the situation. Officials in 
Washington saw the hungry people, but not the political reasons 
behind them. 
  When, after a few months, the insufficient limits of the 
mission were recognized, the new administration under Clinton 
made the second embarrassing mistake. It handed over the U.S. 
troops to the military and political incompetence of the UN 
bureaucracy. The United Nations's hunt for clan leader Aidid 
turned into a farce and finally a tragedy, when the dead bodies 
of U.S. troops were dragged through the streets of Mogadishu. 
The resulting order for the withdrawal of the U.S. forces was 
not determined by strategic and political considerations, but 
exclusively by emotions that were fueled by these grueling 
scenes. 
  It was a fatal and far-reaching decision. All European 
nations immediately followed with the withdrawal of their UN 
peace corps members. What remains are 20,000 UN soldiers, whose 
main contingent is provided by Pakistan, badly equipped and 
incompetently led. They will be at the mercy of a new looming 
civil war. And this new civil war also threatens to bring back 
starvation. In other words: Operation Restore Hope was in great 
probability not a mission of salvation but one of suspended 
chaos. The self-complacent tribute Bill Clinton paid yesterday 
to the returning U.S. troops describing them as great winners 
had a rather embarrassing touch. 
  After all, the real tragedy in Somalia is that the clan 
leaders are now stronger than before this folded intervention. 
They have become legends as a result of their resistance to the 
powerful United States. This is also why they saw no reason to 
make any concessions in the efforts to achieve political and 
diplomatic solutions for the Somalia conflict in Nairobi and 
Cairo in the past few months. Thus, in Somalia, the signals 
continue point to confrontation. 
  However, the consequences of this operation go far beyond 
Somalia. They became visible over the past few months in places 
as far away as Haiti and Bosnia. Somalia defined the limits of 
U.S. military commitment of ground operations and direct enemy 
contact. The readiness to take risks in such operations has 
further decreased as a result of Somalia. At the same time, it 
exposed the limits to military leadership and strategy at the 
level of the highly overtaxed United Nations. What remains in 
Somalia is a minimum of hope and the distressing danger of new 
extreme misery. 

