Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Backgrounder": "China's National People's Congress"] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, March 9 (XINHUA) -- The Second Session of 
the Eighth National People's Congress (NPC) is due to open here 
tomorrow and will last 13 days. 
  The NPC is the supreme organ of state power in the People's 
Republic of China (PRC). It is elected for a term of five years 
and meets in session once a year. 
  The functions and powers of the NPC include: Formulating and 
amending the constitution; supervising its enforcement; enacting 
and amending basic statutes and other laws; electing the 
president and vice-president of the PRC; deciding on the choice 
of the premier of the State Council upon nomination by the 
president, and deciding on the choice of State Council members 
upon nomination by the premier; electing the chairman of the 
Central Military Commission and deciding on the choice of other 
members of the commission upon nomination by the chairman; 
electing the president of the Supreme People's Court; electing 
the president of the Supreme People's Procuratorate; examining 
and approving plans for national economic and social 
development, examining and approving the state budget and its 
implementation; approving the establishment of provinces, 
autonomous regions and municipalities directly under the central 
government; deciding on the establishment of special 
administrative regions and systems to be instituted there; 
deciding on questions of war and peace; and exercising such 
other functions and powers as the highest organ of state power 
should exercise. 
  There are permanent and temporary special committees under 
the NPC. When the congress in not in session, the special 
committees work under the direction of the NPC Standing 
Committee. 
  The eighth NPC has established the following committees: the 
nationalities committee, law committee, committee for interior 
and judicial affairs, financial and economic committee, 
education, science, culture and public health committee, foreign 
affairs committee, overseas Chinese committee and environmental 
protection committee. 
  Since the founding of the PRC in 1949, the NPC has had eight 
terms of office. 
  The First Session of the First NPC was held in September 
1954; that of the Second NPC, in April 1959; that of the Third 
NPC, in January 1965; that of the Fourth NPC, in January 1975; 
that of the Fifth NPC, in March 1978; that of the Sixth NPC, in 
June 1983; that of the Seventh NPC, in March 1988; and that of 
the Eighth NPC, in March 1993. 
  Liu Shaoqi, Zhu De, Ye Jianying, Peng Zhen and Wan Li served 
successively as chairman of the past NPC Standing Committees. 
Qiao Shi is chairman of the current NPC Standing Committee. 

