BFN 

<F P=106> [Yunnan provincial government work report delivered by </F>
Yunnan Governor He Zhiqiang before the Second Session of the 
Eighth Yunnan Provincial People's Congress on 1 March: 
"Government Work Report"] 
  [Text] Fellow deputies: 
  On behalf of the provincial people's government, I now 
submit 
the government work report for your examination and approval and 
also for suggestions and comments from members of the provincial 
committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative 
Conference [CPPCC] and other observers. 
<H5>  Review of Work in the Past Year </H5>
  Nineteen ninety-three was a year in which we comprehensively 
implemented the spirit of the 14th party congress and the Third 
Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee. During the 
year, under the guidance of Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on 
building socialism with Chinese characteristics, under the 
leadership of the party Central Committee, the State Council, 
and the CPC Yunnan Province Party Committee, and in accordance 
with requirements for the building of a socialist market 
economic structure, as well as resolutions adopted by the first 
meeting of the 8th provincial people's congress, Yunnan's 
governments at all levels have led the people of all 
nationalities to deepen reform on a constant basis, vigorously 
expand the scope of opening up, work hard to speed up the pace 
of development, and overcome all kinds of difficulties, thus 
creating a new situation in all aspects of work. 
  I. The national economy maintained fairly fast 
growth.GNP was 64.8 billion yuan in 1993 (calculated at 
current prices), representing an increase of 10 percent over the 
1992 figure (calculated at comparable prices). Conquering 
serious national disasters, agriculture enjoyed a fairly good 
harvest, and added agricultural value increased by 2.2 percent 
over the previous year. The production of most major 
agricultural and sideline products was better than that of the 
previous year, among which grain output reached 10.85 billion 
kg, the second highest yield in history. Steady growth has been 
registered in animal husbandry and fisheries. Total meat output 
was 1.023 million tonnes, while output of aquatic products stood 
at 58,000 tonnes, up by 10.7 and 8.6 percent respectively. 
Township and town enterprises enjoyed rapid development, with 
total revenue reaching 22.4 billion yuan, up by 71.6 percent. 
Industrial production maintained stable growth, with improved 
economic efficiency. Added industrial value went up by 13 
percent over the previous year. Yunnan's advantages in the "two 
tobaccos" were brought into better play, and the total output 
value of the tobacco processing industry amounted to 19.1 
billion yuan, registering a 20.5-percent increase. Output of 
all major products, including cigarettes, sugar, generating 
capacity, steel, finished steel products, and cement rose over 
the previous year. The volume of outbound freight moved by rail 
stood at 10.17 million tonne, representing an increase of 5.1 
percent. Posts and telecommunications enjoyed fairly fast 
development, with a 55.6 percent increase in the scale of 
operations. Urban and rural markets enjoyed brisk business and 
an ample supply of goods, and the volume of retail sales rose by 
25.8 percent. Local financial revenue for the year totalled 
20.04 billion yuan. Fairly good results were scored in both 
afforestation and environmental protection. 
  II. New strides taken in economic structural reform, 
and results registered in exercising macroeconomic control and 
regulation. In 1993, in accordance with the arrangements of 
the party Central Committee and the State Council and in the 
light of Yunnan's actual conditions, new headway was made in 
many fields of endeavor, such as deepening rural reform; 
changing the operational mechanism of state-owned enterprises; 
building up a market system; perfecting the social guarantee 
system, the land use system, and the housing system; and 
transforming the functions of government. A total of 114 
counties (cities) relaxed controls over the purchase and selling 
prices of grain and continued efforts were taken to readjust and 
decontrol prices of most of the major means of production, 
including transportation and energy. Improvement was registered 
in the general application of market principles by Yunnan's 
economic sectors. Since the second half of last year, we 
conscientiously carried out all of the central authorities' 
measures on strengthening and improving macroeconomic control 
and regulation, and we scored positive results. 
  The 
financial order took an obvious turn for the better. The 
balance of all kinds of savings deposits in banks at year-end 
amounted to 49.38 billion yuan, representing an increase of 20.7 
percent over the beginning of the year, while total loans and 
currency issued in the whole year were controlled within the 
scope specified in the state plan. High-speed growth of 
fixed-assets investment was slowed, contradictions between the 
supply and demand of the major means of production, such as 
sheet steel and cement, were eased, and the national economy 
attained healthy development while enjoying sustained and speedy 
growth. 
  III. Remarkable results were registered in the 
construction of key projects. To ensure the construction 
of key projects, we screened all projects under construction, 
abolished a number of general projects, and concentrated our 
efforts on speeding up the construction pace of 27 indispensable 
projects, which were selected from a total of 47 key projects in 
the original development plan. A total of 14 projects and 
individual projects were completed and put into operation, 
including the exhibition hall of the Kunming Commodity Exchange 
Fair, the terminal area of Kunming Airport, Shaotong Airport, 
and the Kunming-Yuxi Highway. The fifth and sixth generating 
units of Manwan Power Station and the Mankun 500-Kv Transmission 
and Transformer Project were completed and put into production, 
marking the beginning of a new level of power construction in 
Yunnan. The completion of the Kunming-Yuxi Railway and the 
Guangchu section of the Guangda Railway showed the historic 
results of Yunnan in building local railways. The completion 
and operation of three optical fibers linking Dali and Ruili, 
Kunming and Pingdi, and Kunming and Yuxi under the first phase 
of the Tianxi digital microwave project further eased Yunnan's 
tight supply of telecommunications services. Through 
technological transformation, the Kunming Iron and Steel Plant 
attained an annual steel output of over 1 million tonnes, while 
the Lanjian Light Vehicle Factory and the Dongfeng Gaoyuan Motor 
Truck Factory had the ability to produce more than 10,000 
vehicles a year respectively. The completion of the 
240,000-tonne compound fertilizer project at the Yunnan 
Nitrogenous Fertilizer Plant and the 120,000-tonne ammonium 
phosphate project at the Honghe Prefectural Phosphate Fertilizer 
Plant pushed Yunnan's annual production capacity of ammonium 
phosphate to 640,000 tonnes. Songhuaba Reservoir in Kunming had 
newly added storage capacity of 150 million cubic meters, thus 
improving Kunming's water supply. Initial results were also 
registered in the renovation and construction of the former war 
zone. All of these accomplishments stated above will play an 
important role in reinforcing Yunnan's economic strength and 
potential for further development. 
  4. The scale of opening up was further expanded. 
During the past year, while continuing to consolidate and 
promote existing economic and trade relations with over 100 
countries and regions, Yunnan further stepped up contacts with 
neighboring countries as well as southeast Asian countries. 
Laos and Burma respectively set up consulate generals in 
Kunming; the Hekou, Tianbao, and Jinshuihe outlets for export 
produce along the Sino-Vietnamese border, as well as the Mohan 
outlet along the Sino-Laotian border, were reopened; a number of 
new national-level ports were opened for exports, including 
Jinhong Port, Simao Port, Tianbao, and Jinshuihe; and Yunnan 
Airlines formally opened international routes from Kunming to 
Singapore and Bangkok and put chartered planes into operation 
for package tours to Malaysia. We successfully held the first 
session of the Kunming Commodity Exchange Fair, giving great 
impetus to the southwestern region in its efforts to enter 
southeast Asian markets. Continued progress was attained in 
foreign-related economic and trade work as a result of our 
efforts to deepen reform and overcome difficulties. The annual 
import and export volume totalled $840 million, while that of 
border trade amounted to 2.87 billion yuan, up by 25.3 and 26.6 
percent respectively over the 1992 figures. A total of 509 
foreign-invested enterprises were approved in Yunnan, and 
foreign investment totalling $188 million was utilized, thus 
speeding up the pace of the introduction of foreign investment. 
A 74.1-percent increase was registered in the turnover of 
construction projects contracted abroad and labor cooperative 
services. During the year, Yunnan received a total of 405,000 
overseas tourists, and earned $104 million of foreign exchange 
from tourism, up by 29.3 and 53.8 percent respectively. 
Entailing a total contract amount of 1.3 billion yuan, 1,226 
joint and cooperative projects of various kinds were started 
both inside and outside Yunnan, playing a positive role in 
promoting the economic development of our province. 
  5. New results were attained in education, science 
and technology, and all other social undertakings. Efforts 
were made to strengthen elementary education. The provincial 
government basically fulfilled its plan to raise 50 million yuan 
for the establishment of 1,000 extra primary schools and 200 
extra junior middle schools. Nine-year compulsory education was 
implemented in four more cities (prefectures), while six-year 
compulsory education was basically made universal in 23 counties 
(cities). Vocational and technical education underwent under 
constant development. With the total number of students 
surpassing that of students attending ordinary middle schools, 
secondary vocational and technical schools successfully brought 
up and trained a large number of elementary and 
intermediate-level technical personnel for every front of 
Yunnan's endeavor. Smooth progress was made in optimizing the 
structure and readjusting the setup of higher education, and the 
State Council has already given approval to our plan to set up 
the Yunnan Industrial University. Strides were taken to build 
the Yunnan University into one of China's 100 key institutions 
of higher learning, and the provincial government has already 
allocated 20 million yuan to improve teaching conditions in the 
university. Major headway was made on reforming the province's 
enrollment and distribution system, and the practice of 
respecting teachers and education is being turned into a sound 
general practice for the whole of society. The concept that 
"science and technology is the primary productive force" has 
gradually become a consensus of the people of all nationalities 
across the province, and the contribution rate of scientific and 
technological progresses to economic development has been 
enhanced. Efforts were taken to speed up the pace of 
industrializing and commercializing scientific and technological 
results. Governments at provincial, prefectural, and county 
levels are all engaged in a number of related projects, and a 
large number of scientific and technological products were put 
into batch production. Constantly deepened reform of the 
scientific and technological structure aroused the enthusiasm of 
the vast numbers of scientific and technological personnel, who 
subsequently scored gratifying results in projects and 
enterprises they had contracted or taken charge of. New 
breakthroughs were made on reforming the fund allocation system 
in scientific research institutions. Basic and applied research 
were strengthened, and a number of new results were attained in 
social scientific research. Contributing to enhancing economic 
efficiency, a total of 226 scientific research results won 
national and provincial-level awards for scientific and 
technological progresses as well as spark prizes. Public health 
made constant development, and new headway was made in improving 
public health and elementary medical care in rural areas. Among 
18 counties (cities) which were selected to carry out 
experiments with elementary medical care, 15 passed appraisals 
and fulfilled the requirements of the state. The incidence of 
contagious diseases stated in all kinds of statutory reports 
dropped for the twelfth year in succession. Family planning was 
constantly strengthened. The natural population growth rate of 
the province in 1993 stood at 13.9 per thousand, showing that 
excessive population growth has been basically brought under 
control. A total of 143 projects relating to the construction 
of the 1,000-li border cultural corridor were started, while the 
provincial folk art exhibition proved a success. Comprehensive 
efforts were taken to facilitate cultural exchanges with foreign 
countries. Rapid progress was registered in the development of 
radio and television. A plan to build 8,000 township and 
village-level satellite surface reception stations was fulfilled 
one year ahead of schedule, thus enhancing the television 
coverage rate from 72 percent in the previous year to 77 
percent. Mass sports were carried out in an extensive way. 
Yunnan's athletes won a total of 69 prizes in a number of major 
national-level and international competitions, thus winning 
honors for our motherland and Yunnan. New results were also 
scored in all social undertakings, including the press and 
publishing. 
  6. The living standards of urban and rural residents 
were further improved. Alongside the development of the 
economy and with more employment opportunities, urban and rural 
residents are enjoying higher incomes, and their living 
standards are also under constant improvement. During the year, 
a total of 89,000 job-waiting people in urban areas were given 
employment, and the year-end job-awaiting rate stood at 2.2 
percent. The per capita income used by urban dwellers as living 
expenses and the per capita net income of peasants reached 2,376 
and 675 yuan respectively after allowing for price rises, 
representing an increase of 8.2 and 1.3 percent respectively 
over the previous year. Annual per capita savings deposits of 
urban and rural residents at year-end stood at 647 yuan, 136 
yuan more than at the end of the previous year. Living 
conditions in both urban and rural areas were constantly 
improved, and the spiritual and cultural life of urban and rural 
residents was increasingly enriched. To help the masses tide 
over current difficulties in production and daily life in the 
wake of serious national disasters, governments at all levels 
promptly organized the masses to provide for and help themselves 
by engaging in production, allocated 233 million yuan as relief 
funds, and made appropriate arrangements for the production and 
daily lives of the masses in both disaster-stricken and poor 
areas. 
  7. Democracy and the legal system were constantly 
improved, and the building of spiritual civilization was further 
strengthened.The provincial government conscientiously 
implemented resolutions and decisions adopted by the provincial 
people's congress and its standing committee, subjected itself 
to the supervision of the people's congress, further 
strengthened democratic consultation with the provincial CPPCC, 
as well as various democratic parties and non-party personages, 
and carefully handled letters and visits from the masses. Both 
deputies to the provincial people's congress and provincial 
CPPCC members put forward many suggestions on promoting reform, 
opening up, economic construction, and social development. We 
conscientiously studied and adopted their suggestions with a 
positive attitude with a view to enhance our decision-making 
skills. Headway was made in local legislation. During the past 
year, the provincial government submitted for examination and 
approval six local laws and regulations to the standing 
committee of the provincial people's congress, including 
"Provisions of Yunnan Province on Protecting the Interests and 
Rights of Consumers," and formulated 23 governmental 
regulations. Meanwhile, departments under the provincial 
government as well as governments at all levels also worked out 
a number of documents of standardization; and in line with the 
spirit of the 14th party congress, organized governments at 
county level and above as well as their affiliated departments 
to screen all existing documents of standardization, thus 
enhancing their awareness of the need to administer government 
according to the law. We vigorously carried out special-duty 
struggles against smuggling and drugs and arms trafficking, 
handed down severe punishment to all kinds of criminals, 
eliminated social evils, further implemented measures for a 
comprehensive improvement of public security, strengthened the 
building of the law-enforcement contingent, and successfully 
safeguarded the political and social stability of the entire 
province. The lawyer and notary system was gradually put into 
practice. Education in professional ethics and social morality 
continued to be carried out in both urban and rural areas on an 
extensive scale. Joint activities of building socialist 
spiritual civilization between the Army and the people and 
between the police and the people were under constant 
development. Vigorous efforts were taken to carry out mass 
cultural and recreational activities which are good for the 
people's health, thus further promoting the building of 
socialist spiritual civilization. 
  8. Accomplishments were made in the current phase of 
the anticorruption campaign. Governments at all levels 
conscientiously acted in line with the decision of the party 
Central Committee and the State Council, carried out the 
anti-corruption campaign in depth, and scored certain results. 
In May last year, this government called its first routine 
meeting to study the issue of building a clean administration 
and worked out six stipulations for leading members of the 
provincial government on being clean and honest when carrying 
out official duties. 
  Cadres at the county level and above in 
government organs carried out criticism and self-criticism, and 
measured themselves by the central authorities' five 
requirements for party and government leading cadres to remain 
clean and honest. Working in close coordination with relevant 
sides, supervisory departments put on file and handled 613 major 
cases, of which 484 were concluded. Efforts were taken to 
straighten unhealthy practices which the people resent most, 
including arbitrary fund collection and fee apportionment. The 
provincial government publicly abolished 11 irrational charges, 
and with the addition of charges abolished by all prefectures, 
autonomous prefectures, and cities, heavy burdens on enterprises 
and the masses were lightened by over 380 million yuan a year. 
Efforts were also taken to rectify other incorrect practices, 
such as party and government organs running economic entities, 
traveling at the expense of the state, and cadres embezzling 
public funds. Governments at all levels worked out measures to 
maintain a clean and honest administration with a view to 
gradually systemizing and legalizing the work of combatting 
corruption and advocating a clean administration. 
  Fellow Deputies: 
  Over the last year, we have stepped up economic development, 
promoted unity among all nationalities, and consolidated border 
defense, thus bringing stability to the entire society. It is 
the Army and the people of the whole province who, through their 
hard struggle in unity, have made all these achievements 
possible. On behalf of the provincial people's government, I 
wish to extend our heartfelt gratitude to the people of all 
nationalities, the vast numbers of cadres, and all officers and 
men of People's Liberation Army units and armed police 
garrisoning Yunnan. I also wish to express our sincere thanks 
to all our domestic and international friends who care about and 
support Yunnan's construction. While recognizing our 
achievements, we must also be aware that we are still faced with 
many difficulties and problems on the way ahead, and there have 
been failings and mistakes in the work of the government. These 
are chiefly the following. Agricultural production was affected 
by serious national disasters; as a result, prices of the means 
of agricultural production went up by a large margin, the 
comparable efficiency of agriculture dropped, and growth of 
peasants' incomes slowed down. Tobacco production experienced a 
bigger drop than expected as a result of natural disasters. 
Because the quality of tobacco was not as good as before and 
also because of a failure to adopt prompt measures to boost 
tobacco purchases, overall economic returns on tobacco and the 
incomes of tobacco growers were impaired to a certain extent. 
Structural contradictions with economic development remain 
conspicuous, and a considerable number of enterprises found 
themselves in a difficult situation. Retail prices in the 
market rose by an excessively large margin, thus affecting the 
normal operations of the economy and the improvement of people's 
living standards to a certain extent. Many problems still exist 
in public security, and some evil phenomena keep emerging 
despite repeated bans. To counter all existing problems and 
difficulties, the provincial people's government will make 
detailed studies, adopt effective measures, and make every 
effort to solve these problems one after the other. Meanwhile, 
we sincerely hope that all delegates to the provincial party 
congress as well as provincial CPPCC members can offer their 
criticism and suggestions with a view to helping us do a better 
job. 
<H5>  Major Tasks for 1994 </H5>
  The sound development of the economy will maintain its 
momentum in 1994, an important year for advancing reform. The 
following is a basic guiding principle for the work of the 
provincial government: Under the guidance of Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics as well as the party's basic line, the 
provincial government will comprehensively implement the spirit 
of the 14th party congress and the Third Plenary Session of the 
14th CPC Central Committee; vigorously promote all reforms which 
are aimed at establishing a socialist economic structure; 
further expand the scope of opening up; maintain sustained, 
rapid, and healthy national economic growth; strengthen the 
building of socialist spiritual civilization, socialist 
democracy, and the legal system; safeguard political stability; 
and bring progress to all sectors of society. In other 
words, we should adhere to the guiding principle of this year's 
work, which was raised by the party Central Committee and the 
State Council, act in light of Yunnan's actual 
conditions,make up our mind to further emancipate the 
mind, seize favorable opportunities, deepen reform, expand 
opening up, step up development, and maintain stability. 
  In line with this requirement, the provincial government 
has set the GNP growth rate for 1994 at 10 percent, total grain 
output at 11.25 billion kg, total revenue of township and town 
enterprises at over 32 billion yuan, and the growth rate of 
completed work in kind for fixed-assets investment across 
society at 5 percent. After adopting the new fiscal and 
taxation system, local financial revenue will total 6.67 billion 
yuan; the total import and export volume will reach $950 
million, representing an increase of 13 percent; the retail 
price index of commodities in society will be controlled below 
13 percent; the per capita net income of peasants and the per 
capita income used by urban dwellers as living expenses will 
grow at about 5 and 6 percent respectively after allowing for 
price rises; and the natural population growth rate will be 
controlled below 14 per thousand. 
  To accomplish the above tasks, we must concentrate our 
efforts on work in the following fields: 
<H5>  I. Step Up Our Work as a Whole, Concentrate Efforts on Key </H5>
Issues, and Speed up the Pace of Establishing a Socialist Market 
Economic Structure 
  China's economic structural reform has entered a crucial 
stage, and a series of major measures will be promulgated this 
year guiding reforms in the finance and taxation, banking, 
planning, investment, and foreign trade systems, as well as the 
establishment of a modern enterprise system. Reform has been 
carried out from superficial levels to deeper levels, from 
individual reforms to comprehensive reform packages, and from 
stressing relatively independent reform measures to emphasizing 
comprehensive new economic relations. Since reform involves 
many sides, we will surely encounter many new situations and 
problems. In view of this, we must strengthen leadership, make 
careful arrangements, appropriately handle all kinds of 
complicated social contradictions that might crop up, 
successfully coordinate different interest relations, mobilize 
the enthusiasm of all sectors, and unswervingly carry out reform 
in depth. 
  The establishment of a modern enterprise system is an 
inevitable requirement of the development of socialized general 
production and the market economy, and also the direction of 
reform for state-owned enterprises. The modern enterprise 
system is basically featured by transparent property rights, 
defined powers and responsibilities, separate functions of 
government and enterprises, and scientific management. With 
regard to deepening enterprise reform, Yunnan will concentrate 
its attention on the following issues this year: 1) Continued 
efforts will be taken to implement the "Law on Industrial 
Enterprises Under the Ownership of the Whole People," 
"Regulations on Changing the Operational Mechanisms of 
Industrial Enterprises Under the Ownership of the Whole People," 
and implementation measures of our province, and will ensure 
that all enterprises exercise their rights and responsibilities 
in actuality. Experimental enterprises which have obtained 
approval to change their operational mechanism should pay close 
attention to working out measures and methods which suit the new 
fiscal and taxation system. 2) A total of 30 state-owned large 
and medium enterprises will be selected across the province to 
carry out experiments with the modern enterprise system. 3) 
Experiments with the standard shareholding system will be 
carried out in more enterprises. We will speed up the pace of 
transforming state-owned enterprises into shareholding 
enterprises, and make every effort to put the shareholding 
system into practice in key projects. 4) Contractual 
management or leasing management will be adopted in small state- 
owned enterprises. Such enterprises can also be transformed 
into shareholding cooperative enterprises or sold to collectives 
and individuals. 5) A good job needs to be done to converge 
the contracted enterprise system with the unified enterprise 
income tax system, and to accelerate reform of the internal 
labor, personnel, and distribution systems in enterprises. 6) 
We should pay close attention to fixed-assets appraisal, fund 
circulation, the definition of property rights, assets 
evaluation, and the settlement of debts. 7) Efforts will be 
made to transform urban and rural collective enterprises, 
township and town enterprises, and nongovernmental scientific 
and technological enterprises into shareholding cooperative 
enterprises and to encourage privately run enterprises to 
reorganize themselves into standardized companies. 
  Accelerating the cultivation and development of market 
systems is one of the key tasks of this year's reform. The 
provincial government plans to set up a leading group and a fund 
for market building. It is necessary to continue reducing 
mandatory plans and gradually perfect the commodity market. A 
good job needs to be done in the building of markets at 
different levels, including the international trade market, 
border trade market, specialized wholesale market, and the urban 
and rural trade fair market, and to explore ways to set up a 
futures market. It is imperative to vigorously develop the real 
estate market, as well as markets for various means of 
production, including finance, technology, labor power, and 
information. We should raise funds for market building through 
different channels and should try our best to build up the 
market by adopting a share-holding system. Remote mountain 
areas, areas inhabited by minority nationalities and poor areas 
can set up markets first and standardize them later, with a view 
to accelerating the pace of market building. We should 
conscientiously implement the "Law Against Unfair Competition 
Practices," formulate market regulations, and gradually build up 
and perfect market order. Through cultivating and developing the 
market system, we will gradually give form to a unified and open 
market setup which has its own special features and enjoys 
standardized operations. 
  Major strides should be taken this year in reforming the 
financial, investment, planning, and foreign trade systems. The 
provincial government will make every effort to implement all 
reform measures in line with the arrangements of the State 
Council. To make a success of financial structural reform, at 
the same time as the central bank sets up a powerful and 
effective macroeconomic control and regulation system, Yunnan 
will pay close attention to making preparations for the 
establishment of urban and rural cooperative banks, vigorously 
develop and strictly control the financial market, do a good job 
in stock issuance, make flexible use of credit in stock, 
actively attract foreign funds, and try hard to alleviate the 
shortage of funds for economic construction. As regards the 
reform of the investment structure, since greater autonomy has 
been granted to enterprises and financial structural reform has 
been deepened, enterprises will gradually become the main body 
of economic construction and investment. On the other hand, the 
main function of the government is to guide the investment 
direction, optimize the investment structure, and maintain a 
rational investment scale through macroeconomic policies and 
economic levers. Strides will be taken to reinforce the 
investment risk restriction mechanism, vigorously put into 
practice the enterprise legal person responsibility system and 
the investment decision-making responsibility system, and set up 
a provincial-level infrastructural construction fund system as 
well as a provincial investment company. The direction of 
planning reform is to strengthen macrocontrol, strategic 
importance, and the policymaking role of the planning work, and 
formulate medium and long-term plans, improve comprehensive 
coordination, gradually set up a provincial-level reserve system 
and a regulation fund for key commodities, and increase the 
capacity of the government to exercise macroeconomic control and 
regulation. The goal of foreign trade structural reform is to 
set up an operational mechanism which is well in line with 
international practices and continuous efforts should be taken 
to uphold the reform direction featured by unified policies, 
relaxed control over operations, fair competition, full 
financial responsibility, the integration of industry and trade, 
and practicing an agency system. Meanwhile, we must see to it 
that autonomy is granted to more large and medium enterprises so 
that they can make decisions on matters concerning their own 
import and export operations. With a view to bringing about a 
stable transition to reforming the import and export management 
system, three mandatory plans will remain in use this year on 
the total important and export volume, total foreign exchange 
earned from exports, and the total amount of foreign exchange 
actually utilized. 
  The new fiscal and taxation system has been in effect since 
1 January this year. The focus of this reform is to transform 
the existing local contracted financial system into a tax 
division system which is based on separating the powers of the 
central and local authorities. The purpose of the reform is to 
assure local governments of vested financial gains in 1993, 
appropriately pool new increases, reinforce the capacity of the 
central authorities in exercising macroeconomic control and 
regulation, regulate the distribution and district structures, 
assist less advanced areas to attain development, and to urge 
governments at all levels as well as enterprises to strengthen 
management, enhance economic efficiency, and increase income. 
Since Yunnan's financial revenue and growth mainly rely on the 
"two tobaccos," it has become an important and urgent task for 
us, after submitting most of our cigarette income to the state 
in the form of consumption tax, to maintain the constant growth 
of local financial revenue while ensuring increases in financial 
revenue for the central authorities. In order to make it easier 
for all localities to gradually adapt themselves to the new 
financial structure, the provincial authorities have decided to 
maintain the existing financial contract method for another year 
and will not put into using the new structure until next year. 
To counter the new problems which have cropped up in our 
economic work in the wake of fiscal and taxation structural 
reform, such as increased costs of transportation, difficulties 
in the production and management of materials for agricultural 
use, and decreased income from localities carrying out border 
trade, the provincial government has organized forces to make 
investigations into and study these problems one by one to work 
out appropriate solutions. It is necessary to conscientiously 
carry out all of the measures designed for fiscal and taxation 
structural reform, strengthen the collection and management of 
taxation, organize tax collection in a timely manner, estimate 
our own strength and act accordingly, make rational arrangements 
for expenses, and maintain balanced revenue and expenditure. 
  Besides doing a good job in the above key reforms, we will 
also pay close attention to reforming the science and 
technology, education, social guarantee, and housing systems. 
<H5>  II. Earnestly Strengthen the Foundation of Agriculture and </H5>
Bring About a Comprehensive Development to the Rural Economy 
  Agriculture is the foundation of the national economy, and 
this concept can never be shaken under any circumstances. To 
establish a socialist market economic structure, we must 
comprehensively implement the "Law of the People's Republic of 
China on Agriculture"; further reinforce the basic position of 
agriculture; unswervingly attach importance to and strengthen 
the foundation of agriculture; conscientiously carry out the 
principles set out by the central authorities at the national 
rural work meeting; stabilize the party's basic rural policies; 
deepen rural reform; reinforce the construction of agricultural 
basic facilities; readjust the agricultural structure, as well 
as the rural economic structure; take the road of high yield, 
fine quality, and high efficiency; increase the peasants' income 
in a steady way; and bring comprehensive development to the 
rural economy. 
  First, we should stabilize policies and deepen reform. It is 
necessary to continue stabilizing the system of contract 
responsibility on a household basis with remuneration linked to 
output, fully respect peasants' autonomy in agricultural 
operations, extend the original farmland contract period by 
another 30 years, and allow the practice of compensated 
subcontracts. The right to use reserve resources, such as 
uncultivated mountains, land, and shoals, can be sold with 
compensation or contracted for development in various forms at 
different levels. Compensated sales and contract periods of 
such reserve resources can be extended, and the right to use 
these resources is inheritable. Vigorous efforts should be 
taken to develop the rural socialized service system and put 
such operational patterns as trade, industry, and agriculture 
complexes into practice, as well as an integrated system for the 
procurement of supplies, production, and marketing. Efforts 
will be made to successfully carry out reform of the supply and 
marketing cooperative system. While raising purchasing prices 
of grain, we will pay close attention to the establishment of a 
grain risk fund. After the state lifts its controls over the 
prices of the means of agricultural production, the provincial 
government will adopt positive measures to protect the interest 
of peasants; put the brakes on unhealthy practices, such as 
unjustified financial levies, the arbitrary collection of fees, 
and the arbitrary acquisition of funds; and continue to try hard 
to lighten peasants' heavy burdens. 
  Second, we will increase inputs into agriculture through 
various channels. This year, budgetary provincial-level 
investment earmarked for the construction of basic agricultural 
facilities and special-purpose agricultural funds allocated by 
provincial financial departments have both increased over last 
year. All governments should act in line with the stipulations 
of the central authorities and increase their financial inputs 
into agricultural. Agricultural loans granted by financial 
organs should grow at a higher rate than loans of other kinds, 
and the total amount of newly granted agricultural loans should 
also exceed the level of last year. The proportion of inputs 
into agricultural scientific and technological progress should 
be raised among the three high-tech inputs. Starting this year, 
the newly levied land value-added tax will mainly be used for 
the comprehensive development of agriculture. We will give 
positive guidance to rural collective economic organizations and 
peasants, and encourage them to increase inputs into 
agriculture. Efforts will be made to help peasants run well 
rural cooperative foundations and gradually increase the amount 
and expand the utilization scope of foreign funds in agriculture. 
  Third, continued efforts will be made to carry out the basic 
construction of water conservancy works. For many years 
running, Yunnan has successfully built up large-scale water 
conservancy works and attained remarkable results. This year, 
we will step up our efforts and strive for greater results. The 
pace of building 25 million mu of farmland with high and stable 
yields should be accelerated, and over 2.1 million mu of medium 
and low-yield fields will be transformed this year. We will 
raise 1.3 billion yuan through various channels to build 39 
large and medium-scale water conservancy works, including those 
in Yudong, Wulichong, and Chaishitan, ensuring the completion of 
14 of them within this year; mobilize the masses to build up 
over 200,000 small irrigation and water conservancy works; 
increase irrigated areas by 1 million mu; and strive to bring 42 
percent of all the farmland in the province under irrigation. 
It is necessary to protect and make rational use of farmland. 
Development zones of all kinds should make use of fields on 
idle slopes and hills and allow peasants to cultivate 
requisitioned fields which will not be developed for other use 
in near future. 
  Fourth, it is imperative to constantly optimize the 
structure 
of the rural economy. Under the prerequisite of ensuring the 
stable production of grain and oil crops, we will enhance 
efficiency, increase the income of peasants, and go all out to 
readjust the agricultural structure and the rural economic 
structure with the aim of earning more foreign exchange. It is 
important to rely on science and technology to enhance per unit 
area yield and the quality and total output of grain. We will 
bring into better play our advantages in tobacco, sugar cane, 
and tea. To boost production of tobacco, we will 
conscientiously act in line with the state's plans, give 
priority to the best tobacco-producing areas, and strive to 
enhance both the quality and efficiency of tobacco production. 
Efforts will be made to step up the development of forestry, 
animal husbandry, and fisheries and set up a number of 
production bases of a certain scale. Vigorous efforts will be 
made to boost production of fruit, dried fruit, coffee, 
vegetables, silkworms, flowers, medicinal herbs, and spices, and 
to cultivate exchange-earning agricultural industries. It is 
imperative to give positive support to the development of 
secondary and tertiary industries in rural areas, process more 
agricultural and sideline products, do a good job in circulation 
and all services, and bring prosperity to the rural economy. 
  Fifth, vigorous efforts should be taken to spread the use of 
applied agricultural scientific and technological results. We 
should conscientiously implement the "Law of the People's 
Republic of China on Spreading Agrotechniques," carry out the 
"harvest program" in a comprehensive manner, expand areas sown 
to hybrid rice and hybrid maize, and grow hybrid rice in the 80 
percent of farmland which is good for growing rice and growing 
hybrid maize in over 55 percent of the total sown area. Strides 
will be taken to vigorously spread the use of advanced 
agricultural scientific and technological results and all 
applied techniques, try hard to standardize and model the 
cultivation of grain and oil crops, promote agricultural 
production in winter, and ensure that the output of grain and 
cooking oil attain steady growth. 
  Sixth, we should do a good job in comprehensive development 
and accelerate the construction of commodity bases. After 
completing the first phase of a comprehensive agricultural 
development project in southwestern Yunnan, which entails an 
investment of 280 million yuan, we will invest another 310 
million yuan in the second phase of the project. To develop the 
dry and hot river valley area of the Jinsha Jiang, the 
provincial government has decided to start a comprehensive 
agricultural development project along the middle reaches of the 
Jinsha Jiang, involving 26 counties (cities) in eight 
prefectures, autonomous prefectures, and cities. Entailing a 
total investment of 900 million yuan, this project will be 
completed in two phases, and 450 million will be invested in the 
first phase. The provincial authorities have already arranged a 
number of motivational projects, striving to attain results at 
the earliest possible time. The development project aims to 
turn the rich resources of this hot area into the huge wealth of 
the vast numbers of the masses as soon as possible in an effort 
to extricate them from poverty and become rich, and to build the 
1,000-li river valley into a beautiful and fertile green 
corridor. Meanwhile, we should speed up the construction of 
production and exchange-earning commodity grain, pig, cattle, 
sheep, milk, and egg bases, as well as bases for sugar, tea, 
fruit, and forestry. We will run well Kunming's high-yield, 
fine-quality, and high-efficiency agricultural demonstration 
zones and pay close attention to agricultural projects which 
utilize foreign funds. 
  Seventh, we will go all out to develop township and town 
enterprises. In line with the principle of "emancipating the 
mind, giving a free hand, providing support, and bringing about 
great development," we will conscientiously carry out relevant 
stipulations respectively put forward by the state and the 
provincial authorities; through deepening reform and expanding 
opening up, optimize the structure and accelerate development by 
various means; and strive for high-speed and healthy 
development. Preferential policies will be adopted to support 
the building materials industry, "green enterprises," mines and 
the metallurgical industry, and tertiary industries. Through 
market-oriented resource development, we will build up a number 
of villages, townships, and towns which can respectively earn 
over 100 million to several hundred million yuan a year, and 
with relatively concentrated methods, set up small-scale 
township and town enterprise zones, thus bringing faster 
development to township and town enterprises. It is important 
to encourage scientific and technological personnel to take 
charge of township and town enterprises in rural areas, 
especially in remote mountain areas. We will provide more 
training for our workers and staff, vigorously introduce able 
personnel and technology, and develop new highly competitive and 
much-demanded products. It is imperative to pay close attention 
to the management and rectification of existing enterprises, 
perfect their operational mechanisms, and enhance the quality as 
well as the economic and social efficiency of enterprises. 
Construction of small cities and towns should be strengthened 
so as to bring along and promote the development of township and 
town enterprises. 
<H5>  III. Promote Transportation and Industrial Production, and </H5>
Enhance Economic Efficiency 
  Making a success of transportation and industrial production 
is an important guarantee for the sustained development of the 
national economy. The conspicuous problems currently facing 
Yunnan's transportation and industrial enterprises include 
inferior-quality products, poor economic efficiency, and the 
shortage of funds. Motivated by efforts to deepen reform and 
accelerate the establishment of a modern enterprise system, we 
will make greater efforts to bring about a comprehensive balance 
and coordination to the work, and enable industrial and 
communications production to attain sustained and rapid growth 
on the basis of an optimized structure and enhanced efficiency. 
  We will persistently act in accordance with market demands 
and bring about a balance between production and sales. It is 
necessary to guide industrial enterprises to open themselves to 
both domestic and international markets, organize production in 
the light of market changes, and give priority to the 
development of products which are economically efficient and 
highly competitive and enjoy a high technological starting point 
and high added value. It is imperative to give support to the 
production of people's daily necessities, aid-agriculture 
products, and products for exports in terms of funds, energy, 
and transportation, and to restrict the production of 
unmarketable goods which are of inferior quality and poor 
economic efficiency. Enterprises should vigorously carry out 
activities of creating brand-name products, place the quality of 
products above everything else, vigorously develop marketable 
new products and new varieties, and constantly enhance the 
competitive capacity of products made in Yunnan in both domestic 
and international markets. 
  Strengthening technical transformation and pushing forward 
the technological progress of enterprises is an important means 
and material foundation for increasing the vitality of 
enterprises. This year, Yunnan's investment in technological 
transformation will increase by 20 percent over last year. We 
will focus our efforts on a number of technological 
transformation projects, such as the third technical renovation 
of cigarette production, light vehicle production, the 
high-speed wire rod rolling mills of the Kunming Iron and Steel 
Plant, and the Yangzonhai Power Plant. Meanwhile, we will also 
pay close attention to the technological transformation of 
products which are in high demand, such as fine-quality raw 
materials, fine-quality fertilizers for agricultural use, and 
highly competitive export products, thus upgrading and updating 
Yunnan's products. Continued efforts will be taken to 
strengthen joint development between production units, 
institutions of higher learning, and scientific research 
institutes, set up a risk fund for commercialization of 
scientific results, and speed up the pace of turning scientific 
and technological achievements into realistic productive forces. 
Technological development centers will be set up in 10 large 
and medium enterprises with a view to activating their inherent 
motives to seek technological progress, encourage and support 
them to achieve technological progress, and enhance their 
technological management level. 
  We will attach greater importance to and strengthen the 
internal management of enterprises. At present, heavy losses 
have been incurred by a considerable number of enterprises in 
Yunnan as a result of their failure to strengthen weak links in 
work, strictly enforce rules and regulations, and exercise 
proper internal management. People's government at all levels 
should guide enterprises to strengthen management, give full 
play to the role of the working class as masters, mobilize the 
enthusiasm of the vast numbers of workers and staff to respect 
their factories, love their work, and forge ahead, and give 
impetus to enterprises to voluntarily strengthen their internal 
strength. It is necessary to set up a perfect internal economic 
responsibility system as well as various feasible rules, 
regulations, and systems; put into practice targeted management; 
and optimize on-site management. We will attach great 
importance to safety in production and prevent the occurrence of 
serious accidents. We will carry out the activity of dual 
increases and dual retrenchments, pay close attention to making 
up deficits and increasing profits, make comprehensive use of 
resources, broaden sources of income and reduce expenditure, and 
tap production potential. Hard efforts will be taken to reduce 
energy consumption and raw material and production costs, speed 
up the circulation of funds, enhance the utilization efficiency 
of funds and the economic efficiency of enterprises, and further 
reduce the total number of loss-making enterprises and the total 
amount of operational losses compared to last year. 
<H5>  IV. Maintain A Rational Investment Scale, Continue To </H5>
Strengthen Key Construction 
  The guiding ideology of Yunnan's fixed-assets investment 
this 
year is: To maintain an appropriate investment scale, reduce 
the number of general projects, continue strengthening key 
construction and major technological transformation projects, 
and strive to greatly increase productive capacity. In line 
with the principle of ensuring the completion and production of 
projects, ensuring continued projects, and ensuring newly 
started key projects, the provincial government has decided to 
concentrate strength on 57 key construction projects, which 
entail a total investment of 8.6 billion yuan. Among the 57 
projects, 34 are basic construction projects taking an 
investment of 6.5 billion yuan; 15 are technological 
transformation projects, entailing an investment of 1.5 billion 
yuan; and eight are aid-the-poor projects. These are mainly 
major raw and semi-finished materials projects in the fields of 
water conservancy, energy, communications, telecommunications, 
metallurgy, and industrial chemicals. It is estimated that 
generating capacity will increase by 500,000 kw, high-grade 
highways by 176 km, the mining capacity of state-owned mines by 
300,000 tonnes, and cement production by 320,000 tonnes. 
Measures should be taken to ensure the completion of key 
projects in the restoration and construction of former war zone. 
We should pay close attention to making first-phase 
preparations for enterprises and to enhance the utilization 
efficiency of funds. To ensure the smooth implementation of key 
construction plans, we should firmly ban or suspend the 
construction of unqualified projects which fail to suit the 
requirements of the state's industrial policies, which enjoy no 
financial backing, and which have unclear market prospects. In 
order to solve the housing problems of 40,000 urban dwellers who 
currently have a per capita housing area of only 4 square meters 
and below, the provincial government has decided to invest 500 
million yuan in the "living in contentment project" to speed up 
the construction of urban housing. 
  V. Accelerate Economic Structural Readjustment, and 
Nurture New Highly Adaptable Industries 
  The period from now to the end of this century is a vital 
period for Yunnan's economic development. We should step up the 
intensity of economic structural readjustment, vigorously seek 
and cultivate new growth points, give better play to comparative 
advantages, give form to new economic pillars, open and occupy 
more markets with our products, participate in international 
competition and exchanges, and expedite the process of realizing 
the second-step strategic goal. We should seize the current 
favorable opportunities, and, through readjusting the structure, 
bring up a number of highly adaptable industries which can 
promote the economic development of the whole province, and then 
turn them into continuous major financial resources. 
  The concept and focus of Yunnan's structural readjustment 
is: 
To act in accordance with market demands, rely on Yunnan's 
exceptional advantages in natural resources, cultivate new 
groups of highly adaptable industries across the province, and 
encourage thousands and thousands of households, especially 
those in poor areas, to become rich. During the process of 
readjusting the structure, we should give better play to 
Yunnan's advantages in cigarettes, sugar, and tea, especially in 
the "two tobaccos," and enable them to play a more important 
role in boosting Yunnan's economic construction in the 1990's. 
Meanwhile, we will give priority to cultivating and developing 
industries which are well-suited to Yunnan's advantages in 
natural resources, have good market prospects, and enjoy a solid 
foundation. We will, within this century, build Yunnan's food 
industry, nonferrous and ferrous metal industries, machinery and 
electronic industries, animal husbandry and processing industry, 
and power industry into newly emerged pillar industries which 
enjoy an output value of over 10 billion yuan, while turning the 
chemical industry, building materials industry, forestry and 
paper-making industry, and tourism industry into key industries 
with an output value exceeding 5 billion yuan. In addition, we 
will also develop a number of products with an output value of 
over 1 billion yuan, as well as industries and products which 
can earn $10 billion of foreign exchange through exports. All 
these steps will bring about a great improvement to Yunnan's 
comprehensive economic strength. 
  In our efforts to nurture new highly adaptable industries 
under the new structure, we must act in accordance with the 
requirement of building a socialist market economic structure, 
observe the laws of economic development, and make use of modern 
science and technology, as well as modern management results. 
We will step up efforts to formulate industrial organizational 
policies and organize production in line with the principles of 
economies of scale and with the requirements of specialization 
and socialization. It is important to give play to the role of 
science and technology as the primary productive force and to 
enable industries to enhance their ability to compete from a 
relatively high starting point. A highly efficient and flexible 
investment and financing structure will be set up so that 
enterprises and construction projects can quickly obtain the 
funds they need to support the development of pillar industries. 
Joint investment will be made by the central authorities, 
localities, and enterprises in a number of selected projects 
which enjoy a higher than expected investment return. We will 
continue to bring about simultaneous development to pluralistic 
new-type enterprise organizational forms, including the 
state-owned, collective, individual, private, foreign-invested, 
and shareholding sectors and will build up a number of major 
groups, large enterprises, and millions and millions of medium 
and small enterprises which can be found in both urban and rural 
areas. 
  VI. Further Expand Scale of Opening Up 
  The international and domestic situations at present are 
advantageous to our efforts to further expand the scale of 
opening to the outside world. We should firmly seize this rare 
opportunity, put forward more new ideas, open up more new paths, 
step up the intensity of opening up, and push Yunnan's opening 
up onto a new step. 
  While continuing to actively promote our economic and trade 
relations as well as friendly ties with more than 100 countries 
in the world, we will conscientiously apply the principles and 
policies of the central authorities on foreign-related work and 
put the focus of opening up on the southeast Asia region. In 
accordance with the good-neighbor policy, we will step up our 
contacts and make friends with more neighboring countries and 
bring about faster development to our economic and technological 
cooperation with these countries. It is necessary to bring into 
full play the roles of all democratic parties, associations on 
Taiwan and overseas Chinese affairs, and associations of 
industry and commerce in keeping contacts with overseas friends, 
the millions of our compatriots residing abroad, as well as the 
families of overseas Chinese, and to promote foreign- related 
propaganda and exchange and bring about greater development to 
Yunnan's opening up. 
  Efforts will be taken to actively arrange supplies of goods, 
and try hard to expand exports. We will further readjust the 
mix of exported commodities, continue to do a good job in 
exporting large-scale products, such as cigarettes, machinery, 
industrial chemicals, and nonferrous metals; actively expand 
exports of agricultural and sideline products, foodstuffs, and 
medicines; enhance the export proportion of products which enjoy 
higher added value and can earn more foreign exchange; and 
promptly give shape to a number of products which can earn over 
$100 million of foreign exchange from exports. We will 
encourage all localities to make use of their local resources to 
develop their own products which are oriented to international 
markets so that every county has its own commodities for export. 
It is important to improve the quality and grade of export 
commodities and to improve their packing, with a view to 
enhancing the credibility and competitiveness of exported 
commodities. Efforts will be taken to further expand exports of 
technological and labor services and to contract more projects 
in overseas areas. We will encourage and support qualified 
enterprises to set up factories in foreign countries. After the 
adoption of a uniform exchange rate, we will actively expand the 
scale of exports, support and encourage enterprises to introduce 
advanced technology and equipment from abroad, and accelerate 
the pace of technological transformation. 
  The rapid development of border trade will be maintained. To 
adapt ourselves to the new taxation system, we should work out 
new measures in order to bring about greater development to 
border trade. We should gear ourselves to the needs of both 
domestic and overseas markets, integrate producing industries 
with trade, promote the exploration of local resources, and give 
form to new industries. This year, the growth of Yunnan's border 
trade is estimated at over 20 percent. 
  Bold strides will be taken in the introduction of foreign 
investment. Over the past couple of years, Yunnan has attained 
certain results in introducing foreign investment; however, 
compared with other provinces and cities, we still fall far 
behind. This is mainly attributable to our failure to work with 
more open minds, as well as insufficient attention paid by some 
departments and localities to the numerous problems currently 
existing in management and related services concerning the 
introduction of foreign investment. Under such circumstances, 
we should further enhance the awareness of cadres at all levels 
on the need for opening up; mobilize all prefectures, autonomous 
prefectures, cities, counties, and all industries and trades to 
actively introduce foreign investment; and make particular 
headway in attracting major financial groups and companies to 
invest in our province. We will try every effort to improve the 
investment environment, enhance work efficiency, and seek timely 
solutions to problems cropped up during the introduction 
process. We will run well the existing 20 national and 
provincial-level development zones of various kinds and enable 
them to play a greater role in attracting foreign investment. 
It is imperative to put the focus of foreign investment 
introduction on the development of advantageous resources, on 
the construction of basic industries and infrastructure, on the 
development of exchange-earning agriculture and tourism, and on 
the grafting and transformation of state-owned large and medium 
enterprises. Through arduous efforts, we expect to use more 
than $340 million of foreign investment this year. 
  With the approval of the PRC Ministry of Foreign Economic 
Relations and Trade, the Kunming Export Commodities Fair has 
become one of China's regional fairs for export commodities. We 
are determined to make this year's fair a success. 
  Vigorous efforts will be made to promote the tourism 
industry. Yunnan's tourism industry is enjoying a good 
development momentum. With the improvement of transportation 
facilities and the completion of eight local airports, Yunnan 
has stepped up its contacts with all countries in the world, 
especially neighboring countries, and its tourism industry faces 
unprecedentedly favorable opportunities for further development. 
While continuing to pay close attention to the construction of 
auxiliary facilities at tourist spots, including Kunming and 
Xishuangbanna, we will place tourism in a primary position and 
speed up the pace of development of tourism areas in 
northwestern Yunnan. It is imperative to actively open up 
tourist markets and vigorously develop the production of tourist 
commodities to enhance the economic efficiency of our province 
as a whole. Further efforts will be taken to strengthen 
macroeconomic management, enhance the quality of services, 
perfect the responsibility system at all levels, and bring 
faster development to Yunnan's tourism industry. This year, we 
will strive to attract more than 13 million domestic tourists 
and 480,000 overseas tourists to Yunnan, earn more foreign 
exchange from tourism, and bring about comprehensive development 
to tertiary industries. 
  It is important to actively promote lateral economic ties 
and 
cooperation with other parts of the country. We will 
conscientiously carry out projects adopted at the 10th session 
of the economic coordination meeting which was held by seven 
sides in five provinces and regions, thus bringing about 
comprehensive development to regional economic cooperation. 
Meanwhile, we will actively cooperate with fraternal provinces 
and cities, especial those in coastal areas. We will try hard 
to develop hydroelectric resources in cooperation with Guangdong 
and will engage ourselves in the joint development of oil 
refining and processing bases and other major projects with 
Guangxi and other provinces and regions. 
<H5>  VII. Continue to Attach Importance to Accelerate the </H5>
Economic Development of Ethnic Minority Regions and Poor Areas 
  We must attach great importance to the economic development 
of ethnic minority regions and poor areas, as this has a direct 
bearing on Yunnan's efforts to realize the second-step strategic 
goal, and also on unity among different nationalities and social 
stability in border areas. The provincial government will 
continue to conscientiously implement the "Law on Regional 
Autonomy of Minority Nationalities," and put into practice all 
policies which aim to support the economic and social 
development of ethnic minority regions and poor areas. It is 
imperative to constantly perfect the comprehensive operational 
structure formed by integration between the urban and rural 
areas, between science and technology and the economy, between 
opening up and development, and between agriculture, industry, 
and commerce, with a view to attain the rapid development of 
production. According to the new standards set by the state, 
there are about 7 million people in our province whose per 
capita net income is less than 300 yuan. The provincial 
government has decided to raise 7 billion yuan within the next 
seven years before 2000 to basically solve the problem of 
insufficient food and clothing for 7 million people. We will 
mainly adopt the method of comprehensive regional development, 
and will closely integrate aid-the-poor work with the 
construction of the former war zone, the comprehensive 
exploration of agriculture, and with the development of border 
economic belts and mountain areas to attain common development 
with unifying force. We will focus our efforts on work in the 
following fields: 
  First, we will make a success of comprehensive regional 
development. The provincial government has already studied 
local development programs with a number of prefectures and 
autonomous prefectures and will continue to help several 
prefectures and autonomous prefectures to work out plans on ways 
to extricate themselves from poverty this year. While doing a 
good job in the comprehensive development of areas inhabited by 
minority nationalities, as well as in the large-scale 
development of mountain areas, we will attach importance to 
helping multinational areas and scattered poor households 
extricate themselves from poverty. As regards infrastructural 
construction and resource development in these areas, we will 
try to do a better job in launching projects to provide jobs by 
way of relief and will give priority to a number of projects 
concerning farmland, water conservancy, energy, and 
transportation, thus bringing along the economic development of 
these areas. 
  Second, we will try every effort to optimize the industrial 
structure. We will pay close attention to the construction of 
farmland with stable and high yields, spread the use of applied 
agrotechniques, and support the development of a diversified 
economy. Vigorous efforts will be taken to develop township and 
town enterprises as well as industries and sideline production 
on the basis of households, guide surplus labor to shift toward 
the secondary and tertiary industries, and export labor services 
to advanced areas. During the process of optimizing the 
industrial structure, we will pay attention to suiting measures 
to local conditions, gearing ourselves to the needs of the 
market, and trying hard to develop our own pillar industries and 
highly competitive products. 
  Third, we will boldly give the individual and private 
economies a free hand in development. It is necessary to adhere 
to the principle of relying mainly on public ownership while 
bringing common development to multi economic elements and 
gradually raising the proportion of nonpublic-owned economies 
throughout the national economy. We will guide thousands upon 
thousands of households to proceed from local resources and the 
demands of the market; engage themselves in crop farming, 
livestock breeding, and processing and service industries; and 
support the development of tertiary industries, including 
commerce and trade, tourism, communications, education, 
technology, labor services, and rural socialized services. We 
will encourage individual industrial and commercial households 
as well as private enterprises to contract, lease, merge, and 
purchase small state-owned and collective enterprises. 
  Fourth, it is imperative to gradually set up a perfect new 
operational mechanism for aid-the-poor work. To successfully 
aid the poor and help them develop, we should integrate the 
behavior of the government with that of society and enterprises, 
set up pluralistic fund-raising channels and patterns, and 
attract funds from society and make use of foreign investment in 
an extensive way. We will actively put the shareholding system 
and the project responsibility system in newly started projects 
into practice and will strengthen assisting the poor through the 
application of science and technology, so that the level of 
overall economic and social development of ethnic minority 
regions and poor areas can be enhanced on a constant basis. 
  Fifth, we will continue to take supportive measures. The 
state and provincial authorities will continue to increase their 
inputs to aid-the-poor funds in poverty-stricken areas; 
meanwhile, increases will also be registered in other 
specialized aid-the-poor funds. 
  VIII. Make Adequate Arrangements for the Daily Lives 
of the People 
  This year, under the situation of comprehensively pushing 
forward all reforms, we should attach greater importance to 
making adequate arrangements for the daily lives of the people 
and strive to enhance the general living standards of the masses 
on the basis of economic growth. Salary reform has brought 
improvements to the previous situation where state workers had 
unduly low incomes. As a result of improved agricultural 
production and the development of township and town enterprises, 
as well as tertiary industries, and increases in purchasing 
prices for grain, peasants' incomes are on the rise. Enterprise 
workers and administrative staff also earn more because their 
enterprises have improved production and enhanced work 
efficiency. While trying hard to increase the income of the 
masses, governments at all levels should pay special attention 
to the lives of the masses in disaster-stricken areas, workers 
and staff in enterprises which have suspended their operations 
entirely or partially, and retired personnel with low incomes, 
and should help them tide over real difficulties in their lives. 
We will actively push forward reform of the social guarantee 
system and will pay close attention to establishing and 
perfecting basic insurance systems which have a bearing on the 
life of the people, such as endowment insurance for workers and 
staff. 
  Price reform is directly related to the improvement of the 
people's livelihood and also to maintaining stability in 
society, therefore, we need to push forward price reform in a 
steady way. Last year, commodity prices rose by a large margin. 
To counter such a situation, we should place the work of 
controlling price rises in a primary position, strengthen 
leadership and make careful arrangements, and strive to make 
commodity prices maintain stability. To this end: 1) we should 
make careful arrangements for carrying out price readjustments 
set by the state, and Yunnan will not take advantage of this 
opportunity by adopting measures to raise commodity prices and 
service charges. 2) We will conduct key inspections on prices 
and charges of major commodities which are closely related to 
the lives of the masses and will firmly abolish irrational 
charges. 3) We will strengthen supervision and inspections, 
ban the production and sale of sham and shoddy commodities, put 
an end to price pushing and runaway price rises, and protect the 
interests and rights of consumers. 
  Commodity circulation is closely bound up with the 
livelihood 
of the people, and stabilizing the market is of great importance 
to setting the people's minds at ease. Governments at all 
levels should make the "rice bag" and "shopping basket" projects 
an important item on their agenda; successfully organize the 
purchase, allocation, transportation, and sale of major means of 
livelihood, including grain, cooking oil, vegetables, meat, and 
eggs; and strive to prevent of sensitive market commodities from 
running out of stock. Meanwhile, we will set up funds for 
market regulation and a reserve system for major commodities 
with a view to enhancing our ability to exercise control and 
regulation. Efforts will be taken to give play to the role of 
state circulation cooperatives in regulating supply and demand, 
stabilizing the market, and setting up and perfecting the 
regulation mechanism. 
  Family planning and environmental protection are two 
important tasks for governments at all levels for they have a 
direct bearing on the enhancement of the living standards of the 
people. We should conscientiously observe the central 
authorities' requirement of "paying close attention to and 
making a success of family planning"; persistently implement the 
principle of "relying mainly on propaganda and education, on 
contraception and birth control, and on routine work"; and 
successfully carry out family planning in a down-to-earth 
manner. We will continue to take effective measures and focus 
our attention on family planning work in areas with a weak 
foundation and a high birth rate, as well as on the floating 
population. We will further improve service organs, build up 35 
county-level and 200 township-level family planning service 
stations, and strive to attain new results this year in 
controlling the total population and in enhancing quality. It 
is important to bring environmental protection into our economic 
and social development program, and comprehensively improve the 
environment in both urban and rural areas. We will correctly 
handle the relationship between development and protection and 
strictly ban practices that eventually destroy forests and upset 
the ecological balance. While designing new enterprises and 
transforming the old, we must also take measures to prevent 
pollution. We will attach great importance to water and soil 
conservation, accelerate the pace of afforestation, 
conscientiously carry out "long-term prevention" and "long-term 
harnessing" projects on the Jinsha Jiang, and start to harness 
drainage areas on a small scale. The harnessing of Tianchi is 
already underway, and we must speed up the pace of construction 
and strive for quick results. 
  IX. Expedite Development of Education, Science and 
Technology, and Other Social Undertakings 
  In the process of building a socialist market economic 
structure and carrying out the drive for modernization, we must 
always put the development of education and scientific and 
technological progress in a primary strategic position. Through 
deepening reform, we need to further enhance the awareness of 
the need to promote education and science and technology, 
mobilize the enthusiasm of all sides, and bring about greater 
development to Yunnan's education, science and technology, and 
other social undertakings. 
  In promoting education, we are faced with the following 
major 
tasks this year: We should conscientiously implement the 
"Outline on China's Educational Reform and Development," further 
improve the multi-channel structure of raising educational funds 
which relies mainly on state financial allocations, grant 
greater autonomy to schools in their operations, and gradually 
set up a new operational mechanism for education which suits the 
needs of the socialist market economy. To strengthen elementary 
education, provincial financial departments will raise another 
50 million yuan to help 63 poor border ethnic minority counties 
improve their school-running conditions. Efforts will be made 
to make nine-year compulsory education basically universal in 10 
more counties (cities) and six-year compulsory education in 30 
counties (cities). A total of 280,000 illiterate people have 
learned to read and write, and we will make every effort to 
basically eliminate illiteracy among young and middle-aged 
people in 12 to 15 counties. It is important to mobilize the 
enthusiasm of all departments, enterprises and administrative 
organs, and all walks of life, thus creating a new situation in 
which the whole society is engaged in providing vocational and 
technical education through various forms and at different 
levels. Vigorous efforts will be taken to gear vocational and 
technical education to the demands of the market, adapt it to 
the needs of local economic development, take the road of 
integrating production with education and enterprises with 
schools, and bring up large numbers of qualified personnel for 
the economic structural readjustment and for the cultivation of 
new advantageous industries. In carrying out adult education, 
we should act in accordance with the principle of studying for 
the purpose of application and emphasizing practical results, 
focus efforts on on-the-job training and continued education, 
and attach importance to the knowledge renewal of people in 
employment. To boost higher education, we will take the road of 
relying mainly on intensive development, continue to optimize 
the structure, and enhance the quality of teaching and the 
efficiency of school administration on a constant basis. We 
will make every effort to enable Yunnan University to rank among 
China's 100 key institutions of higher learning, and, meanwhile, 
speed up preparations for the establishment of the Yunnan 
Industrial University. We will conscientiously implement the 
"Law on Teachers" and further improve the working, studying, and 
living conditions of teachers. 
  Efforts will be taken to deepen reform of the scientific and 
technological structure, with a view to gradually establishing a 
new-type structure which suits the needs of the socialist market 
economy, conforms to the development laws of science and 
technology, and closely integrates science and technology with 
the economy. We will readjust the structure of scientific 
research institutions in line with the principle of 
"concentrating on scientific and technological research and at 
the same time encouraging the commercialization of research 
results," accelerate the pace of assigning scientific and 
technological personnel to their special fields of study, 
successfully carry out experiments with the scientific and 
technological structural reform in seven scientific research 
institutions and in the city of Dali, and start experiments with 
the shareholding system and shareholding cooperative system in 
several selected scientific and technological enterprises. 
Vigorous efforts will be taken to push into the market those 
scientific research institutions which are engaged in 
technological development and services and optimize the internal 
organization of scientific research institutions. It is 
important to encourage enterprises to attain technological 
progress to turn these enterprises into the main body of 
technological development. We will continue to do a good job in 
building the scientific and technological service system in line 
with the structural readjustment of agriculture, so that the 
system can play its due role in boosting agriculture featured by 
"two highs and one excellent." We will actively guide 
county-run enterprises as well as township and town enterprises 
to improve their economic efficiency, as well as the quality and 
competitiveness of their products, through the application of 
scientific and technological results. It is necessary to 
organize scientific and technological forces of all sides to 
tackle key problems in scientific research, thus providing a 
technological backing for the development of advantageous 
resources as well as for economic growth. Further efforts will 
be made to develop the technology market and gradually set up a 
technological market system in central cities which relies on 
the permanent technology market and is well connected to other 
domestic markets, as well as international markets. We will 
actively develop urban and rural nongovernmental scientific and 
technological enterprises in the fields of resource development, 
energy conservation, environmental protection, new materials, 
and biotechnology. It is imperative to continuously accelerate 
the construction of 10 key laboratories and 6 intermediate-level 
experimental bases in Yunnan and to pay close attention to 
bringing up 200 leading academic figures in different branches 
of learning. Social scientific research should be focused on 
new situations cropping up during the process of establishing a 
market economic structure and on research on major subjects, 
thus providing services for reform, opening up, and economic 
development. We should protect intellectual property right 
according to the law, respect knowledge, and treasure able 
personnel so that they can fully display their talents on the 
main battlefield of economic construction. 
  Public health should undergo vigorous development. We will 
apply the principle of "relying mainly on prevention of 
diseases," improve hygiene conditions in rural areas in real 
terms, and successfully fulfill the task of providing elementary 
medical care in rural areas. Close attention should be paid to 
the prevention and cure of epidemic diseases of all kinds, while 
keeping an effective control over the sudden occurrence and 
spread of all diseases. We will make full use of Yunnan's 
advantage in medical resources, cultivate our own pharmaceutical 
industry, and bring about further developments in traditional 
Chinese medicine. It is imperative to actively push forward 
reform of the urban medical care system and gradually set up a 
social medical insurance system which tallies with the actual 
conditions of our province. 
  Vigorous efforts will be made to promote sports, put into 
practice the plan of "an entire nation in good health," carry 
out mass sports of various kinds on an extensive scale, and 
constantly improve the physical condition of the masses of the 
people. Good preparations should be made for the Fifth National 
Meet. We will continue to pay close attention to athletic 
sports and strive to attain good results again in major domestic 
and international competitions. 
<H5>  X. Strengthen the Building of Spiritual Civilization, </H5>
Democracy, and the Legal System, Creating a Sound Social 
Environment for Reform and Opening Up 
  It is our basic principle to "pay simultaneous attention to 
two types of work, attaching equal importance to both." The 
more we deepen reform and accelerate development, the more we 
need to strengthen the building of spiritual civilization, 
democracy, and the legal system; maintain the stability of 
border areas; and make reform, development, and stability 
complementary to each other. 
  To successfully carry out the building of spiritual 
civilization, what counts is arming ourselves and acting in line 
with Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics. At present, we must conscientiously 
study the third volume of the "Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping"; 
fully understand the great role of spiritual civilization 
building in providing reform, opening up, and development with a 
spiritual motive force, intelligence support, ideological 
guarantees and a sound environment of social opinions; and take 
concerted efforts to enhance Yunnan's building of spiritual 
civilizations onto a new level. To realize the goal of bringing 
up well-educated and well-disciplined socialist new people who 
have high ideals and ethical standards, we need to carry out 
in-depth education on the party's basic line, as well as on 
patriotism, collectivism, and socialism; carry forward the 
traditional virtues of the Chinese nation; and inspire the 
spirit and enhance the morale of the people. We will carry out 
activities to emulate the heroic soldier, Xu Honggang, on an 
extensive scale and will cultivate sound general practices in 
society. It is important to pay close attention to the 
education of young people and children and guide them to 
establish the correct outlook on life, value, and morality. We 
must have a clear-cut stand in opposing money worship, hedonism, 
ultra-individualism, and decadent lifestyles; absolutely 
eliminate all kinds of social evils; and try hard to give rise 
to a sound general social environment which encourages healthy 
trends and checks unhealthy ones. 
  Conscientious attention should be paid to the development of 
cultural undertakings. It is imperative to deepen reform of the 
cultural structure and to explore ways to establish an 
operational mechanism which is full of vitality. We will adhere 
to the principle of "serving the people and the cause of 
socialism" and of "letting a hundred flowers blossom and a 
hundred schools of thought contend"; encourage those engaged in 
the theoretical circles, literature and art, and the press and 
publishing to immerse themselves among the masses, plunge into 
the thick of life, create healthy works which eulogize reform, 
opening up, and the modernization drive and which sing the 
praises of the main melody of the spirit of our times; try hard 
to occupy the front line of ideology and public opinion with 
literature and art products of good taste; make the cultural 
market flourish; and enrich the spiritual lives of the people. 
We will provide our people with correct opinion guides; enhance 
the propaganda quality of radio, films, television, and 
newspapers; and expand the coverage of radio and television 
reception. The provincial government has decided to build 
another batch of satellite relay stations so that the masses 
residing in remote mountain areas can also enjoy television 
programs. We will actively carry out the activity of creating 
advanced cultural counties and will pay continued attention to 
the consolidation and development of township and town cultural 
stations (centers) as well as to the creation of literature and 
art works. We will successfully protect historical and cultural 
relics and accelerate the construction of the Yunnan Nationality 
Museum. Greater headway will be made this year in building the 
1,000-li border cultural corridor. Efforts will be taken to 
strengthen the management of newspapers and publications, films 
and television, audio visual products, and the entertainment 
sector, with the aim of bringing about healthy development in 
the cultural market. 
  Earnest efforts must be taken to strengthen the building of 
socialist democracy and the legal system. The provincial 
government and its affiliated departments must conscientiously 
carry out decisions and resolutions adopted by the provincial 
people's congress and its standing committee, extensively 
solicit the opinions of people's deputies and accept their 
suggestions, and voluntarily subject themselves to the legal and 
routine supervision of the provincial people's congress and its 
standing committee. We will tighten ties with the provincial 
committee of the CPPCC, all democratic parties, and non-party 
personages and will fully consult with them before the 
provincial government makes major policy decisions. Attention 
will be paid to maintaining close ties between the government 
and the people, handle well letters and visits from the masses, 
and quickly comprehend the opinions and requirements of the 
masses on the government's work. With the goal of setting up a 
local legal system which suits Yunnan's reform, construction, 
and development, we will comprehensively implement the "Decision 
of the State Council on Strengthening Legal Work of the 
Government;" focus our attention on standardizing the main body 
of the market, maintaining market order, strengthening 
macroeconomic control and regulation, improving the social 
guarantee system, promoting opening up, and successfully 
building a clean administration; and speed up the pace of 
economic legislation, especially local legislation. This year, 
we will pay close attention to the drafting and formulation of a 
number of local laws, rules, and regulations which have a direct 
bearing on the socialist economy and other aspects. It is 
important to administer the government according to law, 
reinforce administrative law enforcement and legal supervision, 
and promptly get rid of, amend, and abolish those rules, 
regulations, and standardized documents which can no longer meet 
the requirements of reform, opening up, and economic development. 
  We will implement the party's nationality policy in a 
comprehensive way, correctly put into practice policies on 
religion, strengthen unity among different nationalities, 
mobilize the enthusiasm of all sides, and encourage people of 
all nationalities to make contributions to the socialist 
modernization drive. 
  Maintaining social stability is a basic condition for 
pushing 
forward reform, opening up, and economic development. 
Rectification of public security is a system project which 
requires the efforts of the entire society; therefore, measures 
will be taken to improve all facets of public security, thus 
giving rise to a situation where the entire society sets out to 
improve public security with concerted efforts. We will 
persistently carry out the principle of "cracking down on 
crime," concentrate our energy on investigating major criminal 
cases that severely undermine social order and endanger people's 
lives or property, and crack criminal rings and promptly hand 
down severe punishment to criminals according to the law. 
Continued efforts will be taken to carry out special-purpose 
struggles, mainly the anti-drug campaign; crack down on highway 
and railway robberies; and eliminate such social evil phenomena 
as prostitution, mass gambling, and the abduction and sale of 
women and children. We will implement a management 
responsibility system with specific targets for public security 
rectification at different levels, correctly handle 
contradictions of two different types, and seek timely solutions 
to all problems which may undermine social stability. To 
strengthen the work of public security and judicial organs, the 
provincial government has decided to increase its input to 
ensure necessary expenses, gradually improve working conditions, 
and enhance the quality and equipment of Yunnan's 
law-enforcement to a new level. 
<H5>  XI. Change Functions of Government, and Succeed in </H5>
Institutional Reform 
  Changing the functions and reforming the organizational 
structure of government is an urgent need for the establishment 
of the socialist market economic structure. Governments at all 
levels should persistently separate their functions from those 
of enterprises, allow enterprises to make their own operational 
decisions, and allow intermediary organizations to handle 
whatever they are capable of handling. The main function of the 
government is to reinforce macroeconomic control and regulation, 
intensify auditing and economic supervision, and provide 
coordination services and social management. 
  One prerequisite for changing the functions of government is 
to simplify government structures. In accordance with a plan on 
readjusting the structural establishment, which was submitted to 
the first session of the 8th provincial people's congress by the 
provincial government and later examined and approved by the 
State Council, certain changes have been made to the structural 
establishment of our province; as a result, there are now 37 
work organs, five directly affiliated organs, and two offices 
under the provincial government, thus reducing the total number 
from 62 to 44, down 29 percent. Institutional reform, the 
merger of work organs, and reductions in provincial government 
staff are expected to be completed in the first half of this 
year. Prefectural, autonomous prefectural, and city governments 
are required to start experiments with institutional reform in 
the first half of this year, unfold the work in a comprehensive 
way in the latter half of the year, and complete the work in the 
first half of next year. We will strive to fulfill 
institutional reform in county-level organs in the first half of 
next year. On the basis of institutional reform, we will 
gradually put into practice a civil service system and allow the 
system to function normally within the next three years. 
  XII. Carry Out in Depth the Campaign To Combat 
Corruption and Advocate a Clean Administration, Earnestly 
Improve Work of the Government 
  To adapt ourselves to the new situation of reform, opening 
up, and the modernization drive, we must keep government 
employees honest and industrious and carry out the struggle 
against corruption in a thorough way. This is a basic task for 
power building, and also an important guarantee for the smooth 
progress of reform and development. We should fully understand 
that the anti-graft struggle is a protracted and arduous one; 
therefore, we must pay unremitting attention to such matters of 
life and death for our nation and live up to the expectations of 
the people of all nationalities across the province. Government 
functionaries at all levels should bear in mind that the power 
in their hands is given by the people and that the abuse of that 
power for personal gain is absolutely impermissible. Neither 
can anyone apply the principle of commodity exchange to the 
activities of government institutions, or carry out power and 
money deals. All government functionaries should be honest and 
clean when carrying out their official duties, observe laws and 
discipline, and serve the people wholeheartedly. In accordance 
with the arrangements of the central authorities, we will 
continue to investigate major cases of graft and corruption, 
dereliction of duty, and smuggling, hand down severe punishment 
to corrupt elements, and put an absolute end to unhealthy 
practices which the masses resent most. Efforts will be taken 
to build a system of clean administration and establish an 
effective supervision and constraints mechanism so that we can 
prevent and eliminate decadent phenomena in systemic terms. 
  Earnest efforts will also be taken to improve the work of 
the 
government. Government functionaries, especially leading 
cadres, should conscientiously study the third volume of the 
"Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping"; arm their minds and carry out 
their work in line with Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on 
building socialism with Chinese characteristics; constantly 
enhance their Marxist theoretical level; pay close attention to 
learning about the socialist market economy; make good use of 
the state's major plans policies, rules, and regulations on 
reform; and enhance their leadership skills and ability to 
manage economic construction under the new situation. We must 
further change our style of work; firmly overcome bureaucracy, 
formalism, and departmental selfishness; go down to grass-roots 
units to acquaint ourselves with practical conditions; carry out 
investigations and research and learn public feelings through 
personal experience; and accomplish more solid work for the 
interest of units and the masses at the grass-roots level. 
  The People's Liberation Army is a defender of our great 
motherland and a constructor of the socialist modernization 
drive. Governments at all levels as well as the people of all 
nationalities across the province should concern themselves with 
and support the building of our troops, further strengthen unity 
between the Army and the government and between the Army and the 
people, and constantly enhance the fish-and-water ties between 
the masses of the people and the Army. We should successfully 
carry out education on national defense, enhance the awareness 
of the whole people of the need for national defense, strengthen 
the work of the militia and reserve services, extensively carry 
out the activity of supporting the Army and giving preferential 
treatment to the families of revolutionary servicemen and 
martyrs, and do a good job in the resettlement of demobilized 
soldiers as well as armymen transferred to civilian work. We 
will work side by side with the Chinese People's Liberation Army 
and will successfully safeguard national security, consolidate 
border defense, and maintain social stability. 
  Fellow Deputies: 
  Yunnan is faced with glorious and arduous tasks in reform, 
opening up, and development in 1994. We must rally closely all 
the more around the party Central Committee with Comrade Jiang 
Zemin as its core, and under the guidance of Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics and under the leadership of the Yunnan 
Provincial CPC Committee, take concerted efforts, forge ahead, 
carry out hard struggles, open up new paths, and strive to build 
up a new socialist market economic structure and fulfill this 
year's tasks of economic and social development! 

