CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladislav Kuzmichev: "Violators Are Threatened </F>
With Unusually Harsh Sanctions; Step-by-Step Introduction of 
Currency Control Is Underway"] 
  [Text] The RF [Russian Federation] Central Bank has 
developed a working program of step-by-step introduction of 
control over the currency operations of residents and 
non-residents performing entrepreneurial activity on the 
territory of the Russian Federation. 
  The first step in the organization of currency control in 
Russia is regulated by the joint instructions of the Central 
Bank and the RF GTK [Russian Federation State Tariff Committee] 
dated 12 October 1993, No 19 (coordinated with the MVES 
[Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations] of Russia), "On the 
Procedure for Implementing Currency Control Over Receipt by the 
Russian Federation of Currency Revenues From the Export of 
Goods." The said instruction went into effect as of 1 January 
1994 in regard to the export of strategically important raw 
materials goods, and as of 1 March in regard to all nomenclature 
of export goods. 
  The system of currency control is based primarily on 
stepping 
up the role of authorized banks as agents of currency control, 
as well as of information exchange in regard to the movement of 
funds in foreign currency and foreign trade shipments between 
customs agencies, commercial banks and organs of state 
administration. 
  The only control document will be the tracking certificate, 
which is a universal document of control for all types of 
currency operations (including accounting not only for export, 
but also for the import of goods and services). 
  Information on specific shipments will be forwarded by the 
RF 
State Tariff Committee to the authorized banks which have signed 
the tracking certificate with the exporters. The authorized 
banks must fill out the cards received from the RF GTK and 
return them within the control period, using the column reserved 
for bank use to provide information on the receipt of revenues 
for the shipments indicated on the card. 
  There are also plans to create a data bank on the basis of 
the RF GTK computer center to keep track of all foreign trade 
shipments and payments. This will make it possible to verify 
information on the movement of funds and goods. Thus, it will 
become possible to identify cases where export prices have been 
reduced and import prices have been increased. 
  The adopted order of control provides for the collegial 
(MVES, TPP [Chamber of Commerce and Industry], etc.) adoption of 
decisions on controversial questions. 
  At the second stage (four-six months after start of 
implementation of control), the application of an analogous 
scheme is planned (under the so-called "mirror principle") for 
import and barter trade operations. 
  At the third stage (second half of 1994), a system of 
currency control for the export and import of services and for 
non-trade operations will be introduced. 
  Subsequent stages presuppose the implementation of control 
over operations associated with the movement of capital. 
  The introduction of a system of control is planned for 
May-June, when the computer center of the RF GTK will be able to 
provide exact information on all export shipments and currency 
receipts. 
  Strict sanctions are provided, up to the non-acceptance 
withdrawal of funds from banks whose clients are guilty of 
improper and untimely accounting for the mandatory sale of part 
of their export earnings. 
  In order to implement the currency control, the Main 
Administration of Currency Regulation and Currency Control has 
been created within the central apparatus of the RF Central 
Bank. Its primary functions are: To participate in the 
development of legislative and standard statutes and 
international agreements of Russia in the sphere of currency 
regulation and control; to license currency operations; to 
coordinate and provide methodological management of the activity 
of organizations implementing control, and to cooperate on these 
questions with the central banks of other states and 
international organizations. 
  In order to increase the effectiveness of operation of the 
agencies implementing currency control, the RF Central Bank 
proposes: To strengthen the legislative base, and specifically, 
to introduce criminal responsibility for violations 
in the currency sphere; to specify individual statutes of the 
law on currency regulation and currency control, and to adopt 
legislative statutes which permit the signing and ratification 
of international agreements on currency questions. The Bank of 
Russia, in conjunction with the RF MFA [Russian Federation 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs], has sent to the RF government a 
proposal on joining in the Strassburg "Convention on Money 
Laundering, Identification, Arrest and Confiscation of Recovered 
Funds Obtained by Criminal Means." 

