CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ignacio Gutierrez A.] </F>
  [Text] Nearly 3 million doses of drugs (171 kg of cocaine, 
12 kg of "crystal," 66 kg of ephedrine, and 62 kg of marijuana), 
estimated as worth $18 million, were seized by agents of the 
Attorney General's Office [PGR] yesterday. 
  The counternarcotics operations carried out by the Federal 
Judicial Police in cooperation with the National Institute To 
Combat Drugs, in Chihuahua, Sinaloa, and Baja California States, 
made it possible to capture four presumed drug dealers. Also 
confiscated were three vehicles equipped to transport the drugs. 
  In making the preceding announcement, Alfonso Cabrera 
Morales, the PGR's assistant attorney for local offices and 
inspections, claimed that, during the current administration, as 
of yesterday, approximately 7.5 tons of cocaine have been seized. 
  Alberto Jardi Alonso, the institution's representative in 
Chihuahua, for his part, reported the largest confiscation. Joel 
Delgado Bustamante was captured with 171 kg and 800 grams of the 
alkaloid and 62 kg and 30 grams of marijuana in his possession. 
The cocaine alone would have allowed nearly 2.5 million doses to 
go into circulation. 
  The capture took place near the settlement of San Isidro, 
located on the Ciudad Juarez-El Porvenir highway. The subject 
was driving a brown Grand Marquis vehicle with state of Texas 
license plates GJZ-65K. 
  The federal agents requested a search of the vehicle, 
because 
it appeared to be carrying a heavy load in the trunk. It was 
here the drug dealer was transporting his shipment. 
  As for the "crystal," it was seized upon the arrest of 
Francisco Nava Duarte, who was intercepted at a highway 
checkpoint established near the settlement of El Desengano, in 
the Sinaloa municipality of Ahome, where his vehicle was 
inspected. 
  The latter was a blue 1988 Nissan minivan with state of 
California plates 20KL853. It was carrying in its fuel tank the 
12 kg and 700 grams of the drug, which would have been used to 
produce 250,000 doses. 
  The subjects presumed guilty were left at the disposal of 
the 
agent of the Federal Public Prosecutor's Office, together with 
the confiscated drugs. The pertinent preliminary investigations 
are being opened, while the Federal Judicial Police continue the 
search to locate and arrest the other accomplices in this 
illicit activity. 

