Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Yin Hongzhu (1438 7703 4376): "The </F>
Implementation of the `Outline on Educational Reform and 
Development Program' Brings About Progress"] 
  [Text] Today, a spokesman for the State Education 
Commission said that, in the past year since the beginning of 
the implementation of the "Outline of China's Educational Reform 
and Development," new progress has been made in our country's 
educational undertakings. Basic education has been further 
strengthened; vocational, adult education, and higher education 
have been developing at an obviously quicker pace; and 
educational structural reform has been conducted in depth. 
  The spokesman said: Last year, the schooling rate of 
children between 7 and 11 years of age in our country increased 
substantially as compared with that in 1992 and reached 98.3 
percent; elementary education was basically popularized in areas 
with over 90 percent of the national population, and junior 
secondary education was basically popularized in large cities 
and some economically developed areas. Nine-year compulsory 
education was implemented in stages throughout the country, and, 
in 1993, illiteracy was eliminated among about 5 million young 
and middle-aged people, and the rate of illiteracy among young 
and middle-aged people was lowered to about 7 percent. The 
State Education Commission established the system for assessing 
the work of popularizing nine- year compulsory education and 
eliminating illiteracy. By the end of last year, 26 provinces, 
autonomous regions, and municipalities assessed the work in more 
than 350 counties (cities and districts). The results showed 
that Beijing Municipality took the lead in basically 
popularizing nine-year compulsory education and basically 
eliminating illiteracy, and Jilin Province basically eliminated 
illiteracy among young and middle-aged people. 
  The spokesman said: Last year, the number of students 
currently taking degree courses and diploma courses in ordinary 
institutions of higher education reached 2.54 million people, an 
all-time high. In order to set in motion the "211 project" aimed 
at training competent professionals for our country in the 21st 
century, the State Education Commission also began to carry out 
the "program for training outstanding well-educated people for 
the new century" and selected the first group of 42 outstanding 
young experts whose work would receive financial assistance. 
Last year, the number of students receiving senior secondary 
vocational education for the first time exceeded the number of 
students receiving ordinary senior secondary education; and the 
number of adult students taking degree and diploma courses of 
higher education reached 1.9 million people, or increased by 
more than 20 percent over that in 1992. In addition, the number 
of adults receiving all sorts of technical training also 
increased markedly. 
  When discussing the reform of the educational structure, the 
spokesman said: In the first year since the "Outline" was 
implemented, the schooling system in our country has begun to 
change from the pattern of complete government-run schools to 
the pattern of the government primarily running schools but with 
the participation of various social circles, and the educational 
management system based on multitiered local administration has 
also been further improved. The new curriculums for nine-year 
compulsory education and the unified examination system for 
senior secondary education have also been put into practice. In 
the area of higher education, marked progress has been made in 
the reform of the school management system and in the adjustment 
of school distribution. Some colleges and universities were 
merged, and some schools which were originally managed by the 
ministries concerned were changed into institutions jointly 
managed by local governments and central departments. Reform of 
the internal management system in colleges and universities has 
generally been started; and the reform of the systems for 
enrolling students, fixing school fees, and job placements for 
graduates has been obviously quickened. The spokesman said: 
Over the past year, with the coordination and management of the 
government, vocational education and adult education were 
strengthened with the participation of various trades, 
institutions, and social circles. The reform of the system for 
enrolling students and seeking jobs for graduates in secondary 
technical schools was also sped up. Approximately 40 percent of 
students were enrolled beyond the state's enrollment target. 
The comprehensive educational reform in rural and urban areas 
has effectively promoted economic and social development in all 
localities. 
  Gratifying progress was made in educational legislation over 
the past year. The promulgation and implementation of the 
"Teachers' Law" became an important event which was cared about 
by people in all social circles. The "Regulations on Education 
for Disabled People," the "Regulations on Non-Government-Run 
Schools," and the "Regulations on Giving Awards to Outstanding 
Teaching Results" have been submitted by the State Education 
Commission to the State Council, and the "Education Law" is 
being intensively drafted. At the same time, a number of 
important policy documents and some local regulations were also 
successively put into practice last year. 

