CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Serhiy Zhurets, NARODNA ARMIYA commentator: </F>
"Partnership for Peace: A Step Forward or Marking Time?"] 
  [Text] An international conference on "Security in Europe: 
The Central European Component" has begun in Kiev. The 
conference is being sponsored by the Ukrainian Center for the 
Study of International Security Issues. The purpose of the 
conference is to assist the leaders of Central European states 
to work out possible options for creating a system of collective 
security in Europe. 
  This is the third conference of its kind in the last two 
years. As a result of the work done in the past, experts, 
scientists, and diplomats from Belarus, Bulgaria, Hungary, 
Poland, Moldova, Slovakia, the Czech Republic, and Ukraine have 
concluded that there is a need to conduct international research 
on the problems of security in Europe and to engage specialists 
from the Central European countries, as well as Russia and NATO, 
in this endeavor. 
  Considering the high level of representation, one could 
conclude that the desired goal has been successfully reached. 
The military and civilian specialists who came to Kiev included 
not only representatives from countries in the immediate 
vicinity of Ukraine, but also from Great Britain, Germany, 
Spain, the United States, and Switzerland. 
  If we isolate the problems that pertain solely to Ukraine 
from among all the issues discussed during the first day of the 
conference, it becomes apparent that buttressing security by 
having Kiev join NATO's proposed "Partnership for Peace" is 
regarded as far from the best and only solution. 
  Professor Volodymyr Bruz, representing the Ukrainian 
Institute of International Relations, proposed another option. 
In his opinion, we need to strive for an alliance of East and 
West in a single structure. This will relieve tensions among the 
countries that have been left outside NATO and the CIS agreement 
on collective security. Moreover, this will immediately 
eliminate the problem of the entry of these countries into 
already existing military alliances. Security will be guaranteed 
because all European countries will become members of a single 
structure. 
  The Ukrainian specialist cited Russia's rather negative 
reaction to the joining of NATO's initiative by former Warsaw 
Pact members as confirmation of his thesis. The situation with 
respect to Ukraine will be much more difficult. "Russia will not 
allow Ukraine to join NATO until after Russia herself becomes a 
member of NATO, if she ever does so," believes the Ukrainian 
expert. Ukraine's attempt to draw closer to NATO may aggravate 
Ukrainian-Russian relations. 
  However, Neville Hunter, the representative of NATO and a 
professor at NATO's military college, expressed the opinion that 
another structure should not be added to the already existing 
entities engaged in maintaining security. The North-Atlantic 
alliance is up to the job of resolving all problems. 
  The position of the Ukrainian defense department on this 
issue was expressed by Capt. 1st Rank Hryhoriy Perepelytsya, an 
officer of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine. He 
noted: "NATO's `Partnership for Peace' program will help us to 
normalize relations with Russia with the help of already 
existing international standards and executive structures, which 
will be put into effect by the program. It is therefore in our 
interest for Russia to join NATO's initiative as soon as 
possible." 
  Moreover, in the opinion of the Ukrainian officer, joining 
the "Partnership for Peace" does not mean the direct entry by 
the partnership members into the North-Atlantic alliance. 
  The conference is continuing. Its goal is to create an 
international group of experts and to agree on a plan of action 
to study the problems of European security. 

