Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by John Mason and Lisa Wood: "Lords Back EU on </F>
Workers' Rights"] 
  [Text] The government's drive to create a flexible labour 
market suffered a substantial setback yesterday when the House 
of Lords ruled that UK laws on part-time workers' rights over 
redundancy pay and unfair dismissal are in breach of European 
law. 
  The Law Lords' ruling may add significant costs for 
employers 
as the government will be forced to give part-timers rights 
equal with those in full-time employment. 
  The reaction of employers organisations to the Lords 
judgment 
was mixed. The Confederation of British Industry said it 
believed most employers would be "relaxed about the 
implications," while the Institute of Directors condemned the 
likely changes as "contrary to the interests of employers and 
employees alike." 
  The Association of British Chambers of Commerce, many of 
whose members are from small companies, said it was 
"disappointed" this had occurred at a time when the UK was 
trying to build a flexible labour market. 
  The government suffered an equally severe blow when the Law 
Lords ruled at the same time that those bringing challenges over 
the government's implementation of European Union [EU] law 
should be able to use the High Court's judicial review procedure 
rather than go to the European Court. 
  It is expected that that might significantly increase the 
number of politically controversial cases brought by pressure 
groups. 
  The Law Lords ruled, by a majority of four to one, against 
the provisions of the Employment Protection Act 1978, which 
restricts the rights of those working less than 16 hours a week. 
  Under the Act, part-time workers are covered by unfair 
dismissal and redundancy pay provisions only after completing 
five years continuous employment. Full-time employees qualify 
for such entitlements after two years. 
  The Equal Opportunities Commission [EOC], which brought the 
action against the government, had claimed this breached 
European law intended to outlaw discrimination in the workplace. 
  The government had maintained that the provisions struck a 
fair balance between employers and employees. It also argued 
that employees working fewer than 16 hours a week benefited 
since the lack of entitlements encouraged employers to take on 
more part-time staff. 
  However, Lord Keith of Kinkel said the government had failed 
to prove that the use of the 16-hour threshold had resulted in 
an increase in part-time employment. He also noted that the 
Republic of Ireland was the only other EU country to have 
similar thresholds. 
  The Lords ruled that the Act's provisions over redundancy 
pay 
breached Article 119 of the Treaty of Rome, while those over 
unfair dismissal breached the Equal Pay Directive. 
  The government must now introduce legislation to conform UK 
law with that of the EU. The Department of Employment said that 
would happen as soon as possible. However, it seems unlikely 
that it will be passed without ministers having to endure strong 
protests from right-wing and anti-European Tory MPs. 
  Part-time work is the growth area in the UK labour market, 
involving about a fifth of the 25 million workforce. 
  Its advantages for employers include increased flexibility 
and cost saving -- any employee who works less than 15 hours per 
week, or earns less than 56 pounds, does not have to be covered 
for National Insurance. 
  The EOC estimates the move will affect about 500,000 
part-time staff now working between eight and 16 hours a week. 
They will not formally enjoy the same rights as full-time staff 
until legislation reaches the statute book. Until then they 
will be able cite the Law Lords' judgment in industrial 
tribunals. 

