Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "A Serious U.S. Change"] </F>
  [Text] As always, King Husayn has moved quickly to 
formulate an Arab reply to the serious change in the U.S. 
position on the issue of holy Jerusalem. This change surfaced 
during the UN Security Council's deliberations yesterday prior 
to passing a resolution on the Zionist massacre committed in the 
al-Ibrahimi Mosque on 25 February. 
  His majesty promptly made contacts with the fraternal Arab 
leaders in Rabat, Damascus, Cairo, and Tunis. He stressed the 
need for an Arab effort to safeguard Palestinian rights and 
thwart the danger posed to holy Jerusalem. He also emphasized 
the importance of coordination among the Arab brothers on issues 
related to the peace process in order to confront the important 
developments of the serious U.S. position on the issue of 
Jerusalem. 
  The serious change in the U.S. Administration's 
position--from considering this holy city as an indivisible part 
of the occupied territories to not considering it as part, and 
quite the most important part, of these territories--would 
threaten the stumbling Arab-Israeli peace process with grave 
failure and would also pave the way for U.S. recognition of 
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. 
  This change heralds a yet more serious change in the U.S. 
position on the entire peace process, thus turning Washington 
from a cosponsor of the Arab-Israeli peace process to a spade 
designed to totally destroy this process. It would also bring 
the aspired balance in the U.S. Administration's position 
between the two parties to the conflict back to the eras of the 
clear U.S. bias toward Israel. 
  King Husayn has always warned against the dangers posed by a 
collapse in the peace process. It can be learned from his 
majesty's quick move yesterday that he feels the imminent danger 
posed to this process. This requires a fast Arab reply and 
coordination at the highest level. 
  We hope for a quick Arab response to King Husayn's efforts. 
Such a response should be equal to the danger which his majesty 
feels whenever there is an imminent large threat to the Arab 
nation. We hope that this "SOS" will not go unheeded, so we, 
along with all other Arabs, will not regret it. Such regret 
would then be useless. 

