Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by RIA-NOVOSTI correspondent Aleksandr Veretennikov </F>
on interview with Estonian Prime Minister Mart Laar conducted 
specially for ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI in Tallinn; date not given: 
"`The Russian Question an Amorphous Thing,' Estonian Prime 
Minister Mart Laar Thinks"] 
  [Text] "Unregulated Estonian-Russian relations and the 
political instability in Russia have not yet affected Estonia, 
which will have the highest economic growth in Europe in 1994, 
which, incidentally, is confirmed by representatives of the 
IMF," Estonian Prime Minister Mart Laar said during a 
conversation with a RIA-NOVOSTI correspondent. The head of the 
Estonian cabinet of ministers stressed that the fact that there 
is no political disagreement between all political forces in his 
country is a guarantee of his country's economic success. In 
his opinion, there is no agreement even within Russia's 
government. "One part of the government implements reform, 
while the other spends money. The result is utter chaos," Mart 
Laar reckons. He voiced the hope that the "Fedorov-Gaydar" 
reforms will continue in Russia. At the same time he pointed 
out that [former Russian Finance Minister] Boris Fedorov's ideas 
are in many respects similar to his own, and the same Western 
experts advised the group of young reformers in the Russian 
Government as the Estonian Government. 
  The Estonian prime minister also believes that it is quite 
valid to compare Russia with his country as far as economic 
reform is concerned. "Small Estonia has its own advantages when 
carrying out these reforms; however, a large country has greater 
resources and thus greater opportunity for maneuver," Mart Laar 
asserted. 
  "Russia's economic sanctions against Estonia enabled us to 
rapidly orient ourselves to the West, as we had no other 
option," he said. "After all, for two years now Russia has 
refused to sign economic cooperation treaties with the 
republic." In his opinion, all that is reminiscent of Vladimir 
Zhirinovskiy's policy, which is nothing new for Estonia. 
  "But surely Estonia benefits more from economic contacts 
than 
Russia?" I asked. 
  "Not at all," the Estonian prime minister said. "Nowadays 
our republic has become totally independent of Russia's economy, 
with which we have a positive balance of trade, while Russia 
only accounts for 12 percent of our imports." He also noted 
that Estonia is gearing its economy to the world market in order 
to be able to sell its industrial output in Paris or London, 
say.... And also in Moscow. 
  "In this respect our aim is integration into Europe's 
political and military as well as economic structures," Mart 
Laar said. According to him, Russia is also willing to join 
these structures, but that will be possible only if it continues 
its economic reforms. Laar voiced misgivings that events in the 
East will take a different course, as shown by its leaders' 
speeches and resolutions and, in particular, their policy toward 
their so-called near neighbors, excessive influence, etc. 
  "Moreover, the matter of the Russians' failure to 
acknowledge 
the former USSR's occupation of Estonia in 1940 -- which the 
rest of the world has already done -- remains unresolved," the 
head of the cabinet of ministers said. "Furthermore, they 
recognize it within the borders of that time." 
  "The borders of our state were changed a a result of its 
occupation in 1945, not even in accordance with the laws of the 
former Union and without the republic itself making that 
decision," he believes. According to the premier, Estonia found 
itself in a situation where its border and its security line 
[kontrolnaya liniya] were in the same place. 
  "We are not linking the resolution of the border issue with 
Russia with other priority problems since we are aware of the 
political situation prevailing there today," Mart Laar stressed. 
"However, we want this question discussed during talks with 
Moscow, but in the presence of the international public and, in 
particular, the CSCE." 
  "Nonetheless, questions of the Russian troop withdrawal from 
the republic are a top priority for Estonia?" 
  "Of course," the prime minister replied. "Estonia is even 
ready to help the Russian military build housing for themselves, 
there is no problem there." In his view, the whole thing is 
only being held up by one signature -- Russia's signature on the 
schedule for its troops' withdrawal from Estonia. 
  The Russians are, regrettably, doing everything they can not 
to provide this schedule, which is naturally restricting the 
flow of money from the West for housing for the military," Laar 
complained. "Those who have housing problems will now have to 
address the Russian Federation Foreign Ministry." 
  "But the ministry already has plenty of problems to solve, 
particularly with regard to the violation of the rights of 
Estonia's Russian-speaking population." 
  "That is evidence once again that Russia very often sees the 
laws of the Baltic countries from a totally different angle," 
the Estonian prime minister explained. "It is not true that our 
laws are not very clear. For instance, only our country's 
citizens will be able to take part in the coming parliamentary 
elections, but I do not know of a single state where people who 
are not citizens can take part in elections of this kind. At 
the same time Estonia is one of the rare countries where all 
Russian-speaking inhabitants were given that right in the 
elections to local self-government bodies. 
  "And here is a positive point: During these elections in 
Narva and Sillamae, which have a largely Russian-speaking 
population, the Russians' chauvinistic forces were defeated, 
which was a kind of protest against the Liberal-Democratic Party 
of Russia and its provocative actions," Mart Laar continued. He 
claimed that of all the Russians in the northeast who took part 
in the elections to the Russian State Duma, only those who 
wanted to become Russian citizens and who had always campaigned 
against the republic's independence voted for Zhirinovskiy. 
  "But what is to be done about the `Russian question' or does 
it really not exist?" 
  "The `Russian question' encompasses people who do not know 
who they really are," the head of the cabinet of ministers said. 
"They have no intention of living either in Estonia or in 
Russia. Of course, most of these people are interested in 
emigrating to the West, but I do not think that Europe is very 
interested in them. 
  "In my view, the main thing for these representatives of 
'homo sovieticus' is to take a psychological step toward 
Estonia, a state whose laws accord with European norms," Mart 
Laar believes. "Especially since it is virtually impossible to 
say that they are being discriminated against, otherwise we 
would not be a member of the Council of Europe. Admittedly, 
every 'homo sovieticus' will have to actively do something to 
survive -- it is after all hard to live by Soviet traditions in 
our country today." 
  "Nonetheless, Mr. Prime Minister, what is to be done about 
the `Russian question'?" 
  "The `Russian question' is an amorphous thing...." 

