BFN 

  [Text] Hanoi, May 20 (YONHAP) -- South Korean Foreign 
Minister Han Sung-chu, confirming that the International Atomic 
Energy Agency (IAEA) has proposed negotiations to North Korea on 
inspecting the refueling process at the 5-megawatt reactor in 
Yongbyon, north of Pyongyang, said Friday that the next round of 
North Korea-U.S. high-level talks may be held next month. 
  "The immediate task right now is to stop North Korea from 
further discharging fuel rods from its reactor and to 
successfully conclude negotiations with the IAEA," said Han here 
in the middle of his Asian tour. 
  "The North Korea-U.S. high-level dialogue remains a 
possibility, assuming that these two conditions are met," Han 
said. 
  "The situation is neither optimistic nor pessimistic," said 
Han cautiously. 
  But other officials predicted that North Korea-U.S. dialogue 
will likely open next month if Pyongyang agrees to stop changing 
the rods until an inspection accord is reached with the IAEA. 
In a long-awaited breakthrough that could well crack the 
nuclear impasse, the IAEA proposed sending a team to North Korea 
to negotiate the agency's presence and safeguards activities 
related to the rod discharge operation. 
  "North Korea had proposed earlier that it and the IAEA 
discuss the matter. The IAEA has, in a sense, accepted this 
proposal after judging that safeguards at the 5-megawatt reactor 
have not been broken yet," Han told reporters. 
  An IAEA monitoring team arrived in North Korea May 17 for a 
week- long inspection. The inspectors' main task was to 
determine whether North Korea had indeed started removing fuel 
rods from the 5- megawatt reactor and, if so, how many. 
  The agency's press release stated that "core discharge has 
indeed started." 
  The inspection team reported on the extent of the discharge, 
"and as of today, it still seems possible to implement the 
required safeguards measures," the IAEA said. 
  "In view of the above, the agency proposed sending a team of 
officials immediately to (North Korea)" to discuss necessary 
safeguards measures. 

