Language: <F P=105> Albanian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Lorenc Vangjeli report: "Appeal Court Sentences </F>
Journalists Frangaj and Leka and Officers Licaj and Feta"] 
  [Text] Journalism is without a doubt the most dangerous 
profession in Albania. The second act of the drama of the 
journalists Aleksander Frangaj and Martin Leka, staged this time 
at the Tirana Appeals Court, has convincingly proved this once 
again. Arrested on 31 January this year on charges preferred by 
the Defense Ministry and on a warrant signed by Prosecutor 
Qeleshi, the two journalists tasted the bitterness of detention 
on remand for one month. The charge they faced was of revealing 
a state secret in collusion with officers Licaj and Feta, while 
Leka also faced the charge of public slander against Defense 
Minister Zhulali. At the four-day trial at the Tirana District 
Court, Leka's charge of slander was not proved, and the 
collusion "thought to have been" entered into by the four turned 
out to involve only Leka and Licaj. Frangaj, editor in chief of 
the independent newspaper KOHA JONE, was acquitted, while his 
colleague Leka was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment for 
"colluding to reveal a state secret." One month later all hopes 
of overturning this verdict in the Appeals Court turned out to 
be illusory. After the appeal lodged by the three defendants 
Leka, Licaj, and Feta and the protest made by Prosecutor Qeleshi 
over Frangaj's acquittal, it was the turn of Appeals Court Judge 
Prel Martini to dispense justice. Of course, Mr. Martini will 
have been aware of the dozens of protests by European and world 
journalists' organizations for the release of the two Albanian 
journalists. However, he and the modern Albanian state that he 
serves showed once again that the bell tolls only for those who 
want to listen. After a judicial hearing of five hours, Judge 
Martini pronounced both journalists guilty and sentenced Martin 
Leka to 18 months imprisonment and Aleksander Frangaj to five 
months. 
  How did the trial go? 
  It started at 0900 yesterday with the reading of the 
defendants' appeals, in which they asked for the initial court 
verdict to be overturned, for an acquittal, and for the 
application of justice. It was the Appeals Court's task to 
examine the legitimacy of the earlier court verdict. Leka's 
lawyer Agim Tirana announced that he wanted an end to "this 
illegal sham," and demanded his client's acquittal. He argued 
that there was no legal basis for the crime committed by Leka 
and Licaj and claimed that no such thing had been proved by the 
earlier court, which had even based its conclusions not on the 
documents of the case but on guesswork. Moreover, as a 
journalist, Leka could not be held liable to a charge of 
revealing a state secret and therefore could not be punished for 
such a crime. However, surprises were not long in coming. 
Although Leka had been arrested under the signature of 
Prosecutor Qeleshi for public slander against Defense Minister 
Zhulali, no such accusation had arrived at the Prosecutor's 
Office. Indeed, the first trial had been unable to prove that 
Leka had commited slander. However, Prosecutor Mosko produced 
from among the papers in the file a charge preferred by the 
Defense Ministry that lacked a couple of minor features, i.e. a 
rubber stamp and a protocol number. 
  The Tirana Court's declaration of Frangaj's innocence turned 
out to be premature for District Prosecutor Qeleshi. Qeleshi 
protested and called for Frangaj's conviction on the basis of 
Article 20 of the Press Law. It was the turn of Prosecutor 
Mosko to write the speech that was successfully to bury the 
public's hopes that the state would this time sign a peace 
treaty with the press. In the one hour that Mosko demanded he 
managed to pull to shreds the one month's investigation of the 
journalists made while they were on remand and also the courts 
questioning of them. This prosecutor, who in 1990 warned 
defendants who had blown up Uncle Stalin with dynamite that he 
would not allow them to insult the power of the people, and who 
often sweated during the public defense of Hoxha's widow, 
concluded that the crimes of the four defendants should be 
legally reclassified. In his speech, he believed he had proved 
that Martin Leka had commited slander and had offended against 
Article 20 of the Press Law, that Aleksander Frangaj must be 
considered guilty because he allowed the article to be 
published, and that Licaj and Feta had abused their positions. 
  The dissatisfaction in the courtroom reached new heights at 
1400, when the presiding judge read out the verdict, this time 
open to appeal only at the Higher Appeals Court. 
  The word "guilty" uttered by Martini buried once and for all 
the hopes of the most optimistic. Martini called for 18 months 
for Martin Leka for his "sin" of having slandered the defense 
minister and violating Article 20 of the Press Law, four years 
for officer Licaj, and a suspended sentence of six months for 
officer Feta. 
  Thus, the second act of this drama ended without providing 
an 
answer to the question that was at the focus of this trial. Was 
Defense Minister Zhulali's order a secret? It was so for the 
court, but not for the defendants and their lawyers, who 
asserted that "a secret ceases to be a secret when it emerges 
from government offices into the streets and becomes known to 
thousands of people." However, "you need a stone to crack 
walnuts," and in Albania journalists have nothing but their 
ballpoints and a Press Law that states that the press is free. 

