Language: <F P=105> Urdu </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Chaudhry M. A. Shaida Advocate: "The Spread of </F>
Drugs Is a Serious Problem."] 
  [Text] According to the national press, the drug mafia is 
buying Stinger missiles from Afghan commanders. An alleged major 
smuggler and drug king is making the Afghan commanders a better 
offer than the Americans for Stinger missiles. The Afghans and 
tribal leaders negotiate over the price of Stinger missiles 
which are stored in an unknown location in a tribal area. 
Reportedly, an armed reaction by tribal sardars cannot be ruled 
out because of the operation carried out against drug smugglers. 
In August 1993 the federal cabinet officially approved an 
administrative and budget package aimed at purging drugs from 
the country by the year 2000. The determination shown by the 
caretaker government in taking action first against those who 
are delinquent in repaying government loans and compulsory 
levies [taxes] or have had these loans forgiven, and second 
against drug smugglers, is a laudable measure and greatly 
welcomed by all patriotic and informed Pakistanis. The smuggling 
and use of drugs have not only ruined Pakistan's reputation 
internationally, but also constitute a heinous plot to poison 
and thus destroy the next generation. Heroin is sold in cities 
as well as in the streets of remote villages, and no correct 
statistics exist as to the number of drug addicts. There are 
wide divergences in the numbers of drug addicts cited 
occasionally by government officials and ministers. 
  As regards the advent of the heroin trade in Pakistan, the 
preparation and smuggling of heroin in Pakistan started after 
the Iranian revolution and the Soviet attack on Afghanistan. On 
the one hand, the Iranian Government imposed the death penalty 
on drug smugglers, and, on the other hand, during the Afghan 
jihad, certain Afghan drug smugglers obtained the cooperation of 
a number of locally influential individuals in the free tribal 
areas of Pakistan and established heroin processing laboratories 
there. Since opium is grown in the free tribal areas and 
northern regions, it was easy to obtain raw materials for the 
heroin laboratories. The trade facilities provided by Pakistan 
to Afghanistan were used for illegal purposes, and chemicals 
needed in heroin production were imported into Pakistan and sent 
to heroin laboratories in free tribal areas. Not only 
influential individuals but certain high government officials in 
agencies responsible for curbing the drug trade were involved in 
this reprehensible business. 
  You may remember that during the term of the late Zia, the 
U.S. gave substantial aid to Pakistan aimed at ending opium 
cultivation in the Gadown Amazai area by offering alternative 
means of livelihood to the opium cultivators. However, there was 
widespread corruption and theft in this aid program. Secret 
agencies reported during Zia's term that a number of National 
Assembly deputies were involved in the preparation and smuggling 
of heroin, but no steps were taken against these individuals. 
The long reach of these individuals involved in drug smuggling 
can be gauged from the fact that a former minister of the 
Northwest Frontier Province, who was jailed for heroin 
smuggling, escaped from prison. 
  An important reason for the production and smuggling of 
heroin is the high price it commands on the international 
market. We will have to accept the fact that certain influential 
Pakistanis have amassed huge fortunes by promoting the drug 
business, and their wealth has given rise to innumerable moral 
and social evils in our society. The part played by the drug 
mafia money in politics is no secret; mafia activity has changed 
the very nature of the society. The tragic situation now is that 
ladies from well-to-do families, students, and even female 
students in colleges and universities have fallen victim to this 
destructive, expensive, and lethal addiction. 
  It would be inexcusable if we did not praise here the 
efforts 
of the caretaker government to end drug abuse. All Pakistanis 
accept the fact that the caretaker government made some 
courageous decisions which a democratic or political government, 
which has many kinds of pressure on it, may not have been able 
to do. As for the drug mafia and the heroin business, thanks to 
the lack of interest, incompetence, and aloofness displayed by 
certain past governments, the drug mafia has become so 
influential and powerful in Pakistan that it has been able to 
establish close connections with the entire bureaucracy. The 
drug mafia is so influential in the political arena that several 
assembly members and ministers are accused of complicity in this 
reprehensible business. For the first time, the caretaker 
government has taken concrete and effective measures to end this 
running sore in society, and, for this effort, the caretaker 
government deserves the gratitude and prayers of the entire 
nation. Many members of the drug mafia have forsaken politics 
and elections and some have fled in fear to Afghanistan. 
Pakistan Narcotics Board has become active throughout the 
country against heroin dealers and the drug mafia. 

