BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Who Is the Minister Addressing?"] </F>
  [Text] "The major problems that our industries now face 
are, in order: the constant changes in policies, especially 
foreign exchange policies; delays in the approval of customs 
tariffs; shortages of foreign exchange and the bureaucracy in 
the field of foreign exchange; shortages of cash flow; a drop in 
the people's purchasing power; technological problems; 
profitability; and personnel." 
  You might think that the above remarks were made by a critic 
of the government's economic policies of the past five years or 
by one of the critical newspapers. But no! These remarks were 
made by a person who himself was involved from the very start in 
the implementation of the government's policies and continues to 
be in charge of one of the country's important industries 
ministries. But as you can see, he remarks as though he was not 
at all involved in affairs such as constant changes in policies, 
especially on foreign exchange, and so on. Of course, he stated 
other things in his remarks that we will study at a later date. 
  The important question that arises is: "Who is the minister 
addressing?" Is he addressing the people? Is he talking to the 
people who did not play any part in these affairs and were only 
witnesses of the results? Is he addressing the Majles? 
Obviously, the Majles approved the First Plan and approves the 
annual budgets. But it thus assigns the government to carry out 
its duties and places the responsibility for the implementation 
of such affairs on the shoulders of the statesmen. Is he 
addressing the cabinet and the statesmen? If so, is he not a 
member of this cabinet and has he not been involved in all these 
affairs? Why is he addressing anyone? What objective does he 
have by making such remarks? Is the president as the head of 
the government also one of his addressees and should he too be 
included among the people who have created problems by adopting 
and implementing such policies? 
  We think that in criticizing the government, nothing can be 
more effective than these remarks because had they been uttered 
by the newspapers or anyone who comments on the government's 
policies, first of all, they would be looking at matters from 
the outside. Secondly, they would easily be branded as 
"opponents of the government" and efforts would be made to 
discredit their criticisms. And thirdly, under the current 
sociopolitical conditions, criticisms by the press and other 
critics fall on deaf ears. But if they are uttered by someone 
who is inside the government, no one can doubt that his remarks 
are true, and the impact that his remarks will have will be 
greater than that of the newspapers and other individuals. 
  Does the esteemed president who accuses newspapers because 
of 
their criticisms of being "demagogic" or of trying to 
"disenchant" the people, cast a glance at his partners and 
listen to their remarks? Does he categorize these people too in 
the same way? It seems that some of the ministers who have been 
involved in these policies from the very outset and have been 
together with Mr. Hashemi-Rafsanjani from the very start are 
trying to portray that what they say has nothing to do with the 
president. Otherwise, there is no logical reason why a person 
who himself is involved in these affairs would speak as he does. 
  In conclusion, it should also be noted that the esteemed 
minister complained about a "reduction in the people's 
purchasing power." However, some time ago he strongly defended 
the increase in the prices of vehicles that are manufactured by 
a plant that falls under his ministry's jurisdiction, justifying 
this increase in prices by saying that the difference between 
the finished price and the market price would go to the 
country's treasury. Possibly this was aimed at increasing the 
cash flow of the government(!) or of the plant. Anyway, it is 
very difficult to make heads or tails out of his remarks! 

