Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Supreme Council Deputy Guram Petriashvili, </F>
by Roman Koval, reporter for the State Independence of Ukraine 
press service; place and date not given: "Empires Turn to Dust, 
But Nations Live On"] 
  [Text] [Koval] Mr. Guram, there are different versions 
regarding unbelievable developments in the Mengreli village of 
Djikhaskari on New Year's eve. What happened to Zviad 
Gamsakhurdia? Is he dead or alive? If he is dead, what were the 
circumstances of his death? 
  [Petriashvili] Just like many other Georgians I do not 
believe in the death of our president. However, if the reports 
are true, I am sure that Gamsakhurdia was murdered -- such 
outstanding people do not commit suicide. Gamsakhurdia has the 
character of a warrior bound by ties of blood with his nation. 
  [Koval] It has become evident that an active redistribution 
of the spheres of influence is under way in the world. 
Undercover diplomacy is becoming a driving force of the new 
world order and some nations make decisions regarding the fate 
of other nations. Do you share these views? 
  [Petriashvili] It is clear now that a scheme has been 
designed in world politics: The United Nations and other 
influential organizations led by the United States have made a 
secret deal with Russia. Its provisions stipulate that Russia 
will have no claims on the so-called socialist camp in East 
Europe and the Baltics. In exchange for this, Western states 
will support Russian attempts to preserve control over all other 
republics and to save the diminished empire. 
  Having consent from the world's influential political forces 
Moscow inspired a coup in Tbilisi and brought KGB General E. 
Shevardnadze to power. Why is the "democratic world community" 
threatening Ukraine and pushing it toward giving up its nuclear 
arms for Russia's advantage? This is another component of the 
same criminal plot against former Soviet nations. 
  [Koval] Can we believe Western mass media claiming that 
Shevardnadze arrived in Georgia to fight Gamsakhurdia's 
"totalitarian regime" and to build a democratic Georgia? 
  [Petriashvili] "Gamsakhurdia's totalitarian regime" is a 
myth invented by the KGB and blown up by those political forces 
of the world that participate in the plot. "World democracies" 
are not satisfied with Gamsakhurdia's desire to win genuine and 
not token CIS-type, independence for Georgia. When in 1991, 
Moscow came forward with an initiative to sign the new Union 
Treaty, the Georgian president categorically refused. The U.S. 
President's reaction was very ambiguous: "Zviad Gamsakhurdia is 
swimming against the stream." 
  With regard to Shevardnadze, it is no secret that this 
imperial secret service general has only one goal, namely to 
subordinate Georgia to Russia again. Even those who once fought 
against legally elected President Gamsakhurdia have realized 
this. A member of Shevardnadze's "legislature" Vazha Adamia 
points out: "Shevardnadze was sent to Georgia on a secret 
mission." Tengiz Sigua, one of the leaders of the Georgian 
putsch agrees: "Shevardnadze has been destroying the Georgian 
economy on purpose so as to make CIS membership the only way to 
save the situation." 
  The myth of Shevardnadze being a freedom-fighter was 
invented 
by those who want the Russian Empire's humble slave to be 
Georgia's leader. 
  Lawlessness reigning in Georgia since the ousting of the 
legal power makes the purges of 1937 look like innocent 
children's games. People who have not seen Georgia for the last 
two years may find witnesses' testimonies exaggerated and 
fantastic. Executions without investigations and trials, 
kidnapping, and robberies represent Georgia's "democracy" of 
today. 
  If someone disregards the people's choice demonstrated in 
the 
general elections he will hardly lead the nation to democracy 
and happiness. Those who come to power by means of violence can 
only bring bloodshed and suffering. History testifies to this. 
  Shevardnadze has always been and remains a Bolshevik 
regardless of his speculations about democracy. Commenting on 
establishing the Georgian Security Ministry he said: "The 
ministry's primary task will be to fight zviadists" (in fact he 
meant dissidents). 
  [Koval] How will the events in Georgia develop in 1994? 
  [Petriashvili] I do not want to give forecasts, but this 
much I am sure of: No matter what happens, the Georgian people 
will not give up their fight for independence. No Lenins, 
Stalins, or Shevardnadzes can bar the movement of Georgians and 
other nations of the Russian empire toward freedom. Empires 
turn to dust, but nations live on. 

