BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "24 Hours" newscast] </F>
  [Text] On 25 May, the Group of 100 and the Environmental 
Research Agency urged the Mexican delegation, which is 
participating in the 46th Annual Conference of the International 
Whaling Commission (IWC), to avoid making changes in a French 
proposal to establish a sanctuary for this animal in Antarctica. 
  Mr. Homero Arigis, president of the Group of 100, and 
Catherine Helmsly, who heads the whale program of the 
Environmental Research Agency, said the original plan was to 
demarcate the sanctuary at 40 degrees latitude south across the 
Indian, Pacific, and Atlantic Oceans. The Mexican proposal, 
however, is to demarcate it somewhere between 50 and 62 degrees 
latitude south, which would entail the reduction of thousands of 
kilometers where the capture of whales would be banned. 
  Mr. Homero Arigis said: Mexico has joined Chile, 
Switzerland, 
Sweden, and Monaco in supporting this proposal, and, in doing 
so, Mexico is obstructing the original French proposal without 
giving it an chance. This move was called divisive and 
contradictory to the position publicly announced last week by 
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari. 
  The two organizations pointed out that the Mexican 
delegation 
must explain the reason for its change in position on the 
protection of whales, adding that its reply should be reflected 
in the way it votes on the sanctuary issue. 
  Mr. Homero Arigis said: In terms of protecting the sea cow, 
which is the most threatened and most common marine cetacean in 
the upper Gulf of California, this year the IWC Scientific 
Commission has estimated its total population at 316. An IWC 
delegation has proposed a resolution to protect sea cows at this 
meeting. The Mexican delegation, however, replied that Mexico 
prefers the noninclusion of this resolution on the IWC meeting's 
agenda. 
  The Group of 100 and the Environmental Research Agency ruled 
out that Mexico will sell its vote, but both groups noted Japan 
is capturing whales in Mexican seas. They recognized Japanese 
sovereignty, but asked this Asian nation to also enforce 
international sovereignty and to modify its customs, as Mexico 
did when it stopped consuming sea turtle eggs. 

