Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Riga, Feb 17, BNS -- BNS interviewed the Latvian 
ambassador to Russia, Janis Peters, on the atmosphere in Russia 
in view of relations with Latvia. 
  Q. Are Russian residents interested in the interstate talks 
between Latvia and Russia? 
  A. I have always said that Russia thinks about Latvia far 
less than Latvia (thinks) about Russia. We here (in Moscow) 
sometimes think that it is time for Russia to consider Latvian 
developments. I think, Latvian developments occupy a tiny 
proportion in Russia's consciousness. But, if we speak about 
the official Moscow, about the Russian Government, I think, that 
it is topical for Russia to settle relations with Latvia. The 
political forces in power missed in elections the moment of 
patriotism. I mean Russia's Choice. They had the chance, but 
they underestimated it and, consequently, the theme of 
patriotism was stolen from them by powers represented by 
Zhirinovskiy. (...) Now, many, including the foreign minister 
and many other political forces, moderate forces, democratic 
forces, are trying to outrun Zhirinovskiy but they cannot afford 
to use Zhirinovskiy's lexicon. The common Russian, the tired 
Russian, the humiliated Russian is forced to side with extremist 
views, with extremist slogans at least to set himself at ease. 
The Russian Government, in this case, faces a very serious 
challenge, including what regards relations with Latvia. That's 
why we can observe this very fierce attack on the Latvian 
legislation, the Latvian reality. Consequently, I think, that it 
is also important for Russia to settle relations with Latvia in 
the eyes of the international community. But Russia itself 
lacks a real understanding and concept as to what is, in fact, 
going on in Latvia. I think, they (Russian leaders) sometimes 
have not the time to go deep into Latvian processes. 
  Q. How much significance does Russia attach to the 
speculation by certain political forces with human rights 
problems in Latvia? 
  A. It is important but, what is interesting, the Russian 
propaganda speaks about the alleged human right infringements in 
Latvia in a very generalizing and abstract manner. In fact, no 
concrete cases are being cited. We watched a television 
broadcast, Voskresenije, last Sunday [13 February], in which the 
topics were highly invented. We must require Russia to name 
concrete cases, a list of human rights violations, then we will 
be able to answer. Presently, I think, the influence is not 
great, but it is so only on the one hand. On the other hand, 
all political forces in Russia regret the collapse of the Soviet 
Union. Even very democratically disposed people (are among 
them) because the dream about a good union still lives and is, 
maybe, haunting almost every Russian resident. These people 
would allot the Baltics the role of some kind of an associated 
member (in the dream union). The thought that the Baltics are 
on the Russian soil is alive in their (Russian people) 
consciousness. This makes it difficult to estimate the 
influence of these allegations but they are unlikely to 
seriously endanger Latvia. 
  Q. How to explain similar attitudes of Russian political 
forces? 
  A. The democratic forces would like to form a new union. 
You know the processes connected with the setup of the 
Commonwealth of Independent States. Boris Yeltsin openly 
declared that Russia had a specific mission and task to create 
the CIS, that Russia is the number one amid equals. We perceive 
it with concern. We, being a small country, can criticize and 
reject the idea but for Russians a great power means something 
positive, a good life for everybody, an integrated economy. We 
should take this into account that in the world there are 
different unions, disintegrated unions, existing unions and it 
is nothing censurable. But this concrete model, a union with 
the enormous Russia, would not work, history has proved it. Too 
different are the numerical characters of the nations, the 
traditions, the economic showings, development and 
infrastructures. We think this is evidently incompatible but 
many Russians think it could work. It may turn into a kind of 
historic polemics. God save it from turning into a war. We 
should thank late Academician Andrei Sakharov, may he rest at 
peace, for his great contribution to the development of 
democracy in the former Soviet Union. But even he did not 
forsee in his constitution of European and Asian nations the 
collapse of the Union. What he had was a sweet illusion about a 
splendid union. This sweet illusion apparently lives in the 
minds of Russians and we have to prove them that we can live as 
an independent country. Russians do not believe in it yet 
because they have been brought up differently. I think, that, 
frankly speaking, Latvians also do not fully believe in it. 

