Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Lego for the United Nations"] </F>
  [Text] At the beginning of the year, UN Secretary General 
Butrus Butrus-Ghali sent his emissaries to Europe on a 
particularly sensitive mission. They were to levy troops for 
blue helmet units that would be permanently available for UN 
operations such as the one in Somalia. 
  The Danes and Norwegians immediately made pledges. In Bonn, 
however, there were problems: The team from New York was 
consoled. The government's decision was that at this stage it 
could not name any Bundeswehr units that would be available for 
Butrus-Ghali's future intervention troops. The UN was asked to 
wait until the Bonn constitutional debate about the deployment 
of troops abroad has been settled and the German military 
mission in Somalia has been assessed. 
  Butrus-Ghali does not want to wait that long. He, along with 
the French, British, and Americans are trying to pressure the 
Germans, who are seeking a permanent seat on the UN Security 
Council, into making a greater military commitment. Germany is 
to provide New York with information on its UN troop contingent 
before the Bonn summer recess, that is, by the end of June. 
  The UN chief has drawn his first conclusions from the 
failure 
in Somalia. He never again wants to have to beg for soldiers 
all over the world when an operation is already in progress. 
Nations should maintain military units ("stand-by forces") 
which could be called up and assembled by an expanded general 
staff at UN headquarters under whose joint command they would be 
placed. 
  Bonn knows that it will not be able to refuse indefinitely. 
Concrete plans are already being prepared behind the scenes, as 
if the Bundestag had already changed the constitution, which 
forbids the deployment of Bundeswehr units in military 
conflicts, a long time ago. 
  The times when the government wanted to limit such 
involvement to high-tech troops for "humanitarian missions" are 
long over. German combat troops are also to be available now. 
  "The troops that we will provide to the United Nations will 
not be limited to medical orderlies and logistics specialists, 
but will cover the entire range," says one Defense Ministry 
planner. Following "Bundeswehr successes" in Cambodia, Somalia, 
and among the Kurds, says the Foreign Ministry, the allies' 
"expectations have become higher." 
  Thus, Defense Minister Volker Ruehe, CDU [Christian 
Democratic Union], has abandoned his plans to create two special 
battalions for UN missions along the lines of the Somalia force. 
The new plan envisages "maintaining" a large number of 
companies in various large formations, from communications 
specialists to paratroopers. 
  These units will receive special training and materiel. The 
military wants to form blue helmet units according to the "Lego 
system" (Defense Ministry jargon). In Regensburg, a special 
command staff ("airborne forces command") is already being 
formed and it should command forces all over the world. 
  Military leaders do not want to have to look once again for 
troops in 200 different units as was the case with their corps 
for Africa. "We need," says a planner in the best military 
German, "units that are available and on alert and will serve as 
elements for putting together larger formations." 
  The detailing of troops should not be the end of the matter. 
The people in Bonn are pressing for more organizational 
positions. The Defense Ministry is calling for more key 
positions in the UN military staff. At the moment, there are 
five Bundeswehr officers there, and only two of them are serving 
in the important operational section. "We must be present in 
coordination and decisionmaking," says one Kinkel colleague, 
drawing conclusions from the Somalia debacle. 
  Irrespective of the price? 
  Senior Bonn military officials are already working out a 
simple sum: As in NATO, the number of posts in the military 
staff should be based on the number of troops in contingents. 
Thus, the Germans would have to offer several thousand troops 
to be able to take part in decisions on how the United Nations 
is to promote peace. 
  Bonn's allies have made it clear beyond any doubt that 
whoever wants to participate in command decisions must also 
participate on the battlefield. The chancellor has had to 
abandon his belief that Bundeswehr troops have nothing to look 
for in territories that were at one time occupied by Hitler's 
troops, such as Bosnia and the former Soviet Union. The people 
in Bonn have been trying to avoid deployment in former 
Yugoslavia, despite being urged to do so by the main allies. 
Several blue helmet battalions belonging to other nations have 
been fully equipped with former GDR People's Army equipment at 
no cost. Hundreds of trucks, armored personnel carriers, and 
radio communications units have been given to a Pakistani 
regiment as a present. 
  The government will not get away so lightly next time. In 
its capacity as a regional UN organization, the CSCE is 
currently looking for forces to be used in an armed peace 
mission in the Caucasus. 
  In the crisis region of Nagorno-Karabakh, where Armenians 
and 
Azerbaijanis have been waging a bloody conflict for years, the 
CSCE is planning its first large-scale operation as a guarantor 
of peace. A demilitarized corridor is to be created between the 
two opposing parties and it is to be safeguarded by an 
international buffer force. According to a Defense Ministry 
general, "the inevitable question for us is what form will 
Germany's participation take?" 
  Bonn and NATO face a dilemma. On the one hand, no Western 
state is prepared, according to a Kinkel aide, "to get its 
fingers burned there." On the other hand, the Germans do not 
want the Russians alone to ensure order in the former Soviet 
Union -- not even if they receive a concrete assignment from the 
United Nations or the CSCE. What the Western states have 
proposed is that Moscow should provide the troops, but that CSCE 
officers, including Germans, must also be given supervisory 
roles in blue helmet staff headquarters. Their job, says a Bonn 
diplomat, would be to ensure the Russians adhere "to the rules 
of the game." 
  The Russians have responded cleverly. CSCE officers are 
welcome in the sensitive Caucasus mission, but on one condition: 
Western states are either to provide them with their own troops 
or provide the Russian Army with money. 

