Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article from Ukrainian Navy press center: "Is </F>
the Mirror Guilty of the Eyesore?"] 
  [Text] A program on Russian radio of February 2 of this 
year quoted the expression of a representative of the ChF [Black 
Sea Fleet] command that the delays in paying servicemen in the 
fleet are occurring owing to the lack of cash at the banks of 
Ukraine. 
  The press center of the Navy of Ukraine reports that this is 
just the latest disinformation. Ukrsotsbank [Ukrainian Social 
Bank] acting director T.I. Shcherban has informed us that "there 
has been not a single delay in pay over the course of 1993 due 
to a lack of cash at the Sevastopol branch of the Ukrsotsbank." 
  The chief reason for the delays in issuing pay is the 
absence 
of funds in the accounts of the Black Sea Fleet, and its many 
billions in debt. 
  The city budget is also suffering for the same reasons, 
since 
the Black Sea Fleet is not making timely payments for electric 
power, water, ship repairs, capital construction and other items. 
  The disruptions in the financing of the fleet often occur 
because of the unwarranted ambitions of its command. It refused 
to settle up the amount of 21 million karbovantsi with MO 
[Ministry of Defense] of Ukraine last year for the financing of 
the shipyards of the ChF, for example, only because it had gone 
through the financial service of the Ukrainian Navy. 
  Certainly no requests whatsoever were received from the ChF 
by the financial service of the Ukrainian Navy, either in 
December or in January of this year, for the transfer of funds. 
  This stance can elicit only surprise. Objecting to the fact 
that the MO of Ukraine has financed the ChF through the 
financial service of the Navy, its command for some reason has 
no objections to the analogous actions by the MO of the Russian 
Federation, which also finances the ChF not directly, but rather 
through the economic and financial directorate of the Russian 
Navy. The ChF also does not object to the financing of its 
Russian side through commercial structures, and that goes 
against the requirements of the joint agreement between Russia 
and Ukraine on questions of financing. 
  The disinformation in the fleet community on these issues is 
none other than an attempt by certain parties in the ChF to 
evoke a negative attitude toward Ukraine and its Ministry of 
Defense and Navy. That serves only those who are striving not to 
strengthen friendship and mutual understanding, but rather to 
fan further the hubbub surrounding the problems of the Black Sea 
Fleet and further destabilize the situation. 

