Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Gaston Flosse, president of the French </F>
Polynesian Government, by Nicole Kern; date and place not given: 
"Flosse Behind Chirac -- President of French Polynesian 
Government Wants Nuclear Test Firings To Be Resumed, Deeming 
Them Essential for Credibility of French Defense Policy" -- 
first paragraph is LE FIGARO introduction] 
  [Text] Gaston Flosse, the president of the French 
Polynesian Government, has a dual interest in the debate on 
stopping the Mururoa nuclear tests: first, as the top political 
leader in the region; second, as a deputy. 
  Kern: What is your position in the debate on the 
cessation of firings? 
  Flosse: As a Gaullist, my view is that we have 
already waited too long. The credibility of the French 
deterrent force is at stake. Tests are essential for our 
defense. 
  Kern: What do you think the decision not to resume 
the tests is based on? 
  Flosse: It is the president of the Republic who is 
quite firmly opposed to it. He is the head of the army. He is 
the man in charge for as long as the current period of 
cohabitation lasts. 
  Kern: Has the moratorium not had the advantage of 
enabling better relations with the other Pacific states? 
  Flosse: The nuclear tests had practically been 
forgotten in the region, and relations would not have 
deteriorated if France had not discontinued them. When the last 
test firings were made, Australia and New Zealand already 
reacted less argumentatively than in the past. At the last 
Pacific forum, the resolution opposing the tests still figured 
on the agenda, but no more than usual. On the other hand, a 
resumption of tests after the moratorium would risk heightening 
tension in the area again. 
  Kern: So you follow the same line as Jacques 
Chirac? 
  Flosse: Absolutely. For the resumption of tests 
is absolutely essential to our armaments. There is a need for 
progress in scientific research. I never saw any real motive 
for the moratorium other than pulling off a political coup. 
  Kern: Your determination may appear to be a desire 
to obtain new financial resources... 
  Flosse: Absolutely not. The past agreement with 
the defense minister within the context of the orientation law 
enabled us to obtain more than in the past. My position is not 
linked with any budgetary interest, it is purely political. 

