BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special dispatch from Beijing": Report on interview with </F>
Wu Yi, minister of foreign economic relations and trade, by Xiao 
Lu (5135 6424), in Hong Kong; date not given: "Development 
Trend of Sino-U.S. Economic and Trade Cooperation Judged From Wu 
Yi's Visit to the United States"] 
  [Text] In late April, Wu Yi, minister of foreign trade and 
economic cooperation, paid a week-long unofficial visit to Hong 
Kong and Macao on her way home from a 12-day visit to the United 
States during which she headed a delegation to a meeting of the 
Eighth Sino-American Commerce and Trade Joint Commission. 
  The aim of her visit to Hong Kong and Macao was to 
participate in the meetings of the boards of Hong Kong's China 
Resources Group and Macao's Nam Kwong Group, which are 
subsidiaries of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic 
Cooperation [MOFTEC]. Therefore, except for holding meetings 
and visiting some Chinese-funded enterprises, she did not appear 
on any other occasion. From the first day she arrived in Hong 
Kong, however, she became the focus of the well-informed Hong 
Kong and Macao media. Reporters began to follow her wherever 
she was. Television, radio, and newspapers carried reports 
about her. 
<H5>  Closely Bound Up With Hong Kong's Economy </H5>
  The reason Hong Kong media paid so much attention to Wu Yi's 
Hong Kong visit is, first, because Hong Kong and Macao media 
were very concerned about the results of the minister's 
just-ended visit to the United States. The development trend of 
economic relations and trade between China and the United States 
-- and particularly the question of whether the United States 
would extend China's most- favored-nation [MFN] trading status 
-- is closely bound up with Hong Kong's economy. According to 
the Hong Kong Government's estimation, if MFN status were 
terminated, Hong Kong would suffer a loss of trading 
opportunities ranging from HK$133 billion to HK$187 billion, 
Hong Kong's GNP would shrink by a range between HK$19 billion 
and HK$26 billion, and the number of people whose employment is 
affected will range between 54,000 to 57,000. 
  In a special interview with our staff reporters in Hong 
Kong, 
Wu Yi said that one of her important tasks during the U.S. visit 
was to preside, together with U.S. Secretary of Commerce Ronald 
Brown, over the meeting of the Eighth Sino-American Commerce and 
Trade Joint Commission, held in Washington 13-14 April. She 
thought that the meeting was a success and that it laid a good 
foundation for the establishment of long-term, stable 
cooperative economic relations and trade between China and the 
United States. 
  As an annual meeting between the Chinese and U.S. 
Governments, the meeting of the Sino-American Commerce and Trade 
Joint Commission was the most important mechanism of 
consultation for questions related to bilateral economic 
relations and trade. Wu Yi said: "The meeting discussed a wide 
range of economic and trade issues of common concern. Both 
sides thought this kind of discussion was frank and pragmatic. 
At the end of the meeting, a joint declaration regarding 
cooperation in industrial technology was signed." 
  Please do not think the phrases "a wide range of," "frank," 
and "pragmatic" are some everyday diplomatic terminology. As 
far as this author knows, behind these adjectives were practical 
contents. For example, questions the two ministers discussed 
included MFN status, trade deficit, market access, and 
intellectual property rights. Moreover, under the framework of 
the three working teams for investment, industrial cooperation, 
and law, the Joint Commission meeting was divided into 18 small 
groups for discussions on special topics including finance, 
trade statistics, export control, commercial law, and 
intellectual property rights. Furthermore, the joint declaration 
the was finally issued announced the establishment of 
trade-financing and trade-promotion working teams, thus 
restoring the bilateral law symposium and establishing a 
commercial law working team. These were two highly constructive 
concrete results. 
<H5>  Advance Amid Frictions </H5>
  Wu Yi's basic comment on Sino-U.S. economic relations and 
trade was "advance amid frictions." She said that despite the 
frequent frustrating and restless days, trade volume between the 
two countries increases at a rate of 20 percent each year. 
  She held that the biggest shadow on Sino-U.S. economic 
relations and trade is the U.S. annual review of MFN status for 
China. She stressed that if the United States continues to 
attach conditions to MFN, the consequences will be more serious. 
If the two sides confront each other, they will suffer and 
neither side will win. The delegation's visit to the United 
States fell on the eve of the U.S. Congress' debate over MFN 
status. It was a subtle and sensitive moment. On her visits to 
U.S. Vice President Gore, Treasury Secretary Bentsen, and 
National Economic Council Chairman Rubin, and Commerce Secretary 
Brown, she repeatedly stated China's position. 
  Wu Yi said: MFN status is purely a trade issue. We 
consistently oppose the linking of it with non-trade issues. If 
confrontation arises from this issue, then not only will 
Sino-U.S. economic relations be clouded in a shadow, but there 
also is the possibility they may break up. She said that China 
is fully prepared if the United States chooses to confront China 
and that China will not crumble without MFN status. 
  While 
in the United States, she always cited the Chinese saying to 
explain China's diversified market policy: "If there is no 
light in the east, there is light in the west. If there is 
darkness in the south, it will not be dark in the north." There 
now are 228 countries and regions that have economic relations 
and trade with Mainland China. Wu Yi said: "China's door has 
been opened to the whole world. It is impossible for anyone to 
close it." 
<H5>  An Economic Card </H5>
  Some media hold that during her U.S. trip, Wu Yi played a 
good "economic card": She headed a 200-person investment and 
trade delegation for the trip across the Pacific at the same 
time. The delegation -- which was comprised of high-ranking 
officials, experts, and entrepreneurs from the eight ministries 
and commissions of the State Council and from the 26 provinces, 
municipalities, and autonomous regions -- offered more than 800 
projects for negotiation. They launched large trade-promotion 
campaigns in Los Angeles and New York. It has been learned that 
the delegation was the largest ever sent to the United States by 
China. In the 10-day trade talks, at least $1.3 billion of 
contracts were signed and the total amount as stated in letters 
of intent exceeded $4 billion. 
  U.S. financial, industrial, and commercial circles responded 
enthusiastically. Various multinational corporations and 
medium-sized and small investors kept visiting, and a total of 
1,200 or more people participated in the trade talks. 
  Everyone knows that last year, more than 300 large U.S. 
corporations sent a joint letter to President Clinton, asking 
for the unconditional renewal of China's MFN status, ending the 
annual debate at an early date, and eliminating destabilizing 
factors. Since the end of the Cold War, the international 
macroclimate has developed in the direction of "economics and 
trade," and among corporations from around the world China has 
become a large market to scramble for. So far, of the 500 
largest corporations listed by FORTUNE, 52 have set up factories 
in China, and U.S. economic interests have been expanding 
continuously. Therefore, the call for the resolution of China's 
MFN status comes mainly from U.S. industrial and commercial 
circles. They were extremely interested in the MOFTEC 
minister's visit. 
  Moreover, many U.S. industrialists and businessmen know that 
Wu Yi was once an entrepreneur in charge of a large 
petrochemical company and that she has excellent expertise. On 
one occasion when she met IBM's new president in Beijing, her 
familiarity with and knowledge of IBM's business greatly 
surprised the guest, who exclaimed: "I am wondering if I am the 
IBM president or you." 
<H5>  Historical Opportunity for Sino-U.S. Economic and Trade </H5>
Cooperation 
  During the U.S. trip, Wu Yi paid a special visit to the 
McDonnell Douglas Corporation, and General Electric's president 
flew Wu Yi, head of the Chinese Government Economic and Trade 
Delegation, and Ye Qing, the deputy head and vice minister of 
the State Planning Commission, to its headquarters on a special 
plane. In their last day in New York, the U.S. top boss 
(Greenburgh) came to see her and held a farewell party for Wu Yi 
and her party, at which dozens of bosses of well-known U.S. 
corporations gathered, making the night a brilliant one. 
  Wu Yi placed a big order with the U.S. entrepreneurs: "In 
the next seven years, China's total imports will reach $1,000 
billion. China's emphases of development are in such areas as 
communications, telecommunications, and energy -- precisely 
those in which the United States has an advantage. U.S. 
economic circles are faced with a historical opportunity to 
develop Sino-U.S. economic cooperation." 
  Over the past four years, the U.S. Congress has been a major 
obstacle to the smooth extension of MFN status. In recent 
years, following large numbers of visits to China by congressmen 
and their assistants, plus the positive and effective lobbying 
of U.S. industrialists and businessmen, more and more 
congressmen have come to support the unconditional extension of 
China's MFN status. On the trip to the United States, Wu Yi met 
with more than 30 congressmen and was invited to the Congress, 
where debate was under way. According to data supplied by the 
Chinese Embassy in the United States, that was the first time a 
senior Chinese official had met so large a number of congressmen. 
<H5>  Effective Cooperation Will Create a Miracle </H5>
  Another reason Hong Kong and Macao were so concerned about 
Wu 
Yi's visits was because the popularity of this female minister 
is rapidly increasing in international economic circles. Since 
the end of 1991 when she, as the head of the Chinese 
representatives to the Sino-U.S. talks on intellectual property 
rights, finally succeeded in the nagging talks following an 
arduous battle of words, has been considered a strong rival in 
talks by Western countries, especially by the United States, 
which is the de facto controller of several major world economic 
organizations. Although she did not have to participate in 
talks as her duty during the delegation's visit to the United 
States, she demonstrated a frank, forthright, calm, and 
resourceful personal character in her contacts with government 
officials and entrepreneurs, and won many new friends. Her 
style has become a new image of openness of senior Chinese 
officials and is drawing increased attention. 
  She said: "The United States is the most developed country 
in the world. It possesses a great wealth of capital and 
advanced technology. China is the world's largest developing 
country and possesses a wealth of human resources and a 
practical and potential huge market. If China and the United 
States can achieve effective cooperation, then we believe that 
an economic miracle will be created." 

