Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Greg Torode] </F>
  [Text] Confidential government papers reveal that Chinese 
officials are responsible for half of nearly 100 attacks on 
shipping around the South China Sea in the past 18 months. The 
papers, obtained by the SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST, have been 
cleared by the Security Branch and are expected to be handed by 
the Marine Department today to a visiting United Nations 
maritime safety official. 
  If there is no late editing of the papers, it will mark the 
first time the Government has released into the international 
arena concerns about Chinese official involvement in the 
attacks. Their release will follow heated exchanges between the 
Marine Department and Security Branch, which is fearful of Hong 
Kong overstepping its jurisdiction and offending China. 
  Admiral Thimio Mitropoulos, chairman of the International 
Maritime Organisation's safety committee arrived from Beijing 
yesterday after what he described as "frank and open" 
discussions with mainland foreign affairs, shipping and Customs 
officials. 
  The admiral's visit is being treated with extreme 
sensitivity 
by the Government. To avoid angering China, sources said, a 
planned press conference at the Government Information 
Department offices in Beaconsfield House had been hastily 
changed to the neutral airport departure lounge just before 
Admiral Mitropoulos leaves tomorrow. 
  The papers list 98 attacks and are compiled only from 
distress messages picked up by the Marine Department's rescue 
co-ordination centre since September 1992, without any input 
from local civil servants. About 47 attacks -- many violent 
with tens of rounds of bullets fired on ships leaving Hong Kong 
-- describe clear Chinese official involvement, identifying 
police, Customs, naval and army officers right down to serial 
numbers of patrol vessels. 
  In one attack listed, the uniformed officers claiming to be 
Chinese naval officers threatened to blow up the Panamanian- 
registered tanker World Bridge after hurling explosives on the 
deck and strafing it with machine-guns. The ship, managed by 
Hong Kong's World-Wide Shipping, did not stop and managed to 
outrun the attackers. Another tanker faced rockets and tracer 
fire in the same area, the report notes Reports from captains 
under fire outline lengthy chases at sea, grenade and rocket 
attacks and gun-point searches of cargo far from Chinese 
territorial waters. 
  Much of the information was deleted from an earlier 
government submission to a meeting in London of Admiral 
Mitropoulos' committee with the Foreign Office and Security 
Branch intervening to ensure the Marine Department did not stray 
from the topic of piracy by mentioning any Chinese involvement. 
Many of the cases are far from Hong Kong with no Hong Kong 
people involved, meaning Admiral Mitropoulos' visit could be the 
only chance for the Government to get the information into the 
international domain. China, like Hong Kong and Britain, is a 
member of the maritime organisation. 

