Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lu Zhidi [0712 1807 6611], senior engineer in </F>
the China Wind Energy Technology Development Center, Beijing: 
"Development of China's Wind Energy"] 
  [Text] Following the worldwide petroleum crisis in the 
1970s that spurred the rapid development of new energy resources 
and renewable energy resources in the developed countries, the 
subsequent resolution of that crisis and falling petroleum 
prices have once again slowed the development momentum of new 
energy resources and renewable energy resources. During the past 
several years mankind has come to understand that fossil energy 
resource reserves are limited and that pollution from fossil 
energy resources has obviously destroyed the equilibrium between 
global space and the overall ecology on which mankind depends 
for its existence and that non-polluting new energy resources 
and renewable energy resources are truly energy resources on 
which it can rely. 
  Wind energy is a clean and renewable inexhaustible energy 
resource. Through more than 10 years of research and 
development, the technology is maturing and the economic and 
social benefits are apparent (the price of wind-generated 
electricity in the United States is $0.06 to $0.07 per kWh and 
will drop to $0.04 by the year 2000). As a result, the developed 
countries are competing to develop it and are investing large 
amounts of capital, formulating several medium and long-term 
development programs, and establishing all types of 
organizations to conduct R&amp;D (such as Denmark's (Lisuo) Wind 
Powered Generator Experiment Station, the United States Wind 
Energy Association, the Japan Wind Energy Association, the 
European Wind Energy Assocation, etc.). At the same time, all 
countries are competing to formulate the associated policies 
such as providing tax exemptions for private capital investments 
in wind energy in the United States and requiring that electric 
power companies purchase wind-generated electricity from 
wind-powered generating fields, and the implementation of a 
one-third subsidy from the state in Denmark for private 
purchases of wind-powered generators and permitting the sale of 
electricity to electric power companies. 
  Wind energy development and utilization in China has always 
been a concern of the state and several key wind energy projects 
were included among projects to attack key S&amp;T problems 
during 
the Sixth 5-Year Plan, Seventh 5-Year Plan, and Eighth 5-Year 
Plan. 
  China has now established an S&amp;T and production staff 
of more 
than 3,000 people, and we have established several 10 production 
plants (producing small-scale and large and medium-sized 
wind-powered machinery) with an annual small-scale wind-powered 
generator production capacity of 30,000 units, and development 
and production of 55 kW, 120 kW, and 200 kW wind-powered 
generators is now in progress. China as a whole has now extended 
120,000 small wind-powered generators and we have nine 
medium-sized and small wind-powered generating fields under 
construction. China's wind-powered installed generating capacity 
is now more than 20MW. As part of it, Inner Mongolia and 
Xinjiang have made enormous contributions to small wind-powered 
generator and large wind-powered generator demonstration, 
extension, and application. 
  China's wind energy development and utilization can be 
divided overall into four phases: Phase 1 involved the 
development of small 10 kW and smaller wind-powered generators. 
Phase 2 involved the commercialization, batch production, and 
extension of small wind-powered generators. Phase 3 involved the 
development of medium-sized 10 kW to 100 kW wind-powered 
generators. The present Phase 4 involves batch production of 
medium-sized wind-powered generators and the development of 
large (100 kW and up) wind-powered generators. The commercial 
wind-powered generators that China is now capable of producing 
in batch amounts are: 100 W, 150 W, 200 W, 250 W, 300 W, 500 W, 
1 kW, 3 kW, 5 kW, 20 kW, 30 kW, 40 kW, 55 kW, and 120 kW 
generators. China will be capable of small-batch production of 
the 200 kW wind-powered generators it developed around the end 
of 1995 to improve the situation of using foreign-made 
generators in our nine wind-powered generating fields in Inner 
Mongolia, Xinjiang, Liaoning, Guangdong, Fujian, Shandong, 
Zhejiang, and other locations. 
  Moreover, China has developed its own eight varieties of 
wind-powered water-raising machinery with a maximum flow rate of 
up to 120 to 200 tons per hour and a maximum lifting height of 
140 meters, and the performance of certain devices has now 
attained international levels. Applications of China's 
wind-powered water raising machinery have already produced 
rather good economic results. For example, using FDG-7 
wind-powered water lifters for two-stage water raising in salt 
fields can conserve over 10,000 kWh of electricity annually for 
a savings of about 6,000 yuan. Wind-powered water lifting 
machinery used in the Tianjin region has produced very good 
economic results in desalination of vegetable fields and they 
are now making major efforts to extend them. 
  China is a developing country with a large population, vast 
territory, and shortages of energy resources. The development of 
new energy resources is a strategic shift for energy resources 
and can produce real benefits. Given China's technical 
capabilities, developing wind energy is certainly not something 
that cannot be attained. China's famous scientist Qian Xueseng 
[6929 1331 2773] wrote to the China Wind Energy Technology 
Development Center in 1991 describing the world's major efforts 
at present to develop wind energy and China's broad prospects 
for wind energy development and saying that we must develop them 
in a major way instead of just piddling around. 
  In June 1991, at the Wind Energy Construction Planning 
Conference held by the Ministry of Energy Resources, Minister 
Huang Yicheng [7806 3015 6134] pointed out that "developing wind 
energy requires that we foster everyone's initiative and that we 
get organized, improve our understanding of using wind power to 
generate electricity, and focus on wind-powered electricity 
generation as one force in overall electric power construction." 
  According to preliminary plans by the Ministry of Energy 
Resources, we will strive for an increase of 120 to 200MW a 
year. To achieve this objective, given China's existing wind 
energy technical forces, we should take the route of 
self-development, which means organizing China's wind energy 
experts on our existing technical foundation in a planned 
manner, absorbing the essence of advanced generators from 
foreign countries, developing large generators that conform to 
China's national conditions, and engaging in cooperation as 
appropriate with foreign businesses that are willing to provide 
technology as well as expanding the proportion of 
domestically-manufactured components and attaining a complete 
shift to domestic production. In the long term, some of our 
products should satisfy domestic demand and some of them should 
be exported to developing countries to attain a foreign exchange 
balance in the entire process. We must watch out that all 
departments do not engage in blind importing without conducting 
economic analysis. The State Science and Technology Commission 
and other ministries and commissions should control imports and, 
except in cases that have state permission, we should focus on 
protecting our own nascent industry, and the State Science and 
Technology Commission should increase its investments in wind 
energy R&amp;D. The State Economics and Trade Commission should 
increase its investments in the wind-powered machinery industry 
and strive to attain a domestic production rate of 80 percent 
for the wind-powered generators in China's wind-powered 
generating fields by 2000 to change the present lopsided 
development situation. 
  Currently, the international price of large wind-powered 
generators is about $900 to $1,000 per kW whereas the price of 
small domestic hydropower generators is 3,000 yuan renminbi per 
kW, so when they are being produced in large batches the price 
of China's large wind-powered generators could be 4,000 to 5,000 
yuan renminbi and each kWh of electricity about 0.04 yuan 
(large-scale development of wind energy would be best among new 
energy resources), so it would be entirely capable of competing 
with thermal power in regions that have electric power 
shortages. Wind-powered electricity on Nan'ao, Guangdong, has 
been welcomed by the local electric power bureau and the Nan'ao 
Island Electric Power company can sustain its existence now by 
selling electricity generated by wind power. Thus, we can affirm 
that with the state's guidance the development of wind energy 
will produce real benefits. 

