BFN 

  [Text] [Unidentified announcer] Our special correspondent 
Yevgeniy Osipovskiy is on the line from Vnukovo-2, where Russian 
Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev arrived from Belgrade literally 
a few minutes ago. What have you got to tell us? 
  [Osipovskiy] Andrey Kozyrev's news conference has only just 
ended and, although it was brief, there was a lot of interesting 
information in it. First among the main decisions that were 
made at the talks with Serbian President Milosevic in Belgrade, 
Kozyrev stressed the decision to hold a meeting in Pale between 
the leadership of the Bosnian Serbs, UN spokesmen, and Vitaliy 
Churkin, the Russian president's cochairman. [title as heard] 
  Kozyrev hoped that this meeting--in other words, making a 
decision on this matter--might succeed in lifting the siege of 
the town and in ensuring the creation of a demilitarized zone to 
be handed over to UN forces, as well as, in the broader 
perspective, in working out conditions for observing a truce 
between the Serb and Muslim sides along all lines of contact 
between them. 
  Kozyrev stressed that we are now at a crossroads. We should 
choose a road that leads to peace. Russia, he stressed, will 
back the aspiration of Serbs to have the sanctions lifted. At 
the same time, however, Kozyrev stressed that Russia will strive 
for an end to the siege of the town, which is not in the 
interests of Serbs and may only lead to disaster. 
  The matter of NATO's decision to carry out an air strike 
against Bosnian Serb positions also came up. Kozyrev stressed 
that this was the chief question, and he referred to President 
Milosevic, who had expressed his confidence that the Serbs would 
enter talks on ending the conflict around Gorazde and that they 
were ready to sign an agreement worked out a week ago. 
  Incidentally, everyone was very skeptical about the signing 
of this agreement, which provides for a halt to military 
operations along the whole line of contact. However, the 
Muslims carried out provocations, Kozyrev said, and the Serbs' 
armed response was inappropriate. After that, in Kozyrev' 
opinion, NATO's decision to carry out air strikes against the 
Serbs' positions was inappropriate. So that is how the present 
situation has emerged and how the crisis has been intensified. 
  A further interesting point here is that President Milosevic 
stressed that everything necessary would be done to stop the 
blockade of UN subunits. However, NATO's air strikes had given 
rise to suspicion on the Serbs' part with regard to these 
forces. This is, of course, making all these talks more 
difficult. 
  The final matter raised at the brief news conference was the 
issue of Russia's joining NATO's Partnership for Peace program, 
specifically in connection with events in Yugoslavia. Kozyrev 
stressed that Russia had been in favor of it from the very 
outset, but now there is discussion regarding in what form 
Russia will sign it--in the form of a framework agreement or in 
the form of a broader agreement. In this connection, Moscow 
needs a broader agreement that would rule out 
unilateral--especially unilateral--military actions in zones 
where the sides are closely cooperating, as in Yugoslavia. 
Kozyrev recalled, in this connection, that Russia is acting 
independently but is constantly--not just daily, but literally 
hourly--keeping its partners informed. It would like them to 
reciprocate in the same way. 
  Those, I think, are all the questions that Foreign Minister 
Kozyrev answered at Vnukovo-2 after his arrival there from 
Belgrade, where he met Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic. 
  [Announcer] Yevgeniy, I have just one question. What was 
your impression? At this difficult juncture, is there hope in 
the Bosnian crisis about which Kozyrev was speaking, that 
success will be achieved in making a transition toward peace? 
Is there light at the end of the tunnel? Are there grounds for 
optimism, or does the situation still remain very difficult 
indeed? 
  [Osipovskiy] Well, the situation remains difficult, of 
course. Kozyrev stressed two or three times, however, that 
perhaps all the sides now face the issue of choosing the path 
leading to stabilization and peace. In this connection, of 
course, he expressed great hopes regarding the multilateral 
meeting in Pale, which I have already mentioned. 
  [Announcer] Thank you very much. That was our special 
correspondent Yevgeniy Osipovskiy. 

