Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "International Report" program] </F>
  [Text] Burma is on the brink of an AIDS [Acquired Immuno 
Deficiency Syndrome] explosion that could rival the problems 
experienced in neighboring India and Thailand. New studies 
revealed that Burma has the world's highest prevalence of the 
AIDS-producing HIV virus among intravenous drug users, and one 
estimate says 400,000 people may already have been infected. 
Evan Williams reports that after years of disastrous economic 
isolation, Rangoon's dilapidated health structure appears unable 
to cope with Asia's unknown AIDS epidemic. 
  [Begin recording] 
  Unidentified speaker: He was having fever for 
over a month here, he had thrush all over his month, he had 
these shingles, he had lymphatic glands, and marks all over his 
body. He was very very ill, and in fact I thought he was not 
going to make it. That was a few years ago. 
  Williams: Twenty-four-year-old Myo Tun used to 
share needles with friends to inject heroin for a dollar a hit. 
Now he lies in Rangoon's Infectious Diseases Hospital -- part 
of the first wave of an epidemic nobody really knows the size of. 
  Unidentified speaker: When he started using this 
among his friends nobody, you know, cleans the needle. 
  Williams: In fact, nobody knew about AIDS, and 
few in Burma really still understand it. The biggest problem in 
the country producing most of the world's heroin is among 
injecting drug users. Many are sexually active young men who 
work in mining areas and travel throughout the country. It's 
illegal to possess a needle in Burma so instead those using 
heroin go to so-called shooting galleries where more than a 
dozen people share one needle. A new study says Burma has the 
world's highest rate of HIV infection among injecting drug 
users. It is a third more than New York and 15 times more than 
Sydney. It says HIV infection among these drug users in Burma 
is out of control, and there are no signs of that changing. In 
some areas, 96 percent of prisoners and drug users tested were 
HIV positive. AIDS is established in the Burmese population, it 
says, and a lack of information is spreading it fast. 
  Unidentified speaker: What is needed now is, 
really, a nationwide information campaign which has to reach all 
the population as fast as possible. 
  Williams: UNICEF's Sylvia Muchiani says Burma's 
AIDS problem could already compare with the worst in Asia where 
hundreds of thousands are HIV positive. 
  Muchiani: There are estimates that the HIV 
positive cases could be anywhere between 100,000 and 400,000. 
  Williams: So do you think Burma is actually one 
of the biggest HIV problem countries perhaps in the region? 
  Muchiani: After Thailand and India at the moment, 
and with the knowledge we have, Burma is the third worst country 
in the region. 
  Williams: HIV positive prostitutes returning from 
Thailand, casual sex workers moving through the country, and a 
health system sharing needles for family patients have spread 
HIV into the wider community. Condoms are available but in 
short supply and are rarely used. 
  Muchiani: Now the epidemic is not restricted 
anymore to intravenous drug users. It has grown and is 
spreading very rapidly among the heterosexual population. A lot 
has to do with intraborder movement, migration... 
  Williams: International AIDS groups are just 
starting to discover the scale of the problem here, but 
education will be difficult in a conservative society that does 
not openly discuss sex and a country run by a military junta 
lacking international support. [end recording] 

