BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Business News Weekly" feature No. 22 , 23-29 May </F>
94] 
  [Text] In December 1993, Ukraine had to pay 70 to 80 
dollars for each 1,000 cu. m. of natural gas to Russia's 
suppliers. 
  As Oleg Akhrimenko, deputy chairman of the Ukrainian State 
Committee for Oil and Gas, disclosed in an interview to 
UKRINFORM, the most recent agreement with the Russian suppliers 
provides for the natural gas purchasing price of 50 dollars per 
1,000 cu. m. set for Ukraine. 
  According to Mr. Akhrimenko, this price reduction was made 
possible as a result of Ukraine's declared intention to grant 
the state Committee and eventually the Ukrneftegaz National 
Holding Joint-Stock Company the monopoly authority to purchase 
Russian natural gas, instead of numerous government-owned and 
privately-run enterprises. 
  As Yevgeniy Sukhin, first deputy chairman of the State 
Committee for oil and gas and Ukrneftegaz's newly appointed 
president, maintains, Russia's Gazprom, which is the virtual 
monopolist of Russian fuel exports, can be offset and 
counterbalanced by only a replica monopolist. 
  Mr. Sukhin, who was appointed to head Ukrneftegaz by 
President Kravchuk's decree of May 14, 1994, asserts that the 
new suprastructure's other strength will be in monopolizing 
Ukraine's transit piping services rendered to the Russian 
monopolist. In this way, as Mr. Sukhin maintains, Ukraine will 
be able to influence Russia's fuel pricing policies toward 
Ukraine posing as a Russian fuel consumer. 
  In this reduced transit charge-decreased gas purchasing 
price 
game Ukraine is reported to have won as much as 350 million 
dollars from Russia. 
  Though Mr. Sukhin refused to specify Ukraine's transit 
charge, he noted that it did not exceed 1 USD per 1,000 cu. m. 
per km. of pipe-lines. However, an agreement is known to have 
been reached between the two parties setting the transit charge 
at 0.6 USD. 
  Ukrneftegaz's monopoly is supposed to extend to Ukraine's 
domestic fuel market. Posing as such, it will dictate domestic 
fuel prices; though, as Mr. Sukhin asserts, the state, through 
its Anti-Monopoly Committee, will rigidly control the National 
Holding Joint-Stock Company and protect consumers' rights. 
Specific mechanisms to implement this scheme are currently 
drafted and adjusted by authorized ministerial and departmental 
bodies, in accordance with President Kravchuk's decree of May 
11, 1994 "On Holding Companies, which are Set Up in the Process 
of Corporatization and Privatization" (see UBN no. 20/1994). 
  Ukrneftegaz's rigid scheme for fuel supply and transit 
piping 
settling may place many Ukrainian fuel and power-consuming 
enterprises on the brink of shut-down, which as the Ukrainian 
monopoly proponents maintain, will facilitate and accelerate 
Ukraine's real transition to genuine market economic relations. 
However, its opponents warn that the scheme can be effective 
only under a stabilized monetary-crediting system, which is not 
the case with Ukraine, as well as normalized domestic settling. 
  Until Ukrneftegaz's scope of competence has been determined, 
which in principle is a natural monopolist, one is left to 
wonder what the State's control over it will look like, if any, 
in influencing its pricing policies. The issue at stake may 
prove vital for many Ukrainian industries' viability. 
  Russia's experience in forming natural monopolists and 
futility of its anti-monopoly bodies' attempts to control 
commodity and service pricing should teach Ukraine a good 
lesson, though. Russia's Mintopenergo monopolist has been 
frustrating the Russian government's attempts to influence 
domestic pricing policies, so far. 
  It would not be altogether impertinent to remind the 
attentive reader that corporatization of the Ukrainian gas and 
oil complex has followed the Russian pattern, replicating it 
pretty closely, though with about a six-month time lag, which 
makes Ukraine's task of prognosticating the process's likely 
consequences easy enough. On the other hand, as analysts 
maintain, Ukraine's and Russia's replica structures, which 
emerged from the former USSR's integral system, may show, under 
certain conditions, their propensity to merge. 
  The former USSR's gas and petroleum infrastructural legacy 
has not been divided yet between Russia and Ukraine. Leading 
the race after structural reorganisation Russia will obviously 
attempt to exploit its advantage and acquire a sizable part of 
facilities, which are located on Ukraine's territory, making 
Ukraine cede them by way of extinguishing its enormous fuel debt 
to Russia. The Russian side believes that Ukraine's 1 billion 
USD debt to it entitles the Russians to claim controlling 
parcels of stocks in Ukrneftegaz's affiliates. As of this very 
day and date, Ukrneftegaz's authorized capital has not been 
determined. 
  According to Mr. Sukhin, independent foreign experts 
estimate 
Ukrneftegaz's aggregate property at roughly 110 billion dollars. 
Guided by the tentative sum, the National Holding Joint-Stock 
Company's president stated the Ukrainian party's readiness to 
sell stocks to Russia by way of the debt's repayment, but not 
cede proprietorial rights to the Russian side. 
  The Ukrainian official ruled out the controlling parcel 
saying, Russia's maximal share in the stocks would not exceed 2 
per cent. In the meantime, the Russian party has been rather 
vigorously pushing its cause. As it may be the case, Russia's 
actions could be provoked by the Ukrainian State Property Fund's 
position, which estimated Ukrneftegaz's aggregate property at a 
much smaller figure than the independent foreign experts did. 
  As Ukrneftegaz's top-placed officers say, the disputable 
issue will become much clearer, when the National Holding 
Joint-Stock Company's authorized capital and foundation 
documents have been approved together with its scope of 
competence. 

