Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Conakry, Jan 7 (AFP) -- A Liberian armed faction 
slaughtered about 20 Guinean traders in cross-border raids on 
their villages in the Macenta district of southern Guinea, 
authoritative sources said here Friday [7 January]. 
  Members of the United Liberation Movement (ULIMO) attacked 
three villages on December 20, killing traders they accused of 
supplying their rivals of the National Patriotic Front of 
Liberia (NPFL), the sources said. 
  Questioned by AFP from Dakar, Guinean Interior Minister 
Alseny Rene Gomez confirmed "the existence of trouble" along the 
border, but declined to give any casualty toll. 
  Almost all those killed were Malinkes, but the minister said 
the massacre had nothing to do with "an ethnic problem or a 
political problem" among Guineans following a presidential 
election here. 
  Alpha Conde, Guinea's main opposition leader, who is a 
Malinke, also said there was no question of ethnic strife among 
Guineans. 
  "These are ULIMO men who once again have made incursions 
into 
Guinea, killing Guineans they accuse of cooperating with (NPFL 
leader) Charles Taylor," he said. 
  Guinean officials have also accused the NPFL of launching 
punitive raids into Guinean territory to kill traders they 
accuse of supporting ULIMO. 
  Both ULIMO and the NPFL are, with the Armed Forces of 
Liberia, the army of assassinated President Samuel Doe, 
signatories to a peace and disarmament accord reached in Benin 
in July after more than three years of civil war. 
  In a separate development, a first contingent of 173 Ugandan 
soldiers arrived in the Liberian capital Monrovia on Friday, to 
join the Nigerian-led ECOMOG peacekeeping force first sent to 
the war-torn country by other West African states in 1990. 
  They immediately went on to the iron-ore port of Buchanan, 
90 
kilometres (55 miles) east of Monrovia, where their headquarters 
will be established. 
  More than 600 soldiers from Tanzania have arrived in Liberia 
since December 23 under a plan to reinforce ECOMOG with some 
2,55O soldiers from Uganda, Tanzania and Zimbabwe, bringing the 
force's total strength to 19,000. 

