Language: <F P=105> Italian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Trento. "It is not a large sum. It is only 430 
million lire over four years but the important thing in this 
case is the scientific and technological recognition of our 
laboratory and the project that we have been working on in 
recent years. It means that we were right from the beginning." 
IRST (Institute for Scientific Research and Technology) founder 
and director Luigi Stringa is extremely satisfied, and was 
commenting on the close collaboration agreement with the 
extremely powerful MITI, the Japanese ministry of industry and 
international trade, that is part of the new research program 
into artificial intelligence. 
  IRST is definitely talked about more abroad than it is in 
Italy, and this association with Japanese scientists, who are 
working on a new technological challenge, is proof of the fact. 
The involvement of this Trento-based, nationally-funded 
institute in the most prestigious project in the world shows 
that despite the lack of a research policy and the fact that 
funding is always scarce, it is also possible in Italy to have 
methodologies and goals that will stand up to competition from 
the lavishly equipped and extremely rich American, French, and 
German laboratories. 
  The meeting between Trento and Japan is a very special 
story, 
that has its roots in the last decade. Telling the story is 
like tracing the evolution of artificial intelligence throughout 
the 'eighties. The "fifth generation" was a fundamental step. 
This was the Japanese national program that frightened the 
entire West. The goal of the program, that was coordinated 
directly by the MITI, was to invent and construct intelligent 
computers that were capable of simulating human mental processes 
on an industrial scale. It was 1984 and "artificial 
intelligence" was a magical term on the same level as "expert 
systems." Every problem should have been overcome by their 
realization. Hardware and software, gifted with intelligence, 
would have helped man in every initiative and in taking every 
type of decision. There were many futile and dangerous hopes 
and finally there was delusion. Japanese research has surpassed 
this wave, this particular subject, that dominated the frontier 
discipline, of working on the capacity of the 
logical-algorithmic calculation of a machine to vainly attempt 
to imitate the human brain. The "fifth generation" program 
encountered many difficulties and later its goal was modified 
and given specifications at a lower level. This was far removed 
from the importance it had been given, thanks to which the most 
advanced American and European research centers had obtained 
generous funding to stem the enormous Japanese power. 
Paradoxically, the most concrete result obtained from the 
"fifth generation," was the strengthening of research in the 
countries that compete with Japan. 
  In fact, last year, a disconsolate Kazuhiro Fuchi, director 
of the program, was forced by the scientific community of his 
country, to make the conclusions, that everybody already knew, 
official. Nine years of work and 500 billion in investments led 
to the perfection of well-developed workstations and advanced 
software that is entirely Japanese (something important in a 
great nation that ignores the English language, the language 
used in computer science), but nothing that really gets close to 
an intelligent computer. "It will take a lot more time to reach 
this goal. Ten years is completely insufficient," Fuchi 
bitterly commented. 
  The government, industry, and the academy say that he is 
right, and have proposed a new research program with a 
completely changed perspective, the RWC [no expansion provided]. 
As its name already states, realistic ways are being sought for 
the computer to form part of an ever deepening integration 
between the different technologies, to construct systems that 
are able to interact with the external world. An investment of 
one trillion [currency not specified] is to be made over 10 
years. Japanese industry will closely collaborate with 
universities, an undertaking that partially failed in the 
preceding program, and with the help of the best, and most 
suitable, foreign ability, this time it should succeed. There 
are already prototypes that are close to the goal of the RWC, 
which is to obtain intelligence from the machine's ability to 
adapt to its environment, in accordance with the most advanced 
evolutions of computer science and robotics. 
  Stringa continued: "When we read the specifications of the 
new Japanese program here at the IRST, we said `But this is MAIA 
[Advanced Artificial Intelligence Model],' and we decided to 
reply to the announcement made by MITI with our proposal." The 
evaluation committee immediately gave a positive reply and the 
funding arrived with the agreement. For IRST, as well as the 
great satisfaction that derived from the fact that MITI had only 
accepted another two foreign proposals in addition to that of 
the Trento-based laboratory, there is also the security of being 
able to conduct their research without problems. In fact the 
MAIA project has been going on for some time, and working on the 
internal project and the Japanese project is the same thing, and 
will require the same effort. 
  MAIA is a mobile robot that can do a lot of things, such as 
moving about without being given a precise navigation program, 
recognizing the voices and faces of speakers, understanding 
spoken phrases, and giving voice replies in natural language. 
By concentrating all the know-how of IRST onto the realization 
of MAIA, Stringa has managed to do something that still seemed 
to be impossible in the second half of the eighties, that is to 
make the experts in the various branches of artificial 
intelligence communicate with each other. Today it seems to be 
folly, yet yesterday researchers into vision were little 
interested in the progresses of speech recognition, and even 
less in movement. Moreover the construction of MAIA meant 
perfecting a robot that was able to understand orders and then 
obey them. Every type of knowledge was indispensable to be able 
to build the entire system, then one piece had to be added to 
another integrating the subsystems in the best possible way. 
This implied the total involvement of all the work groups, that 
were all equally important for the success of the project. 
  The road of integration, and that of sensors, have 
demonstrated themselves to be IRST's winning cards, although 
they once left the Italian scientific community perplexed. At 
that time people were only talking about expert systems and 
intelligent computers, and perhaps a robot like MAIA seemed 
useless. However, if each of the subsystems making up the robot 
is examined individually, each one has its own autonomy, and it 
is already possible to imagine a series of different 
applications for it. MAIA recognizes faces and books. It plays 
the role of "electronic librarian" at IRST, and could become a 
security system. A face is like a fingerprint and the 
methodology using histograms that is followed by the system 
cannot be deceived. If the face is recognized mathematically, 
the system opens the armored door, and gives the OK to a banking 
operation. 
  The interaction of man and machine using natural language is 
one of the big myths of artificial intelligence and its 
applications cover all the sectors of computer science. The 
same is true for voice recognition and comprehension of the 
spoken word. The mobile robot, able to move anywhere, is part 
of many research programs, including a European program for its 
use in hospitals, the robot nurse. It is precisely in this 
sector that there will be deeper collaboration between IRST and 
RWC. It is very difficult to make a machine move without the 
intervention of man in an environment that has no particular 
structures (without the factory assembly lines that run along 
rails). The robot must recognize obstacles, go round them 
without colliding, regulate its velocity, and "feel" the nature 
of the ground. We are only talking about movement on wheels. We 
are putting movement on legs aside for the time being. It is 
not very useful and movement on wheels or caterpillar crawlers 
is often more efficient. The robot must be very intelligent to 
be able to understand where it is and react in the right way to 
the environment surrounding it. 
  Autonomous systems based on vision, and the development of 
learning systems for mobile robots, are the subjects that will 
be concentrated on during the four years of collaboration with 
the Japanese scientists. They remind us of the little automaton 
like ET that wandered around the institute experimenting a 
process for memorizing images and reproducing them. After 
having stored the images the machine could remember those 
environments by referring back to the images. It was the first 
prototype. It will be developed further in the future. 
  As well as the research methodology that has made IRST a 
pole 
of great excellence in the panorama of world research, a type of 
self funding that has obliged the researchers at IRST not to get 
lost in pure academic theory has been very useful and has made 
researchers continually face up to projects and schedules. 
After seven years of activity, IRST costs the autonomous 
province of Trento 22 billion [lire] per year. However, the 
figure is reduced to 14 when copyrights and other sources of 
funding are considered. These are those of the major European 
programs, EUREKA [European Research Coordination Agency] and 
ESPRIT [European Strategic Program for Research and Development 
in Information Technoloiges]. If one was to evaluate, and this 
must be done, the research earnings from the international 
activity of a laboratory, and from its participation in EC 
projects, perhaps IRST would have no rivals. University and 
Scientific research Minister Umberto Colombo has recently 
complaint about the low level of university participation in 
these programs. In fact only 61 billion [lire] will go to the 
entire Italian academic community over five years. IRST, alone, 
can boast of 18, almost one third of the total. 

