BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by 'Amr Nasif from Cairo] </F>
  [Text] For some time, Tel Aviv has anxiously been raising 
with Egyptian politicians an issue of considerable importance to 
it, that is, the picture the Egyptian opposition press draws of 
Israel and the Israeli personality. 
  The Zionist viewpoint can be summed up thus: The political 
line pursued by the Egyptian opposition in general, and by the 
Nasirists and Islamists in particular, is determined to tarnish 
the image of Israel and the Israelis in the eyes of Egyptians by 
pinning many dirty accusations on the Israelis to ruin Egypt's 
economic, social, and health relations with them. The 
consequences have gone beyond the Egyptian society to worldwide 
specialized research centers, which have tended recently to 
verify the charges made in Egypt against Israeli nationals. 
Some of these centers have approached official and nonofficial 
Egyptian sources, who confirmed some of these charges. 
  Making no effort to hide the negative impact this policy 
might have on the Israelis themselves in the long run, Tel Aviv 
has been pressing for invigorating the normalization process on 
the basis of new Israeli proposals. The major and most serious 
of these was a proposal to organize a series of intellectual 
meetings and debates involving two Egyptian and Israeli groups 
of researchers under 35 years of age. According to the 
proposal, the two groups would employ the outcome of these 
debates in studies and research which the mass media in both 
countries can publish to improve each side's image in the eyes 
of the public. 
  An Egyptian source has told AL-SAFIR that Cairo did not 
object to the Israeli proposal and that a debate involving 15 
researchers of each side was indeed held some time ago under the 
auspices of an Egyptian center, which the source referred to by 
the letters "M.E". The Egyptian side to the debate was 
supervised by a person referred to by the letters "A.F." The 
source added that the debate ended in utter failure. Although 
Egypt was careful not to select any fanatic or anti-Israeli 
researchers, all observers noted that the Egyptian researchers 
deliberately insulted the Israelis so much that one of the 
latter remarked: We are not war criminals to be treated with 
such disdain. 
  The source added that Egypt made calculations before and 
after the debate. Available information later confirmed that 
the Israeli researchers had undergone three weeks of intensive 
training in gathering intelligence and that Egypt decided to 
suspend the debates. 
  Instructions were later issued to prepare a file on "Israeli 
criminal conduct in Egypt." Several security and other 
organizations were involved in the report, which confirmed that 
Israeli apparatuses were engaged in an exhaustive process to 
inflict harm on Egypt--harm that can go as far as sabotage. 
  The report recommended a number of measures to confront 
organized Israeli crimes in Egypt. It recorded that Israelis 
are behind 77 percent of crimes involving forgery and drug and 
money smuggling. The report emphasized a special recommendation 
by the Egyptian Central Bank that stringent measures be applied 
by banks and money changers in checking and authenticating the 
currencies Israeli tourists exchange in Egypt. The report cited 
several major crimes that involved Israelis in Egypt. The 
following were among these crimes: 
  - An eight-member Israeli network led by Gadi Ya'aqov was 
caught in possession of $80,000 last January. Investigations 
showed that the network was operating under the command of a 
former Israeli army general named Binyamin 'Ezer. The network 
members succeeded in smuggling large amounts of counterfeit 
money between September and January 1993 with the help of some 
collaborators. 
  -A network to smuggle counterfeit currencies has been 
caught. It operated under the command of Chaim Ben-Aharon, an 
employee in the security section of the Israeli Embassy in Cairo. 
  - A scheme to smuggle $10 million to Egypt through a network 
led by Chaim Eli'ezer with the assistance of former Israeli army 
officers, three tourist guides, and tour-bus drivers working for 
Eagle Tours was aborted in 1993. 
  - Case No. 318/1993, which involved Rufa'il Bitar, who was 
caught in possession of counterfeit sums worth $7,000; 5,000 
pounds sterling; and 20,000 dinars. 
  - Case No. 517/1994 from Ismailia, a felony in which Shalom 
Mitan was caught trying to smuggle one kilogram of heroin and 
counterfeit $3,000 which he planned to deliver to a merchant in 
the jewelry market. 
  - Case No. 2187, in which 'Adli Avraham was caught trying to 
change counterfeit $5,000 at Misr Bank in the Mena House Hotel. 
Avraham was almost a permanent resident in Cairo, under the 
pretext of preparing a master's degree in pharaonic history. 
Criminology laboratory tests confirmed that these currencies 
were identical with those which Chaim Eli'ezer had tried to 
smuggle in terms of the material and method of counterfeiting. 
  - Case No. 397/1994, in which Frois Tekfu, Sahar Rosan, and 
the latter's girlfriend Violette Minshah tried to smuggle large 
amounts of counterfeit currencies. 
  - An attempt to smuggle large quantities of heroin in 
toothpaste tubes by Avraham Shalon, vice president of the 
Israeli Academic Center in Egypt, was aborted. 
  - An attempt by the assistant economic attache at the 
Israeli Embassy to smuggle heroin in the diplomatic pouch was 
aborted in January 1993. 
  - Several Israeli AIDS-infected women have been caught. 
Some of them confessed that it was their national duty to 
transfer AIDS to the largest number of Egyptians possible. 
  The report mentions many such cases, including a network 
that 
was caught by accident in the summer of 1993, when a boat 
carrying Israelis was involved in an accident. The passengers 
were rescued and taken to hospital, where tests showed that all 
the women passengers were AIDS carriers. Two of the passengers 
had been banned from entering Egypt, for being members of the 
AIDS club network uncovered in Egypt in the late 1980's. They 
confessed at that time that they transferred AIDS to three 
Egyptian young men, who tested HIV positive according to 
internist Sabbur. 
  It is appropriate to commend the vigilance of the Egyptian 
security authorities vis-a-vis the Zionist sabotage schemes. 
However, is it not equally appropriate to ask why Egypt has 
refrained from taking firm and decisive measures against the 
Israeli presence in Egypt? Moreover, what is the nature of the 
agreements signed between Egypt and Israel, by which Egypt 
contents itself with extraditing some Israeli saboteurs, or 
trying some of them in utter secrecy? If the solid security 
rule says that the maximum success in crime prevention does not 
exceed 40 percent, what is more likely to succeed is 60 percent 
of these sabotage operations. The people who pay the price for 
these operations are the citizens, who were insulted by 
Agriculture Minister Yusuf Wali when he said two months ago "if 
it were not for Israel, Egypt would not have known the taste of 
bananas or apples." The country's economy as well is paying the 
price; Israel exhausts that economy and the government takes 
revenge from the public sector. 

