Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Zhang Yuan] </F>
  [Text] Fake currencies have been flooding the Chinese 
market, causing widespread concern among law-enforcement 
agencies. Counterfeiters are now using advanced technology to 
make fake notes and water stamps, according to security sources. 
  The Putuo branch of the Industrial and Commercial Bank in 
Shanghai confiscated forged banknotes valued at more than 20,000 
yuan from January to June last year. The bank estimated all its 
14 branches in Shanghai could seize more than 300,000 yuan of 
bogus money in a year as the forged notes kept flooding the 
market. Sources close to the police said laymen would find it 
difficult to tell if the notes were genuine. 
  In an attempt to prevent the banknotes from circulating, 
banks in China will confiscate all the forged notes when 
enterprises and individuals turn in their counterfeited notes. 
The forged notes usually get into the market through business 
transactions. People who accidentally get banknotes will have 
to bear the loss. Some victims said they preferred getting fake 
goods to fake money. Experts in the field of finance said the 
authorities had to enhance the awareness of businessmen and 
citizens to counterfeit currencies. 
  Counterfeiters also illegally print and sell invoices which 
resulted in a disruption of the financial system. Sources said 
some enterprises had commissioned unauthorised or underground 
printing plants to produce invoices to cheat tax departments. 
The invoices are also being used by unscrupulous civil servants 
and businessmen to claim expenses. 
  The authorities have raided many printing plants in 
different 
areas and have seized printing equipment, half-finished 
products, and end products of unauthorised invoices. Recently, 
the tax department of Chengdu, Sichuan province, raided 743 
state-owned and private printing plants in the area, and 39 were 
found to have been involved making fake invoices. 

