Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Liu Zhenyan from Phuket] </F>
  [Text] Taiwan President Li Teng-hui will make a 7-hour 
stopover in Bangkok today before departing for Taiwan at 1800 
[1100 GMT]. Parliament President Marut Bunnak, who led a 
delegation to Taiwan last month, will host a luncheon for Li's 
delegation. 
  According to a Taiwan official source, Li Teng-hui hopes to 
drink "coffee" and meet informally with Prime Minister Chuan 
Likphai after the luncheon. 
  Taiwan authorities tried to ask the Thai side to arrange for 
President Li to have an audience with His Majesty the King 
before concluding his 3-day "holiday trip" to Thailand. The Thai 
side has not replied to the request. Their Majesties the King 
and Queen visited Taiwan 31 years ago. Several royal projects 
in Northern Thailand have received technical assistance from 
Taiwan. 
  Li Teng-hui will leave Phuket for Bangkok at 0900 today. 
Yesterday, Deputy Prime Minister Amnuai Wirawan -- Lin Riguang 
-- played another round of golf with Li Teng-hui and accompanied 
him on a sightseeing tour to Phangnga Bay aboard a cruise 
vessel. The deputy prime minister and Li Teng-hui also had an 
informal luncheon meeting on the boat. Last night Li Teng-hui 
held a return banquet in Phuket. 
  Li invited correspondents to join him on the cruise. After 
his talks with Amnuai, Li told reporters that his visit to the 
ASEAN countries of the Philippines, Indonesia, and Thailand 
achieved great success and enabled him to get a deeper 
understanding of the Southeast Asian region. 
  A golf enthusiast, Li said: "my trip has significance. I am 
not on this trip to play golf. If I want to play golf, I can do 
that in Taiwan. It is not necessary for me to come this far." 
The Taiwan president declined to give details of his talks with 
the Thai deputy prime minister. He only said: "I will hold a 
press conference upon my arrival in Taipei at 2300 tomorrow. I 
will talk for about an hour." Because Li suffered from 
seasickness, he wrapped a small adhesive tape around his neck on 
the instructions of his doctor. 
  Li went to the Blue Canyon Club for another friendly golf 
game yesterday morning. Amnuai finished last among the four 
players with a score of 108. Li finished third with a score of 
102. The winner was Bangkok Bank Vice President Sathit Uthaisi, 
with a score of 77. Jeffrey Koo, adviser to the Taiwan Executive 
Branch, was runner-up with a score of 84. Others attending the 
meeting on the cruise boat included Taiwan Foreign Minister 
Frederick Chien; Hsiao Wan-chang, chairman of the Council for 
Economic Planning and Development of Taiwan; Jeffrey Koo; and 
Phuket Governor Somchit Nimitkun. 
  An informed source told our correspondent that the Thai and 
Taiwan officials exchanged views on strengthening bilateral 
trade and investment cooperation. He said that Li's Southeast 
Asia tour during the Chinese new year is aimed at gathering 
economic and investment information about this region to guide 
Taiwan businessmen interested in investing in this region. 
  Li Teng-hui began his "Chinese new year trip" on 9 February. 
He met Philippine President Fidel Ramos at Subic Bay and held 
an informal meeting with Indonesian President Suharto in Bali. 

