BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement issued by Foreign Ministry to INA] </F>
  [Excerpts] Baghdad, 6 Jun (INA) -- The rebellious, 
separatist clique in Yemen has claimed that it has detained five 
Iraqi soldiers who were participating with the legitimate Yemeni 
forces in battles against the separatists. Reporting this 
allegation, the Saudi MBC television showed pictures of five 
Iraqi citizens, claiming that they were soldiers seized by the 
separatists in Yemen. 
  The Iraqi Foreign Ministry stresses that the five Iraqi 
citizens whose pictures appeared on the screen of Saudi MBC 
television as Iraqi soldiers are in fact civilian employees 
working under contract with the Yemeni Government. [passage 
omitted] 
  The Foreign Ministry spokesman said: By resorting to such 
fabrications and misleading reports, the gang of separatists in 
Yemen attempts to conceal suspect and dishonest objectives 
through which it tries to instigate certain parties against the 
legitimate authorities in Yemen and to harm Iraq. The documents 
kept by the Iraqi Foreign Ministry concerning the five Iraqi 
citizens -- job contracts and passports -- categorically refute 
the separatists' allegations. 
  Noting those facts and expressing readiness to give public 
and mass media access to those documents, the Iraqi Foreign 
Ministry appeals to the news media which have reported those 
allegations to be accurate and to refute, on the basis of those 
facts and documents, the separatists' lies and allegations. 
This is especially since the allegations are not the first 
attempt to mislead and deceive public opinion into believing 
that there are Iraqis fighting by the side of the legitimate 
Yemeni forces. 
  Holding the separatists responsible for the safety of those 
Iraqi citizens and their property, families, and rights, Iraq 
demands that they be released so that they can leave Yemen for 
Iraq. Reiterating its denial of those cheap, unfounded 
allegations which are refuted by categorical evidence, Iraq 
reaffirms its support for the unity of fraternal Yemen and its 
support for the legitimate, legal, and constitutional authority 
represented by the leadership of unified Yemen under President 
'Ali 'Abdallah Salih. Iraq also condemns that treacherous crime 
of secession. 

