CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by V. Zakharchenko, Plant Protection Branch </F>
academician-secretary and Russian Agricultural Academy 
academician: "The Crops Can Be Preserved Only by Preventing the 
Development of Pests and Diseases on the Fields"] 
  [Text] Spring is moving rapidly toward the north and the 
front of field work is becoming broader. When conducting the 
planting campaign it is important to recall that planted areas 
must be protected from pests, diseases, and weeds, which even in 
favorable years bring about losses of more than one-fourth of 
the crops that are raised. Under the conditions of the extremely 
low level of the culture of farming, which is typical of the 
present economic situation of the farms in the country as a 
whole, the possibilities of agrotechnical measures of plant 
protection are especially limited. Protective measures have to 
be conducted when there are practically no systems of farming 
and crop rotations adapted to the specific natural and economic 
conditions. Moreover, this year on every seventh hectare the 
grain crops have been planted with seeds that have not been 
conditioned with respect to weediness and the same is true from 
every fourth hectare planted in sunflowers. In essence, seeds of 
weed plants will be planted on 10 million hectares. The level of 
application of mineral fertilizers is also extremely low. 
  Under these conditions the work for disinfecting the seeds 
is 
proceeding surprisingly slowly. Only 0.5 million tonnes of seed 
material have been prepared in this way and yet it will be 
necessary to plant about 10 million tonnes. Consequently, even 
at the beginning of the growing period the sprouting seeds and 
subsequently also the young plants will be unprotected. In the 
central and northern regions it is not too late to disinfect the 
seeds right before planting. 
  This pertains especially to seed potatoes. In recent years 
in 
zones of commercial potato growing there has been development of 
aggressive new races of phytophthorosis that last year attacked 
at least one-third of the crop. The new races sexually form 
spores that are capable of surviving in the soil for a long 
time. Infection essentially accumulates before the tubers are 
planted in the soil. The danger of soil infection can be reduced 
by skipping no less than three to four years before growing 
potatoes on the field again. But in order to guarantee 
protection from soil and tuber infection with phytophthorosis 
and other diseases it is important to prepare the seed material. 
  Before planting or while it is being done it is expedient to 
use for disinfection nitraphen (60 percent paste at 0.6 
kilograms per tonne), polycarbacine (80 percent s.p. [expansion 
not identified]), homecine (cuprosan) (80 percent s.p. at 0.25 
kilograms per tonne) using 3-10 liters of the liquid per tonne 
of seed material. It is important to inspect the planted areas 
during the growing period and above all on areas where potatoes 
were grown during the preceding year. For reliable protection it 
is necessary to create a reserve of fungicides for four to six 
treatments, including two-system preparations. Before the 
beginning of the work it would be expedient to make up a 
complete fleet of machines used for protecting plants, to 
regulate and adjust them to the norms for expenditure of the 
liquid that are set for the specific conditions, and to 
determine the places for taking in water and filling the 
equipment with preparations so as not to allow pollution of 
water sources and other elements of the environment, and also to 
train personnel. 
  Even now it is clear that agriculture will lose the products 
raised on the field, paying its tribute to the pests, diseases, 
and weeds, because of omissions in the art of farming and the 
inadequate level of plant protection. But it is also clear that 
losses can be reduced to a minimum by efficiently organizing 
protective measures and orienting them to extreme conditions. 
  Especially fixed attention must be devoted to protection 
work 
in regions with intensive farming, and above all the Northern 
Caucasus. According to the results of an analysis of the 
phytosanitary condition here it is suggested that they reduce 
the cereal crops and corn in the crop rotations and increase the 
areas planted in pulse crops and other nongrain crops. It would 
be expedient to revise the system for picking and selecting 
strains, giving priority to those that are resistant to pests 
and diseases, to increase the role of phytological evaluations 
of seeds and planting material, and to step up the monitoring of 
unsanctioned shipment of uninspected planting material from 
abroad. On the whole it is necessary to revise the system of 
farming in order to adapt it more to the real natural and 
economic conditions. This would contribute to solving problems 
of plant protection, whose importance is difficult to 
overestimate. After all, in 1993 because of infestation with 
click beetles alone 6,000 hectares of sugar beets had to be 
replanted. The overall losses were estimated at R1.5 billion in 
1993 prices. Moreover, grain from Krasnodar winter wheat raised 
last year is dangerous to the health. Out of 1.6 million tonnes 
of grain procured in Krasnodar Kray, 1.5 million tonnes are 
infested with fusiarial toxins. 
  There is a significantly greater danger of the development 
of 
pyriculariosis on rice fields, on corn fields--southern 
helmynphosporiosis, and on sunflower fields--phomopsis blight. 
  Last year's experience, however, showed that with well 
arranged work of scientific institutions and the state plant 
protection service it is possible to keep the situation with 
dangerous pest organisms under control. Thus thanks to measures 
that were taken it was possible to avoid losses of crops from 
locusts. 
  The organizational measures taken by the quarantine service 
and agricultural organs made it possible to significantly reduce 
the danger of southern helmynthosporiosis on areas planted in 
corn and to keep other quarantine objects under control. 
  This year is much more difficult than last year. Therefore 
it 
will be necessary to take thoroughly considered steps to 
organize protective measures. There is no doubt that an 
important role must be played by agrotechnical measures, whose 
implementation in and of itself creates preconditions for 
reliable plant protection. But specialists must give prompt 
warning of places of possible appearance of danger from the 
development of harmful organisms and provide measures to 
suppress them. 
  The replanting in the south of the country of about 30 
percent of the winter wheat that froze and became extremely thin 
and more than 80 percent of the barley with early spring crops 
using basically treated seeds does not cause alarm. But the 
field inspections conducted there show that on 10 percent of the 
area the winter crops have been infested by snow mold and about 
5 percent by perenophorosis. In the fight against these diseases 
and also other causes of root and root area rot, it is effective 
to use benlate (0.4 kilograms per hectare) mixed with potassium 
salt (10 kilograms per hectare) and also sportak (1 liter per 
hectare). 
  The warm, dry weather in April created the danger of the 
development of root rot and contributed to the laying of eggs of 
cereal leaf beetle. Therefore it is suggested that treatment 
with pyretroid insecticides (decis, ambush, karate, sumi-alpha 
0.1-0.2 liters per hectare) be done selectively, taking into 
account the number of pests, not before 50-70 percent of the 
larvae have hatched and when there are no less than one of them 
per stalk. It is possible to use a mixture of half norms of 
pyretroids and metaphos. 
  In the southern grain producing regions pine shoot moths 
have 
begun to migrate to the fields planted in cereal grass crops. We 
must not miss the time when the larvae emerged from their mines 
and enter the antrum of the upper leaf of the plant, which lasts 
four to six days. When there are more than 20 larvae per square 
meter it is expedient to treat with metaphos, malathion, or 
sumithion (1 liter per hectare). It is predicted that there will 
be focal spreading on corn of southern helmynthosporiosis and 
stalk rot. If the first half of the summer is damp, fusariosis 
is expected to develop. 
  Under the conditions that have developed with the relatively 
severe winter there is a depression of the traditional pests of 
grain crops in the southern regions--grain carabid and harmful 
chinch bugs. The danger is at the level of the many-year average. 
  This year the problem of providing agricultural commodity 
producers with pesticides and biological substances could be 
eliminated; all the necessary preparations are available for 
this. But, unfortunately, since the farms have no money there 
are difficulties with payment. 
  Measures for fighting against extreme situations on the 
fields are of a statewide nature. Even at the present time it is 
necessary to allot funds and material and technical resources 
for conducting them. Delay could lead to excessive losses and 
costs. 
  Scientific research institutions could play an important 
role 
in solving this problem. It would be expedient even now to 
create all-Russian precision centers for monitoring especially 
dangerous diseases, pests, and quarantine bio-agents, and also 
regional control centers. On the basis of oblast (kray) plant 
protection stations located in the zones with large volumes of 
production of the main agricultural crops it is necessary to 
create points for phytopathological and entomological analysis 
and forecasting of extreme situations. 

