BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent Yevgeniy Belovitskiy] </F>
  [Text] Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk June 7 TASS -- Japanese fishermen 
again violated the Russian sea border in the South Kurils zone 
on Tuesday morning. A Japanese fishing craft, sailing from 
Hokkaido, entered the Russian territorial waters near the island 
of Kunashir. A Russian patrol boat rushed to intercept it in 
spite of the heavy mist. The Japanese vessel was able to escape 
from the Russian territorial waters and no warning shots were 
fired as it happened on the night of June 3-4 when another 
Japanese boat intruded into the Russian territorial waters in 
the Kunashir Strait. 
  The situation on the Russo-Japanese border in the south 
Kurils zone grew particularly strained this month. Poachers, 
who had made a living for many long years by unlawfully fishing 
within the Russian economic zone and in Russian territorial 
waters, became particularly active since the beginning of this 
summer fishing season. It is believed that most of the poachers 
can hardly be expected to switch over to much safer legal 
sources of income. However, Tokyo has bluntly rejected the 
proposal made by Nikolay Pokidin, mayor of the south Kurils 
district, to legalise the "raids" of fishermen from the 
neighbouring Japanese island into the south Kurils zone by 
concluding regional agreements. 
  Russian borderguards believe that the coming summer will be 
particularly tense. Chief of the south Kurils borderguard 
detachment Lieutenant-Colonel Oleg Petrov told ITAR-TASS that 
some violators had been most impudent, as, for instance, on the 
night of June 3-4. As a matter of fact, the legal norms now in 
force allowed the Russian borderguards in that case to open 
effective fire. Petrov noted that the Kurils borderguards had 
always behaved and would go on behaving in strict accordance 
with the federal law on the state border of the Russian 
Federation, but their humaneness will not be endless. 
  Local analysts do not rule out the possibility of additional 
forces being moved to the south Kurils area if the situation 
grew worse, particularly from the fleet of the "Putina-94" 
operation, a large-scale action to protect the biological 
resources of the Russian Far Eastern seas, which began on April 
20. 

