Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] During the Monday closed parliamentary hearings at 
the Council of the Federation the President of Ingushetiya 
Ruslan Aushev called for the introduction of direct presidential 
rule in Prigorodny region of North Ossetia. After the hearings 
he told journalists that during the time of direct presidential 
rule talks should be held between the presidents of Ingushetiya 
and North Ossetia "till the situation becomes stable". 
Prigorodnyy region is a disputed territory between Ossetians 
and Ingushes. 
  "I am against the abolition of the state of emergency, but 
it 
should be restricted to the area where the conflict broke out", 
Aushev said. 
  The president of North Ossetia Akhsarbek Galazov also spoke 
favorably of the hearings and described them as another step to 
peace in the Northern Caucasus and stability in North Ossetia 
and Ingushetiya. 
  According to Galazov, territorial claims and the attempt to 
seize part of Prigorodnyy region by force were the initial cause 
of the Ossetian-Ingush tragedy. "The implementation of the 
decree of President Yeltsin on the return of refugees to their 
home places should begin with the first clause that declares 
Prigorodnyy region an integral part of North Ossetia", Galazov 
said. 
  He said that the Russian president, government and Federal 
Assembly face the task of ruling out "any territorial changes, 
and not only in the Northern Caucasus". The integrity of Russia 
can be preserved only in this way, Galazov thinks. 
  Galazov spoke for a comprehensive approach to the refugee 
problem. He called absolutely wrong the reduction of the matter 
to the return of Ingush refugees alone. He said that for three 
and a half years 47,500 refugees from former Soviet republics 
have been living in North Ossetia, among them Ossetians, Azeris, 
Armenians and Russians. Their number continues to grow. 
  In Galazov's opinion official talks between Vladikavkaz and 
Nazran which are now being prepared can begin at the end of 
March or beginning of April. He said the meeting could see the 
signing of a package of documents to settle the situation. 
  The North Ossetian president expressed his sharply negative 
attitude to the proposal to introduce direct presidential rule 
in Prigorodnyy region because "it will do no good". He spoke 
against "the use of force, whoever might use it." 

