Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Riyad Mansur] </F>
  [Text] Amman -- In the first Palestinian opposition 
reaction to the Davos meeting between President Yasir 'Arafat 
and Israel's Foreign Minister Shim'on Peres, the Popular Front 
for the Liberation of Palestine [PFLP], led by George Habash, 
has called on the Palestinian leadership to abandon the Oslo 
agreement and account for its actions to the Palestinian people, 
in view of the damage it has caused. 
  The Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine [DFLP], 
led by Nayif Hawatimah, called for the immediate resignation of 
the Palestinian leadership, which, he said, is not authorized to 
carry on with its devastating policies. 
  'Abd-al-Rahim Malluh, member of the Political Bureau of the 
PFLP, told SAWT AL-SHA'B that before the Davos meeting, it had 
been expected that the PLO negotiators would work out a 
compromise with the Israeli side. But the compromise reached 
accommodated Israel's requirements on the issues of security and 
the crossings. It is regrettable, he said, that things will 
follow much the same line in the future. He noted that the 
Palestinian negotiators reached security agreements with Jordan, 
and asked what has become of them after the Davos session. 
  Malluh urged the rejectionist Palestinian forces and Arab 
forces to move to counter the negative consequences of the Oslo 
accord to give priority to Arab-Palestinian relations and 
inter-Arab relations in order to confront what Israel is trying 
to impose on the Palestinian party or the other Arab parties. 
  Malluh urged the Palestinian leadership to immediately 
abandon the agreement ratified with Israel and to return to the 
Palestinian people, whom it harmed, to account for its actions. 
  Taysir Khalid, member of the DFLP Political Bureau, told 
SAWT 
AL-SHA'B that the results of the Davos meeting, as reported by 
the media, reiterate that the only interpretation of the Oslo 
agreement is the Israeli interpretation. Khalid added that the 
Oslo team gave the impression that there were Israeli and 
Palestinian interpretations of the Oslo agreement. He added 
that what was announced in Davos reiterates that the 
implementation of the agreement falls within the framework of 
what is drawn up by Israel. Khalid, who withdrew from the PLO 
Executive Committee protesting the Oslo agreement, described the 
presence of a Palestinian lawyer at the crossing point as a 
presence to bear false witness to Israel's right to control 
internal and external security in accordance with the military 
laws and orders of the occupation authorities. 

