BFN 

  [Text] Lhasa, June 27 (XINHUA) -- The Tibet Autonomous 
Region will use hydro-power in a bid to quadruple its current 
electric power generating capacity by the end of the century, 
according to local government sources. 
  Figures from the regional industrial electricity department 
show that Tibet has one-eighth of China's total area, but its 
entire electric power generation is only 173,400 kw, 0.096 
percent of the country's total. 
  The lack of power is attributed to the underdeveloped social 
and economic conditions in Tibet, especially the low 
industrialisation, according to Liao Ximing, vice-director of 
the department. 
  One of the region's leading electricity projects under way 
is 
a 90,000-kw pumped hydro-electric storage station at the Yamzhog 
Yum Lake. When completed, it will raise the total installed 
capacity in Tibet by 50 percent. The first 25,000-kw generating 
unit will go into operation by the end of next year. 
  Tibet now has 405 small electric power stations, but most of 
them have a generating capacity of only hundreds of kilowatts. 
  "The vastness of land and dispersion of population and 
natural resources in Tibet have led to having these small-scale 
and scattered stations," the vice-director said. In the coming 
years, more stress will be put on the construction of big 
hydro-power stations above 10,000 kw of generating capacity. 
  Tibet is rich in water resources. The region's potential 
water energy is 200 million kw, 30 percent of the country's 
total, and 56 million of this is exploitable. The Yarlung 
Sangbo River and the eastern mountainous areas possess most of 
the energy. 
  A 10,800-kw station is going to generate power next year, 
and 
the design work for several electric power projects are well 
under way. 
  In addition to hydro-electric power, the region will also 
promote the development of solar and geothermal power. 
  So far, more than 600 places which have underground heat 
have 
been found, with an estimated prospect of 800,000 kw installed 
capacity. 
  The 25,000-kw Yangbajain geothermal power station near Lhasa 
is the biggest power station in Tibet. Geological prospectors 
are exploring terrestrial heat 2,600 m underground nearby, and 
local electric power officials estimate that a new 50,000-kw 
geothermal station might be set up. 
  Not long ago, the United Nations Development Programme 
helped 
build a 1,000-kw geothermal power station which went into 
operation last year. 
  Situated on a plateau dubbed "the roof of the world", the 
region also enjoys abundant sunlight all the year round. Now 
Tibet is applying for international aid to establish a modern 
30,000-50,000 kw solar power station near Lhasa. 

