Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jiang Shijie [3068 0013 2638], RENMIN RIBAO </F>
reporter: "Electric Power: Another Bottleneck in China's 
Economy"] 
  [Text] [Editorial Note] Today, we begin a series dealing 
with electric power issues with this article, "Electric Power: 
Another Bottleneck in China's Economy." The subject matter of 
the series will be of two types: reportage uncovering 
contradictions and pointing out means of resolving them; 
descriptions of typical cases in power construction about which 
people have strong feelings. 
  For the people's economy to achieve sustained, rapid, and 
effective development, we must readjust industry's structure and 
conscientiously eliminate the bottlenecks that constrain it. 
This is a major, real issue of broad significance which should 
attract attention at all levels and from all quarters. Points of 
view, statements of concern, and advocacy from all parties will 
help to further clarify the situation, to achieve unity of 
understanding, to draw on collective wisdom, and to find better, 
more numerous and more effective methods and approaches to 
resolve the contradictions. In the future this paper will tackle 
major, multilevel problems of economic activity and economic 
life and will use serialized reports and continuing coverage to 
investigate and analyze them, so as to promote the appropriate 
solution of real problems. We hope those working in the economy 
will highlight themes for us. 
  It should be made clear that, for a variety of reasons, our 
reportage is not necessarily comprehensive; its objective is to 
prompt serious consideration by all quarters, to launch a 
discussion and to seek a consensus. 
  Everyone would agree that railroads are currently a 
bottleneck in the economy. 
  But if we were to state that electric power is another such 
bottleneck that is constraining China's economic development, 
not everyone would agree: many comrades would stare in blank 
surprise, wondering if this was indeed the case. 
  For did not China's national power output and installed 
capacity vault into fourth place in the world in 1987, and have 
they not retained this position since then? And in the five 
years since 1988, has not 60 million kW of new capacity been 
installed, equivalent to the total amount installed in the 30 
years before the reform and opening to the outside? 
  And is it not true that, on average, China's electric power 
output in two days is now equivalent to its power output for the 
entire year of 1949? 
  It is true that these objections are all based on fact; but 
they do not give the whole story regarding China's electric 
power situation. There is another group of equally important 
facts. 
  Like a specter, power shortages have haunted China for more 
than 20 years. Numerous power outages or cutbacks indicate that 
even though electric power is supposed to be a vanguard, it is 
falling increasingly in arrears, and its rate of advance is 
being hobbled. 
  China's supply of electric power began to be tight in 1970, 
when there was occasionally not enough to go around. Because 
power generating equipment must be operated so as to maintain a 
constant balance between production, supply, and sales, the 
principal emergency measure used to "compensate" power shortages 
was to cut off or cut back on the supply of power. As a result, 
power supply planning offices (which later were also given the 
functions of power conservation and power safety, hence gaining 
the name of "three-power" offices) sprang up all over the 
country. Owing to their painstaking management, factories and 
mines, offices and units, and the urban and rural populace began 
to take turns in experiencing load cutbacks or power shutoffs 
one or more times a week. 
  In order to alleviate this intolerable situation, the party 
and government have taken a series of measures during the past 
20 years, and the power industry has in fact made rapid strides. 
But the annual pace of the economy's development has also been 
fairly rapid, and as a result, a debate over whether the power 
industry is lagging behind has intermittently broken out. 
  At the end of the Seventh 5-Year Plan and the beginning of 
the Eighth 5-Year Plan, the dispute as to whether or not there 
was an electric power shortage re-emerged. One view was that 
from 1988 to 1991, the average amount of newly installed 
generating capacity exceeded 10 million kW, and that the 
country's power supply shortage had been alleviated. Proponents 
of this view pointed to the fact that in 1990, the number of 
power cutoffs or cutbacks in Beijing and the amount of power 
involved decreased by 79.1 and 76.77 percent respectively, 
compared with 1989, and in northeast China, power cutbacks and 
outages were essentially eliminated. Another view is that this 
alleviation was only temporary and resulted from a slump in 
production capacity during the period of administrative 
rectification. Neither viewpoint conceded to the other. But 
numerous events since 1992 have put an end to the debate: not 
only has China's electric power shortage not been fundamentally 
alleviated, but adversity has been piled on adversity as local 
power shortages have expanded into a national power shortage and 
intermittent outages have become continuous shortages. 
  Comrades of the National Electric Power Dispatching 
Communications Center gave a reporter the following information: 
  --China's per capita electric power output is now only 644 
kWh, or 40 percent of the world average, leaving China in the 
80th place in the world. 
  --Of the 30 province-level administrative units on the 
mainland, only the Ningxia Muslim Autonomous Region has a slight 
excess of supply over demand; all other provinces, autonomous 
regions, and directly subordinate municipalities are 
experiencing various degrees of difficulty in making ends meet. 
  --Beijing began to experience power shortages in the 1970s, 
and they are now increasing in severity. In 1991, the actual 
supply of electric power fell short of the planned figure by 
400,000 kW; in 1992 the shortfall reached 493,000 kW; and in 
1993 it will increase further, to 683,000 kW. In the first half 
of this year [1993], cutbacks in electric power reached 671,000 
kW, an increase of 30.8 percent over the figure of 513,000 kW in 
the previous year. The shortages were most severe in May, when 
the average daily power cutback rose rapidly to 1.395 million 
kW, an increase of 134 percent from the previous year. 
  --In the East China Grid, which has the greatest installed 
capacity of the country's five major power grids, during the 
first half of this year electric power output was up 9.87 
percent from last year, but supply and demand conflicts were 
extremely acute: from January to May, in Jiangsu and Zhejiang 
provinces alone, there were 12,480 instances of power cutoffs or 
cutbacks mandated by the East China Grid General Scheduling 
Office or the Central Scheduling Offices of the two provinces' 
grid centers; this figure is 4.9 times the figure for the 
preceding year. The cumulative reduction in load was 79.24 
million kW, 2.8 times the figure in the equivalent period of 
last year. 
  --In Guangdong Province, which is on the leading edge of 
China's reform and opening to the outside, the start of electric 
power shortages coincided with the beginning of economic growth. 
For more than a decade, the shortfall of electric power has been 
about 30 percent, and the purchasing of electric power from Hong 
Kong that began in 1979 will continue this year; the amount 
purchased has already increased by a factor of more than 10. 
  --The Northeast China Grid had no power shortages two years 
ago, but this year it will experience a shortfall of 900 million 
kWh, so that users who earlier suffered shutoffs and cutbacks 
will be subjected to the same unpleasantness again. 
  --Numerous incidents, both past and present, make it clear 
that China's electric power industry is falling far too short of 
society's continually expanding need for electricity for 
production and for household use. 
  The electric power shortage is not only holding back the 
continuous, steady, effective growth of the national economy, 
but is also adding to the electric power worries of the masses 
everywhere and infecting the power industry with persistent 
maladies. 
  Some liken electric power to the "life blood" of the 
national 
economy and electric power shortages to anemia: it is clear than 
an anemic patient will have no way of joining the ranks of the 
healthy and vigorous. 
  Developing the national economy is a systems engineering 
activity, and the constraints that are imposed on it by the 
electric power bottleneck are mostly advance constraints. For 
example, China's railroads are not only limited in number, but 
also have low technical standards and limited haulage capacity. 
There is an urgent need to build new electrified lines and to 
electrify existing lines. But if the regions that need new or 
reconstructed lines cannot find the needed electric power, there 
will be no way of making a start with this railway 
electrification. In the 20 years during which China has 
experienced power shortages, there must have been many such 
cases of construction projects that were not built or that were 
built late. 
  The other adverse effects of the electric power bottleneck 
are mostly visible and tangible. 
  First, power cutoffs and cutbacks have caused immense losses 
of industrial output. Everyone knows that without electric power 
to drive it, almost all modern production equipment becomes 
incapable of functioning. But in the priorities for electric 
power cutoffs and cutbacks that the power supply planning 
offices throughout the country have set up, it is industrial 
power users that bear the main impact. In Guangdong, electric 
power shortages result in a loss of power for three or even four 
days a week, and as a result, 30 percent or more of productive 
capacity is idled. It is estimated that at least a third of the 
country's productive capacity stands idle as a result of power 
shortages. Comrades of the Ministry of Electric Power state that 
our annual electric power shortfall is about 15 to 20 percent. 
In 1992, for example, the total electric energy shortfall for 
the year was between 111.7 and 148.9 billion kWh. If we assume 
that each kWh used by industry represents an output value of 4.9 
yuan, then last year the country lost between 547.33 and 729.61 
billion yuan of output. This constitutes an immense economic 
loss. 
  In addition, electric power cutbacks cause harm to 
electrical 
equipment, product quality, and production management. In 
certain industrial and mining enterprises, even if conscientious 
preparations are made after receiving notification of a power 
shutoff, some harm to equipment and products is unavoidable. 
  In addition, serious power shortages also affect China's 
opening to the outside. Experience with the development of 
China's "three capital" enterprises shows that a sufficient 
supply of energy is an important precondition for attracting 
business and capital. Other conditions being equal, foreign 
investigators always "go where the lights are on." The Shenzhen 
Special Economic Zone, the first to be developed in this 
country, has consistently taken emergency measures to assure a 
sufficient, uninterrupted supply of electric power. In addition 
to buying electricity from Hong Kong, at the end of 1991 alone 
it commissioned 10 small fossil-fired power plants (which are 
very uneconomical) with a generating capacity of 500,000 kW, 
investing more than 1.6 billion yuan for the purpose. Even so, 
electricity shortages put a great deal of pressure on Shenzhen. 
  Electric power shortages cause a great deal of inconvenience 
in the daily life of the masses and have an adverse effect on 
the prestige and credibility of the party and government. 
Initially, the reform and opening to the outside caused a great 
improvement in the people's standard of living, with 
televisions, refrigerators, electric fans and the like finding 
their way into homes. But the numerous electric power cutoffs 
and voltage cutbacks have rendered televisions and refrigerators 
unusable and have made fans into nothing more than decorative 
objects. People who want to read have to light candles. Many 
complain that "the power goes off when it's time for supper; the 
power comes on when it's time for bed," and basic-level cadres 
frequently report to their superiors that "when the lights go 
off, the family quarrels start." 
  Serious electric power shortages also create organic 
imbalances in electric power production, leaving behind a 
variety of hidden problems: 
  --Electric power is a special commodity, whose production 
and 
consumption must proceed at the same pace. In order to deal with 
increases in load, sudden malfunctions, decreases in 
hydroelectric power output during the low-water season, and the 
stoppages for routine inspection and maintenance of the 
equipment, the power grid must maintain a certain reserve 
generating capacity, usually equal to 25 percent of the total 
installed capacity (in Hong Kong the figure is between 40 and 50 
percent). This is similar to the practice of having reserve 
troops in wartime. But because of excessive electric power 
shortages, all available forces have to be thrown into the 
breach: the reserve generating equipment too, has to be put into 
action. Therefore, equipment that needs inspection and 
maintenance does not receive it in timely fashion, and some 
essentially deficient generator sets are forced to keep 
operating, which not only has a severe effect on the "health" of 
the equipment, but also leads to a pronounced increase in 
equipment malfunctions and breakdowns and results in large 
numbers of above-plan temporary equipment stoppages. The loss of 
electric energy output as a result of temporary stoppages of 
generating units with rated capacities of 100 kW or more was 
28.4 billion kWh in 1989, 30.1 billion kWh in 1990, and 29.4 
billion kWh in 1991, roughly equivalent to 6 million kWh of 
capacity a year (assuming 5,000 generating hours a year). 
  --In order to maintain the normal economic and technical 
service life of generating equipment (25 years for fossil-fired 
generator sets and 50 years for hydroelectric sets), according 
to international standards, the annual operating time of the 
equipment must be 5,000 hours or less (there is a total of 8,760 
hours in a year). In such developed countries as the United 
States, the UK, France, Germany, and Japan, the figure is 4,000 
hours or less, and in Hong Kong it is between 4,380 and 4,730 
hours. But because of China's low per capita installed 
generating capacity and the need to produce more electric power, 
the annual operating time of generating equipment in this 
country is the highest in the world. Since the Fourth 5-Year 
Plan, the annual operating time of fossil-fired generating 
equipment in this country is universally about 6,000 hours. In 
1990, the annual operating time of equipment at Shajiao A in 
Guangdong, of the power plant at Huangpu, and of major power 
plants elsewhere was over 7,000 hours, and the equipment at the 
Maoming power plant actually was in operation for 8,046 hours 
per year. In recent years, the electric power departments have 
become aware of the seriousness of putting the equipment at 
risk, and in addition, there has been a rather large increase in 
newly commissioned equipment, so that a resolute effort to 
rectify this unscientific, "exploitative" operation has been 
called for. But the electric power shortage is so severe that 
the annual operating time of generating equipment has still 
failed to decline significantly. It was 6,011 hours in 1987, 
5,907 hours in 1988, 5,716 hours in 1989, 5,413 hours in 1990, 
5,451 hours in 1991, and 5,462 hours in 1992. The consequences 
of this long-standing failure to give the equipment some rest 
can only be a shortening of operating life and an increase in 
latent problems, which constantly endanger the safe and stable 
operation of the power grid. 
  --Replacement of the old by the new is a universal law, but 
because of the long-standing electric power shortage, some 
outmoded equipment that cannot be retired on schedule. In 
China's power grid, about 33 million kW of medium- and 
low-voltage generating equipment is in need of thorough overhaul 
or modernization, and in addition, 7 million kW of seriously 
defective hydroelectric equipment and 6 million kW of 
superannuated heat supply equipment is still in operation. The 
country's rural low-voltage power distribution system is 
obsolete everywhere, and even Tian'anmen Square's power supply 
lines, which went into operation in 1959, have not been 
modernized. All of these factors adversely affect the safety, 
reliability, and economic performance of the power grid. 
  "Three feet of ice takes more than a day to freeze." It is 
inadequate investment in electric power and an inadequate scale 
of capital construction that are the true causes of the power 
shortage. An "extraordinary acceleration of development" is an 
approach that offers a hope of alleviating the electric power 
bottleneck. 
  In the late fall of 1991, Energy Minister Huang Yicheng 
visited Hunan and Hubei provinces to inspect the status of 
electric power construction. During his visit, the province 
governors asked him for more electric power, and so did the 
mayors. Even his former neighbors from his hometown of Zaoyang, 
who made a special rush trip to see him, asked him point-blank 
for more electricity. As the person in charge of China's energy 
industry at the time, Huang Yicheng had a clear awareness of the 
basic factors responsible for Central China's energy shortage. 
He said, "Central China's energy shortage is no accident: it is 
entirely due to an inadequate scale of capital construction for 
the power industry." 
  Actually, this penetrating conclusion applies equally to all 
parts of the country that have power shortages, and to China as 
a whole. 
  "To increase oil output, you have to drill wells; to 
increase 
power output, the key is to install equipment": this unadorned 
statement by old power industry hands is an incontrovertible 
truth. 
  The basic characteristic of the electric power industry is 
that it uses an extensive form of expanded reproduction to 
increase its power generating capabilities: the annual increase 
in its ability to produce electricity is equivalent to the 
number of kilowatts of equipment capacity that it adds during 
the year. But to meet the continually expanding requirements of 
the national economy and the people's livelihood, the power 
industry must maintain a coordinated proportionality between 
supply and demand. This is a measure of whether electric power 
development is forging ahead, keeping pace, or falling behind. 
  A commonly used yardstick worldwide is the "electric power 
elasticity coefficient," i.e., the ratio of the annual rate of 
increase in electric power generation to the rate of increase in 
total industrial and agricultural output value. When this 
coefficient is equal to 1, the increase in electric power 
generation and the growth of the economy are keeping pace with 
each other; if it is greater than 1, electric power is indeed 
"leading the way"; and if it is less than 1, this is cause for 
concern, because numerous power cutoffs and cutbacks are 
unavoidable. In China, since the 1970's there has never been a 
year in which the electric power elasticity coefficient reached 
1. For the most part it has been between 0.7 and 0.75. Even in 
the seven-year period from 1986 to 1992, when both installed 
generating capacity and the output of electric energy rose 
rather rapidly and when in addition there was a three-year 
period of management rectification, the average electric power 
elasticity coefficient was still less than 0.9. The value of the 
coefficient for Guangdong Province during the Sixth and Seventh 
5-Year Plans was respectively 0.56 and 0.76. With such low 
values of the elasticity coefficient, it would be surprising if 
power shortages did not occur. 
  Another widely used yardstick is the ratio of 
power-producing 
to power-using equipment, i.e., the ratio of installed 
power-generating capacity to the capacity of equipment that 
consumes electric power. If the supply and demand of electric 
power are in balance, the ratio should be 1:2, indicating that 
during the period in question, power generation capabilities 
were sufficient to meet electric power demand, and no power 
shortage existed. When the ratio is less than 1:2, power 
shortages will occur. The smaller the ratio, the more serious 
the shortages. In China, the ratio was 1:1.91 in the 1960's and 
fell below 1:2 in the 1970's. From a value of 1:2.22 in 1980, it 
decreased to 1:2.54 in 1988, then fell further to 1:2.57 in 
1989. From 1990 to 1992 the value of the ratio was consistently 
between 1:2.45 and 1:2.5. With the persistent low values of this 
ratio over a period of 20 years, serious power shortages and 
frequent power cutoffs are the natural result. 
  Some may say that we should take the long view and that, 
despite power shortages in the past and present, if the Eighth 
and Ninth 5-Year Plans are carried out, shortages may cease by 
the year 2000. 
  An authority from the power field replies that, based on 
economic statistics for the period since readjustment, the 
national electric power requirement in 1995 will be 920 billion 
kWh and that in the year 2000 will be between 1.34 and 1.47 
trillion kWh. If 68 million kW of new large- to medium-size 
generating sets is commissioned during the Eighth 5-Year Plan, 
together with a few medium-to-small size generating sets, a 
capacity of 920 billion kWh could be attained by 1995. If an 
average of 20 million kW of large- to medium-size generating 
equipment capacity is added each year during the Ninth 5-Year 
Plan, then by the year 2000, national generating capacity will 
reach 307 million kW and the output of electric energy will 
attain 1.4 trillion kWh. Clearly, attaining this objective 
involves a great deal of difficulty in such areas as raising 
funds, obtaining equipment, and adequate progress in preparatory 
work, and also depends on a balance of various external 
conditions. Furthermore, even if the above objective is 
realized, the national power shortage will not necessarily be 
fundamentally alleviated. This is because, assuming a population 
of 1.25 billion in 2000, China's per capita installed generating 
capacity will be 0.24 kW and the per capita output of electric 
energy will be only 1096 kWh: this figure is far short not only 
of the per capita values of 26,000 and 18,000 kWh attained by 
Norway and Canada, but even of the figures of 2,000 to 6,000 kWh 
attained in Eastern Europe. 
  Consider also the following analyses. 
  At the end of last year, in the spirit of the 14th Party 
Congress, comrades of the Shandong Province electric power 
office set a specific target for "having electric power lead the 
way," involving effective management and utilization of the 
existing 10 million kW of generating capacity and the 
commissioning of an additional 10 million kW of capacity in the 
next eight years. Meeting this objective will be difficult, but 
it is a stirring undertaking. However, careful calculations show 
that if this goal were realized in the year 2000, Shandong 
Province's electricity shortage would still increase from the 
current 1.5 million kW to 3 million kW, and the relative size of 
the shortfall would be virtually unchanged. 
  Not long ago, after thorough consideration of electric power 
construction projects for the Eighth 5-Year Plan and the power 
development program for the Ninth 5-Year Plan, the Beijing 
municipal electric power departments submitted to the municipal 
leadership a forecast that in the next seven years Beijing's 
electric power shortages will become more severe than they are 
today. 
  The above analyses are, of course, long-term concerns; but 
the next example involves immediate concerns. 
  Since last year, investment in the fixed assets of all 
state-owned units increased by 50 to 70 percent, but 
structurally, there was no tilt of funding toward the energy 
industries. In the last two to three years, electric power 
investments declined steadily: last year the investment in 
electric power was nearly 2 percent below that in the previous 
year. In the first half of this year [1993], investment levels 
in the transportation, posts and telecommunications, metallurgy, 
and building materials sectors showed a pronounced increase, and 
only energy investments received a declining share of total 
investment, falling by 2.9 percent, with investments in electric 
power dropping by 0.9 percent. 
  The central and local authorities have been slow in 
disbursing the electric power investments included in the state 
plan. In the first five months of this year, 40 percent of the 
year's investments should have been disbursed, but the actual 
figure was only 10.9 percent. This circumstance is unprecedented 
in the last 10 years and has caused certain electric power 
construction projects to be completely or partially idled. 
  The backlog of projects under construction has been steadily 
declining, so that the foundation of the electric power pyramid 
is not sound. Because electric power construction involves large 
investments and a long cycle (three to five years for a 
fossil-fired power plant and seven to 10 years for a 
hydroelectric station), there must be a great deal of advance 
work for power industry capital construction: the number of 
projects in the surveying and planning stage must be more than 
10 times the number that had been given authorization; the 
number of authorized projects for which construction 
preparations are being made must be in a similar proportion to 
the number of projects actually under construction; and the 
number of projects under construction must be in a similar 
proportion to the number of projects about to be commissioned. 
Only in this way will it be possible to continue commissioning 
new power generating capacities each year. Regrettably, during 
the last few years, the ratio of under-construction generating 
capacity to capacity commissioned within the year has been 
declining steadily: it was 9:1 in 1990, 5.9:1 in 1991, and 5:1 
in 1992; this year, it will fall below 5:1. 
  Both long-range and short-range concerns are being turned 
over in the minds of Minister of Electric Power Shi Dazhen and 
his four deputies. These top commanders, who have been 
inseparably connected with the electric power industry and who 
now shoulder the arduous responsibilities of China's electric 
power reform and development, took counsel together, and at a 
major Ministry of Electric Power meeting held on 28 May of this 
year they stated resoundingly that "if the electric power 
industry does not undertake an extraordinary acceleration of its 
development, it will be impossible for electric power to lead 
the way. In order for electric power to lead the way, the power 
industry must strive to make reform more thorough, because 
without reform no solution is possible." 
  Having electric power lead the way has been a consistent 
policy guideline of the central party authorities and the State 
Council. In 1953, in an annotation to the report of a party 
group in the Ministry of Fuel Industry, the CPC Central 
Committee stated that the coal, oil and electric power 
industries are the vanguard industries of the national economy. 
In the 1950's, Comrade Mao Zedong stated that electric power and 
transport facilities were the vanguard sectors. In 1985, while 
drafting recommendations for the Seventh 5-Year Plan, the CPC 
Central Committee stated that "the development of the energy 
industry must be centered on electric power." And in March 1993, 
in a political report delivered to the first session of the 
Eighth National People's Congress, Premier Li Peng stated that 
"we must vigorously develop the electric power industry." The 
statement of the Ministry of Electric Power leadership that in 
the future, the electric power industry must undertake "an 
extraordinary acceleration of its development" is consistent 
with China's conditions and with worldwide trends. In the course 
of gathering information for this article, I had the sense that 
the 2 million employees of the nation's power system are geared 
up for an extraordinary acceleration of the power industry's 
development, and that all sectors of the national economy, tired 
of electricity cutoffs and cutbacks, are eagerly looking forward 
to an early breakout from the electric power bottleneck. 

