BFN 

<F P=106> ["Press Review" -- ITAR-TASS headline] </F>
  [Text] Moscow May 17 -- The Russian national newspapers 
comment of the blast that destroyed a considerable amount of 
ammunition of the Russian Pacific Fleet. NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA 
quotes Maritime Territory Governor Yevgeniy Nazdratenko as 
saying that the accident was a result of the "thoughtless 
practice" of reducing the army and the navy and insufficient 
funding, which have led to the weakening of discipline in units 
and formations. 
  TRUD suggests that "as always we will now calculate the 
damage which could have been avoided, and continue to hope for 
the better. There will probably be no next blast. But who can 
guarantee that more people will not have to flee their burning 
houses and bury their loved ones hit by unsparing shell 
fragments?". 
  The newspapers also comment on the explosion in Tbilisi's 
Armenian theatre. NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA reports that "the 
Georgian leader made a statement saying the act of terror was 
aimed not at the Armenians residing in Georgia but personally at 
the head of state and his policy". 
  KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA daily says the investigator in charge 
has no doubt that "it was just another routine act of 
diversion". An unofficial version is that the accident is an 
echo of the Karabakh war. Acts of subversion on Georgian 
territory against Armenians and Azeris are a permanent headache 
for Georgian security forces." 
  NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA carried an interview with the secretary 
of the council of defence ministers of the Commonwealth 
member-countries Leonid Ivashov. Asked whether the Baltic 
countries have shown any interest in interacting with the CIS 
member countries in the military field replied, "no active steps 
have yet been taken but I am sure that this process is bound to 
begin earlier or later. The past two years have convincingly 
shown that playing up to the public in politics is one thing and 
real life is something else. We, former Soviet republics, are 
necessary to ourselves and to other ex-Soviet republics. The 
rest of the world has a different interest in us. The 
politicians should start thinking about the future of their 
children and grandchildren. It does not take a lot of brains to 
destroy things...". 
  The same newspaper comments on last week's Geneva talks on 
Bosnia: "What happened at the Geneva meeting of the foreign 
ministers of Russia, the United States, France, Britain, 
Germany. Belgium and Greece, as well as of representatives of 
the United Nations and the European Union, was evaluated by all 
the participants as the world community's breakthrough in the 
Bosnian direction. For the first time the parties immediately 
involved in the settlement of the crisis reached a uniform 
understanding of the problem and took a common stand". 
  ROSSIYSKIE VESTI publishes a viewpoint of Russian 
parliamentarians on the current elections in Ukraine, as 
formulated by Yevgeniy Krinitskiy, an expert of the State Duma 
Committee for Commonwealth affairs and relations with 
compatriots. According to him, "our observers have no doubt 
that the public opinion vector in Ukraine is clearly shifting 
towards pro-Russian sentiments. This is not a theoretical 
assumption, as the fact has been confirmed by a republic wide 
poll. Russia's position should be oriented toward strengthening 
ties with Ukraine without any infringement of its national and 
state dignity, on the basis of mutual respect and mutual 
benefit". 
  The same newspaper carries and interview with Bulgarian 
Ambassador to Russia Kristo Miladinov who points out that "the 
disruption of links is painful and affects the wellbeing of both 
countries. The attempts of our (Bulgarian) entrepreneurs to 
find a niche in the West has led nowhere. Even given an 
agreement with the European Union we cannot force our way onto 
the European: We cannot compete in either prices or quality of 
our products or in stability of deliveries, i believe -- and 
many people agree with this -- that the Commonwealth and Russia 
first of all must remain our main trade partners". 
  NOVAYA YEZHEDNEVNAYA GAZETA (New Daily) reports that "the 
chairman of the Russian State Committee on Defence Industries 
has announced that Russia pans to increase its arms exports by 
50 per cent this year. Given that the Russian gas and oil 
industry is experiencing hard times, arms exports can become one 
of the main sources of Russia's hard currency earnings. 
Russia's main clients in this field are China and India who buy 
between them one half of all the arms Russia sells abroad. in 
addition, the country is planning to make its way onto new 
markets, among which the Middle and Near East is the most 
promising". 
  KRASNAYA ZVEZDA reports that "according to the Georgian 
health minister, Avtandil Dzhorpenadze, 17 thousand of the 
republic's inhabitants have been infected with rabies and are in 
need of urgent medical treatment. Several deaths have already 
been registered. The minister thinks an epidemic is likely to 
flare up in summer unless emergency measures are taken to 
enforce sanitary order. A special commission of the Health 
Ministry has reported that the situation is the worst in 
Adzharia. 

