BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS special correspondents Lyudmila Aleksandrova, </F>
Nikita Yermakov, Yuriy Sizov, Vladimir Shekhovtsov] 
  [Text] Madrid April 12 TASS -- "The grateful nation to 
those who gave their lives for Spain." "The aches of the 
victims of the shooting of May 2, 1808 are buried in this field 
where their blood was spilt," read the signs on the obelisk in 
Madrid's Lealtad Square. Russian President Boris Yeltsin, on an 
official visit here, placed a wreath at this historic monument 
on Tuesday morning. 
  The monument was erected to commemorate the shooting in 1808 
of Madrid people rebelling against French invaders. At the base 
of the obelisk there is an urn with the ashes of heroes. The 
obelisk is framed with statues symbolising loyalty, courage, 
virtue and patriotism. 
  The next stage of the programme of the Russian president in 
Madrid was a visit to the Madrid minicipal council. Inspecting 
the guard of honour of the mounted municipal police, Boris 
Yeltsin, accompanied by Mayor of Madrid Jose Alvarez del 
Mansano, entered the building which was housing municipal 
authorities from mid-17th century. The edifice built in a 
severe style with the use of granite, bricks and tiles was 
later decorated in barocco style. 
  After members of the municipal council were presented to the 
head of the Russian state, the guest made an entry in the golden 
book. The mayor of Madrid presented Boris Yeltsin with the 
golden key to the Spanish capital. 
  Expressing gratitude for this gift, Boris Yeltsin said he 
was 
deeply moved by the fact that ordinary people in Spain wish 
success to Russia in its democratic transformations. "This is 
the best evidence that the striving of Russian and Spanish 
politicians to strenthen relations between the two countries 
will be given support of the people," he said. 
  The president favoured the development of Russo-Spanish ties 
in every direction so that "there should be less cool formalism 
and more life and specific useful deeds in it. Both Spanish and 
Russian people will feel cramped by official formalities." 
Boris Yeltsin said "the style of Russo-Spanish cooperation will 
be determined by hospitality, profound mutual sympathy and 
hospitality." 
  He assessed the presentation of the key to Madrid to him as 
a 
symbol of confidence and friendship to the Russian people and an 
evidence of the intention to develop and deepen cooperation with 
Russia. "Accept my assurances that Russians have the same 
feelings for the Spanish people," Boris Yeltsin said. 
  The palace of Cortez where the Congress of Deputies of the 
Spanish Parliament works is situated close to the municipal 
council. The Congress of Deputies is housed in a modest gray 
building. Its walls have witnessed much in a century and a half 
of the building's existence. Relatively recently, on February 
23, 1981, shots fired by military putschists sounded there. 
They tried to take the country back to its former course. The 
attempt at restoring the former regime proved futile.... 
  President of the Congress of Deputies Felix Pons and 
President of the Senate Juan Jose Laborda met the Russian 
president at the gala main entrance and invited him to the 
building. After the presentation of members of the presidiums 
of both houses and of leaders of the parliamentary groups, Boris 
Yeltsin was presented with medals of the Congress of Deputies 
and the Senate and a copy of the Spanish Constitution of 1978. 

