BFN 

  [Text] Mexico City, 1 Apr (NOTIMEX) -- Costa Rican 
President Rafael Angel Calderon will begin a visit to Mexico on 
5 April. The government has reported Calderon and his colleague, 
Carlos Salinas de Gortari, will sign a free trade agreement 
during his visit. The Foreign Secretariat announced this 
Thursday that during Calderon's visit to Mexico he will sign 
this agreement with Salinas de Gortari and will also meet with 
Finance Secretary Pedro Aspe Armella, as well as with a group of 
Costa Rican businessmen. The agreement is the confirmation of 
Mexico's commitment to the Latin American integration process, 
the Foreign Secretariat report revealed. It also stated this 
will be the country's first free trade agreement with a Central 
American nation. 
  The treaty will open a new phase in relations between both 
countries and will lay the foundation for more in-depth, more 
efficient complementary economic relations between Central 
America and Mexico, the document added. It did not specify, 
however, how long Calderon will stay in Mexico. 
  Costa Rican Commerce Minister Roberto Rojas and Mexican 
Commerce Secretary Jaime Serra Puche headed the negotiations for 
the bilateral pact, which ended in San Jose on 3 March. The 
agreement is the most advanced pact in Latin America, because it 
not only covers the free exchange of goods and services but also 
includes investments and solutions to commercial differences, 
Serra Puche stated when the negotiations ended. 
  When the officials successfully ended their negotiations, 
the 
text of the pact was sent to specialized lawyers in both 
countries for a legal revision, and they wrote the final draft 
of the treaty. Once it is signed, the treaty has to be ratified 
by the legislative branches and promulgated by the executive 
branches in both countries so it can go into effect on 1 January 
1995. 
  The treaty stipulates that both countries will give each 
other gradual tariff advantages on more than 8,400 products. The 
tax cuts will be assigned in three stages. The first phase 
covers products that will be allowed to enter both countries 
without paying custom duties as soon as the agreement goes into 
effect. The second covers items that will not have to pay custom 
duties in the next five years, and the third includes products 
that can be imported tax free in the next 10 years. 
  As soon as the treaty goes into effect, Mexican businessmen 
can export to Costa Rica at least 65 percent of the products on 
the tariff lists without paying custom duties. Costa Rica will 
also be able to sell Mexico 80 percent of the goods on the 
tariff lists without paying custom duties. Those percentages 
amount to between 4,000 and 5,000 products that will be allowed 
to enter the respective countries without paying custom duties. 

