Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Muhammad Ghunaym (Abu Mahir), Fatah Central </F>
Committee member, in Tunis; date not given: "Israel's Tactics in 
the Negotiations Raise Doubt About Its Intentions"--first three 
paragraphs are AL-HAYAH introduction] 
  [Text] The organization delegate and official for the 
occupied territories on the Fatah Central Committee, Muhammad 
Ghunaym (Abu Mahir), stressed the unity of the movement's 
position on the "Gaza-Jericho-first agreement." He said that 
everyone must adhere to the position that has become an official 
Fatah position. 
  However, he explained in an interview with AL-HAYAH in Tunis 
yesterday that recent Israeli policy in the negotiations was 
causing doubt about Israel's intentions to abide by the 
agreement. He said, "We will work through dialogue to stop these 
violations and make Israel abide by the resolutions." 
  The following is the text of the interview. 
  [AL-HAYAH] After signing the declaration of principles 
agreement with Israel, did Palestinians discover that they had 
become embroiled in difficulties over interpretation of the 
content and concepts of the agreement? 
  [Ghunaym] The agreement reflects the balance of forces and 
the circumstances in which it was signed--circumstances 
unfavorable to us Palestinians and to Arabs in general. We went 
to the Madrid conference against the background of the 
post-cold-war balance of international forces, the collapse of 
the Soviet Union, and the Gulf war, which had major impact on 
the Arab body politic. Thus, at the Madrid conference we agreed 
to things we should not have sanctioned had the Arab reality 
been better and the balance of forces undisturbed--for example, 
postponing discussion of Jerusalem, the settlements, and the 
refugee problem. These are questions that will be discussed in 
the final stage. 
  The Oslo agreement did not deviate from the formula on which 
the Madrid conference was based; it did, however, develop that 
formula to the advantage of the Palestinian people and brought 
about gains such as Israeli recognition of the PLO, which means 
recognition of the Palestinian people. Israel's agreement to 
withdraw from Gaza and Jericho constitutes recognition that 
these lands are occupied and not Israel's by right. This, too, 
is a Palestinian achievement. 
  But the agreement also contained many defects and 
shortcomings. This is natural because we did not conclude the 
agreement while we were victorious. 
  [AL-HAYAH] Israel is ignoring the agreement and continuing 
to 
build settlements and confiscate lands. Are these things signs 
of evasion and retreat? 
  [Ghunaym] There is more than one question mark about 
Israel's 
abiding by the agreement and the nature of its intentions about 
implementing the terms of the second stage of the transition 
period--especially regarding the settlements, Jerusalem, 
withdrawal, and the refugees. These harbingers raise doubt about 
Israeli intentions. We expect Israel to persist with these 
tactics, but we will work through dialogue to stop these 
violations and induce Israel to abide by the resolutions. On the 
mass level, protest stands will continue to escalate violently 
as long as this aggression against the land and rights of the 
Palestinian people continues. Thus, there are two methods: one 
official, which is dialogue; the other popular, which is to 
escalate the violence and protest against Israel's policy 
through its army and settlers. The Palestinian response will be 
proportionate to the amount of Israeli violence. 
  The present escalation in the occupied territories does not 
aim necessarily either at destroying the agreement or speeding 
its implementation. The struggle basically is linked to the 
presence of the occupation and will continue according to the 
nature of the circumstances, as long as the occupation and 
settlement exist in Palestinian territory. Israel's 
implementation of the terms of the agreement and handing over 
power to Palestinians will signal the sincerity of Israel's 
commitment and will help calm conditions and turn attention to a 
new stage. 
  [AL-HAYAH] To what extent is the PLO abiding by the terms of 
the agreement at a time when Rabin's government is accusing the 
PLO of not abiding by the tenor of the agreement? 
  [Ghunaym] The Israeli position wants to shrink the powers 
and 
the area of Palestinian national sovereignty in the transition 
period to as little as possible. In other words, it wants to 
make these powers functional. We, however, understand these 
powers as the agreement indicated: that foreign security and 
foreign relations are not the right of the Palestinian 
authority. Thus, the prerogatives must be full. So we hold fast 
to this right. Israel, for its part, is trying to give its own 
interpretation. We think that Israel's logic about this is weak. 
Through negotiations, it may grant the Palestinian position 
because that position agrees with the content of the agreement. 
  [AL-HAYAH] How do you interpret the reserve of international 
organizations regarding the composition of the Palestinian 
economic council? In the context of Palestinian self-rule is 
this reserve foreign interference and tutelage over Palestinian 
structures? 
  [Ghunaym] It is not interference. Rather, certain of the 
parties tried to impose conditions on the mechanism for forming 
the council, but we rejected this. They have recognized and 
approved what we have done. Their terms were rejected, and in 
the end they retreated from them. 
  [AL-HAYAH] Did Israel intend to load the declaration of 
principles agreement with provisions or economic agreements 
aimed at normalization and making the Palestinian economy 
dependent on Israel and a bridge to normalizing Israel's 
relations with the Arab world? 
  [Ghunaym] There still is no real Palestinian economy, 
because 
the occupation confiscated everything. Thus the Palestinian 
economy became, as it were, part of the occupation economy, 
because the occupation joined the Palestinian economy to its 
economy in its occupation stage. In our transition period we 
shall try to achieve Palestinian economic separation, so that 
our economy can be independent from the economy of the 
occupation. After the transition period everything is open to 
discussion. 
  But we must realize that the next stage involves a Middle 
Eastern economic system. Our choice is the Arab option. We will 
work to build an Arab base that moves in two directions: a 
political direction that moves toward unity, and an economic one 
that makes these Arab interests integrated and homogeneous, so 
that our choice of the Middle Eastern system will accord with 
the extent of our national aspirations. As for the apparent 
intertwining now between the Israeli economy and the Palestinian 
economy, the process is to disentangle the Palestinian economy 
from the Israeli economy. It is liberation from the Israeli 
economy, not being attached to it. 
  [AL-HAYAH] The agreement has caused debate in the ranks of 
the Palestinian national movement, particularly at the level of 
the Fatah movement, between opponents and supporters of the 
agreement. To what extent is this debate influencing the 
Palestinian political course? 
  [Ghunaym] The state of debate that has arisen within the 
movement is something natural. It arises from democratic 
practice within Fatah before making a decision. However, when a 
decision is made, there is complete adherence to it, whether it 
expresses one's point of view or differs from points of view. No 
one in Fatah will go against the agreement or hold reservations 
about it, because the position now is a Fatah position, and 
everyone must adhere to it. 
  As for the negotiations, they take difficult forms because 
they are based on differing points of view about texts contained 
in the agreement, despite their explicitness; for each party is 
trying to strengthen its point of view in accordance with its 
understanding of the provisions of the agreement. 
  Israel is obstructing the negotiations through its 
understanding of the subject of security. It seems to want to 
undertake a new occupation of the Gaza Strip through its 
understanding of the security of the settlements. The 
Palestinian side rejects this. Israel always gives itself the 
right to have a presence on the ground, whether on the borders, 
in the settlements, or outside them. All this does not give 
Israel the right to find excuses or justifications for its 
military presence. Nevertheless, Israel has granted the 
necessity of a Palestinian presence at the crossings and on the 
borders. But everything depends on the ability of the 
Palestinian negotiator--on his understanding of the nature of 
the agreement and of what the texts contained in the agreement 
give us. 

