Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jacques Isnard: "Secret Services and French Arms </F>
Manufacturers Have Difficulty Cooperating in Foreign Markets"] 
  [Text] A number of France's weapons manufacturers and its 
intelligence services are currently involved in a 
misunderstanding at best or a divorce at worst. Without actually 
proclaiming it from the rooftops, the former are not above 
accusing the latter of being of no use to them at all in the 
cut-throat competition that pits them against their main rival, 
the United States. The latter have willingly condemned the arms 
industry's inability to work with discretion, while castigating 
its propensity for being a blabbermouth in a world in which 
secrecy is the rule. 
  The attitude of certain French arms firms stems from deals 
in 
Asia and the Pacific and the Near or Middle East, where they 
feel that over the course of the past few months, the General 
Foreign Security Directorate (DGSE) has not given them the 
support they expect from its officers in the field. If one is to 
believe the arms merchants, the intelligence services are 
unable--when they so request--to provide them, in time and with 
sufficient precision or even evidence, with information on the 
precise nature of the proposals submitted to foreign customers 
by their American rivals. The DGSE is supposed to have somewhat 
legal and occasionally even clandestine means to gain access to 
such files. 
  For the arms builders in question, this accusation could 
serve as an alibi for failures vis-a-vis a competitor whom they 
suspect of not sparing any means to win the contract. This 
explanation of the divorce between the DGSE and certain French 
firms remains plausible, but is not sufficient since 
intelligence officials tacitly recognize (without singling out 
any one manufacturer) that it may well be recriminations that 
they are hearing. Nevertheless, they hasten to return the ball 
to the other court. 
<H5>  Excessively Lax, Even Imprudent </H5>
  At the root of this controversy is the so-called affair of 
the "leaks" in March 1993, on the heels of the legislative 
elections in France, when the American press published documents 
implicating the DGSE in acts of industrial, technological or 
economic espionage in the United States. The accusations 
generated strong tension in intelligence communities on both 
sides of the Atlantic (LE MONDE, 4 June 1993), damaged relations 
between the DGSE and the CIA, and forced the new "boss" of 
French intelligence, Jacques Dewattre, to try to restore ties 
with his American counterparts on a different basis. 
  Although the documents, some of which had been doctored from 
what were initially authentic elements, did not emanate from the 
DGSE directly, everything led French agents to believe that the 
sending of the material to American interlocutors was the work 
of industrial sources that either blundered or acted out of 
spite. Whatever the case, the DGSE began to distrust the French 
industrial world, particularly the aeronautics and arms 
industry, which stands accused of not being able to hold its 
tongue and of being too lax in its exchanges with other 
countries, when not openly taxed with imprudence at best and a 
deliberate intent to do harm at worst. 
  From this arises the current limitations placed on the 
transmission of certain "sensitive" intelligence to 
manufacturers who want to know the position of their rival 
exporters across the Atlantic and, in particular, the secrets of 
their proposals compared with French bids. From this the 
discontent of major firms in the face of what seems to them to 
be a deliberate and discriminatory retention of its information 
by the DGSE has also developed. 
<H5>  Reorientation of Missions </H5>
  The whole affair would be no more than an anecdote if it did 
not actually reveal how difficult it will be to handle the 
transformation which most intelligence services in the world 
undertook at the end of the Cold War between the East and West. 
Like its foreign counterparts, the DGSE works less and less on 
military intelligence strictly speaking and now gives priority 
to gathering information of a more political, economic, 
financial, banking, scientific, industrial or commercial nature. 
Today, the quest for so-called defense intelligence makes up 
only 20 percent of the DGSE's overall activities. 
  This reorientation of missions poses the problem of knowing 
to whom to transmit information obtained in these new "niches." 
When the DGSE intercepts documents on GATT, as it did during the 
recent trade negotiations between Europe and the United States, 
there is little uncertainty about the final destination of the 
dossier in question. But when the DGSE reads a message on the 
long-term strategy of a foreign firm that might threaten the 
activity of its French rivals, who should be informed? The 
State, meaning the Elysee and the government through the 
agencies directly involved? Or certain specially designated 
ministries? Or, more directly, the national or private 
enterprise in the sector involved, provided that the 
intelligence services--which have no mandate to do so--interfere 
in the French industrial fabric by giving preference to one 
company over another in the same sphere of activity? The 
questions go unanswered. 
  In practice, the intelligence services in France and abroad 
seek to identify a hand-picked official, the duly-empowered CEO 
or general manager, to come consult the file on site, even 
refusing the right to photocopy the document. 
  All things considered, it is a delicate affair. It is not 
always enough to allay the vigilance of intelligence 
professionals, now distrustful of anyone not sharing their 
natural or excessive obsession with secrecy. It has also 
occurred to manufacturers that they would henceforth be better 
served by setting up their own intelligence networks or by 
calling upon the services of professionals! 

