CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Jana Klusakova: "Pendulum of Czech-Russian </F>
Relations Is Still in Motion"] 
  [Text] The November 1989 revolution in Czechoslovakia 
brought with it the beginning of a new relationship with the 
Soviet Union, a counterreaction to the previous 40 years. We cut 
ourselves loose from dependence on our mighty neighbor in an 
absolute but nonsensical way. 
  Understandably, the local population had a distaste for 
everything emanating from Russia. But the phenomenon of moving 
from one extreme to the other soon became apparent. 
  To illustrate, take the example of Russian-language 
instruction, which existed on a fairly high-quality level in all 
Czechoslovak general-education schools. It is debatable whether 
it was really necessary for all Czech and Slovak children to 
learn this particular language on a compulsory basis beginning 
in the fourth grade, but the fact of the matter is that we had 
thousands of university-educated teachers of Russian. After the 
revolution, there was a radical turnabout. 
  Even though the revolution came in the middle of the school 
year, over 90 percent of parents pulled their children from 
Russian classes and enrolled them instead in German or 
French--and, above all, English--classes. This was all very 
well, except that there was, and remains, a shortage of teachers 
of those languages. The teachers of Russian took crash 
retraining courses so they could teach languages about which 
they had only vague knowledge. Tons of Russian textbooks ended 
up in garbage bins. Established Russian bookstores were 
abolished. These days, Russian is being laboriously 
re-introduced, and there is a scramble to buy new Russian 
textbooks. 
  This scenario provides insight into the current relationship 
between the Czech Republic and Russia, irrespective of culture, 
economics or politics. We know very little about Russia, and the 
information we get is sporadic and incomplete. It seems that our 
biggest concern is that crude oil continues to flow from Russia. 
  It is therefore logical that when Russian Foreign Minister 
Andrei Kozyrev recently arrived in Prague on the first stop of 
his visit to the Visegrad Four countries, Czech journalists were 
surprised by his erudition, tact and "European standard." They 
were amazed that a Russian foreign minister was capable of 
speaking English. 
  Kozyrev was brought up in a Russian diplomatic family. The 
years he spent abroad during his youth predetermined his career 
as a diplomat. He studied at the prestigious Moscow State 
University for Foreign Relations, which is also the alma mater 
of many Czech diplomats. He then served in the Soviet Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs. When he rose to foreign minister, he faced 
the challenge of following Gromyko, Shevardnadze and Pankin--and 
had to make major staff changes in the ministry. 
  Kozyrev ranks among the most progressive Russians, but he 
has 
a well-known habit of changing his opinions according to 
circumstance and need. In the Russian government, he belongs to 
the Yegor Gaydar's reformist faction, although he isn't an 
outright "Yeltsinite." At the same time, well-informed sources 
in Moscow say Prime Minister Victor Chernomyrdin is not 
particularly close to Kozyrev, who is unpopular with extreme 
nationalists, moderates and conservatives. 
  When Kozyrev was in the Czech Republic, he visited President 
Vaclav Havel at his country cottage in Hradecek. Havel served 
his guest cabajka (Hungarian salami) and vodka, then Kozyrev 
answered a few questions posed by journalists. He said, for 
instance, that if the Czechs did not like the expression "sphere 
of interest," he would discontinue its use in regard to 
Russian-Czech Republic relations. He immediately went on to say 
Russians were concerned with the traditionally close historic 
and cultural ties between the two countries. He said these 
relations often took on romantic overtones. 
  As far as the Czech Republic's bid to join NATO was 
concerned, Kozyrev said the matter was a Czech affair but that 
we should not forget that there are other European groupings, 
such as the Visegrad Four. 
  Many among us remember that in the spring of 1968, Leonid 
Brezhnev also declared that what was happening in Czechoslovakia 
was nase delo--our affair. 
  With that in mind, I recall the song by Isaac Dunayevski 
from 
the film "Kuban Cossack." The lyrics go: "You have remained the 
way you always were." 

