BFN 

  [Text] After the regional party committee and government 
held a 17 June meeting of leading cadres of departments directly 
under the jurisdiction of the regional government to make 
arrangements for flood fighting and relief work, the general 
offices of the regional party committee and government held 
another such meeting on the afternoon of 20 June to make further 
arrangements for flood fighting and relief work, at which 
regional government General Secretary (Liu Xianye) transmitted 
the regional party committee's suggestions for calling on 
departments directly under the jurisdiction of the regional 
government to support the flood fighting and relief work effort. 
Deputy Secretary General (Pan Hongquan) made specific 
arrangements for the offering of donations for flood-stricken 
areas. 
  The meeting urged departments directly under the 
jurisdiction 
of the regional government to exert great efforts and make great 
contributions in the current donation activities. This will 
help solve some problems. While actively taking the lead in 
donating money and goods, leading cadres of departments directly 
under the jurisdiction of the regional government should 
earnestly mobilize cadres, staff members, and workers to do 
their utmost to donate money and goods. All units should try 
their best to distribute fewer bonuses and subsidies and to take 
some money from earnings outside the plan for donations for 
flood-hit areas. Enterprises that achieve good economic results 
should be mobilized to make contributions in helping the flooded 
areas with their donations. Donations of clothing, mosquito 
nets, quilts, and daily necessities, which are currently badly 
needed by flood victims, should be mobilized first. 
  According to the two general secretaries, the regional 
leading comrades, including regional party Secretary Zhao Fulin, 
have indicated that provincial leading cadres at the deputy 
level and above will donate 500 yuan or so each. Moreover, the 
offices of the regional party committee and government have 
stated that they will donate 300,000 yuan each. 

