CSO 

<F P=106>   [Article by Andrey Zhdankin: "A Chemical Warfare Romance"] </F>
  [Text] It is no accident that the Universal Human 
Rights Declaration begins with an article on the human right to 
life: After all, if it is not guaranteed, who will take 
advantage of the others? 
  Unfortunately, our domestic history is a history of 
complete neglect of human rights. Even in cases when they are 
officially declared. Times are changing a little, but even today 
it is frequently impossible to exercise in practice the rights 
and freedoms that are registered on paper. 
  The right to life is an empty sound if, for example, a 
person does not know specifically what is threatening his life. 
And if everyone is aware of the dangers of nuclear war, the 
"chemical bomb," which is still being kept in our home, contains 
a number of unpleasant surprises, but the most important thing 
is that few know about them. 
  Citizens of Western countries know precisely how much 
and what kinds of poison they have stored up, where and how to 
destroy it, and the extent to which it threatens their life and 
even their comfort. The situation is different in our country. 
The passions surrounding chemical weapons, which have recently 
burst out of the zone of departments into the field of public 
discussion, confirm that nobody knows the complete, terrible 
picture of military-chemical socialist realism except for a 
small circle of generals of the military-chemical complex. Any 
attempt to make this knowledge public even now is punishable 
under the law. And the power of a chemical charge is such that 
if, God forbid, it were to explode a large proportion of the 
country's population would become mutants. 
<H5>  Glasnost for Export </H5>
  The domestic press started discussing chemical weapons and 
problems related to destroying them two or three years ago. The 
opening of this topic might be called the last gasp of 
Gorbachev's glasnost period. 
  The adherence to the new thinking and openness moved the 
country's leaders to confess their military-chemical "sins" and 
in 1987 even to declare to the whole world that the USSR had 
halted production of chemical weapons. A cause for rejoicing -- 
if only the statement were true! In the spring of 1991 President 
M. Gorbachev crowned the work of the secret group of comrades 
with the Lenin Prize. The service to the homeland was the 
development of a binary weapon whose killing force exceeded 
everything created previously. In case anybody does not know, 
let us emphasize that the prize is now awarded without the 
production of an experimental-industrial batch. At the beginning 
of last year Russia signed (along with 154 other countries) the 
Paris Convention on banning the development, production, 
accumulation, and application of chemical weapons and also their 
destruction. Our small trick and at the same time unquestionable 
achievement is that the components of the binary gas and the gas 
itself are not included on the lists of banned substances. We 
have a weapon but no violation. 
  One must say that with today's development of military 
technology chemical weapons are an anachronism, simply a poison, 
suitable perhaps only for Saddam Husayn to use to poison the 
recalcitrant Kurds and also for poorly developed countries in 
conflicts among themselves because of the relatively low cost of 
production. 
  Against the background of the nuclear missile standoff, 
chemical weapons are nothing more than "toys" of the generals of 
the military-chemical complex, a way of obtaining rank, awards, 
and positions. Like any other chemical substances, toxic agents 
have precise storage periods, after which they turn into 
ecological bombs that are dangerous only to those who have them. 
And in addition it takes immense amounts of money to destroy 
them. 
  According to the Convention (if it is ratified) we will have 
to destroy our chemical weapon stockpiles before the year 2005. 
In keeping with the edict of the president of Russia, in order 
to develop the corresponding program a Committee on Conventional 
Problems of Chemical and Biological Weapons was created in 1992. 
It was headed by one of the generals (in the literal sense) of 
the military-chemical complex, Academician Anatoliy Kuntsevich, 
who in 1987 had announced the termination of the output of 
chemical weapons by the Soviet Union. Under the banner of 
fighting for the destruction of chemical weapons, the "creme de 
la creme" of the military-chemical complex gathered, people who 
for many years had been working on the development and 
production of this weapon. And, one must add, protecting their 
departmental secrets with their life. 
  The committee announced that we had accumulated 40,000 
tonnes 
of toxic agents. Their position regarding the majority of issues 
was cheerful, almost life-affirming. All the "goods" are 
reliably protected. For destruction they could use the former 
capacities for producing the same toxic agents. One sticking 
point was that the unreasonable population of the regions where 
the plants are located was resisting for some reason. Therefore 
they would most likely have to be destroyed not in the places 
where they were produced but in the places where they were being 
stored. 
  The first facility for destroying toxic agents was built 
several years ago in Chapayevsk. 
<H5>  A War Against Our Own People </H5>
  Chapayevsk -- the city, or rather the people living there, 
had suffered through more than their share of military-chemical 
woes. During the war years the local plant produced cartridges, 
mines, and bombs containing mustard gas and lewisite. The safety 
technology for working with toxins was out of the stone age: 
They were removed from the tank cars into barrels with hoses, 
and from the barrels to the ammunition in buckets and jars. The 
angry god Moloch ate up many people, most of them prisoners. 
During peace time the plant had started making pesticides, which 
involves the formation of an immense quantity of dioxin, which 
disturbs the human immune system just as much as AIDS. The 
purification of waste waters and discharges into the atmosphere 
in those days, especially during the difficult times for the 
military, were largely hypothetical concepts. Now the ecology 
has been mutilated so much that 90 percent of the births there 
are pathological. Only 8 percent of the children are born 
normal. That is degeneration. 
  According to the figures in the bulletin "Ecology and 
Conversion" published by the Volga Information Agency in 
Saratov, there are 29 locations in Russia where chemical weapons 
were produced. On that list are Moscow, Volgograd, Bereznyaki 
(Perm Oblast), Novocheboksarsk (Chuvashia), Dzerzhinsk (Nizhniy 
Novgorod Oblast), and Nizhniy Tagil (Yekaterinburg Oblast). To 
this group must be added the main places where chemical weapons 
were tested. There are nine of them. When you add to these the 
24 places where this poison was stored (warehouses), you get a 
fairly full but not a final picture of the theater of military 
operations in which for many years a chemical war was being 
waged against their own people. 
  This is no exaggeration for the sake of making a point. 
Military chemistry left the land and water poisoned in all of 
the aforementioned places. One need not go far; in Moscow in 
Kuzminki from the 1920's until the end of the 1950's there was 
functioning a chemical test site belonging to the Central 
Scientific Research Military-Technical Institute (TsNIVTI). Here 
during the twenties they conducted open tests of mustard gas, 
lewisite, and phosgene, and then they destroyed the toxic 
substances in the same place. It was the idea of the military at 
that time that destruction meant burial in the ground. Nobody 
except the military chemists knows how dangerous it is to live 
there. Valeriy Menshchikov, deputy chairman of the Committee on 
Ecology of the past Supreme Soviet of Russia, thinks that there 
is more than one such test site in Moscow. "We will be simply 
terrified when we learn the truth about Moscow alone!" 
  If they would not spare the capital, there is no need even 
to 
speak of any other sites. The majority of them are located in 
the Volga Basin, where almost one-third of Russia's population 
live. 
  Wastes from the Volgograd Khimprom, where no less than two 
years after the announcement of the termination of the 
production of chemical weapons they were still producing soman, 
were disguised in the general waste waters. The so-called "white 
sea" into which these wastes were discharged joins with the 
residential quarters of the city. In the spring of 1964 during a 
flood the "sea" broke through into the Volga. From Volgograd to 
its mouth the river's entire surface was white with dead fish. 
  At the Novocheboksarsk Khimprom, one of the leaders in the 
production of the poison, in 1974 there was an extremely large 
fire in shop No. 83. VI-X gas was produced there. The fire 
turned into a large-scale ecological disaster. The aftermath was 
covered up, not cleaned up. 
  The list of crimes could be continued. There was, for 
example, the burial of chemical weapons (both our own and 
captured ones) in the seas that wash our country's shores: the 
Baltic, White, Barents, and Okhotsk. How much of what was buried 
and where, and when will it all explode? The generals mollify 
us: "Everything is in order, we have it under control, there is 
no danger." The starfish in the White Sea "spilled the beans." 
They up and died at the very height of perestroyka, and in 
immense quantities at that. 
  We learn about only the largest catastrophes; the crimes 
committed from day to day, little by little, remain outside our 
field of vision. 
<H5>  How Much Poison Do the Generals Have Up Their Sleeves </H5>
  The primary question is specifically what quantity of 
supplies we have. The official figure -- 40,000 tonnes -- tells 
us nothing whatsoever. Independent experts cite much larger 
figures, reaching up to 400,000 tonnes. Doctor of Chemical 
Sciences Lev Fedorov, who knows the problem well, and Vil 
Mirzayanov, who published in MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI an article 
entitled "Poisoned Politics," at the request of the last Supreme 
Soviet, or, more precisely, its Committee on Ecology, painted a 
picture of our "achievements" in the development of chemical 
weapons. It diverges terribly from the official version. 
  The official list does not include phosgene, diphosgene, or 
prussic acid, which up until the sixties were included in the 
concept of chemical weapons, predominantly in army arsenals, and 
were produced on a large scale. 
  In response to the American threat the USSR prepared for 
herbicide war. The aforementioned A. Kuntsevich was awarded the 
title of Hero of Socialist Labor for his work on the Foliant 
program. Something was set aside for practical use as well. 
  L. Fedorov has calculated that from 1940 through 1945, 
77,000 
tonnes of mustard gas were produced, but only 690 tonnes were 
turned in for destruction along with another 1,010 tonnes of a 
mixture of mustard gas and lewisite. A difference of 75,000 
tonnes. What they did with this poison is no idle question. 
There is a similar picture with lewisite of which, according to 
the most modest calculations, 20,601 tonnes were produced and 
6,585 tonnes were turned in. Mustard gas was produced up until 
1940 and, mixed with lewisite, it was still being produced after 
1945. And where are the toxic substances of the third generation 
mentioned by the scientist from Volsk, Vladimir Uglev, a 
dissident of the military-chemical complex? Uglev made them with 
his own hands. Vil Mirzayanov was taken to court for mentioning 
them in MOSKOVSKIYE NOVOSTI. The newspapers did not conduct an 
investigation of this disgraceful trial; they had more important 
things on their mind. Since authorized organs regarded this as 
disclosure of a state secret, it meant that the weapons actually 
did exist. 
  To sum up what has been said, the list of chemical weapons 
turned in for destruction is, to put it mildly, very incomplete. 
The military-chemical monster has many "surprises" up its 
sleeve. Each of them is fraught with terrible tragedies. 
  L. Fedorov included a list of our "achievements" in a 
reference which was burned on the 19th floor of the White House 
while parliament was being fired upon. There is a twist of 
fate... But before its demise the Supreme Soviet "cut" the 
program for destruction of chemical weapons proposed by the 
Committee on Convention Problems. Now the military-chemical 
lobby is trying to work its program in again. On 15 January 
sector chief of the convention committee, Igor Vlasov, stated in 
ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA that "after remarks and corrections the draft 
was adopted." One wonders by whom? The old parliament did not 
approve it and the new one has not discussed it, and neither the 
president nor the prime minister has made any public statement 
regarding this subject. 
  In the brief history of the creation of the domestic program 
for the destruction of chemical weapons there is an episode that 
explains the motives for the behavior of people responsible for 
solving the problem. The developers demanded a considerable sum 
for the program for destruction: The apportionment was curious. 
For the reprofiled military chemistry facilities in 
Novocheboksarsk, Kambarka, Gornyy, Volsk-17, and Shikhani -- the 
construction of a diagnostic center and capacities for 
destroying toxic substances, reconstruction of railroads, and 
solving social problems of the population--they asked R836 
million (prices from a year ago). Kuntsevich and his 
subordinates asked for 90 percent of the foreign currency 
expenditures or, more specifically, $494 million for "measures 
for providing for national and international oversight." 
Translating this phrase into the language of simple concepts, it 
means that the money will be used for trips of official 
specialists, per diem, representation expenses, and other such 
goodies. Per diem was planned at $400 per day! 
  When presenting their brainchild, the developers of the 
draft 
decided to be cunning -- they did not report on the last page, 
which contained the breakdown of expenditures. Apparently there 
is no point in trying to shame these people, but it would not 
hurt for others to give it some thought: Can a difficult problem 
be entrusted to people who are prepared to spend 90 percent of 
the foreign currency on taking care of their own comfort? 
  The proceedings against Vil Mirzayanov demonstrate the 
undiminishing power of the military-chemical lobby. Their chairs 
were just rocked a bit. The generals, after saluting, cheerfully 
adjusted to the destruction. And again they are afloat, with 
money and rank. Not simply survival but a comfortable existence 
has been provided for more than the next 10 years. 
<H5>  The War Continues </H5>
  In the meantime the concealed surpluses of toxic substances 
are being destroyed in a hurry and in a barbaric way. During the 
past two years the main chemical test site left in Shikhani 
(Saratov Oblast) has been operating with a heavy load. After the 
collapse of the Union the test site on the Ust-Yurt plateau 
gained sovereignty; all the work and the specialists were 
transferred to the banks of mother Volga. The leaders of the 
test site, of course, assert that no destruction is taking place 
but, for example, V. Uglev, who worked for 15 years at GITOS -- 
Main Institute of Technology of Organic Synthesis -- located on 
the territory of the test site, and many others saw the 
explosions with their own eyes. 
  Sometimes toxic substances are simply burned or they are 
even 
poured out "on the landscape." What threat does this present? In 
two years the number of oncological diseases in the rayon 
doubled, and now it exceeds the average level in Russia by 2.5 
times. Last summer ulcers began to appear on the skin of the 
local residents, especially after it rained. The clinical 
picture is very similar to the effects of blistering agents 
(mustard gas, lewisite, and mixtures of them). The military 
blames the grass cow parsnip which, according to data from the 
plant protection station, is encountered very rarely in those 
parts. They can give as many arguments back and forth as they 
want to, but they will continue to destroy them as they have 
been doing unless a team from the higher leaders steps in. 
  But the country's leaders are exhibiting Olympian calm and 
complete ignorance of these problems, as though all this were 
happening in a foreign country. But the country and its citizens 
are in the position of hostages; held by a group of people 
joined together by selfish corporate interests. In spite of all 
the changes in society, socialist realism prevails as before in 
the military chemical sphere. But the problem has already gotten 
out of departmental control and the pretty little picture is 
about to collapse. All they have to do is officially recognize 
some "trivia" and it will be necessary to admit all the rest. It 
would be better if this were to take place more quickly. 


