Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [First installment of Foreign Minister Jozef Moravcik's </F>
report to parliament on 2 February: "Slovakia in the World"] 
  [Text] For the first time ever, a report on the 
independent Slovak Republic's foreign policy has been delivered 
in the National Council of the Slovak Republic. We consider 
this document to be historic and have therefore decided to 
publish the full text of it. It was by Foreign Minister Jozef 
Moravcik. 
<H3>  Evaluation of the Fulfillment of Slovak Foreign Policy in 
1993 </H3>
  In 1993, the Slovak Republic established itself as an entity 
under international law. In the first year of its independent 
existence, the Slovak Republic has successfully become party to 
all of the important international organizations and agreements, 
as permitted by the conditions and the situation that arose 
after the partition of Czechoslovakia. In the course of the 
year, we have succeeded in defining the interests and priorities 
of the Slovak Republic's foreign policy and in gradually 
presenting ourselves as an equal-right partner on the 
international scene. These facts create favorable prerequisites 
for the Slovak Republic's foreign policy in 1994. 
<H5>  1. The Sphere of Multilateral Cooperation </H5>
<H5>  1.1 Slovak Foreign Policy in the Security Sphere </H5>
  The unequivocal definition of the Slovak Republic's 
orientation on security matters and drafting a concept in that 
sphere has been one of the most important results of the Slovak 
Republic's foreign policy in 1993. 
  The Slovak Republic is not able to secure its security 
through its own forces. This is why Slovakia began to seek 
security guarantees at the very beginning of its establishment. 
Slovakia unequivocally sees the guarantee for its own security 
in West European security structures, and it seeks the optimal 
ways of integrating itself into them. 
  In the European security system that is being established, 
there are several entities of different importance and weight. 
NATO is the most efficient security organization in Europe. 
The process of the Slovak Republic's rapprochement with NATO is 
a long-term process involving many aspects. This process fits 
harmoniously into the process of establishing a new European 
security system. 
  The basic steps and measures that are inevitable for the 
Slovak Republic's integration into the North Atlantic Alliance 
(NAA) are detailed in the Project of the Slovak Republic's 
Rapprochement with NATO. A commission comprising members of the 
Foreign Ministry, Defense Ministry, and Finance Ministry 
participated in drafting this project. 
<H5>  NATO and the Western European Union [WEU] </H5>
  The Slovak Republic regards extending its activities in the 
North Atlantic Cooperation Council (NACC) and participating in 
the NATO program for Central and East Europe as the most 
important element of its rapprochement with NATO. Slovakia's 
efficient engagement in NACC activities have resulted in its 
participation in the work of the Political Committee, the 
Economic Committee, and an ad hoc peacekeeping group. The 
Slovak Republic's charge d'affaires in Brussels has regularly 
participated in NACC meetings at an ambassadorial level. At the 
end of 1993, Slovakia intensified its contacts with NATO, 
particularly with the aim of influencing the final shape of the 
Partnership for Peace plan. 
  In 1993, the parliamentary aspect of cooperation with NATO 
intensified. The Slovak Republic, as an observer, began 
regularly and actively to participate in North Atlantic Alliance 
meetings. 
  The intensification of the contacts on all of the levels 
represents yet more evidence of improving cooperation between 
NATO and the Slovak Republic. In the course of 1993, Slovak 
Republic representatives at the highest level visited NATO. The 
president's and the prime minister's visit to NATO has finally 
dispersed worries about our security orientation and its nature. 
NATO Secretary General Manfred Woerner received the Slovak 
deputy prime minister and the foreign minister on the occasion 
of the European Community Three meeting with the Visegrad Four 
countries. 
  The contacts of the Slovak Republic's representatives within 
the NACC are also universal. Between 8 and 29 March 1993, there 
was an NACC meeting at the level of defense ministers. The 
participants in the meeting gave their opinions on NACC 
activities since the previous meeting of defense ministers; 
discussed defense-related problems linked to peacekeeping 
operations, which were conducted on the basis of a document 
drafted by the NACC ad hoc group; and gave their opinions on the 
possibility of further cooperation in the sphere of security. 
On 11 June 1993, there was an NACC meeting on the level of 
defense ministers in Athens. On 17 July 1993, A. de Francis, 
NATO first deputy secretary general, received the Slovak foreign 
minister during his visit to Brussels. On 3 December 1993, 
there was an NACC meeting on the level of defense ministers in 
Brussels. 
  Several high NATO officials visited the Slovak Republic in 
1993. J. Shalikashvili, supreme commander of NATO troops in 
Europe, visited Slovakia. In Bratislava, a staff meeting 
between the Slovak Defense Ministry and a NATO SHAPE delegation 
took place with the aim of evaluating the level of mutual 
cooperation and finding ways to improve it. On this basis, the 
plan for cooperation between the Slovak Defense Ministry and 
NATO SHAPE has been drafted for 1994. From the viewpoint of 
searching for the optimal forms of cooperation, the visit to 
Slovakia by Dr. E.v.C. Bruce, NATO director of press and 
information, was an important event. 
  In the fall of 1993, W. van Eekelen, the WEU general 
secretary, visited the Slovak Republic and met with the 
president, the prime minister, and the foreign minister. 
  The visit of the NAA secretary general to the Slovak 
Republic 
on 15 November 1993 helped to develop relations between the NAA 
and the National Council of the Slovak Republic. 
  The Slovak Republic, however, still does not have 
specialized diplomatic representation in NATO in Brussels. The 
task of securing cooperation with NATO and the WEU has been 
fulfilled by our mission in Brussels and the Slovak Permanent 
Mission at the WEU. 
<H5>  CSCE </H5>
  The Slovak Republic's course of action during the CSCE 
meetings in Vienna in 1993 was based on Resolution 980, approved 
by the Slovak Republic Government on 22 December 1992. The 
activity and contacts with the U.S. Department of Defense, the 
Defense Ministries of Sweden and Italy, and the CSCE general 
secretary have helped to efficiently establish the Slovak 
Republic within the CSCE. The Slovak Republic's Permanent 
Mission in Vienna has considerably contributed to this 
establishment. 
  One of the first tasks of Slovak diplomacy within the CSCE 
was to dispel worries about the status of the Hungarian ethnic 
minority living in Slovakia. The partition of the former 
Czechoslovakia has been used to dramatize the situation. The 
mission that visited Slovakia as a new CSCE country in March 
1993 confirmed that the Slovak Republic had fulfilled the 
obligations it had toward the CSCE and ethnic minorities. The 
mission also stated that the transition toward a market economy 
and pluralist democracy and respect for human rights were 
satisfactory in the Slovak Republic. These processes have not 
been discontinued since the partition of Czechoslovakia. The 
mission's conclusions have also contributed to lower tension 
surrounding the ethnic minorities issue. According to the 
mission, there are opportunities for improving the legal status 
of the minorities in Slovakia, but, in general, the mission has 
not discovered any signs of tensions or hostility between 
various ethnic groups. 
  The mission of the CSCE High Commissioner for Human Rights 
has similar results. In the interests of reducing tension in 
that sphere, making the situation clear, and building mutual 
trust, the Slovak side proposed, on the initiative of the Slovak 
prime minister, the establishment of an impartial group of CSCE 
experts to examine the status of the Hungarian ethnic minority 
in the Slovak Republic and the status of the Slovak ethnic 
minority in Hungary, and the overall ethnic policies of the two 
countries. 
  We consider the acceptance of our proposal to establish a 
group of experts from other countries as a success for Slovak 
diplomacy. This was something new in the CSCE's attitude toward 
solving problems related to the status of ethnic minorities and 
in the CSCE concept of preventive diplomacy. For the first 
time, the CSCE is taking preventive steps in a situation where 
there is no open conflict or center of tension. 
  Our membership in the coordinating CSCE Three and our 
participation in important activities, mainly in the sphere of 
preventive diplomacy, have helped the Slovak Republic to 
establish itself within the CSCE. Our activity in the Three, 
consultations on the higher ministerial level, participation in 
CSCE missions and in the decisionmaking process, plus our 
fulfillment of all of our obligations, helped the Slovak 
Republic to obtain its proper position. 
  We can mention several of the most important activities in 
which the Slovak Republic participated as a member of the Three: 
the meeting between the Three and U.S. Secretary of State Warren 
Christopher, consultations with the top officials of the Council 
of Europe and the United Nations about problems of human 
dimensions, the meeting with ZRJ [expansion unknown] officials 
in Stockholm on extending the CSCE mandate in former Yugoslavia, 
and the ministerial meeting of the CSCE Council on further 
improving CSCE activity. Moreover, Slovak diplomats participated 
in Swedish Foreign Minister Margaretha af Ugglas's mission in 
Central Asian and Transcaucasian countries on the level of high 
commissioners, and in the intelligence mission in Macedonia 
commissioned in connection with Macedonia's admission to the 
CSCE. 
  At meetings of the CSCE Forum for Security Cooperation, the 
goal of which was to strengthen cooperation between CSCE member 
countries on security and to reduce the risk of new conflicts in 
the region, the Slovak Republic has built on the activity of the 
former CSFR and has become a coauthor of the proposal to draft 
new measures to strengthen trust and security and to harmonize 
the obligations adopted on military security in the previous 
period, and a coauthor of the joint proposal by 24 countries on 
the nonproliferation of arms and the control of their transfer. 
The Slovak foreign minister spoke at a plenary meeting of the 
CSCE Forum for Security Cooperation in Vienna on 29 September 
1993. 
  One of the most important roles of the Slovak delegation at 
the Vienna meetings dealing with the Conventional Forces in 
Europe Treaty [CFE] and the Open Skies Treaty was to ensure the 
Slovak Republic's successorship as regards both treaties. The 
countries that signed the CFE Treaty approved at an 
extraordinary conference on 5 February 1993 the division of the 
former CSFR's obligations between the two successor countries. 
The Slovak Republic's successorship in the Open Skies Treaty, 
which creates conditions for building the trust by observing the 
military activities of the CSCE countries, was confirmed on the 
plenary meeting of the signatories on 3 May 1993. 
  The Slovak Republic has also participated in the meeting of 
the Consultative Committee of the CSCE Center for Preventing 
Conflicts, whose importance, however, has significantly declined 
with the progress of CSCE institutionalization. The task of the 
Forum for Consultations on Security Issues was transferred onto 
the newly established Vienna Group of CSCE Committee of High 
Commissioners. 

