BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Lilian Bem David] </F>
  [Text] The main objective of the National Biodiversity 
Program that the Ministry of Environment and the Amazon Region 
will set in motion in Rio de Janeiro on 17 June is to obtain 
more detailed knowledge of the living organisms in Brazil, which 
represent 15 percent of all the living organisms in the world, 
and to explore their sustainable use. "We want to open a 
registry based on proposed projects," Haroldo Mattos de Lemos, 
Brazil's Secretary for Environmental Affairs, said yesterday in 
Porto Alegre. Mattos de Lemos attended the 7th State 
Environmental Conference (Confema), which was sponsored by the 
Rio Grande do Sul government and the State Foundation for 
Environmental Preservation (Fepam) with the support of Germany's 
GTZ [German Society for Technical Cooperation] environmental 
agency. 
  Lemos reported that 30 million living organisms are believed 
to exist on the planet, but that only 1.5 million are 
scientifically known, while approximately 100 species are 
eliminated or lost every day. 
  The government has already guaranteed the provision of $48 
million for financing the National Biodiversity Program, of 
which $30 million were granted by the World Bank (IBRD) and will 
be transferred through the Global Environment Facility (GEF). 
Lemos said: "The priorities for allocation of the funds have 
not yet been defined. The idea is to establish practical 
partnerships between the government, the private sector, and the 
civil sector." No budget limits have been set for individual 
projects, he added. 
  At the end of May, Lemos attended a meeting of the United 
Nations commission for supervision of compliance with the 
decisions made by Eco-92 [United Nations Conference for 
Environment and Development], which was held in Rio de Janeiro. 
He believes progress has been made in the implementation of 
conventions on biodiversity and climate change, which have 
already been enforced. "There is consensus on the registration 
of patents for the protection of intellectual property, while 
developed countries are willing to share the profits with the 
countries from which genetic resources are obtained for 
research," he said. 
  Negotiations are moving more slowly over the increase from 
0.33 to 0.7 percent of GDP from the rich countries that should 
be allocated to environmental preservation in the developing 
countries. "In the case of Brazil, it is also necessary to 
interpret Agenda 21 in terms of local features, as has been done 
in China, which set goals for the next century," he said. This 
will be one of the main missions of an interministerial council 
that the federal government intends to create to set the rules 
for sustained development in Brazil. 
  Lemos briefed Confema delegates on the operation of the 
Decentralized Implementation Program, which was agreed upon with 
the IBRD three weeks ago. The program will allocate $61 million 
(70 percent of which will be provided by the IBRD) for 
environmental projects that will be picked up by the Ministry of 
Environment and the Amazon Region and by registered state 
governments. The states that intend to register for the program 
will have to meet at least seven requirements, some of which are 
compulsory: preparation of environmental legislation consistent 
with the Constitution, creation of a state environmental council 
(a requirement that Rio Grande do Sul has not yet met), the 
issuance of environment permits for large undertakings, and the 
creation of legal advisory services to advise the population on 
environmental matters. 
  Each state may strive to obtain funds for up to six projects 
over a period ending 30 March 1995. Funds will be transferred 
directly to the municipal governments involved. 

