BFN 

  [Text] Kladno, Central Bohemia June 11 (CTK) -- Chairman 
of the coalition Civic Democratic Alliance (ODA) Jan Kalvoda 
said today he had not expected Tomas Jezek (ODA) to resign as 
chairman of the National Property Fund (FNM) as soon as Friday 
[10 June] even though he had known about his intention to leave 
the post. Jezek's official reason was the presumed legal 
incompatibility of the positions of FNM chairman and chairman of 
the Parliamentary Budget Committee, Jezek said yesterday after 
handing in his resignation. 
  He told CTK that he had decided to resign "because of 
untiring attempts on the part of some FNM Presidium members, 
particularly its chairman (Jiri Skalicky)" to get him to step 
down, and also "in the interest of restoring normal working 
conditions at the National Property Fund," which have recently 
been seriously disrupted by "continuous attacks" on his person. 
Jezek resigned after a FNM Presidium's discussion about him, 
which took almost five hours and in which he was not allowed to 
take part. 
  Speaking at a press conference within ODA Day in Kladno 
today, Privatisation Minister Jiri Skalicky (ODA) said that 
Roman Ceska, who was appointed new FNM chairman yesterday, would 
retain his post of first privatisation minister. "The (FNM) 
Presidium decided on Friday to return to the original close 
personnel connection between the Privatisation Ministry and the 
Fund. Earlier the Fund was headed by the first deputy 
privatisation minister. We have found this link functional and 
we have returned to it," Skalicky said. 
  He said that the Presidium had dismissed Jezek yesterday 
because, at the beginning of its deliberations, he had announced 
his intention to resign in connection with the planned passage 
of a law on conflict of interest. But Skalicky admitted that 
the Presidium members had had to persuade Jezek to resign 
immediately. 
  Skalicky also admitted that tension had been afflicting 
relations between the Fund leadership and the Presidium for a 
long time. "There were disputes over how to solve the exercise 
of ownership rights... and we have been dissatisfied with the 
pace of realisation of privatisation projects." 
  In view of his announced intention to resign within several 
next months, the personality of Jezek did not provide guarantees 
of these shortcomings to be removed. That is why Ceska has been 
chosen to replace him because his activity has been most tightly 
connected with the FNM, Skalicky said. 
  The FNM Presidium has charged Ceska with drafting by the 
next 
Presidium session on June 24 a "programme statement" which would 
outline ways of removing the above shortcomings, Skalicky said. 

