BFN 

  [Text] Cairo, 27 Apr (MENA)--The Palestinian-Israeli 
negotiations to implement autonomy in Gaza and Jericho resumed 
today. The Palestinian side is led by Dr. Nabil Sha'th, 
political adviser to President Yasir 'Arafat while the Israeli 
side is headed by Deputy Chief of Staff General Amnon Shahaq. 
  Knowledgeable Palestinian sources have told MENA that the 
Legal and Security Affairs Committees will try today to reach an 
agreement over a number of issues still under dispute. The same 
sources pointed out that progress was achieved on several topics 
during the round that started on Sunday, 24 April. This 
includes the two sides' agreement over the corridor between Gaza 
and Jericho and the provision of permits--valid for one year--to 
cars that use this corridor. This step, the sources added, will 
facilitate contact between the two autonomous regions--Gaza and 
Jericho. 
  The Palestinian sources said that agreement was also 
reached on a Palestinian presence in a place called al-Mawasi in 
al-Shati' area, Gaza Strip, where Israel had previously rejected 
any Palestinian presence. 
  The sources said progress was made on the question of legal 
jurisdiction over the Gaza Strip and Jericho area, so that 
foreigners will be subject to Palestinian authority, as will the 
prosecution of suspects in security and criminal cases there. 
The sources affirmed that agreement was reached on instituting 
joint patrols on parallel roads linking the Israeli settlements, 
especially in Gaza. 
  The sources explained that despite the progress made in this 
round, it is not expected that all the issues will be resolved 
during this round. The sources said the release of Palestinian 
detainees; some points on control over the crossings between 
Gaza, Egypt, Jericho, and Jordan; and control over the crossing 
points on the green line separating Israel and the West Bank are 
still outstanding. 
  Therefore, another round is likely to be held next week to 
discuss the remaining unresolved issues. The next round is 
expected to be the last. 

