BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Ciro Ortega from the "RPC Television News" </F>
newscast] 
  [Text] Five of the seven presidential candidates agreed 
today on the need to develop a more humane economy. This was 
the most relevant point of the Second National Meeting on Unity 
and Human Development. 
  The activity to support the Panamanian democratic process 
was 
promoted by the United Nations and took place at the Marriott 
Hotel in the capital. At this Second National Meeting on Unity 
and Human Development, presidential candidates Ruben Dario 
Carles of the Change '94 Alliance, Samuel Lewis Galindo of the 
National Consensus Alliance, Jose Salvador Munoz of the 
Doctrinaire Panamenist Party, Ernesto Perez Balladares of the 
United People Alliance, and Eduardo Vallarino of the Christian 
Democratic Party had the opportunity to present their main 
political ideas. 
  The candidates agreed on the need to strengthen democracy 
through politics aimed at the less-favored segments of the 
population by emphasizing education, health, and employment. 
They also stressed the need to put the reverted areas to use 
and to strengthen the transfer of the interoceanic waterway to 
Panamanian hands. 
  The event was attended by the former presidents of Uruguay 
and Colombia, Drs. Julio Maria Sanguinetti and Belisario 
Betancur, respectively, representing the international 
community. Meanwhile, Fernando Zumbado, UN assistant secretary 
general and program director for Latin America, praised the 
degree of maturity displayed by what is being called an state 
agenda for the country's future. He pointed out that similar 
events will be held after 8 May to improve the quality of and 
conditions for the transition between the current and future 
government. 
  Former Colombian President Belisario Betancur emphasized 
that 
the plans that were presented are close to what Panama needs. 
  [Begin Betancur recording] I was candidate for the 
presidency 
of Colombia four times. Thus, I was coprotagonist in four 
electoral processes, and I know that each electoral process 
involves uneasiness and, at times, abuses. Once the elections 
are over, however, this becomes ancient history, not even recent 
history. Ancient history because vast possibilities are opened 
for the future. And I think that Panamanians are searching for 
solutions to their own problems in a normal, constructive, and 
creative manner. [end recording] 
  Betancur pointed out that government policies must be 
stongly 
humane to help the downtrodden. 

