BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Orlando Mendieta and Lastenia Murillo Munoz] </F>
  [Excerpts] Most of the presidential candidates, political 
leaders, and some authorities expressed some degree of sadness 
when they saw the video showing the outrages committed against 
many people by the military dictatorship. The video was aired 
over a national television network following an introduction by 
President Guillermo Endara. 
  Samuel Lewis Galindo, presidential candidate for the 
Solidarity Party and National Unity Mission (MUN), said the 
video clips presented by President Endara were directed at the 
people, so they will remember the past of the PRD [Democratic 
Revolutionary Party]. "Many of us who suffered those outrages 
in the past have been forced to enter politics so that the past 
will never return," Lewis Galindo added. [passage omitted] 
  Ruben Dario Carles, presidential candidate for the Change 
'94 
ticket, said the video clips broadcast last night "make me want 
to cry because they remind me of those very sad moments we 
endured. What we have seen merits deep thought" by the 
Panamanians, Carles added. Let us hope the Panamanians will 
understand the fiscal problem that existed, the former 
comptroller general said, adding: "Now they know the task I 
undertook, which was to bring order to such a disaster." 
[passage omitted] 
  Juan Chevalier, former government and justice minister, said 
the video showed aspects that must be analyzed -- that three 
political organizations seeking the presidency were linked to 
acts of corruption, weapons, and a specific style of government. 
Chevalier emphasized that the video did not lie, adding that 
everything that was seen was the truth. "What the country needs 
is the truth," the Arnulfist Party member said. 
  Former Supreme Court Justice Cesar Quintero said the 
Constitution prohibits the president from using his office to 
favor a specific candidate. Quintero said that in his opinion, 
that is what Endara did with this message to the people last 
night. The constitutional expert said that Endara's 
presentation of video clips showing the actions of the ousted 
military regime was a "political act" and that the president 
described it as such. "Endara made a political decision and he 
will be the object of either much criticism or support," 
Quintero added. 
  Victoria Figge, president of the Panamanian Association of 
Business Executives, described as "inopportune" President 
Endara's decision to air over a national television network 
video clips of Noriega's military regime only a few weeks before 
the 8 May presidential elections. 

