BFN 

  [Text] Buenos Aires, 17 Jun (NA) -- The government has 
presented a mining update and mining environmental protection 
bill, eliminating the state monopoly on radioactive minerals and 
providing a legislative framework for environmental reclamation 
in a highly contaminating activity. 
  In addition to ending the state monopoly on the mining and 
marketing of radioactive minerals that has been in effect since 
1956, the bill is aimed at changing about 20 National Mining 
Code articles. 
  Upon presenting the bill, Economy Minister Domingo Cavallo 
emphasized the significance of adjusting the legislation that 
governs this activity in order to facilitate investment in an 
area that requires significant capital. 
  Cavallo said: "More than 60 large international companies, 
which committed themselves to investing $1.5 billion, have been 
establishing themselves in our country." 
  Concerning this data, the minister noted: "This is the best 
way of promoting the development of regional economies." 
  The ceremony to present the bill was held on 16 June in the 
Economy Ministry's Padilla Hall. Present at the ceremony were 
Mining Secretary Eduardo Angel Mazza and Natural Resources and 
Environment Secretary Maria Julia Alsogaray. 
  Manuel Mondino, the National Commission for Atomic Energy 
(CNEA) chairman, was invited to the ceremony but sent a letter 
expressing his support for the bill. 
  During the ceremony, Mazza was the only official who 
addressed, although superficially, the significance of 
eliminating the state monopoly on uranium and thorium. 
  Concerning this point, the mining secretary merely admitted: 
"It is a very sensitive issue." He emphasized: "We have the 
CNEA's agreement." 
  For her part, engineer Alsogaray ended her brief speech by 
emphasizing: "Environmental problems cannot be solved unless 
economic factors are correctly interpreted." 
  Despite the removal of the current monopoly on nuclear 
elements, the state, through the CNEA, will police and monitor 
these activities and advise provincial organizations. 
  The companies interested in mining activities will present 
an 
environmental impact statement in order to receive an 
Environmental Certificate for a period established by this law's 
regulations. The Environment Certificate will be issued by the 
appropriate provincial authorities. 
  In addition, those who will exploit mines with radioactive 
minerals will present a program on the reclamation of the 
natural areas effected by the waste material. 

