BFN 

<F P=106> [Communique issued by the Standing Committee of the </F>
Political Commission of UNITA in Huambo on 28 June] 
  [Text] 1. On 18 June 1994, Jonas Savimbi, president of the 
National Union for the Total Independence of Angola [UNITA], 
received Alioune Blondin Beye, special representative of the UN 
secretary general in Angola, as well as the representatives of 
the United States, Russia, and Portugal. President Savimbi 
congratulated the mediators for their efforts, noting that 90 
percent of the work at the peace talks had already been carried 
out. Thus, he encouraged them to quickly examine the remaining 
problems. This is UNITA's stand. 
  2. We were thus astonished to learn that the UN secretary 
general still wants to apply additional sanctions against our 
party. Under these conditions, the UN Security Council will only 
be jeopardizing the work carried out in Lusaka for the past 
seven months. 
  3. The Political Commission will count on the UN Security 
Council's pragmatic attitude so as not to destroy so much work 
carried out in favor of peace in Angola. With additional 
sanctions, UNITA will draw the right conclusions. Apart from 
peace and democracy, UNITA also defends the cultural values of 
the citizens in Angola and on the continent. UNITA cannot 
eternally live in fear of sanctions from the UN Security 
Council. This attitude goes against [words indistinct] 
governing the United Nations. 
  4. UNITA has accepted and decreed a unilateral cease-fire on 
20 September 1993. This cease-fire was fruitless, however, 
because the government of the Popular Movement for the 
Liberation of Angola [MPLA] did not respect it. 
  5. There are no hostages in Huambo. Those nongovernmental 
humanitarian organizations that did not want to stay in Huambo 
left for Luanda on 17 June 1994. Only the personnel of the 
International Committee of the Red Cross [ICRC] decided to 
remain in Huambo. If the ICRC also wants to leave Huambo, it 
can do so immediately, without any prior notice. The Luanda 
government is to blame for the suspension of humanitarian aid 
flights, since it uses food as a political weapon against the 
Angolan people. There are so much lying and pharisaical 
hypocrisy that UNITA no longer fears anything but just waits to 
see what will happen. 
  [Issued] Huambo, 28 June 1994. 
  [Signed] The Standing Committee of the Political Commission 
of UNITA. 

