CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary: "Competent Opinion: Businessmen on the </F>
President's Edicts"] 
  [Text] Valeriy Neverov, president of the Germes [Hermes] 
Concern: 
  "To comment on the president's edicts is very simple. 
Previously, from every earned ruble [R], the state attempted to 
take from us taxes in the amount of R1.20-1.30 and now the 
amount is R1.70-1.80. There is no difference -- it is impossible 
to survive all the same. So we looked for loopholes in the 
legislation and we will continue to look for them. In commercial 
circles, the conviction is getting stronger that the state has 
taken a course for the destruction of the non-state sector. I do 
not think that this is an advisable and well-considered policy, 
rather, it is a confirmation of the authorities' helplessness. 
Do you remember the anecdote? When a brothel does not work, it 
is necessary to change the personnel. First and foremost, those 
whose length of party membership is more than 20 years." 
  "But, seriously, the economic problems lie in the 
non-economic area. The Russian people cannot be without an 
ideology and a philosophy. At one time, both Mikhail Gorbachev 
and Boris Yeltsin were symbols of change. The people were 
enthusiastic. The people gave them a measure of trust. Now they 
tell us: let him who can, enrich himself, let him who cannot, 
die, and whoever does not die, we will run down ourselves. This 
is not an ideology. Russians have been constructed in such a 
fashion that they have always received energy from the future 
and have always lived on hope for the coming day. And now it is 
not financial stabilization which can defeat inflation, but 
rather, only a new ideology." 
  "Of course, a change in leadership is not a sufficient 
condition, but it is necessary." 
  Mikhail Lapshin, president of AO [Joint-Stock Company] 
Brokers Trading House: 
  "The position of the state, which is giving the raw 
materials 
market directly to the suppliers, is quite clear: to remove the 
superfluous bureaucratic link. To date, direct ties with the 
buyers have already been set up. As for licensing, it has lost 
all meaning at present: Russia's raw materials market has 
already been established, so that an outsider has almost no 
chance of obtaining access to the raw materials. On the whole, 
however, the abolition of export quotas and licenses is quite 
sensible and is leading only to the emergence of civilized 
relations with Western partners. First, the suppliers will not 
be wasting time overcoming the protection barrier. Second, it 
will be possible to actually participate in the competitive 
struggle and to not pay bribes in order to obtain quotas." 
  Aleksey Vlasov, president of the RTSB: 
  "Too many people are feeding from this large trough to let 
this decree pass so calmly. That is, it can be adopted, be 
worked out very well, but be stuck somewhere at the level of a 
very average bureaucratic system. As for the registration of 
accounts, obviously, this is an attempt by the tax inspectorate 
to obtain data about the taxpayers' incomes. The fact that the 
necessity of the reporting violates my rights is not what is 
troublesome. It seems to me that this burden is too much for the 
tax service." 
  "It is very likely that I will go to the tax inspectorate 
and 
there they will explain for 2 months which information form is 
needed and it will be necessary to write three times a night in 
order to obtain it." 
  Petr Korotkov, chairman of the RTSB's exchange board: 
  "The president's edicts are of an intellectual management 
nature. Now it is the government's business to implement them." 
  "The abolition of quotas is aimed at the elimination of 
monopolism. Our economy is being gradually transformed from a 
monopoly type to a comprador-concern [buyer-seller] type." 
  "The time has come to reduce the level of the rates 
collected 
from enterprises. But as for raising the level of the taxation 
of natural persons' incomes, it will be difficult to implement 
this." 
  "The Edict on the Implementation of Integrated Measures for 
the Timely and Complete Submission of Taxes and Other Obligatory 
Payments to the Budget provides for the opening of a current 
account only upon the presentation of a document which confirms 
the establishment of registration in the tax organ. But it has 
always been so. Otherwise, it is a violation. The fact that we 
have no such legislation is another matter." 
  Andrey Fetisov, deputy chairman of the RTSB's exchange 
board: 
  "It is possible to talk about what is known and about the 
specific mechanism for implementation. But it is still early to 
talk about this. After all, a tax inspector, for example, does 
not act at all according to the edict, but rather, according to 
his own department's instructions. But I cannot yet give a 
specific commentary as I need to examine the edicts seriously. 
Unfortunately, neither edict nor law determine the rules by 
which we are acting, but rather, semi-legal acts." 
  Sergey Mishin, broker: 
  "To be honest, I have not read them, I have read a 
restatement of these edicts in KOMMERSANT. But any restatement 
subjectively reflects the essence of what has been written. In 
principle, the simpler a system is, the more reliable it is. The 
desire to simplify the tax system can only be welcomed. After 
all, the more complicated this system is, the simpler it is to 
escape from it. The fact that this problem was tackled is good. 
But, since I have not yet read the edicts themselves, I cannot 
analyze them further. The president tackled these problems and 
that is good, really good. It would seem that the overall 
direction is a normal one." 
  Aleksandr Deduchenko, manager of the RTSB: 
  "When you read the documents, you will form your own 
opinion. 
But I have not yet read the documents, I have only heard a 
commentary. But we know from experience that a commentary is one 
thing, but when we carefully read a document, we see something 
completely different. We shall see what we shall see!" 
  Andrey Kushnirenko, deputy chief of the RF MVES' [Russian 
Federation Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations] Foreign 
Economic Activities Main Administration: 
  "The edict's text states that the setting of quotas for and 
the licensing of Russian exports remain in effect for those 
goods and services with respect to which Russia has 
corresponding international obligations. These obligations can 
be divided into two categories:" 
  "-- the first is: Russia has made a commitment to limit its 
exporting with respect to textiles, aluminum and diamonds, as 
well as materials and items associated with weapons of mass 
destruction, missile technology, poisons, narcotics and 
dual-purpose goods;" 
  "-- the second is: the export licenses and quotas are being 
maintained in fulfillment of Russia's treaties and agreements 
which have been signed on an international level and which 
Russia is obligated to fulfill. For example, the delivery to 
Cuba of 2.5 million metric tons of oil in exchange for sugar." 
  "In the near future, a governmental decree will be issued 
with respect to export quotas and licenses and then it will be 
possible to talk about this matter in more detail." 
  Boris Bolotin, doctor of economic sciences and senior 
scientific associate of the IMEMO RAN [Russian Academy of 
Sciences' World Economics and International Relations Institute]: 
  "The adopted decrees are not impromptu and an 
improvisation." 
  "The recently promulgated presidential edicts do not 
signify, 
in my opinion, a repudiation of the former course of the 
reforms. They are more a response to the inaction of the State 
Duma and the government. Indeed, after Boris Yeltsin's economic 
message received general approval, the honorable deputies did 
not adopt a single corresponding law." 
  "The most important one, in my opinion, the edict on the 
transformation of state enterprises into public ones, is the 
first logical attempt to designate the ways and methods for 
influencing the economic processes. Now it is impossible to 
permit the failure of those 5,300 enterprises which have 
remained state property after privatization. We are talking 
about 60 percent of the country's production capacities, a large 
portion of which is on the brink of bankruptcy. More than 2,000 
enterprises are situated in small and medium-sized cities which 
actually live on them. If they are denied support, the people 
will find themselves on life's sideline. No relatively 
responsible government should permit this." 
  "The utterances about the fact that inefficient enterprises 
need to be closed while social benefits are paid to the workers 
have become somewhat outdated by now. Moreover, practice has 
shown that we are incapable of carrying out such programs 
competently. When they started talking about the conversion and 
closing of defense enterprises and the redirecting of resources 
to civilian enterprises, Western financial assistance in the 
amount of $25-30 billion was supposed to prevent the conversion 
from turning into a detonator for a social explosion." 
  "However, instead of this, humanitarian aid arrived, which 
did not even apply to the defense-industry workers." 
  "Thus, the people have been brought to the brink of despair 
and the decision adopted by the president is the best one to 
date. First, it permits Mr. Yeltsin, at the upcoming meeting in 
Naples, to seek Western assistance for specific goals which can 
ensure social peace and stability. Second, now there is a 
guarantee that 10 million workers will not find themselves on 
the street." 
  "The abolition of quota-setting and licenses is also a quite 
natural step. Especially if you remember the decree issued at 
the beginning of May on their restriction. It is no secret that 
the 27-28 percent production slump in the first half of this 
year in relation to the same period for last year, to a 
significant degree, is the result of the lack of a solvent 
demand within the country. This is why the removal of the export 
restrictions is very important now. However, this, 
unfortunately, does not mean that the West is ready to accept 
our goods." 
  "The tightening up of currency and tax control has been 
caused by the same need to intensify the state's participation 
in the country's economy. If Western estimates are to be 
believed, every month, export currency earnings of Russian 
enterprises ranging from $1.5 billion to $2 billion are either 
slipping away to the West or remaining there. And, in addition 
to this, according to the latest data, the state is being 
shorted around 40 percent of the taxes. Considering the budget 
deficit, it is clear that control is necessary." 
  "How to carry it out is another matter. A decree requiring 
the banks to inform the tax organs about clients' financial 
transactions contradicts the generally accepted norms. 
Throughout the entire world there exists the concept of banking 
privacy, while financial control is handled by special organs." 
  "Thus, it is perfectly obvious that, despite the substantial 
imperfections, the adopted decrees are not impromptu and not an 
improvisation. However, it is not clear why the introduction of 
new market principles is occurring by means of declarations and 
edicts of the president. Especially since the range of 
competence of our government is quite limited and the solving of 
economic problems is a direct sphere of its activities." 
  In discussing the progress of economic reform in Russia in 
the "Economy and Entrepreneurship" section, the participants of 
the first international Slavic-Eurasian congress of figures of 
science, culture and entrepreneurship, which took place in 
Novgorod, did not ignore the president's latest decrees on 
economic matters. 
  The deputy governor of Nizhegorodskaya [Oblast] and director 
of the Department of Economics and Forecasting, Vasiliy Kozlov, 
at the request of an ITAR-TASS correspondent, commented on these 
documents as follows: "There should be a positive assessment of 
the president's good will and his understanding of the two most 
critical problems -- the lowering of taxes for producers, which 
was evoked by the extraordinary slump in production, which 
reached, for example, 30 percent in Nizhegorodskaya Oblast, and 
the need to improve the financial system. It is no accident that 
the lion's share of the edicts' text has been devoted to the 
state's fiscal policy and the replenishment of its treasury. The 
documents contain an appeal to the government, to [Russian] 
Federation entities and to parties and movements to submit the 
needed suggestions on this matter and to think over measures for 
improving the tax policy, taking into account at the same time 
the deplorable experience of the past. The basic orientation 
should be a lowering of the tax rates." 
  According to him, the local group of managers "saw in the 
edicts not so much an easing of taxes as menacing restrictions 
which deprive the enterprises' managers of the last bits of 
'leeway' and maneuvering room. They consider the following to be 
obvious shortcomings of the Edict on the Reform of State 
Enterprises: the lack of a mechanism for determining the 
procedure for transferring an enterprise into the category of 
the public ones and the ban on changing the number of workers in 
a public enterprise in comparison with the previously existing 
federal state enterprise." 
  And here is the opinion of Gennadiy Zyuganov, leader of the 
Communists of Russia parliamentary faction, who participated in 
the work of the congress, which he expressed in a conversation 
with an ITAR-TASS correspondent: "Through these edicts, the 
president is actually taking upon himself the responsibility for 
the subsequent continuation of the reforms. But, after all, a 
mass of good decisions was also adopted previously, but they 
also did not produce the expected results." 
  RF Deputy Minister of Economics Sergey Vasilyev called RF 
President Boris Yeltsin's edict on the abolition of export 
quotas and licenses "a political decision which completes the 
final stage of the liberalization of Russia's economy." This is 
an extremely timely edict and a big step forward in the plan for 
the development of Russian exporting, he emphasized in the 
interview to a BIZNES-TASS correspondent. 
  Sergey Vasilyev noted especially the important significance 
of the president's edict for the country's oil industry. In our 
country, he said, a paradoxical situation has emerged with 
respect to oil exporting. Russia is seeing the overproduction of 
oil, the domestic consumer is not paying, the oil-producing and 
oil-refining enterprises are in a difficult position and the oil 
storage tanks are filled to the brim. Yet, at the same time, the 
administrative system established harsh regulatory conditions in 
the form of export quotas and licenses and exceeding these 
limits was prohibited. Now, instead of quotas and licenses, a 
system of duties is being established, which treats everyone the 
same. From each metric ton, the state is supposed to receive, in 
the form of a duty, 15 ECU [European Currency Unit] as against 
the current 35 ECU. 
  In principle, according to him, the abolition of the quotas 
will not lead to "an explosive increase in Russian oil exporting 
due to our limited capacities," however, it may be expected that 
there will be a substantial increase in shipments to the foreign 
market, which will undoubtedly make it possible to increase 
budget receipts. 
  Moreover, the deputy minister of economics noted, the 
abolition of the export quotas and licences destroys the last 
stronghold of the administrative-and-command system, eliminating 
a source of large-scale abuses and corruption in the state 
machinery. 

