BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Eneida Cortez] </F>
  [Text] The Solidarity Commitment program planned by the 
Development Ministry to curb inflationary levels will undergo 
drastic changes as a result of the imbalance in foreign 
exchange, which will undoubtedly cause an increase in the prices 
of goods and services. 
  Development Minister Luis Carlos Palacios made that remark 
and stressed that the lack of confidence in the financial system 
and the continuous injection of assistance to banks have 
generated an absolute imbalance in the foreign exchange market, 
which, should it continue, will hamper any macroeconomic program 
that may be implemented. 
  It is worth noting, he said, that, after adjustments in the 
foreign exchange were made, the price of a large number of the 
component parts used in national production and considered 
imported raw materials will go up, leading to an increase in the 
price of the final product. 
  The initial objective of the Development Ministry regarding 
consensus on prices will be affected in view of this new 
macroeconomic situation, and, for that reason, an abrupt 
reorientation not based on orthodox policies will be needed. 
  One must keep in mind that the economic crisis the country 
is 
experiencing is the legacy of the vicious circle of the past and 
of scant supervision over the financial system. One must also 
note, he said, that the poor concepts, implemented by certain 
independent entities, of giving constant financial assistance to 
curb the problem of liquidity led to a gigantic infusion of 
monetary resources that did not take into consideration its 
repercussions on the economy. As a result, this heated up the 
climate of crisis we are now experiencing. 
  The Development Ministry's plan to curb slightly the impact 
of the monetary devaluation comprises two aspects. The first 
aspect involves continued talks, despite disagreements with the 
major producers of goods and services, to try to minimize the 
potential price adjustment. This means there is a possibility 
that the monetary changes will be reflected in prices. For that 
reason, what matters now is that these increases not exceed the 
levels of the foreign exchange market. The second aspect is to 
stipulate clearly that once the turbulence has ceased we must 
resume, with greater force, the concerted effort planned 
regarding solidarity . 
  It was also reported that the Development Ministry is 
negotiating with local industrialists to reduce the initial 
impact of the adjustments, estimated to be between 20 and 30 
percent. If that agreement is reached, the adjustments will be 
made based on the devaluation of the previous week, which was 
from 12 to 13 percent. Price increases for medicines were higher 
than predicted, and for that reason the authorities have 
considered imposing sanctions, consisting of rolling back prices 
to their previous level. 

