BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo -- [Okinawa Prefectural] Governor Masahide 
Ota, who traveled to Tokyo in haste because of the successive 
crashes [in Okinawa] of U.S. military aircraft, visited the 
Foreign Ministry, the Defense Agency, the U.S. Embassy, and 
other offices on 7 April. He stressed during his visits that, 
"The problem it that accidents involving U.S. military aircraft 
continue to occur, and this is extremely unfortunate. Moreover, 
military training has been resumed even before the causes of the 
accidents have been determined. This gives rise to growing ill 
feelings among the prefecture's people." He strongly demanded 
that the U.S. forces be asked to report the causes of accidents 
to the prefectural government promptly, to implement safety 
measures thoroughly, and to prevent the recurrence of accidents. 
  During his meeting with the governor, Foreign Minister Hata 
said, "The Japan-U.S. security setup can only function with the 
local people's cooperation." He demonstrated a positive 
attitude with regard to the submission of reports on accidents 
to the Okinawan Government. 
  During this meeting, Ota said: "Every time an accident 
occurs, they promise that they will implement safety measures 
thoroughly. However, there has been no end to the accidents. 
That is the problem. Moreover, it is an affront to the popular 
sentiment in Okinawa to resume military training two days after 
an accident occurred. We have not received any report on the 
accident, although we have asked for it." He expressed his 
strong anger at and distrust of the U.S. forces. 
  In response, Hata said, "It is regrettable that the 
helicopter accident occurred even after we had complained about 
safety management, immediately after the F-15 fighter crash, to 
the U.S. forces." He expressed the view that reports on the 
causes of accidents should also be given to the Okinawan 
Government. 
  On the other hand, Atsushi Tokinoya, director general of the 
Foreign Ministry's North American Affairs Bureau, and Ichiro 
Yoneyama, director general of the Defense Facilities 
Administration Agency [DFAA], said: "It is not that we take the 
Okinawan people's sentiments lightly. The Foreign Ministry and 
the DFAA have always asked that safety measures be fully 
implemented and that causes of accidents be reported. However, 
we are not in a position to demand that training be suspended 
until the causes of accidents are determined." 
  Meanwhile, Defense Agency Director General Kazuo Aichi told 
Ota, "I take this seriously" and "I would like to visit Okinawa 
as soon as possible." 
  At the U.S. Embassy, Ota was met by Deputy Chief of Mission 
Ross Deming. Deming stated that the consulate general in 
Okinawa has been instructed to carry out an investigation. 
  Kosuke Uehara, director general of the Okinawa Development 
Agency and who was also present at the meeting with the foreign 
minister, revealed that he is considering including this issue 
in the agenda of the liaison meeting of the Foreign Ministry, 
the Defense Agency, and the Okinawa Development Agency. 
  On the other hand, at the meeting of the Japanese-U.S. Joint 
Committee on the Status-of-Forces Agreement on the same day, 
Tokinoya made an official statement on behalf of the Japanese 
Government. He asked the United States to also give the 
Japanese Government a report once the causes of the accidents 
are clarified. 

