BFN 

  [Text] Amman--Ten Jordanian Islamist and leftist parties 
have joined hands to demand a total end to all inspections of 
Jordan-bound cargo as part of the enforcement of sanctions 
against Iraq and called on Arab, Islamic, non-aligned and 
African countries to support the Kingdom's stand. 
  In a rare joint statement, the 10 parties, including the 
powerful Islamic Action Front (IAF) and mostly leftist parties, 
did not directly refer to the agreement Jordan has reached with 
the U.S. to replace the sea-based inspections by a U.S.-led 
naval task force with a land-based sanctions verifications 
regime. 
  But it rejected "any inspections in Jordanian territory, 
whether at sea or land," as "and infringement of Jordan's 
sovereignty," 
  Official party spokesmen were not immediately available for 
comment, but party sources said the statement was deliberately 
left vague since the 10 groups, which espouse varying ideologies 
ranging from Islamic law, socialism, Ba'thism and pan-Arab 
nationalism, could not agree on a unified stand to reject the 
land-based verifications before the modalities of the 
arrangement were known. 
  The sources said some of the parties would not outrightly 
reject the land-based arrangement as long as it is conducted 
under the direct supervision of the United Nations with no 
American intervention while others did not want any inspections 
in any form of shape, they said. 
  "Some of the parties are aware that for the moment there is 
no escape from some kind of mechanism at al-'Aqabah and they 
wanted to reflect that position in the statement," said one 
source. "But there is unanimous agreement that the inspections 
are unacceptable to Jordan and should be rejected as a form of 
pressure aimed at the Kingdom and its people." 
  After a meeting with His Majesty King Husayn in London on 
Monday, U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher said 
Washington would support, subject to some "fine tuning," the 
Jordanian proposal that Lloyds Register of London conduct the 
sanctions-verifications at the port of al-'Aqabah. 
  Lloyds Register of London is described as a non-profit, 
independent international organisation with no political 
affiliations. 
  The American acceptance of the proposal came after more than 
three years of Jordanian complaints that the sanctions were not 
only causing heavy economic losses to the Kingdom but also 
reflected distrust of the Kingdom despite its record of 
adherence to U.N. Security Council resolutions. 
  The U.S. agreed to the proposal to change the sanctions 
regime nearly one month after Jordan made its return to peace 
talks with Israel contingent on an end to inspections. 
  The two-page statement of the 10 parties, issued Thursday, 
said the continued inspections were a "punishment for the stand 
that Jordan and its people adopted during the Gulf crisis" by 
calling for an Arab solution to the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait 
and refusing foreign intervention on Arab soil. 
  The inspections "constitute an aggression against the 
Jordanian people, who have paid a heavy price for the Gulf 
crisis in the form of poverty, high unemployment and social and 
economic problems," it said, adding that "Zionist domination" of 
the region through pressuring Jordan into signing peace 
agreements with Israel was the objective of the continued 
blockade of al-'Aqabah. 
  The statement, a copy of which was made available to the 
JORDAN TIMES, called on members of the Arab League, the 
Organisation of Islamic Conference, the Non-Aligned Movement and 
African countries to "make their voice heard" in support of the 
Jordanian rejection of the inspections which the parties 
described as piracy. 
  It also warned the United Nations, the Security Council, the 
United States and its allies which are party to the Red Sea 
inspections that the continued siege of al-'Aqabah would on 
"deepen people's hostility." 
  The 10 parties which signed the statement control 20 seats, 
including the 16 of the Islamic Action Front, in the 80-member 
Lower House of Parliament. 
  The signatories to the statement were: the Islamic Action 
Front, the Jordanian People's Democratic Party, the Jordanian 
Socialist Democratic Party, the Jordanian Arab Ba'th Socialist 
Party, the Jordan Arab Democratic Party, the Jordanian Popular 
Unity Party, the Jordanian Progressive Democratic Party, the 
Unionist Arab Democratic Party, the Jordanian People's 
Democratic Unity Party and al-Mustaqbal. 

