BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by "RYCH": "Private Sector Is the Winner; Poland </F>
in the Period of Transformations"] 
  [Text] The Polish economy is in a transitional 
period, which by its very nature makes assessments of phenomena 
occurring in the economy difficult. Depending on the viewpoint, 
the same indicators may be interpreted in a number of different 
ways. An unclear picture emerges as a result of positive 
phenomena intertwining with negative ones, say the authors of a 
report entitled "The Polish Economy in the Period of 
Transformations in 1993," which was prepared by the Development 
and Strategic Studies Institute. 
  Among the unquestioned positive phenomena, one should list 
an 
increase in the GDP, the increasing profitability of 
enterprises, growing labor productivity, and a halting of the 
process of declining employment levels. Among the negative 
phenomena, one must mention inflation, which remains too high, a 
foreign trade deficit, and a crisis in public finances. 
  In discussing the report, Professor Marek Lubinski said that 
growth in individual consumption is the main source of economic 
revival. Last year, the indicator was 7 percent, with a 
3.6-percent growth in income. This happened at the cost of a 
decreased willingness to save and as a result of using 
consumption credits (the society's debt level is on the 
increase). Undocumented income from the "gray area" has also 
definitely influenced the market. On the other hand, however, 
one must consider the fact that Polish society's consumption is 
overvalued. About $2.5 billion worth of merchandise per year 
leaves our country primarily in the suitcases of visitors from 
Germany, and recently from the CIS as well. 
  Among the positive phenomena, one should list a change in 
the 
structure of the economy, which is reflected in the economic 
indicators. The private sector has been playing an ever-growing 
role in the economy. The sector demonstrates a higher level of 
investment activity and increases the employment level, and its 
contribution to the GDP has been growing. As Jerzy Kropiwnicki 
has noted, this happens, among other reasons, because of the 
process of a shrinking public sector. But there is no doubt 
that private entrepreneurs are not wasting opportunities that 
arise in this way. 
  Investments in real terms did not decline in 1993, but what 
did happen was a certain shift in these investments. The 
biggest increase was reported in the telecommunications 
industry, trade, and the wood and paper industry, while the 
smallest increase was reported in the metallurgic and 
electromachine industries. Expenditures on machinery and 
equipment have been clearly rising, while expenditures on 
industrial buildings have been declining. This trend is a 
reflection of a leaning toward modernizing machinery and 
equipment. 
  Unfortunately, the crisis in public finances has been 
holding 
steady. True, in 1993, attempts to halt a decline in budget 
revenues were successful, but the contribution by so-called 
rigid expenditures (financing the budget sector, subsidizing 
social insurance, servicing the public debt) has been rising. 
This makes it impossible to make rational choices in the 
process of managing public finances. 
  Throughout 1993, the rate of increase in unemployment was 
declining. In previous years, the rate of increase was 
associated with reductions in employment, whereas, in 1993, it 
was associated mainly with an increased labor supply, which 
enterprises found impossible to absorb. In this regard, the 
situation in agriculture continues to be very difficult; 
concealed unemployment has been gradually rising there. 
  The report's authors are of the view that there is untapped 
production potential in the Polish economy, despite a very clear 
improvement in how fixed assets are utilized. 

