CSO 

  [Text] Hyderabad, April 13--The CPI(M)'s [Communist Party 
of India-Marxist] primary aim was to unite all the Left parties 
not only for the forthcoming elections but also to fight the 
Congress(I), according to the party general secretary, Mr 
Harikishen Singh Surjeet. 
  He was briefing the Press on the second day of the party's 
Central Committee deliberations at the Sundarayya Bhavan today. 
  He said that by Left unity he did not mean Communist unity 
only and added that the united actions of the Left parties on 
the Centre's economic policies had evoked good public response. 
  Mr Surjeet said that his party did not object to criticism 
but stated that opposition would put unity at stake. 
  He said that there was no question of joining the BJP 
[Bharatiya Janata Party] on the economic policies as their 
leader, Mr K.L. Advani, had stated in Parliament that the 
Congress(I) Government was pursuing their economic agenda. 
  Thoug the BJP was opposing these policies under some 
pressure, Mr Surjeet said, as they have not bothered to denounce 
their earlier stand. Joining hands with the BJP would pose a 
threat to national unity, he said. 
  Mr Surjeet said that the central committee also held 
discussions regarding the forthcoming elections to certain 
Assemblies. He said the party had not shifted from its earlier 
stance of fighting the Congress(I) and the BJP. 
  He, however, said that there were some objections from 
certain State units regarding alliances and seat adjustments. 
"There are some policies these Governments (Bihar and Orissa) 
are following we consider are anti-people and need to be sorted 
out," he said. 
  Mr Surjeet said that if the Opposition united in Karnataka 
the Congress(I) could be defeated. 
  Earlier, the central committee of the CPI(M) adopted two 
resolutions. One was to welcome the Supreme Court verdict, which 
asserted that secularism was a basic feature of the Constitution 
and that religion must not be mixed with politics. The party 
called for a parliamentary legislation to be enforced towards 
this end. 
  Another resolution was adopted by the party, paying homage 
to 
those killed in the Jallianwalla Bagh incident on its 75th 
anniversary. 


