Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Decree No 377 of the Council of Ministers -- Russian </F>
Federation Government On Implementation of the Russian 
Federation Law`` On Psychiatric Aid and Citizen Rights When 
Rendered'' signed by V. Chernomyrdin, chairman of the Council of 
Ministers -- Russian Federation Government, on 28 Apr 93] 
  [Text]To implement the decree of the Supreme Soviet of the 
Russian Federation dated 2 July 1992, ``On Procedure for Putting 
Into Effect the Law of the Russian Federation 'On Psychiatric 
Aid and Citizen Rights When Rendered,''' the Council of 
Ministers -- Russian Federation Government hereby decrees to: 
  1. Adopt the attached List of medical psychiatric 
contraindications for different forms of professional activity 
and activity related to sources of high risk, and Statute on 
procedure of issuing licenses for rendering psychiatric aid to 
State, non-State, psychiatric, neuropsychiatric institutions, 
and psychiatrists in private practice. 
  2. Establish that psychiatrists, other specialists and 
health 
care workers with special training and necessary qualifications 
are allowed to participate in psychiatric care. Qualifications, 
as well as upgrade of qualifications, are confirmed following 
procedure established by the Russian Federation Ministry of 
Health. 
  The question of allowing health care workers to participate 
in psychiatric care is decided by the administrator of a 
psychiatric and neuropsychiatric institution or psychiatrist in 
private practice in accordance with existing legislation. 
  3. Ask the Russian Federation Ministry of Labor to examine, 
following established procedure, the question of extending the 
total annual vacation time for health care and other personnel 
involved in rendering psychiatric care. 
  4. Ask the Russian Federation Ministry of Health, together 
with the Russian Federation Ministry of Justice, Russian 
Federation Ministry of Public Protection and other concerned 
ministries, State committees and departments of the Russian 
Federation to accomplish the following before 15 September 1993: 
--prepare draft laws on amendment of legislative acts of the 
Russian Federation related to adoption of the Russian Federation 
Law ``On Psychiatric Aid and Citizen Rights When Rendered,'' for 
subsequent submittal to the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet; 
--develop and submit for approval to the the Council of 
Ministers -- Russian Federation Government draft statutes on: 
----institutions rendering extramural and in-hospital 
psychiatric aid; ----therapy-oriented industrial enterprises to 
provide occupational therapy, training in new occupations and 
job placement at said enterprises, for individuals with mental 
disorders, including invalids; ----dormitory facilities for 
individuals with mental disorders who have lost social contact. 
<H3>  Statute on Procedure for Issuing Licenses for Psychiatric 
Care to State, Non-State Psychiatric, Neuropsychiatric 
Institutions, and Psychiatrists in Private Practice </H3>
  Approved by Decree No 377 of the Council of Ministers -- 
Russian Federation Government on 28 April 1993. 
  1. In accordance with Article 18 of the Russian Federation 
Law ``On Psychiatric Aid and Citizen Rights When Rendered,'' 
State, non-State psychiatric and neuropsychiatric institutions 
(hereafter referred to as institutions) and physicians in 
private practice must have a State license to render psychiatric 
aid (hereafter referred to as license) in order to render 
psychiatric care. 
  It is prohibited to engage in psychiatric aid without a 
license. 
  2. The license indicates the complete name of institution or 
surname, name and patronymic of a psychiatrist in private 
practice, their legal address and types of medical activities 
involved in psychiatric care for which permission is granted. 
  3. Licenses are issued by licensing commissions (hereafter 
referred to as commissions) formed in State administrative 
agencies. 
  4. In order to obtain a license, institutions and 
psychiatrists in private practice submit an application to the 
commission, with indication of types of medical activities to 
render psychiatric care and the following documents: --for 
institutions: charter or statute approved following established 
procedure; founding contract or contract on joint activities; 
documents about structure and staff of the institution, 
qualifications of employees; documents about available space, 
instruments and equipment conforming to the requirements imposed 
for the declared forms of activities; --finding as to technical 
condition of building; --for psychiatrists in private practice: 
copy of diploma received upon graduating from a higher medical 
educational institution; --copy of work book [service record] 
confirming tenure in the field of psychiatry; --other documents 
confirming qualifications of the psychiatrist and his 
performance in rendering psychiatric care; --documents about 
available space, instruments and equipment conforming to 
requirements imposed on declared forms of activities; --finding 
as to technical condition of building. 
  5. The commission examines applications for a license from 
institutions and psychiatrists in private practice within 2 
months from the day the applications are received with all 
necessary documentation. 
  6. In the event issuance of the license is refused, the 
commission informs the applicant in writing about the reasons 
for the refusal, which may be appealed in legal form. 
  7. The names of institutions and psychiatrists in private 
practice are recorded in the pertinent unified State register. 
  8. A license may be suspended or revoked by a court 
decision. 
  9.List of medical psychiatric contraindications for some 
forms of professional activities and activities related to 
source of danger. Medical psychiatric contraindications for some 
forms of professional activities related to effects of toxic 
substances and deleterious industrial factors 
  Approved by decree No 377 of the Council of Ministers -- 
Russian Federation Government dated 28 April 1993. 
  10.Chronic and protracted mental disorders with severe, 
persistent or frequently exacerbated pathological 
manifestations, epilepsy with paroxysmal disorders constitute 
general medical psychiatric contraindications for the types of 
work listed in the table. Marked forms of borderline mental 
disorders are discussed individually in each case. Additional 
contraindications are listed in Column 2.Certification must be 
repeated at least once every five years. General laboratory and 
functional tests; electroencephalography. 



  Hazardous and deleterious substances   Jobs. ADDITIONAL MEDICAL PSYCHIATRIC 
and industrial factors (A denotes      CONTRAINDICATIONS 
allergens) 

1                                      2 

Chemical 

Nitric acid                            Production and use, processes related 
                                       to recovery thereof 

Ammonia                                Same 

Nitrous oxides                         Production and use of acrylonitrile, 
                                       methyl methacrylate, ethyl acrylate 
                                       and others 

Acrylic and methacrylic acids,         Same 
esters thereof, nitriles A 

Amino-, nitro-, nitroso-nitro-chloro   Production and use of trinitrotoluene, 
compounds of aromatic series           dinitrophenol, dinitrobenzene, 
                                       aniline, trimethylene trinitramine, 
                                       dinitrochlorobenzene and others, 
                                       urotropin. Production and use of 
                                       xylidine, cresols, picric acid and 
                                       others 

Amino compounds of aliphatic series    Production and use 
and their derivatives 

Ethylenimine and other immuno          Same 
compounds A 

Amines of aromatic series: benzidine   Production and use (including 
and compounds thereof, dianisidine,    laboratory work). Use of dyes based on 
toluidine and compounds thereof,       them 
naphthylamines 

Barium and compounds thereof           Production and use of soluble barium 
                                       compounds. Production and use of 
                                       insoluble barium compounds 

Benzene and its derivatives            Production and use (including 
(toluene, xylene, styrene and          laboratory work) of benzene. 
others).                               Production and use of homologues and 
                                       derivatives of benzene 
                                       (isopropylbenzene, styrene, toluene 
                                       and others). ADDITIONAL 
                                       CONTRAINDICATIONS: TOXIC AND NARCOTIC 
                                       SUBSTANCE ADDICTION 

Halide derivatives of aromatic         Same 
series 

Halide benzyls, benzylidene chloride   Same 


Azo dyes                               Production and use Anthraquinone, 
                                       phthalocyanyl [typo for cyanine?] dyes 


Beryllium and compounds thereof A      Production and use of metal beryllium 
                                       and compounds thereof, preparation of 
                                       blend, mechanical processing of 
                                       ceramic items made of beryllium oxide, 
                                       production of beryllium-containing 
                                       alloys 

Beta-naphthol                          Production and use 

Bromine and compounds thereof          Production and use 

Halide derivatives of hydrocarbons     Production and use (including 
of fatty series                        laboratory work) of dichloroethane, 
                                       carbon tetrachloride, vinyl chloride, 
                                       methylene chloride, methyl chloride, 
                                       chloroform, ethyl bromide, 
                                       trichloroethylene, chloroprene and 
                                       others ADDITIONAL CONTRAINDICATIONS: 
                                       TOXIC SUBSTANCE ADDICTION 

Hydrazine and compounds thereof        Production and use 

Dimethyl formamide, dimethyl           Production and use 
acetamide and others fatty acid 
amides 

Isocyanates A                          Production and use 

Artificial and synthetic fibers A      Production. Mechanical processing, 
                                       dyeing: a) processing of fibers 
                                       (oxalon, synthetic high-polymer 
                                       materials, aramide, 
                                       carbon-containing); b) heat treatment. 
                                       Preparation and use of lubricants 

Cadmium and compounds thereof          Production and use 

Coke-oven gas and other coking         Production of coke and coke-oven gas, 
products                               trapping coking products, 
                                       rectification of trapped hydrocarbons, 
                                       distillation and processing of coal 
                                       tar at coking by-product plants. Work 
                                       involving preparation and paving with 
                                       bitumen concrete, with use of products 
                                       of the coking by-product industry 
                                       (coal tar, resin, sand, and others) 

Silicone compounds and lubricants      Production and use 
based on them A 

Lithium and compounds thereof          Production and use 

Manganese and compounds thereof        Production and use of manganese 
                                       oxides, welding materials (electrodes, 
                                       powdered-metal wire, flux). Casting 
                                       manganese steel and other metals 
                                       containing more than 10% manganese, 
                                       production of organic manganese 
                                       compounds. Extraction of ore and 
                                       processing thereof, use of inorganic 
                                       manganese compounds in ground form 

Methanol                               Production and use, processes related 
                                       to its recovery 

Arsenic and compounds thereof          Extraction, production and use of 
                                       organic and inorganic arsenic 
                                       compounds; processes related to their 
                                       recovery 

Nickel A and compounds thereof         Production and use 

Organic vulcanization accelerants,     Production and use of captax, altax, 
antiagers, vulcanization inhibitors    thiuram, neozone D and others 
and others A 

Perhydrol                              Production and use 

Pesticides                             Production and use in the national 
                                       economy of organochlorine, 
                                       organophosphorus, carbamic acid 
                                       derivatives, organometal and other 
                                       pesticides, as well as storage in 
                                       warehouse and primary cotton 
                                       processing 

Saturated and unsaturated              Operation, repair of wells and 
hydrocarbons                           installations in extraction of oil, 
                                       processing high-sulfur and sulfur oil, 
                                       natural gas, pyrobenzene; selective 
                                       purification of oils, pyrolysis; 
                                       removal of hydrogen sulfide from oil 
                                       and gas; cleaning tankers, tanks, 
                                       reservoirs; ozocerite-extracting 
                                       production; production of various 
                                       synthetics (phenol, acetone, synthetic 
                                       fatty acids, alcohols and others). 
                                       Ancillary processes related to 
                                       servicing freight yards, taking 
                                       samples, laboratory testing of raw 
                                       intermediate and end products 
                                       (high-sulfur and sulfur oil and 
                                       natural gas). Operation, repair of 
                                       wells in oil extraction; processing 
                                       low-sulfur petroleum and natural gas; 
                                       extraction and processing of 
                                       ozocerite, regeneration of motor 
                                       vehicle and aircraft oils; processes 
                                       related to recovery and use of 
                                       saturated, unsaturated hydrocarbons 
                                       (production of polyethylene, divinyl, 
                                       isoprene and others); use of benzine. 
                                       ADDITIONAL CONTRAINDICATIONS: TOXIC 
                                       AND NARCOTIC SUBSTANCE ADDICTION 

Rare-earth elements                    Industries related to recovery of 
                                       aerosols of rare-earth elements and 
                                       compounds thereof 

Mercury and compounds thereof          Extraction and melting of mercury and 
                                       other processes related to its 
                                       recovery and purification; use for 
                                       extraction of gas-discharging gold and 
                                       other metals; production of mercury 
                                       thermometers and fluorescent lamps, 
                                       other physical and 
                                       illumination-engineered instruments, 
                                       paint, organic mercury compounds; 
                                       production of substances by mercury 
                                       electrolysis. Work with instruments in 
                                       contact with exposed mercury, 
                                       production of mercury fulminate; work 
                                       with mercury-arc rectifiers, current 
                                       transformers, pumps; use as catalysts 
                                       in chemical processes; use of organic 
                                       mercury compounds. Production and work 
                                       with instruments with sealed mercury, 
                                       use of mercury fulminate in 
                                       underground mining; work in dental 
                                       offices with mercury amalgam; 
                                       production of pharmaceuticals and 
                                       cosmetic preparations containing 
                                       mercury 

Lead and inorganic compounds thereof   Smelting lead from ore and 
                                       concentrates; recovery of 
                                       lead-containing alloys; refinement; 
                                       recovery of dry lead-containing 
                                       pigments, bleaches, chrome pigments; 
                                       Schoop spraying with lead in closed 
                                       areas, rolling, pressing, coating 
                                       items with lead; mechanical and manual 
                                       processing of lead; sintering; casting 
                                       bearings; production of lead 
                                       batteries; annealing in lead baths; 
                                       production of ground lead-containing 
                                       paint, glaze and enamel; straightening 
                                       with lead-containing compounds; 
                                       production and processing of 
                                       lead-containing glass and fiberglass, 
                                       welding and cutting surfaces covered 
                                       with lead-containing ground; painting 
                                       work with constant use of lead paints; 
                                       production of lead items. Production 
                                       and use of piezoceramic and 
                                       glass-ceramic cement. Concentration of 
                                       lead ore; pulverization, mixing and 
                                       other processes related to formation 
                                       of dust containing lead sulfide; work 
                                       related to decentralized melting of 
                                       small amounts of lead, soldering, 
                                       printing industry (linotype work, 
                                       manual type-setting, and others) 

Selenium, tellurium and compounds      Production and use 
thereof 

Sulfur and compounds thereof           Production and use of organosulfur 
                                       compounds, sulfanate additives, methyl 
                                       sulfide compounds, sulfurous and 
                                       sulfuric acids, processes related to 
                                       recovery of sulfurous and sulfuric 
                                       anhydride, hydrogen sulfide 

Hydrogen sulfide                       Production and use; processes related 
                                       to recovery thereof 

Cyanide compounds                      Production and use 

Hydrocyanic acid, compounds thereof,   Same 
cyanamides and others 

Synthetic rubber                       Production of synthetic rubber and 
                                       processing thereof (preparation of 
                                       rubber stock, rubber vulcanization) 

Synthetic detergents A                 Production of sulfanol, alkylamides, 
                                       sodium sulfate; chlorination of 
                                       fraction of paraffin hydrocarbons and 
                                       others 

Synthetic resins and plastics based 
on: 

--styrene                              Production of polymers and copolymers 
                                       of styrene, polyester resins, 
                                       varnishes and adhesives on their 
                                       basis, fiber glass, and others. 
                                       Processing resins and plastics. Use of 
                                       resins, varnishes, adhesives 

--phenol and formaldehyde A            Production of resins, varnishes, 
                                       adhesives and others, processing 
                                       molding powders, molding materials. 
                                       Use of adhesives, varnishes, 
                                       impregnating, compounds, binders and 
                                       others 

--silicone compounds                   Production of resins, varnishes, 
                                       liquid silicones, processing polymers, 
                                       molding materials, use of varnishes, 
                                       lubricants, resins and others 

--isocyanates A                        Production of polyurethanes, foam 
                                       polyurethanes, polyurea and others, 
                                       processing and use 

--organofluoric compounds              Production of polymers 
                                       (fluoroplastics) and copolymers; heat 
                                       and mechanical processing of 
                                       fluoroplastics 

--vinyl chloride and vinylidene        Production of polymers and copolymers, 
chloride                               perchlorovinyl, adhesives, varnishes 
                                       and others; processing resins and 
                                       plastics, and use of adhesives, 
                                       varnishes and others 

acrylic and methacrylic acids A        Production and processing of polymers, 
                                       copolymers, use of emulsions, 
                                       varnishes, paint and others 

--amino acids, dibasic acids,          Production and processing of 
diamines A                             polyamides; use of adhesives and 
                                       others 

--epichlorohydrin A                    Production and use of epoxy resins and 
                                       plastics based on them, compounds 

--aliphatic and unsaturated            Production and processing of polymers 
hydrocarbons (polyethylene,            and copolymers 
polypropylene) 

Shale tars A                           Production and use; industries related 
                                       to extraction thereof 

Antimony and compounds thereof         Recovery, processing and use 

Thallium and compounds thereof         Production and use; monocrystal 
                                       growing 

Tetraethyl lead                        Production of tetraethyl led and 
                                       ethylating liquid, mixing ethylating 
                                       liquid with fuel. Use of ethylated 
                                       gasoline; testing, repair, disassembly 
                                       and cleaning of aircraft and motor 
                                       vehicle engines, refueling aircraft 
                                       and other machines, draining, pouring 
                                       ethylated gasoline at manually 
                                       operated stations, cleaning 
                                       installations and containers at bulk 
                                       oil plants, gasoline storage tanks, 
                                       gasoline pumps 

Metals A: 

--cobalt, vanadium                     Recovery and use of cobalt and 
                                       compounds thereof 

--molybdenum, titanium, zirconium,     Recovery of vanadium pentoxide; 
tungsten and compounds thereof         production of ferrovanadium; 
                                       processing vanadium-containing slag; 
                                       Production and use of molybdenum, 
                                       tungsten and compounds thereof; 
                                       processing titanium, reduction of 
                                       metal titanium and compounds thereof; 
                                       recovery and use of tungsten-cobalt 
                                       alloys, titanium-cobalt alloys, 
                                       molding powders with zirconium and 
                                       compounds thereof 

Ursol, ursol dyes and oxidizable       Production and use; fur dyeing 
dyes A 

Pharmacological agents                 Production and preparation of 
                                       ready-made medicinal forms of morphine 
                                       and its derivatives, vitamins, 
                                       sulfanilamide, pyrazolone, 
                                       antineoplastic and hormonal agents, 
                                       neuroleptics, anticoagulants, 
                                       anesthetics (halothane), use in 
                                       anesthesiological practice; 
                                       preparation of drugs in pharmacies, 
                                       use of neuroleptics in psychiatric 
                                       practice ADDITIONAL CONTRAINDICATIONS: 
                                       ALCOHOLISM, TOXIC AND NARCOTIC 
                                       SUBSTANCE ADDICTION 

Phenols and derivatives thereof        Production and use 

Formaldehyde A and other aldehydes     Production and use; processes related 
of the fatty series                    to their recovery 

Phosphorus and compounds thereof       Production and use of yellow 
                                       phosphorus, compounds thereof, 
                                       organophosphorus compounds, including 
                                       plasticizers. Production and use of 
                                       red phosphorus; recovery, production 
                                       and use of phosphates 

Phthalic acid, phthalic anhydride      Production and use 
and derivatives thereof 

Fluorine and compounds thereof         Production and use of fluorine and 
                                       compounds thereof. Electrolytic 
                                       recovery of aluminum, recovery and use 
                                       of fluorspar, processes involving 
                                       recovery of fluorine and compounds 
                                       thereof 

Furans and derivatives thereof,        Production and use 
furfurol, tetrahydrofuran and others 


Chlorine and compounds thereof,        Production and use; processes related 
chlorine-containing mixtures           to their recovery 

Chloronaphthalene and compounds        Production and use 
thereof (halovax, chloronaphthalenes 
A and compounds thereof, 
hydroxynapthalene and naphthol 

Chromium A, chromous acid A,           Production and use (including 
compounds and alloys thereof           substances containing chromium 
                                       compounds as secondary constituents) 

Biological 

Antibiotics A                          Production and use in medical practice 
                                       and pharmacies 

Productive fungi, protein-vitamin      Production and use of products of 
concentrates (PVK), feed yeast,        microbiological synthesis 
mixed feed A 

Enzyme preparations, biostimulators    Production and use in medical 
A                                      practice, pharmacies, agriculture and 
                                       other sectors of the national economy 

Allergens, diagnostic and              Production 
therapeutic; blood preparations A, 
immunobiological preparations 

Infected material and                  Work in contact with infected and 
helminth-contaminated material         helminth-contaminated material, with 
                                       infectious patients 

Brucellosis pathogens                  Livestock farms (regardless of 
                                       epizootic condition for brucellosis), 
                                       enterprises processing raw materials 
                                       and products of animal origin 

Q fever pathogen                       Livestock farms in territories with Q 
                                       fever problem, enterprises processing 
                                       raw materials and products from 
                                       livestock stricken with Q fever 

Industrial Aerosols 

Abrasive and abrasive-containing       Production, processing and use of 
substances                             abrasives (synthetic corundum -- 
                                       aluminum-oxide abrasive, white, 
                                       chromous, monocorundum), carbide, 
                                       boron, L-boron, processing and use of 
                                       silicon carbide and others 

Silicon-containing (free and           Prospecting, tunneling work, open and 
amorphous silicon dioxide)             subterranean extraction of ore and 
                                       adjacent minerals, coal, concentration 
                                       and processing thereof. Production of 
                                       silicon, glass, dinas [silica brick], 
                                       aerosil [silica powder], silicon 
                                       carbide, silicon-copper alloy, silumin 
                                       and others; foundry work (earth 
                                       preparation, casting, stamping, 
                                       trimming, scraping, cleaning cast). 
                                       Sandblasting 

Metals and alloys thereof              Dry polishing of metal sand alloys; 
                                       processes of spray-coating metals, 
                                       producing metal powders and items made 
                                       with them 

Silicates and silicate-containing: 

a) asbestos-containing (10 percent     Prospecting, mining and processing 
or more asbestos)                      asbestos ore and asbestos. Production 
                                       and processing of synthetic asbestos 

b) asbestos-containing (no more than   Production, processing items made of 
10 percent asbestos)                   asbestos cement, asbestos bakelite, 
                                       fiber, asbestos rubber 

c) other silicates and                 Production and processing of glass and 
silicate-containing substances         mineral fiber, cement, clay, fireclay, 
                                       naphthalene syenites, 
                                       disthene-sillimanite, olivine, 
                                       apatites, mica, dunite, chrome 
                                       magnesite, forsterite, limestone, 
                                       barite, ``kotlenit,'' diatomaceous 
                                       earth, tuffals, pumice, pearlite, 
                                       iron-ore concentrates and agglomerate 
                                       in metallurgy and others 

Carbons                                Extraction, processing and use of 
                                       coal. Production and use of carbon 
                                       black, synthetic graphite, coke (oil, 
                                       pitch, shale and others). Processing 
                                       and use of natural and artificial 
                                       diamonds 

Dust of plant and animal origin        Processing cotton, flax, hemp, wool, 
                                       ambary, jute, peat, hops. Production 
                                       of paper, natural silk and other 
                                       materials 

Dust from inorganic luminophores       Production and use 
(including those containing less 
than 5% cadmium) 

Welding aerosols 

a) containing manganese (20% or        Arc-plasma, gas-flame welding, 
more), nickel, chromium, fluorine      fusingand cutting, contact end-to-end 
compounds, beryllium, lead             welding (by flashing), electroslag 
                                       welding of metals. Welding, fusing and 
                                       cutting of medium- and high-alloy, 
                                       including stainless, steel, welding 
                                       and fusing nickel or copper-nickel 
                                       electrodes and wires on pig iron, 
                                       welding and cutting beryllium and 
                                       alloys thereof 

b)containing manganese (up to 20%),    Welding, fusing and cutting carbon, 
ferric oxides, aluminum, magnesium,    including zinc-coated steel, aluminum, 
titanium, copper, zinc, molybdenum,    copper, titanium and alloys based on 
vanadium, tungsten                     them; welding and fusing pig iron with 
                                       iron and iron-vanadium electrodes and 
                                       wires, cutting pig iron 

Physical 

Ionizing radiation. Radioactive        All types of work with radioactive 
sources and sources of ionizing        substances and sources of ionizing 
radiation                              radiation 

Nonionizing radiation: 

--laser radiation                      All types of work with lasers 

--electromagnetic (electric and        All types of work with sources of 
magnetic) radiofrequency fields in     electromagnetic energy in the 
the range of 30 MHz-300GHz (VHF,       indicated ranges 
UHF, SHF, EHF) and below 30 MHz (HF, 
MF, VLF, ILF, ELF, F infrasonic, 
hypo-low frequency) 

--steady electric and direct           All types of work with sources of 
magnetic fields                        direct electric and steady magnetic 
                                       fields 

Industrial vibration                   All types of work involving exposure 
                                       to local or general vibration 

Industrial noise                       All types of work involving exposure 
                                       to intense industrial noise, as well 
                                       as considerable strain on the acoustic 
                                       analyzer, 81 dB and higher 

Ultrasound (contact transmission)      Work with ultrasonic flaw detectors 
                                       and medical equipment 

High atmospheric pressure              Work in caissons, pressure chambers, 
                                       diving work 

Low temperature                        Work at constantly low ambient 
                                       temperature in work zone of industrial 
                                       premises (below permissible levels 
                                       according to Sanitary standards for 
                                       microclimate of industrial premises 
                                       approved by the USSR Ministry of 
                                       Health) 

High temperature, intense heat         All types of work with constant 
emission                               exposure to high temperature 
                                       (exceeding permissible level according 
                                       to Sanitary standards for microclimate 
                                       of industrial premises approved by the 
                                       USSR Ministry of Health) and intense 
                                       heat emission (over 140 Wt/m[.sup]2[/]) 
                                       in the work zone 

Increased eye strain                   All types of work involving increased 
                                       eye strain: a) Class I precision work 
                                       (with objects up to 0.15 mm), 
                                       according to 1980 SNIP [construction 
                                       standards and regulations], and II 
                                       (with 0.15-0.3 mm objects); b) classes 
                                       III and IV precision work (0.5-1 mm 
                                       objects) according to SNIP, and work 
                                       which involves tracking screen 
                                       displays and other means of displaying 
                                       information 

Physical overexertion                  Work involving manual handling of 
                                       heavy items (item in kg) or exertion 
                                       (in N; 1 N = 0.1 kgf) during a shift 
                                       (for men): more than 30 kg (or more 
                                       than 300 N) when done continuously; 
                                       weight moved or lifted manually per 
                                       shift (weight turnover per shift) -- 
                                       more than 12 t, when lifting from the 
                                       floor or a level considerably lower 
                                       than working surface -- more than 5 t. 
                                       Work related to maintaining a 
                                       constrained position for a long time, 
                                       including standing. Work involving 
                                       local muscular tension, mainly of 
                                       wrist and arm muscles. Periodically 
                                       holding up and object weighing more 
                                       than 10 kg with both hands or more 
                                       than 5 kg with one hand kg (for men). 
                                       Work involving periodic marked 
                                       inclination of the body (visual 
                                       estimate of more than 30 from the 
                                       vertical line) more than 300 times per 
                                       shift; assuming a constrained working 
                                       position (on one's knees, stooped, 
                                       lying down, bending forward, in a 
                                       sling, standing) for more than 50% of 
                                       the shift. Work involving vocal 
                                       strain: instructors, speaking, 
                                       vocal-speaking types of acting, work 
                                       at a central telephone office 


  [Text]Medical psychiatric contraindications for some forms 
of 
professional activities involving increased hazard 
Chronic and protracted mental disorders with severe, persistent 
or frequently exacerbated pathological manifestations, epilepsy 
with paroxysmal disorders constitute general medical psychiatric 
contraindications for the types of work and occupations listed 
in the table. Marked borderline mental disorders are discussed 
on an individual basis in each case. Additional 
contra-indications and tests are listed in Column 2. 
Certification must be repeated at least once every five years. 
General laboratory and functional tests; electroencephalography. 



  Work, types of professional         Additional medical psychiatric 
activities, and job categories      contraindications. ADDITIONAL TESTS 

1                                   2 

Work in high places, work of        Epilepsy and syncopic states. 
steeplejacks, and work involving    ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY 
hoisting, as well as work related 
to servicing scaffolding 

Personnel who service working       Epilepsy and syncopic states. Alcoholism, 
127-V or higher voltage electric    narcotic and toxic substance addiction 
installations, perform ongoing      (on an individual basis). 
commutation operations, adjust,     ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY 
assemble and carry out 
high-voltage testing at such 
electrical installations 

Work in the State Forest            Epilepsy and syncopic states. 
Conservation system: felling,       ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY 
rafting timber and primary timber 
processing 

Work in remote regions and          Epilepsy and syncopic states. 
underground:                        ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY 

--work in the oil and gas 
industries, including use of ``on 
watch'' method, in the Extreme 
North and regions equated to it, 
desert and other regions that are 
remote or sparsely inhabited, as 
well as underwater drilling; all 
forms of work underground; work 
at hydrometeorological stations, 
communication installations 
situated in desert, tayga and 
other remote and sparsely 
populated regions, under 
difficult climate and geographic 
conditions; geological 
prospecting, topographic, 
building and other work in 
remote, little-populated, 
inaccessible, tundra, swampy and 
mountain regions of the nation 
(including use of the 
expedition-watch method); work 
dealing with organizing 
recruiting and public appeals for 
the Extreme North and regions 
equated to it 

Instrument technicians servicing    Epilepsy (on an individual basis) 
pressurized containers 

Machine operators (stokers),        Epilepsy and syncopic states. 
boiler room operators, workers in   ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY 
gas oversight service, 

Work involving use of explosives,   Epilepsy and syncopic states. Alcoholism, 
work in explosion- and              narcotic and toxic substance addiction. 
fire-hazard industries              ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY 

Workers in the armed guard and      Alcoholism, drug and toxic substance 
armored vehicle services of the     addiction. Epilepsy (on an individual 
cash collection and delivery        basis) 
system of the Russian Federation 
Central Bank and other 
departments and services which 
are allowed to carry and use 
firearms (employees of the 
Internal Security Troops of the 
Republic of the Ministry of 
Transportation undergo 
pre-employment and subsequent 
regular physicals in accordance 
with Order No 23Ts of the USSR 
Ministry of Railways dated 7 Jul 
87) 

Gas rescue service, volunteer gas   Mental illness (including remissions). 
rescue teams, armed units and       Alcoholism, narcotic and toxic substance 
detachments for prevention and      addiction. Epilepsy and syncopic states. 
eradication of open gas and oil     ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY 
gushers, armed mountain and 
mountain rescue units, fire 
units, emergency medical care 
service, specialized medical 
brigades in constant readiness 

Work on turning lathes, milling     ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY 
machines, other lathes and 
machines, punch presses 

Work directly involved with         Epilepsy and syncopic states. 
vehicular, including intraplant,    ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY 
traffic 

Operators of motor, truck and 
municipal electric vehicles, 
including operators of: 

--all types and makes (Category     Borderline mental retardation and 
A) of motorcycles, motor            retarded mental development (on an 
scooters, snowmobiles;              individual basis, recertification in 3 
minitractors and motorized lifts    years). Epilepsy and syncopic states. 
(who have undergone registration    Alcoholism, narcotic and toxic substance 
with the State Motor Vehicle        addiction (allowed if there is persistent 
Inspectorate), motor vehicles       remission). ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY. 
with manual controls for all        EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING 
categories of invalids (disabled 
veterans of the Great Patriotic 
War and others in the military 
service, work-related invalids 
and invalids since childhood); 

--all types and makes (Category     Epilepsy and diseases associated with 
A) of mopeds;                       narcoleptic and cataleptic episodes. 
                                    Syncopic states. 
                                    Disability-group-classified mental 
                                    illness, and other cases on an individual 
                                    basis. Alcoholism, toxic and narcotic 
                                    substance addiction (allowed if there is 
                                    persistent remission). 
                                    ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY. EXPERIMENTAL 
                                    PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING 

--motor vehicles weighing no more   Borderline mental retardation and 
than 3500 kg, with driver's and 8   retarded mental development (on an 
passenger seats (Category B),       individual basis, recertification in 3 
with the right to work for hire,    years). Epilepsy and syncopic states. 
operate tractors and other          Alcoholism, narcotic and toxic substance 
motorized vehicles;                 addiction (allowed if there is persistent 
                                    remission after specialized treatment; in 
                                    the absence of personality deterioration 
                                    and somatoneurological disorders, the 
                                    question of permission to work is decided 
                                    on an individual basis upon submitting a 
                                    favorable reference and petition from the 
                                    employer and information about behavior 
                                    from internal affairs agencies near place 
                                    of residence. Narcotic and toxic 
                                    substance addicts are allowed to work if 
                                    there has been a persistent remission for 
                                    at least 3 years). ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY. 
                                    EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING 

--motor vehicles weighing no more   Borderline mental retardation and 
than 3500 kg, with driver's and 8   retarded mental development (on an 
passenger seats (Category B),       individual basis, recertification in 3 
without right to work for hire;     years). Epilepsy and syncopic states. 
                                    Alcoholism, narcotic and toxic substance 
                                    addiction (allowed if there is persistent 
                                    remission). ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY. 
                                    EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING 

--trucks designed to carry loads    Borderline mental retardation and 
weighing more than 3500 kg          retarded mental development (on an 
(Category C);                       individual basis, recertification in 3 
                                    years). Epilepsy and syncopic states. 
                                    Alcoholism, narcotic and toxic substance 
                                    addiction (allowed if there is persistent 
                                    remission after specialized treatment; in 
                                    the absence of personality deterioration 
                                    and somatoneurological disorders, the 
                                    question of permission to work is decided 
                                    on an individual basis upon submitting a 
                                    favorable reference and petition from the 
                                    employer and information about behavior 
                                    from internal affairs agencies near place 
                                    of residence. Narcotic and toxic 
                                    substance addicts are allowed to work if 
                                    there has been a persistent remission for 
                                    at least 3 years). ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY. 
                                    EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING 

--vehicles designed to transport    Borderline mental states and retarded 
passengers with more than 8         mental development. Epilepsy and syncopic 
passenger seats, in addition to     states. Alcoholism, narcotic and toxic 
driver's (category D),              substance addition. Speech defects and 
tractor-trailers in vehicle         severe stuttering (on an individual 
categories B, C or D (Category      basis). ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY. EXPERIMENTAL 
E);                                 PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING 

trolleys, trolley buses;            Borderline mental states and retarded 
                                    mental development. Epilepsy and syncopic 
                                    states. Alcoholism, narcotic and toxic 
                                    substance addiction. Speech defects and 
                                    severe stuttering (on an individual 
                                    basis). ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY. EXPERIMENTAL 
                                    PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING 

motorized wheelchairs               Borderline mental states and retarded 
                                    mental development (on an individual 
                                    basis, recertification in 3 years). 
                                    Epilepsy and syncopic states. Alcoholism, 
                                    narcotic and toxic substance addiction 
                                    (on an individual basis). 
                                    ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY. EXPERIMENTAL 
                                    PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING 

Other types of professional 
activities and job categories: 

--employees of food industry 
enterprises, public catering 
services and trade, dairy farms, 
dairy kitchens; food distribution 
centers, bases and warehouses, 
who come in contact with 
foodstuffs in production, storage 
and sales, including those 
involved in sanitary treatment 
and repair of stock, equipment, 
as well as individuals in direct 
contact with foods while being 
carried in all types of 
transportation; 

students at technical schools, 
schools, general education 
schools, VUZs [higher educational 
institutions] before and during 
on-the-job training in 
enterprises, institutions and 
organizations, whose employees 
are subject to medical 
psychiatric certification; 

health care workers in surgical     Epilepsy (on an individual basis) 
hospitals, maternity homes 
(departments), pediatric 
hospitals (departments), 
departments of neonate and 
premature infant pathology; 

employees of educational 
institutions; 

employees of children's and 
adolescents' health-improving 
facilities, including seasonal 
ones 

employees of preschool 
institutions, child centers, 
homes for children, boarding 
schools, school boarding houses; 

workers in medical-preventive 
[therapeutic and preventive care] 
institutions, sanatoriums, rest 
homes, boarding houses, boarding 
schools, who are directly 
involved in organizing patient 
nutrition; 

workers in enterprises of 
sanitary and hygienic services to 
the public (bath-house, 
shower-room employees, 
hairdressers, manicurists, 
pedicurists, cosmeticians, 
ancillary personnel of laundries, 
laundry-receiving centers, 
dry-cleaning establishments); 

swimming trainers and               Epilepsy and syncopic states. 
instructors, swimming-pool and      ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHY 
therapeutic bath employees who 
administer treatment; 

service personnel of hotels, 
dormitories, conductors aboard 
long-distance passenger trains; 
employees of water-supply 
installations directly involved 
in treating water, and 
individuals who service the 
water-supply system; 

workers at livestock farms and 
complexes. 


  [Text]Notes: 1. All categories of invalids undergo 
certification by expert medical industrial commissions in order 
to determine medical psychiatric contraindications to operation 
of vehicles. 
  2. Psychiatric certification of workers servicing commercial 
rail (including underground trains) and aircraft traffic is 
carried out inaccordance with the list of industries and 
occupations approved by the Russian Ministry of Railroads and 
Russian Ministry of Transportation in agreement with the Russian 
Ministry of Health and Russian Ministry of Labor. 
  3. Work in high places refers to work performed at a height 
of 1.5 m or more above ground or floor level, carried out with 
scaffolding or directly with construction elements, equipment, 
machinery and mechanisms to install, operate, assemble and 
repair them. 
  Steeplejack work refers to work in which the principal means 
of protection against falling is a sling worn for all work and 
movement. 
  4. If there are epidemiological indications in a region, 
public health agencies, by agreement with relevant labor 
services and occupation of the public, may augment the list of 
enterprises and occupations, as well as alter the scope and 
frequency of psychiatric certification. 
  5. Employees of institutions rendering psychiatric care 
undergo psychiatric certification in accordance with the rules 
for employment and operation of said institutions. 


