Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article: "Several Regulations of Jilin Province for the </F>
Administration and Management of Family Planning"] 
  [Text] Article 1. The following regulations are 
formulated according to the 52nd Provisions of the "Rules and 
Regulations of Jilin Province on Family Planning." 
  Article 2. These regulations apply to all 
organizations and citizens within the border of Jilin Province 
(including those who are domiciled in but have physically left 
Jilin Province). 
  Article 3. Family planning shall be enforced to 
advocate that each couple have only one child. Men and women who 
are legally married cannot voluntarily have children unless they 
obtain a child-bearing license. 
  Article 4. Men and women who are at child-bearing 
age and without a child-bearing license must use safe and 
reliable birth control devices. Those who fail to do so to 
comply with the regulations shall be criticized, educated, and 
given a time period to adopt birth control measures. Those who 
have exceeded the time limit shall be charged 1 yuan a day for 
family planning administrative fees until they adopt a birth 
control device. 
  Article 5. Those who have unplanned pregnancies 
which have not been terminated on a voluntary basis shall be 
criticized, educated, and given a time period to terminate their 
pregnancies. If they exceed the time limit, they will be charged 
10 yuan a day for family planning administrative fees until they 
terminate such pregnancies. 
  Article 6. Floating population at child-bearing 
age who have not obtained a "marriage and child-bearing license 
for floating population" according to regulations shall be 
criticized, educated, and given a time period to comply with the 
regulations. If they exceed the time limit, they will be charged 
2 yuan a day for family planning administrative fees until they 
obtain the "marriage and child-bearing license for floating 
population." 
  Article 7. If related departments fail to handle 
relevant procedures for floating population at child-bearing 
age, those who are directly responsible for such failure shall 
be charged 100 to 200 yuan of family planning administrative 
fees for each case and may be given administrative punishments 
depending on the seriousness of the case. 
  Article 8. Those who cover up and shield pregnant 
women, resulting in unplanned birth shall be charged 3,000 to 
5,000 yuan of family planning administrative fees depending on 
the seriousness of the case. 
  Article 9. Units where employees have unplanned 
births shall be criticized by notices of local people's 
government organs at and above the county level. Responsible 
persons in the units shall be investigated for administrative 
liability. The units shall be disqualified as contenders for 
annual advanced collective and civilized unit in addition to 
being charged 2,000 to 10,000 yuan of family planning 
administrative fees for each occurrence. 
  If employees and temporary workers, who are fired for 
unplanned pregnancies, have unplanned births, their previous 
units will be treated according to the preceding article. 
  Article 10. Those who have unplanned births will 
be charged unplanned birth fees according to the following 
standards: 
  1. 1,000 to 5,000 yuan for first unplanned birth. 
  2. 5,000 to 30,000 yuan for second unplanned birth. 
  3. 10,000 to 60,000 yuan for third and more unplanned 
births. 
  Adoption of children in violation of the Adoption Law of the 
People's Republic of China shall be considered as unplanned 
births and charged for unplanned birth fees according to the 
preceding article. 
  Article 11. In addition to the treatments 
specified in Article 10, those who have unplanned birth will 
receive the following treatments from their own units and 
departments concerned: 
  1. Employees shall not be paid during maternity leave and be 
held responsible for their own birth expenses. Both husband and 
wife shall be demoted one level on the wage scale, disqualified 
for three years as contenders for awards or model workers, and 
not allowed to be promoted within five years. Those whose cases 
are serious shall be subject to administrative sanctions such as 
dismissal, suspension, or firing. 
  2. Farming couples shall not be considered for employment of 
worker or cadres or allowed to be transferred to register as 
residents of cities or towns. 
  Article 12. Charges under 10,000 yuan shall be 
decided by township and town people's governments or by 
neighborhood offices. Charges of 10,000 yuan or over shall be 
decided by functional departments of people's governments at and 
above the county level. 
  Article 13. Parties who disagree with the decision 
of charges by administrative organs may request reconsideration 
or appeal pursuant to the 55th Provision of the Rules and 
Regulations of Jilin Province on Family Planning. 
  Article 14. Concrete issues in the implementation 
of these regulations shall be interpreted by the family planning 
administrative department of Jilin Province. 
  Article 15. These regulations shall become 
effective on 1 October 1993. 

