CSO 

  [Editorial Report] 
Materials 
  A new material obtained by scientists from the 
Dnepropetrovsk Medical Institute and the local university's 
physics department shields against radiation and x-rays 
1.5-times better than lead. The material can be used in the 
manufacture of protective clothing (Moscow TRUD 13 Oct 93). 
Pharmaceuticals 
  The Crimean Medical Institute's Department of Microbiology 
has developed a new antiseptic, Miramistin, claimed to be ``many 
times superior to comparable medicinal preparations.'' 
Miramistin has undergone successful clinical tests for 
treatment of septic wounds, burns and AIDS (Moscow ROSSIYSKIYE 
VESTI 29 Oct 93). 
  Kukumariozid, a pharmaceutical derived from wastes left 
after 
processing of the sea cucumber Cucumaria, stimulates the immune 
system to combat viral infections and relieve stress. The 
Pacific Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the Far East 
Division of Academy of Sciences, which developed the drug, is 
preparing it in small batches for use in veterinary medicine, 
where it is effective in 95 percent of cases. Kukumariozid is 
being studied for possible use in medicine (Moscow ROSSIYSKIYE 
VESTI 29 Oct 93). 
  The Kharkov Food Industry Institute has developed candies 
containing phytosorbent additives that reduce the accumulation 
of radiation in human organs. The Bershad plant, which is 
manufacturing these candies for sale throughout Ukraine, will 
soon begin production of antiradiation zeolites (Moscow 
NEZAVISKIMAY GAZETA 5 JAN 94). 
Treatments 
  Specialists from the Ear, Nose and Throat Institute have 
patented a new surgical technique which uses remaining tissues 
and muscles to reconstruct the vocal apparatus after throat 
cancer surgery. The novel method has been tested on 500 
patients. Ninety-four percent of patients began to talk 10-15 
days after surgery, and vocal quality was essentially normal 
(Moscow ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI 15 Nov 93). 
Equipment 
  The Donetsk Scientific Production Association Respirator, 
which previously developed medical evacuation complexes for 
returning astronauts is producing a model freestanding, mobile 
field hospital for responding to natural catastrophes and other 
emergencies. The complex consists of a rubberized fabric 
structure which is rapidly assembled by pumping air into a 
pneumatic framework. The structure is equipped with climate 
control, energy supply, and fire extinguishing systems. The 
customer is the Russian Republic's Emergency and Catastrophic 
Medicine Association (Moscow ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI 29 Oct 93). 
  Medical lasers in use at the Russian Federation Health 
Ministry's new All-Russian State Research Center are products of 
conversion projects. The Raduga-1 contact aluminum laser, 
created by the Polyus Scientific Production Association in 
Moscow, is used for bloodless dissection of muscle tissue and 
resection of internal organs. The Istok Scientific Production 
Association near Moscow designed the Raduga-1F laser, which the 
Center uses for endocoagulation. The press report claims that 
Moscow scientists' developments in this field are ``3-5 years 
ahead of Western counterparts.'' The Center, which was created 
to monitor the field of laser medicine and provide training, has 
signed a contract to deliver laser equipment to India, train 
Indian doctors in Moscow, and set up a branch of the Center in 
Dharwar. Reportedly it has also been negotiating with the 
Turkish company Asia Ltd., private clinics in Madrid and Paris 
and the Phillipines Health Ministry (MOSCOW NEWS 1 Oct 93). 
  Minatom's Moscow Institute of Theoretical and Experimental 
Physics has developed a new small-scale, portable synchrotron 
for administering proton radiation treatment to patients with 
cancers, endocrine disorders and other serious diseases. The 
institute has treated 2,500 patients and plans to increase its 
patient load (Moscow ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA 12 Oct 93). 
  Reacting to a sharp drop in orders for its scientific 
developments and acute brain drain, the Samara State Aerospace 
University imeni Academician S. P. Koroleva is seeking sponsors 
for production of special vibration-vacuum nozzles designed for 
urological, stomatological, and cosmetological procedures. The 
mechanism of the therapeutic effect was tested at the Main 
Military Clinical Hospital imeni N. N. Burdenko, the Central 
Scientific Research Institute for Physiotherapy and Moscow State 
Medical University (Moscow DELOVOY MIR 29 May 93). 
  Fifty million rubles is needed to initiate production of a 
unique light-conducting disposable needle designed for 
intravenous irradiation. The newly patented device was developed 
by the Interlaz Scientific Research Center in collaboration with 
the Institute of Laser Medicine. Interlaz is unable to afford 
credit rates and lacks working capital (Moscow DELOVOY MIR 30 
Nov 93). 

