BFN 

  [Text] Wellington, March 29 (AFP) -- New Zealand and 
Britain are to each pay 12 million NZ dollars (6.8 million U.S. 
dollars) in compensation to the cenral Pacific republic of 
Nauru, Foreign Minister Don McKinnon said Tuesday. 
  The payment, to be made to Australia, was the two countries' 
contribution towards settlement of an International Court of 
Justice (ICJ) case brought by Nauru. 
  Australian Prime Minister Paul Keating last year announced 
Canberra would pay 107 million Australian dollars (75 million 
U.S.) to Nauru to assist in rehabilitation of the island, 
severely strip mined for its phosphate under colonial rule. 
  Australia, New Zealand and Britain shared rule of Nauru from 
1914 to 1968 and, under the quasi-government British Phosphate 
Commission (BPC), took the phosphate at very low prices, while 
paying nothing to repair the land. 
  After Keating made the sudden offer as Nauru prepared to 
take 
Australia to the ICJ. [sentence as received] 
  ``Australia had sought appropriate contributions from New 
Zealand and the United Kingdom and the level of contribution has 
now been agreed,'' McKinnon said. 
  He said Britain had already paid Australia and Wellington 
would do so shortly. 
  Nauru has not ruled out the possibility of taking separate 
action against London and Wellington, but if Tuesday's 
contribution is all the two countries now have to pay they will 
have done much better in the deal than Canberra did. 
  Given that the BPC was controlled by a representative each 
from the three powers, and its resources were shared, Australia 
could have asked for as much as 36 million dollars from both 
London and Wellington. 
  Nauru, a former German colony, was extensively mined by the 
BPC, in contravention of the League of Nations, and later United 
Nations, mandate. 
  BPC's operations were a state secret and details never 
revealed at the time. 
  It was both the buyer and seller of phosphate, rigging the 
price to subsidize farmers and publishing two sets of books -- 
one for the League and another secret set showing the real 
picture. 
  In preliminary pleadings to the ICJ in 1990 Australia 
objected to the court dealing with the case on the grounds of 
lack of jurisdiction, bad faith on Nauru's part, and failure to 
join New Zealand and Britain as parties. 
  Australia argued a full and final settlement was reached at 
the time of independence in 1968. 
  Although the colonial powers were committed to 
rehabilitation 
in law, nothing was done and 21 square kilometre (8.4 square 
mile) Nauru is largely a wasteland, its 9,600 people living on a 
narrow coastal strip. 

