Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Luiz Roberto de Souza Queiroz: "AIDS Expected To </F>
Kill 87,000 People in Country by 1995"; introductory paragraph 
in italics as published] 
  [Text] The Ministry of Health says that infection has 
increased in states along the cocaine route. 
  AIDS is expected to kill 87,000 people infected with HIV in 
Brazil by 1995. That figure represents nearly 30,000 deaths per 
year, most of them in the State of Sao Paulo, which has 59 
percent of all cases of the disease. That forecast appears in 
the Ministry of Health's seventh BOLETIM EPIDEMIOLOGICO, which 
was issued this week and reveals for the first time the trend 
toward an explosive increase in the epidemic in the states 
located along the cocaine route. The drug comes from the Andean 
countries and travels through western Brazil to the coast. 
  The ministry's statistical survey shows that between 1987 
and 
1991, AIDS cases increased more than fivefold in Mato Grosso do 
Sul -- on the cocaine route -- where the rate of incidence rose 
from 0.8 to 4.4 cases per 100,000 inhabitants. On the other 
hand, in a state such as Rio Grande do Norte, which is located 
away from the cocaine route, the rate of increase was much 
slower: from 0.6 to 1.9 during the same period. "The 
differentiating factor between the two states is precisely the 
relative frequency of intravenous drug use as a risk factor for 
AIDS," the document says. The study also states that "the faster 
spread of the epidemic associated with intravenous drug use can 
be identified in other states on the western border or in 
municipalities located along a probable trafficking route. 
  The report draws attention to the way the epidemic spread in 
Thailand, the profile of which may be repeated in Brazil. The 
first phase of the disease in Thailand was characterized by the 
rapid spread of the virus among drug users. Those infected in 
the second phase were prostitutes, and in the third phase, the 
virus reached men who were not drug users. In the fourth phase, 
those infected men passed the virus on to their regular 
partners, and in the fifth phase, there was an increase in 
vertical transmission -- infected women began transmitting the 
virus to their children while the latter were still in the womb. 
  What worries epidemiologists is that in Brazil, the wave of 
infection through intravenous drugs is affecting primarily 
adolescents. Among infected young people, 58 percent contracted 
AIDS through the use of drugs. The statistical survey shows that 
1,361 minors under 15 years of age have already contracted the 
disease. 

