BFN 

  [Text] The head of the National Defense Secretariat 
(Sedena), General Antonio Riviello Bazan has affirmed the Armed 
Forces are not subordinated to the Mexican Public Security 
Coordinating Board (CSPN) and added that "we must join efforts 
so the government can serve the people better." 
  During a visit to the town of San Miguel de los Jagueyes, 
the 
Armed Forces training area in the Valley of Mexico, he noted 
that the newly created CSPN "does not entail a subordination (by 
the Armed Fores); it is merely a liaison element," among the 
different entities in charge of public security. He noted that 
the CSPN was created to place greater emphasis on the people's 
concern over security, which is why "we must must join efforts 
so the government can serve the people better." 
  Commenting on the recent acquisition of so-called riot 
vehicles, Riviello Bazan explained they are part of the entity's 
modernization plan that includes the purchase of diverse 
equipment. The secretary indicated the use of those vehicles, 
which he explained are not armored personnel carriers, will 
depend on requests made by local governments through the 
Government Secretariat should they find local public security 
entities insufficient. 
  He added that the country's Armed Forces can provide 
assistance to local governments, but only with the president's 
authorization, and in the case of organized violent actions. He 
also noted the vehicles purchased in the United States are not 
really armored vehicles. "Some of them are armored and carry a 
large amount of water, others can serve to break up 
disturbances." 
  The equipment consists of over 20 units with a capacity of 
approximately 13,000 liters of water, each costing approximately 
$100,000, according to Gen. Riviello Bazan. 
  The Sedena chief emphasized that the government does not 
intend to suspend the freedoms of expression or demonstration, 
adding that the use of those vehicles does not depend on his 
secretariat but on civilian authorities through a request filed 
with the Government Secretariat. 
  Gen. Riviello Bazan also noted that these vehicles not just 
serve to disperse demonstrations but also to protect the the 
security of institutions vital for the country such as Mexican 
Petroleum (Pemex), and the Federal Electricity Commission (CFE), 
among others. 
  Commenting on the conflict in Chiapas State, Riviello Bazan 
said it is a matter of concern for all Mexicans. "It worries us; 
we wish the process could advance as quickly as possible. As 
for the Armed Forces, we are determined to continue supporting 
the government's efforts." 
  On the matter of the number of people in the Zapatist 
National Liberation Army (EZLN), he said: "We deem it 
inappropriate to comment on the matter; we do not want to hamper 
the dialogue or the development of the talks to achieve peace." 
  Gen. Antonio Riviello Bazan also talked about the support 
the 
Mexican Army is giving to this year's electoral process, which 
includes providing security for the nation's graphic workshops 
where the electoral material is being printed, as well as for 
the IFE's [Federal Electoral Institute] central warehouse. 
  He also stated that Mexican Army soldiers protected the 
movement of the electoral material from the nation's graphic 
workshops to the IFE's central warehouse and will do it again 
with the rest of the ballots. 
  The Army will also be in charge of the security of the 27 
local electoral boards in the states' capitals and of the 228 
electoral districts. It will also protect the transfer of 
documents to and from the local electoral boards to the 
electoral circuits. 
  When asked if the Armed Forces were prepared should the 
opposition reach power, Gen. Riviello Bazan said: "We are an 
institution that totally adheres to the law within the framework 
of the Constitution. We have no difficulty in that aspect. We 
are of a completely institutional nature, and with that I want 
to dispel any doubt on the matter." 
  In addition, members of the 66th Infantry Brigade conducted 
several military exercises in the presence of the Sedena chief 
to combat drug trafficking and to deal with other problems. 
  It was explained during the visit, that Mexican Army units 
periodically carry out military training exercises ranging from 
detection of targets and target practice to the destruction with 
explosives of trenches or hideouts of drug traffickers. 
  Mexican Army infantry battalions and air mobile units of the 
Mexican Air Force participate with live ammunition in these 
military exercises, conducted in this area which is within the 
jurisdiction of Huehuetoca municipality in Mexico State. 
  Members of the infantry battalions, ambulances equipped for 
intensive care, vehicles equipped with machineguns, and Bell 
B-12 helicopters, among others, participate in these exercises 
to fight drug traffickers or armed conflicts. 
  Members of the Operations Unit of the 66th Infantry 
Battalion, formed by 600 men, wear a helmet and a bullet-proof 
vest. Some members carry communications receivers which have a 
range of approximately 25 km. Others, who are part of the 
weapons support company, operate 81-mm mortars, machine guns, 
and grenade launchers. Each mortar grenade weighs 3.1 kg. 
  Each operations unit of the air mobile units group of the 
Mexican Air Force is formed by four Bell B-12 helicopters, which 
are used for various missions, and one Sikorsky helicopter 
gunship which fires 1,200 cartridges a minute. 
  On another topic, the Sedena issued a press bulletin 
responding to the Chamber of Deputies National Defense 
Commission regarding its request for information on the purchase 
of riot vehicles. 
  The Sedena reiterated that the purchase of the vehicles is 
part of a program for the Mexican Army and Air Force's overall 
modernization as a result of the current national development 
plan that includes various aspects such as education, updating 
of the legal framework, improvement of the quartering capacity, 
training, and the optimization of equipment of the troop units. 
  It added that the implementation of modernization programs 
and plans are based on the juridical framework that determines 
and delimits the Armed Forces' mission. This framework includes 
Article 29 of the basic law of the federal public administration 
and Article 17 of the basic law of the Mexican Army and Air 
Force, which establish that the Sedena secretary is responsible 
for organizing, equipping, training, managing, and developing 
the ground and air forces in accordance with the instructions 
received from the supreme command of the Armed Forces. 
  It added that Article 89 empowers the president of the 
republic to assign all the permanent armed forces to the 
domestic and foreign defense of the nation. The basic law of 
the Army and the Air Force establishes the Armed Forces' general 
missions. These missions include, among others, guaranteeing 
the country's domestic security, helping the civilian population 
in cases of public need, and maintaining order. 
  It indicated that Article 119 establishes that the branches 
of government have the obligation to protect states against any 
foreign invasion or violence and in cases of domestic rebellion 
or upheaval. Therefore, the Mexican Armed Forces must have 
specialized equipment and armament to face, among others, 
violent groups that surpass the capacity of the public security 
forces of the country's states. 
  It is for this reason that the institutions which form the 
nation's public force and that are guarantors of domestic 
security, must have the means to fulfill their missions, always 
trying to operate by dissuading those persons who, in violent 
groups, attack public order. 
  The special corps that comprise the Army's 
organization-operation structure include the Military Police 
(PM), which have the mission of protecting people and public 
property, and preventing pillage and looting during emergencies, 
among other duties. Thus, the vehicles used for riots will be 
part of the equipment given to the PM members. 

