BFN 

<F P=106> [By Foo Choy Peng] </F>
  [Text] In a major fund-raising move, Hainan Island is to 
set up a property rights centre to help channel foreign and 
domestic funds into cash-strapped enterprises. 
  When it opens its doors tomorrow, the centre will allow 
foreign investors to invest in a long list of state collective 
and shareholding industrial, commercial and infrastructure 
enterprises. 
  "The idea of the centre is to provide yet another route for 
Chinese enterprises to reform their operations and management," 
said Sun Lijun, the provincial government's vice-secretary. 
  It is the first of its kind set up by a special economic 
zone, although major cities such as Wuhan, Beijing, Shanghai, 
Tianjin and Chengdu have had similar operations. 
  Incorporated as a limited company, the centre has 21 
members, 
which may act as broking agents for domestic enterprises seeking 
foreign funds. 
  Mr Sun said foreign investors could either take an equity 
stake, buy the land use, management or intellectual property 
rights, or invest in the fixed assets of these corporations. 
Investment in the listed shares of companies, however, is 
forbidden. 
  He said rules setting out the scope, investment forms and 
the 
type of property rights which could be transferred were 
contained in a regulation recently approved by the provincial 
government. 
  "The rules are an important step towards the setting up of a 
modern enterprise system in Hainan," said Mr Sun. 
  This fund-raising method for Chinese enterprises was seen as 
more cost-effective than just sending a delegation overseas with 
a long list of projects. 
  "Besides, the centre will be able to provide a more detailed 
background of the Chinese corporations, making it easier for 
foreign investors to make up their minds on what to invest in," 
said Mr Sun. 
  Although the exchange will mainly serve the corporations in 
Hainan, it will also be open to enterprises from other regions 
keen to tap foreign capital. 
  The Hainan Securities Committee Office's deputy director, 
Ren 
Junyun, said plans were afoot to link the exchange with the 
other centres to provide a more comprehensive and efficient 
service to its members. 
  To mark the centre's opening, a six-day property rights fair 
will begin tomorrow in Haikou, the provincial capital. 
  So far, 33 corporations have applied to the centre to find 
potential investors from China or abroad, 19 of which are 
shareholding companies. 
  Among the major enterprises seeking funds are Hainan Airport 
Shareholding Co, Hainan Airlines, Hainan Expressway 
Shareholding, and Hainan Handicrafts Import and Export Corp. 
  Hainan Airport hopes to raise capital through the sale of 
300 
million legal-person shares for projects related to two 
airports, Sanya Fenhuang and Haikou Meilan, it is building. 
Sanya is scheduled to open in July and Haikou Meilan in 1996. 
  In addition, Hainan Airport is also involved in property, 
financial and industrial trading activities. 
  Hainan Airlines was set up in 1989 to operate an air cargo 
business. With a fleet of four 737 Boeing planes, it was 
restructured in 1992 into a shareholding company. 
  Hainan Expressway, set up last year to operate expressways 
in 
the province, has expanded into property and tourism. 
  To fund its expansion, it is prepared to sell 250 million 
shares to investors. 

