Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with First Rank Captain Nikolay Vasilevich </F>
Petrov, chief of the 89th inspection of environmental protection 
of the Russian Sea Force for the Baltic Fleet, by O. 
Shcheblykin; place and date not given: ``There Is No Naval 
Ecology''] 
  [Text] 
  Shcheblykin: Nikolay Vasilevich, it is already a 
common opinion among ecologists that the Baltic Fleet is the 
main source of pollution in the region. Is this true? 
  Petrov: The Baltic Fleet can account only for a 
hundredth of a percent of the entire quantity of waste in 
Kaliningrad Oblast. The city municipal services and industrial 
enterprises should account for the remaining quota. Many towns 
in Kaliningrad Oblast still lack sewage disposal. Nevertheless, 
we cannot deny the fact that our ships pollute the environment. 
For example, antisubmarine ships that had been built in Germany 
have separators that purify water and collect residual oil 
products. Eleven supporting ships are also ecologically clean. 
They either had been built or repaired abroad and have the 
required purifying equipment. The remaining ships also have 
special equipment which allows to purify water until the 
concentration of oil products is 100 milligrams per 1 liter of 
water. According to the 1973 Convention, the overflow of waste 
from such ships is forbidden within a 200-mile coast zone. 
  In my opinion, the solution to this issue is the 
construction 
of a purifying station. It should be built in Baltiysk where 
most of our ships are stationed. 
  The collectors of oil products and waste which are at our 
disposal do not meet our demands. In addition, such 
ships-collectors spend a lot of time disposing of the collected 
waste. Civil institutions are reluctant to service military 
ships because they have to overhaul the civil ones first. 
  By the way, this waste can be later processed into 
industrial 
fuel. In Riga, for example, the fishing kolkhoz 
``Brisastselsh'' has been buying oil waste and processing it 
into industrial fuel. In our situation, the Baltic Fleet is 
paying for the processing of its waste, however, we do not get 
back any industrial fuel. 
  According to our accounts, a water purifying station will 
recover the investments in two-three years. Considering the 
fact that Baltiysk is going to acquire international 
recognition, the construction of a water purifying station will 
make it possible to decrease the pollution of the Baltic Sea. 
In addition, we have another source of pollution. In Baltiysk 
harbor, station KU-50, which performs purification of biological 
waste, has not been brought to full capacity. Hence, people's 
feces are overflowing to the Baltic Sea. 
  Shcheblykin: Do you see any way out of this 
situation? 
  Petrov: We count on eight collectors of oil 
products and waste which could be transported to us from 
Liepaja, Riga, and Tallinn. Despite the fact that these 
collectors are outdated, we hope that they could aid us in 
easing the ecological situation in the region. 
  Shcheblykin: Nikolay Vasilevich, in addition to 
ships, you have a complex of ground facilities, including 
motorcars, cantonments, fuel bases, in general, a great number 
of sites which could pollute the environment. How do they 
effect the environment? 
  Petrov: In the first half of 1993, we have been 
fined some 450,000 rubles because the Baltic Fleet had caused 
three oil overflows. 
  Our naval cantonments require complete reconstruction. For 
example, Khrabrovo sewage disposal has been under construction 
since 1974. It is a paradox, however, the new building needs 
repairing. This is out of the question. Moreover, the houses 
that are being built currently also lack sewage disposal. 
  In addition, I can lay charges on check points, technical 
services, and garages of our units. Exhaust emission in most of 
our cars is not regulated. Military motor vehicle inspectors 
[MAI] have no exhaust detectors and are not properly trained. I 
have repeatedly halted at MAI points, however, I have never 
gotten any answers regarding this issue from MAI inspectors. 
  I would like to draw attention of all commanders to 
performing ecological certification within the Baltic Fleet. 

