BFN 

<F P=106> ["National Meeting Commemorates First Anniversary of Comrade </F>
Kim Chong-il's Election as Chairman of DPRK National Defence 
Commission " -- KCNA headline] 
  [Text] Pyongyang, April 8 (KCNA) -- A national meeting was 
held at the February 8 house of culture today to celebrate the 
first anniversary of the dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il's 
election as chairman of the National Defence Commission of the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. 
  The meeting was attended by Marshal O Chin-u, member of the 
Presidium of the Political Bureau of the C.C. [Central 
Committee], the Workers' Party of Korea [WPK], first 
vice-chairman of the National Defence Commission of the DPRK and 
minister of People's Armed Forces; Premier Kang Song-san and 
Vice-presidents Yi Chong-ok and Pak Song-chol who are Politburo 
members of the WPK Central Committee; other senior party and 
state officials and working people in the city. 
  Overseas Koreans staying in the socialist homeland were also 
present. 
  Vice Marshal Choe Kwang, Politburo member of the C.C., the 
WPK, vice-chairman of the National Defence Commission of the 
DPRK and chief of the General Staff of the Korean People's Army, 
made a report at the meeting. 
  The reporter said the election of supreme commander of the 
Korean People's Army Comrade Kim Chong-il as chairman of the 
National Defence Commission of the DPRK at the Fifth Session of 
the Ninth Supreme People's Assembly in April last year was the 
realisation of the unanimous desire of the Korean people and 
People's Army officers and men to have their leader at the head 
of the defence forces and follow him, and another historic 
landmark in firmly defending the security of the people and the 
revolutionary cause and victoriously advancing the Korean 
revolution. 
  The reporter quoted the great leader Comrade Kim Il-song as 
saying: 
  "Comrade Kim Chong-il has an indomitable will and grit and 
outstanding intelligence and commanding art as befits the 
supreme commander of the revolutionary Armed Forces. This 
guarantees the constant strengthening and development of our 
revolutionary Armed Forces and their ever-victorious advance." 
  The reporter continued: 
  Comrade Kim Chong-il, our supreme commander, formulated the 
military doctrine of the great leader as an integral one with 
chuche military idea, theory and tactics as its keynote and has 
comprehensively developed it in depth, thus brilliantly solving 
the urgent questions raised by military practice in the present 
times. 
  With an outstanding and tested commanding art, he has wisely 
led the whole party, the entire people and the whole Army to 
implement our party's line of self-reliant defence so that the 
defence capabilities of the nation have been consolidated 
rock-firm in all spheres. 
  Today our People's Army has grown in strength and developed 
into invincible revolutionary Armed Forces with all services and 
arms, powerful means of strike and defence and unique tactics of 
chuche, which are sufficient for any modern warfare. 
  The ever-victorious might of the People's Army lies in that 
the whole Army has one loyal heart to defend the party and the 
leader with death, closely united with one idea and one purpose, 
and are firmly prepared militarily and technically to defeat any 
formidable enemy. 
  Today our worker-peasant red guards, young red guards and 
other civilian Armed Forces are all firmly built up and the 
whole country has literally turned into an impregnable fortress. 
And, with a powerful self-reliant defence industry, we have 
become able to further modernize the defence power of the 
country with our own efforts, if we decide to. 
  And the traditional beautiful traits of unity between the 
Army and the people are in full bloom on a new, higher level and 
the unity of the Army and the people in ideology and purpose has 
become closer. 
  It is a brilliant fruition of the outstanding and tested 
leadership of our supreme commander that we have built the self- 
reliant defence power which no enemy dare provoke, even under 
the particularly difficult condition in which we are building 
socialism in the constant danger of the U.S. imperialsts' 
aggression and war. 
  The tense situation in which a war may break out at any time 
has been created in our country owing to the vicious 
anti-socialist, anti-DPRK campaigns of the imperialists and 
other international reactionary forces. 
  No machinations of the enemy can frighten our people and 
People's Army that are under the outstanding leadership of a 
great brilliant commander. 
  The reporter stressed: 
  If the enemy dare ignite a war, our people and People's Army 
unshakably determined to share the destiny with the party will 
meet them courageously and wipe out the enemy relentlessly. 
  It is our unshakable will and policy to answer strength with 
strength, and dialogue with dialogue. 
  The U.S. imperialists and their stooges must not 
misinterpret 
this unshakable will and policy and act with discretion, looking 
squarely at the trend of the times. 
  The reporter called upon the entire people and men and 
officers of the People's Army to fight more staunchly to hasten 
the day of national reunification, resolutely smashing the moves 
of the anti-reunification forces with the conviction that 
national reunification in the 90s is certain as they are led by 
the dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il. 

