Article   Type:CSO 

  [Editorial Report] 
<H5>  Evert-Mitsotakis Clash </H5>
  According to Yiannis Politis writing in the 28 February 
Athens daily TA NEA, Konstandinos Mitsotakis, former leader of 
the New Democracy (ND) party and present honorary chairman, has 
resumed daily appearances in the Chamber of Deputies and 
elsewhere, thus refuting rumors that he "retired" after stepping 
down. In public, Mitsotakis is also expressing differences with 
present ND leader Miltiadhis Evert, the only agreement between 
the two being the fact that "the gap separating them cannot be 
bridged." Politis cites officials well acquainted with 
Mitsotakis as stating that the former prime minister's primary 
goal is to regain the leadership of the party as a "savior who 
will rescue it from disaster." However, this goal could only be 
achieved were the ND to suffer a resounding defeat in the 
European Parliamentary elections and the next municipal 
elections that would lead to a "change of heart" of the ND 
parliamentary representation and party officials, the great 
majority of whom elected Evert to his post. Mitsotakis' 
secondary goal is the creation of a new party despite his 
reluctance to do so, Politis continues. The former prime 
minister "cannot just go home," and has already sought out the 
opinion of friendly deputies. While the reaction has so far been 
muted, Mitsotakis is under pressure from dissatisfied ND 
officials, who are urging him to move in the direction of a 
harsher opposition policy. 
<H5>  ND and Euroelections </H5>
  It is very important for the ND to make a good showing in 
the 
Euroelections, writes Stamos Zoulas in the 6 March Athens daily 
I KATHIMERINI. Following the nine-year leadership of 
Konstandinos Mitsotakis, this is the first time the party is 
facing elections under Evert, who will thus be given the 
opportunity to prove that the ND lost to the Panhellenic 
Socialist Movement (PASOK) more on account of Mitsotakis' 
failures than because of PASOK's successes. Another challenge to 
the ND is the existence of Political Spring, a splinter 
political party for which Mitsotakis is also held responsible, 
Zoulas continues. Winning votes away from this party in the 
Euroelections would confirm that Mitsotakis was the problem, he 
comments. 
  A third critical element of the Euroelections for the ND is 
the general condition of PASOK, Zoulas states. Since this is the 
first time PASOK faces elections while following a "clearly 
unpopular" economic policy, the ND hopes that [Prime Minister 
Andreas] Papandreou's party will suffer significant electoral 
attrition. Finally, the government's obvious disorganization 
gives the impression that PASOK has entered a "post-Papandreou" 
era. Coupled with Papandreou's "disengagement" from a dynamic 
prime ministerial role, intragovernmental dissension will likely 
be perceived as government "paralysis," Zoulas concludes. 
<H5>  Origins of Political Spring </H5>
  "Political Spring is not the result of parthenogenesis," 
writes Stefanos Tzanakis in the 3 March Athens daily TA NEA. 
Most adherents were in the ND until last summer, he adds. 
According to information cited by Tzanakis, 55 to 60 percent of 
Political Spring members come from the ND, followed by a 
reported 10 percent from the Coalition of the Left for Progress, 
and 5 percent from the Communist Party (KKE). Tzanakis cites 
Political Spring officials as asserting that, in addition, 5 
percent of party members are former PASOK partisans who withdrew 
or were proscribed from that party. These same officials believe 
that the party must attract new members after the Euroelections; 
they maintain this will not be difficult if Political Spring 
achieves double-digit electoral support in June. 
<H5>  Secret Political Report </H5>
  According to Nikos Marakis writing in the 6 March TO VIMA 
TIS 
KIRIAKIS, Miltiadhis Evert commissioned a secret study of the 
various parties to help him define ND strategy. TO VIMA got hold 
of a copy, Marakis writes, quoting excerpts on the weaknesses of 
the three main parties. 
  ND's present ills are mainly attributed to the image of 
social injustice and indifference the party projected during 
1990-1993. According to the report, "the party's liberal views 
were affected by erroneous government actions" which, unless 
corrected, will lead many Greeks to the permanent impression 
that "a liberal, free market stance is synonymous with 
harshness, social injustice, layoffs, etc." The report also 
points out the "not inconsiderable signs of anachronistic 
practices evidenced by the ND as government and party in recent 
years," as well as public suspicion of "old-fashioned rightist 
mentality, favoritism, lack of ethics and transparency." While 
the report does not "dare refute" these impressions, Marakis 
continues, it notes that even if these accusations are somewhat 
unfair, "the ND's style of management was certainly 
anachronistic and riddled with mistakes." The report accuses the 
ND of "total lack of coordination and strategy, possessing 
mechanisms that only worked in theory...and bad choices of 
people." This contributed to the ND's "increasing isolation from 
quality elements in Greek society and the party." According to 
Marakis, the report also argues that the ND failed mainly 
because it "did not know how to handle power when it achieved it 
or, at a minimum, how to apply its political vision and plans." 
  While the report's judgments regarding PASOK suffer from a 
"strong dose of partiality," they are nevertheless interesting, 
Marakis continues. The report contends that while PASOK enjoys a 
wide popular and parliamentary majority, it is "especially 
weak," since it fails to convince "it can face the essence of 
existing problems." While not ignoring Papandreou's experience 
and ability to maneuver, as well as Minister of National Economy 
Yiorgos Yennimatas' expertise, the report concludes that 
"nothing can save the situation." PASOK's ideological identity 
is also reviewed in the report. Marakis continues. It notes that 
PASOK suffers from a "serious problem of political identity," 
for it is moving toward a "moderate social-democratic, 
European-type model," which is not followed by the mass of party 
officials who, overall, continue to nourish "clearly 
anti-European, micronationalistic, and vindicative feelings." 
  Maraltis cites the report as making "special mention of the 
phenomenon" of Political Spring and its leader Andonis Samaras. 
"In spite of favorable conditions such as deep dissatisfaction 
with the Mitsotakis government and Samaras' high popularity 
stemming from his exploitation of the FYROM issue," this is the 
first time, the report suggests, that "the center-right suffers 
an endogenous disruption of such proportions." Political Spring 
is viewed as "shallow and sentimental.. .neonationalistic... 
voluntarily obscure in expressing political positions," while 
Samaras himself is analyzed as "shallow but charming, lacking 
principles but excelling in projecting himself, approachable but 
essentially without qualms." 

