BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by special envoy John Gutierrez] </F>
  [Text] The Ibero-American countries' battle against money 
laundering and drug trafficking capitals is targeting new paths. 
On 9 June, Colombia stressed the Ibero-American need to control 
bank accounts and investigate shady transactions and the 
recording of money transfers that exceed reasonable ceilings. 
Colombian experts, who proposed a bill to curtail this scourge, 
believe that the fight against money laundering must extend to 
gambling houses and casinos. The objective is to identify 
players and participants and to keep a numbered record of the 
operations. 
  The ministers and representatives of 20 countries, counseled 
by Spanish experts who have implemented several of the measures 
that are currently being multilaterally discussed, on 9 June 
analyzed the terms of a joint declaration, especially those 
regarding financial system controls. 
  EL TIEMPO posed some questions to the judicial authorities 
of 
a group of countries that are attending the ministers summit, 
which will end on 10 June, and is publishing their opinions and 
proposals on fighting money laundering. In principle, the 
prospects of multilateral money laundering agreements reportedly 
will be fully supported by each nation's legislature. 
<H5>  Mexican Deputy Prosecutor General Ricardo Franco </H5>
  Mexico is currently studying a strategy aimed at locating 
moneys illegally entered or transferred. The objective is to 
zero in on the moneys that come from drug trafficking through 
the cooperation of banks and the operations that authorities 
performed in the bank accounts themselves. 
  Those who commit illegal enrichment will be prosecuted and 
sentenced, on average, to 18 years in prison. The solution to 
this problem lies in reinforcing investigations and broadening 
cooperation among the nations to standardize procedures and 
prosecute criminals. 
  Mexico is acting with the law on its side to conduct a 
head-on fight against drug trafficking and will not hesitate to 
punish those who are involved in any activity related to this 
vice. 
<H5>  Chilean Justice Minister Maria Soledad Alvear </H5>
  Chile is about to approve a bill to drastically penalize 
illicit drug trafficking activities, such as money laundering. 
It is even necessary to study the possibility of lifting bank 
secrecy laws, rendering harsh sentences, and expediting legal 
procedures in those cases where there irregular money 
transactions are detected. 
  In our country, we have reached a consensus on moving 
forward 
with drug legislation, although there are certain sectors that 
oppose bank secrecy violations. 
<H5>  Argentine Justice Minister Jorge Luis Maiorano </H5>
  Argentina is equipped with the necessary juridical 
instruments to combat money laundering through actions 
coordinated with the banking system in order to detect, for 
instance, irregular bank account transfers by businesses or 
individuals. 
  In addition, all government bodies have the political 
resolve 
to avoid the proliferation of this affliction. A cooperation 
effort should be implemented in Ibero-America. There is also 
modern legislation on the subject, legislation that carries 
prison terms of up to eight years minimum, forbids prison 
releases, and empowers judges and the Justice Ministry to 
intervene as irregular transactions are detected and confirmed. 
<H5>  Bolivian Justice Minister Rene Blatman </H5>
  In Bolivia, we are holding a number of seminars with banks 
and are drafting a bill to fight money laundering. Our belief 
is that it must be a joint effort among the international 
community. Isolated efforts are destined to fail. 
  Two viable mechanisms, which should be adopted by the 
region, 
to curtail this illegal activity are the lifting of bank secrecy 
laws on suspicious accounts and the creation of formulas to 
justify money sources. 
<H5>  Spanish Justice Minister Teresa Fernandez </H5>
  Spain has adopted criminal and administrative measures to 
prevent capital flight and money laundering, such as setting 
ceilings on cash payments, exerting larger loan controls, and 
storing operations records for up to five years. In addition, 
the Anticorruption Prosecutor's Office was created and is 
authorized to request information from banks. 
  Money laundering is one of the practices that has provided 
oxygen tanks to drug traffickers. This is why I believe 
Ibero-America must adopt measures of this nature to halt money 
laundering. 
<H5>  Cuban Justice Minister Carlos Amat Florez </H5>
  We have not faced the situation generated by drug 
traffickers' investments, because we had a closed economy in 
Cuba. Since we opened our economy, we have been receiving 
foreign aid through agreements with the Cuban Government. 
However, we have been careful and are thoroughly investigating 
and scrutinizing the sources of capital. 

