Accelerator 

<F P=102>   94FE0379B Tokyo GENSHIRYOKU SANGYO SHIMBUN in Japanese 18 
Nov 93 p 4--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY </F>

<F P=103> 94FE0379B </F>
<F P=104>  Tokyo GENSHIRYOKU SANGYO SHIMBUN </F>
<F P=105>  Japanese </F>
CSO 

  [Text] The heavy particle beam accelerator is expected to 
become a new trump card in the fight against cancer. One such 
device has been installed at the National Institute of 
Radiological Sciences (NIRS) and preparations are underway for 
it to begin operation next year. Four main contractors, 
Mitsubishi Electric Corporation, Hitachi, Toshiba, and Sumitomo 
Heavy Industries, plus 150 subcontractors have been working on 
development of the accelerator for nearly 10 years [sic] since 
1988. The accelerator was formally presented to NIRS on 30 
September. 
  This therapeutic device ionizes heavy particles such as 
helium and carbon, accelerates them to 84 percent the speed of 
light in an accelerator called a synchrotron, and focuses the 
beam on cancer cells inside the human body. The main parts of 
the device are an ion source, a pre-accelerator, and a main 
accelerator. In this system, heavy particles that have been 
accelerated in the two linear pre-accelerators are accelerated 
even more in the main accelerator, which is 40 meters in 
diameter and consists of two synchrotrons, until they reach 84 
percent the speed of light. The beam can be directed into three 
treatment rooms. The device has been installed in the NIRS Heavy 
Particle Beam Wing that was opened on 13 October. The total 
cost, including the building, was &yen;32.6 billion, and the 
device itself cost &yen;18.2 billion. 
  The largest parts of this device are the accelerators. 
Accelerators have been used almost exclusively for atomic 
particle experiments in physics and materials research at 
universities and research laboratories. No matter where we look 
in the world, it is extremely rare for four electric product 
manufacturers to cooperate in building this kind of therapeutic 
device. 
  Mitsubishi Electric designed the overall system, the control 
system, the cooling system, and supervised work on the high 
energy beam transport system and the irradiation treatment 
delivery system. Hitachi was responsible for the electromagnets 
and electromagnetic power sources for the main accelerator. 
Toshiba was responsible for the main accelerator's high 
frequency cavities, vacuum ducts, and inlet/outlet beam 
transport systems. Sumitomo Heavy Industries was in charge of 
the injection system including the ion source and the linear 
accelerators. 
  The advantage of using a heavy particle beam to treat cancer 
is that it can be aimed accurately at the tumor to destroy the 
cancer cells efficiently without damaging other tissue in the 
body. 
  The heavy particle beam accelerator uses particles heavier 
than electrons such as helium, carbon, neon, silicon and even 
argon. When it is adjusted to a specific irradiation energy, the 
beam can be aimed at a particular spot. The beam has a strong 
biological effect at the spot where the beam is focused, so it 
is a very powerful tool for destroying cancer cells. This 
treatment is expected to be especially effective against 
heretofore hard to treat cancers such as lung cancer, prostate 
cancer, and bone cancer (osteosarcoma) because it is remote, 
painless, aseptic, and cuts with the precision of a microscalpel. 
  The Lawrence Livermore Laboratory in the U.S. has 
established 
a track record for treating cancer with heavy particle beams, 
but that research was terminated in February 1993. On the other 
hand, a multipurpose heavy particle beam accelerator has been 
completed in Germany, and a plan is presently under review for 
setting up the device so it can also be used for medical 
research. 
  The therapeutic device installed at NIRS is the world's 
first 
heavy particle beam accelerator dedicated strictly to medical 
use, and researchers plan to use it not only for cancer therapy 
but also for accurate diagnoses. 

