Language: <F P=105> Urdu </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Pakistan-China Cooperation"] </F>
  [Text] Chinese Prime Minister Li Peng has asked Chinese and 
Pakistani investors to visit each other's countries more and 
more, and to start some joint ventures so that economic 
cooperation between both countries is increased. He said that it 
is very important to increase cooperation between the two 
countries in the present international situation. This will pave 
the way for economic progress and regional cooperation. China 
also openly announced that it will continue selling weapons to 
Pakistan. Pakistan and China are trusted friends of each other, 
and both have helped one another at various forums and at the 
political level on various international and regional issues. At 
a time when the world is passing through rapid political and 
economic changes, Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's visit to China 
will help improve cooperation between the two countries. This is 
evident from Chinese Prime Minister Li Peng's encouragement to 
investors in both countries to start new ventures and visit each 
other's countries, as well as continuance of selling weapons to 
Pakistan. China is an emerging economic and political power in 
the world. Since the disintegration of the Soviet Union, the 
United States has tried to force its wishes on different parts 
of the world to meet its interests and goals. This has caused 
worry and concern among independent nations. The United States 
has started unilateral propaganda against China over human 
rights violations, breaking the missile technology agreement, 
and other issues, and has imposed restrictions on it. China has 
not only confronted all these tricks, but we can say that China 
is playing an important role in keeping the balance of power at 
international levels. Its economic progress during the twentieth 
century will leave many advanced countries behind. Therefore, 
its role at the international level will be very important in 
the future. Pakistan supported China during difficult times, and 
is its close friend. At present, when Pakistan is dealing with a 
hostile and troublesome country like India, and the United 
States of America is imposing restrictions on it on the pretext 
of a peaceful nuclear program, China's warmer friendship and 
close relationship are very important for Pakistan. Pakistan can 
not only attain self-sufficiency with China's cooperation and 
support, but can also get rid of the blackmail against it for 
defense weapons. We welcome Prime Minister Li Peng's 
announcement that he will continue selling weapons to Pakistan, 
and expect that the friendship between these two countries will 
remain on strong footing. 

