Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Strasbourg/Paris--The daily newspaper LES DERNIERES 
NOUVELLES D'ALSACE reported 15 January that French researchers 
from the European School for Advanced Chemical Industry Research 
(EHICS) had just devised new molecules that can trap cesium with 
great efficiency. The Atomic Energy Commission's Nuclear 
Research Center in Cadarache and COGEMA (General Nuclear 
Materials Company) collaborated with EHICS on the molecules, 
which are dubbed calixarenes. 
  "In the future, calixarenes may be able to reduce the volume 
and weight of radioactive waste by a factor of 100. Highly 
radioactive waste, which is buried 500 meters underground, could 
be concentrated, while waste of lower radioactive levels could 
be stored 20 meters below the surface," said one of the research 
team "bosses", Jacques Vincens of EHICS. 
  Calixarenes are one of the first industrial applications of 
supramolecular chemistry, whose father, Professor Jean-Marie 
Lehn, won the 1987 Nobel prize for chemistry. The Atomic Energy 
Commission (CEA) describes the cup-shaped molecules as a "step 
forward" in research to manage highly-active, long-lived 
radioactive waste. But it will be at least another 10 years 
before the molecules can be applied industrially. 
  Jean-Yves Barre, director of the CEA's "fuel cycle" 
division, 
explained to the AFP that calixarene, a "highly selective 
chemical gripper", is "a cage-molecule that will be able to 
capture the desired element in a solution, extract it from the 
solution, and release it on demand." Another advantage of using 
the "very selective" molecule to extract radioactive elements is 
that it is not very water-soluble and does not deplete. In other 
words, "Calixarenes are not destroyed through use." 
  For now, calixarene molecules can only trap cesium and its 
various isotopes extracted together. Cesium isotopes include 
long-lived (2.3 million years) cesium-135, which researchers 
want to recover, and cesium-137, which has an average lifespan 
(30 years). Barre says that the team headed by Jean-Francois 
Dozo in Cadarache "has gotten yields of 99 percent." 
  The discovery is part of ongoing research programs--some of 
them European1--to find ways of reducing the 
noxiousness of long-lived, nuclear-plant radioactive waste 
through chemical separation or transmutation. The teams have 
been working on the calixarenes for seven or eight months, and 
recently filed a patent on the process. 
  In France, the investigations are an application of the 30 
December 1991 law on "research into the management of 
radioactive waste." The law also deals with "the study of 
possible ways to reversibly or irreversibly store waste in deep 
underground geological formations, notably in underground 
laboratories", and "research on ways to package and warehouse 
such waste for long periods on the surface." 
  The CEA has assigned 190 million French francs [Fr] and 250 
people to the separation/transmutation project, otherwise known 
as SPIN, or Separation and Incineration of Long-Lived 
Radioactive Elements. (The entire waste-management research 
program involves Fr440 million and a staff of 500.) SPIN itself 
consists of two subprograms: PURETEX, which aims to reduce waste 
and improve the performance of COGEMA's retreatment plants in La 
Hague (through enhanced separation of plutonium and neptunium, 
among other methods); and ACTINEX, which seeks to improve 
PURETEX and destroy long-lived products. ACTINEX employs 
additional separations of plutonium, neptunium, americium, and 
curium from long-lived fission products, using accelerators to 
transmute the long-lived radioactive elements contained in such 
waste. 
Footnotes 
  1. The CEA is linked to EHICS, and to the Universities of 
Dublin, Parma, Mayence, and Barcelona. 

