Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 27 Dec (XINHUA) -- Rules for the 
Implementation of the Interim Regulations of the PRC on 
Consumption Tax 
  Article 1. These rules are enacted in accordance with 
Article 18 of the "Interim Regulations of the PRC on Consumption 
Tax" (hereafter referred to as the regulations). 
  Article 2. The term "unit" referred to in Article 1 of the 
regulations means state-owned enterprises, collective 
enterprises, privately-owned enterprises, share-holding 
enterprises, and other enterprises as well as administrative 
units, institutions, military units, social groups, and other 
units. 
  The term "individual" referred to in Article 1 of the 
regulations means individual operators and other individuals. 
  The term "within the boundaries of the PRC" referred to in 
Article 1 of the regulations means that the place of shipping 
and location for producing, processing on contract basis, and 
imported goods dutiable for consumption tax (hereafter referred 
to as "dutiable consumption goods") are within China's 
boundaries. 
  Article 3. The specific taxation scope for dutiable 
consumption goods listed in the "Table of Tax Items, Tax Rates 
(Tax Amounts)" as appended to the regulations will be carried 
out in accordance with the "Explanatory Notes for the Taxation 
Scope for Dutiable Consumption Goods." 
  A large case of 50,000 cigarettes (similarly hereafter) with 
a sale price at or above 780 yuan (excluding value-added tax 
payable by the purchaser, similarly hereafter) shall be levied 
at A-class cigarette tax rate. A large case of cigarettes with 
a sale price below 780 yuan shall be levied at B-class cigarette 
tax rate. 
  Article 4. The term of "dutiable consumption goods with 
different tax rates concurrently managed by taxpayers" referred 
to in Article 3 of the regulations means dutiable consumption 
goods with upwards of two different tax rates produced and sold 
by taxpayers. 
  Article 5. The term of dutiable consumption goods "produced 
by the taxpayer who pays tax at the time of sale" referred to in 
Article 4 means paid transference of dutiable consumption goods, 
that is, dutiable consumption goods transferred on the condition 
of obtaining money, goods, labor, or other economic profits from 
the transferee. 
  Article 6. The term "dutiable consumption goods produced and 
used by the taxpayer or dutiable consumption goods used in a 
consecutive production process" means direct materials used for 
producing final dutiable consumption goods, of which these 
direct materials are component parts. 
  The term "use in other aspects" means dutiable consumption 
goods used by the taxpayer in producing non-dutiable consumption 
goods and projects under construction or dutiable consumption 
goods used by administration departments and non-production 
organizations for providing labor or for donation, sponsorship, 
fund-raising, advertisement, samples, welfare of workers and 
staff members, awards, and other aspects. 
  Article 7. The term "dutiable consumption goods used for 
processing on a contract basis" means processed dutiable 
consumption goods, whose raw materials and main materials are 
provided by the consigner and processed by the assignee who only 
receives processing fees and advance money paid for the cost of 
partial supplementary materials used in the processing. As to 
dutiable consumption goods produced with raw and semi-finished 
materials provided by the consignee, or dutiable consumption 
goods processed with raw and semi-finished materials sold to the 
consigner by the consignee, or dutiable consumption goods 
produced with raw and semi-finished materials purchased by the 
consignee under the name of consignment are not allowed to be 
treated as dutiable consumption goods processed on a contract 
basis, whether or not the taxpayer treats them as a sale in his 
financial arrangement. Such goods attract consumption tax at 
the same rate as that for the sale of self- manufactured 
dutiable consumption goods. 
  Consumption tax shall not be levied again on dutiable 
consumption goods processed on a contract basis if they are for 
direct sale. 
  Article 8. The time at which the obligation to pay 
consumption tax goes into force is to be in accordance with the 
stipulations of article 4 of the "Regulations," which are as 
follows: 
  1. The times at which the obligation go into effect for 
paying taxes for taxable consumer goods sold by tax payers are: 
  a. If goods are sold on credit or on an installment payment 
basis, sellers' obligation to pay consumption tax begins on the 
day of payment collection as specified in the sales contracts. 
  b. If goods are sold on an advance payment basis, sellers' 
obligation to pay consumption tax begins on the day when sold 
taxable goods are delivered. 
  c. If payments for sold taxable consumer goods are to be 
collected by a third party or by a bank, sellers' obligation to 
pay consumption tax begins on the day when the sold goods are 
delivered and the payment collection paperwork is completed. 
  d. If payments for sold goods are to be made in other ways, 
sellers' obligation to pay consumption tax begins on the day 
when payments are completely made or proof of collection of 
payments are received. 
  2. The time at which the obligation goes into effect for 
paying taxes for taxable consumer goods produced and to be used 
by tax payers themselves begins with the day when the goods are 
committed to use. 
  3. The time at which the obligation goes into effect for 
paying taxes for taxable consumer goods that are committed by 
tax payers to others for processing begins on the day when the 
tax payers take delivery of the goods. 
  4. The time at which the obligation goes into effect for 
paying taxes for taxable consumer goods imported by tax payers 
begins on the day when the imported goods clear the customs. 
  Article 9. The "sales quantities" stated in Article 5 of the 
"Regulations" refer to the quantities of taxable consumer goods. 
The details of these "sales quantities" are as follows: 
  1. For those selling taxable consumer goods, the quantity 
refers to the sales quantity of taxable consumer goods. 
  2. For those producing taxable consumer goods for their own 
use, the quantity refers to the quantity of goods committed to 
use. 
  3. For those who commit others to process taxable consumer 
goods, the quantity refers to the quantity of goods taken back 
by tax payers. 
  4. The quantity of imported taxable consumer goods refers to 
the quantity of imported goods of which payment of import duty 
has been certified by the customs. 
  Article 10. The standards of conversion of units for taxable 
consumer goods of which the amount of tax payment is computed 
according to the quantity of the goods are as follows: 
  1. beer: 1 tonne = 988 liters 
  2. millet wine: 1 tonne = 962 liters 
  3. gasoline: 1 tonne = 1388 liters 
  4. diesel: 1 tonne = 1176 liters 
  Article 11. According to Article 5 of the "Regulations," for 
taxable consumer goods sold by tax payers of which the amount of 
sales is to be computed with foreign exchange, the renminbi 
equivalent of the sales may be based on the exchange rate of the 
day on which foreign exchange is settled, or of the first day of 
the month in which foreign exchange is settled (in principle, 
the exchange rate should be the middle rate). Tax payers should 
decide in advance which rate is to be used; once it is decided, 
it must not be changed within one year. 
  Article 12. The "sales amount" stated in Article 6 of the 
"Regulations" does not include the value-added tax payment that 
is to be collected from the purchasers of goods. If payment of 
goods and value-added tax payment of taxable consumer goods are 
collected as a whole by tax payers because value-added tax 
payment is not deducted from the sales amount or because tax 
payers are not allowed to issue special value-added tax 
invoices, the consumption tax should be computed according to 
the sales amount excluding value- added tax payment. The 
equation for the computation is as follows: 
  Sales amount of taxable consumer goods = sales amount 
including value-added tax divided by (1 + value-added tax rate 
or the rate of tax levy) 
  Article 13. All taxable consumer goods that are sold in a 
packed form of which the tax payment is to be computed according 
to price rate -- whether or not the packing is charged 
separately and no matter what kind of accounting method is used 
-- should be included in the sales amount of taxable consumer 
goods for consumption tax purposes. If packaging materials are 
not sold with the products, but instead a security is collected 
for them, this security should not be taxed as a part of the 
sales amount of the taxable consumer goods. However, the 
security that is not returned to buyers because packaging 
materials are not returned within a specified period, and the 
security that has been kept for more than one year, should be 
included in the sales amount of taxable consumer goods and 
should be taxed according to appropriate tax rates of taxable 
consumer goods. 
  Security for packaging materials that are sold with taxable 
consumer goods should be included in the sales amount of the 
taxable consumer goods if the security is not returned to buyers 
within a specified period, and therefore should be taxed 
according to appropriate tax rates of taxable consumer goods. 
  Article 14. The "fees not included in the calculated 
prices" as mentioned in Article 6 of the "Regulations" mean 
funds, pooled resources [ji zi fei 7162 6327 6316], returned 
profits, subsidies, penalties for nonperformance of contracts 
(interest for delayed payments), collection for others, advance 
money for others, and other kinds of fees not included in the 
calculated prices. However, the following fees are excluded from 
the above-mentioned fees: 
  1. The carrier's invoices for purchasers. 
  2. Such invoices delivered by the taxpayer to purchasers. 
  All other fees not included in the calculated prices, 
whether 
they belong to the income of taxpayers or not, should all be 
included in the total amount of sales for tax calculation. 
  Article 15. The "sales prices of the same kinds of consumer 
goods" as mentioned in Article 7 and Article 8 of the 
"Regulations" mean the sales prices of the same kinds of 
consumer goods in the same month received by taxpayers or 
agents. If the sales prices of the same kinds of consumer goods 
in that month fluctuate, the average prices will be used in the 
calculation of consumption taxes. However, the average prices 
cannot be based on the following cases: 
  1. The sales prices are significantly low without proper 
reasons. 
  2. There are no sales prices. 
  If there are no sales during that month or if the amount of 
sales during that month has not been calculated, the sales 
prices of the same kinds of consumer goods in the previous month 
or the latest month shall be used in calculating consumption 
taxes. 
  Article 16. The "costs" as mentioned in Article 7 of the 
"Regulations" mean the production costs of taxable consumer 
goods. 
  Article 17. The "profits" as mentioned in Article 7 of the 
"Regulations" mean the profits based on the national average 
profits over costs of various kinds of consumer goods. The 
national average profits of various kinds of consumer goods 
shall be decided by the State General Administration of Taxation. 
  Article 18. The "costs of materials" as mentioned in Article 
7 of the "Regulations" mean the actual costs of materials for 
processing provided by a consignor. The consignor must clearly 
note (or use other methods to provide) the costs of materials. 
If the consignor does not provide the costs of materials for 
processing, the local taxation organizations shall have the 
authority to examine and determine the costs of materials. 
  Article 19. The "processing fee" as mentioned in Article 8 
of the "Regulations" means all fees obtained by the processor 
from the consignor for processing taxable consumer goods 
(including actual costs of supplementary materials purchased by 
the processor). 
  Article 20. The "duty-paying value" as mentioned in Article 
9 of the "Regulations" means the tariffs stipulated by the 
customs. 
  Article 21. According to Article 10 of the "Regulations," 
the power of calculating taxes for taxable consumer goods is 
classified as follows: 
  1. The prices of A-class cigarettes, grain, and white wine 
for taxation shall be examined and decided by the State 
Administration of Taxation. 
  2. The prices of other taxable consumer goods for taxation 
shall be examined and decided by various branches of the State 
General Administration of Taxation. 
  3. The prices of imported taxable consumer goods for 
taxation 
shall be examined and decided by the customs. 
  Article 22. "Other items stipulated by the State Council" as 
mentioned in Article 11 of the "Regulations" mean taxable 
consumer goods of which the export is restricted by the state. 
  Article 23. If consumer goods for export are rejected at the 
customs or if they are returned by foreign customers after 
receiving reimbursement of tax and reenter the country free of 
tax, the exporters must promptly repay the exempted amount of 
consumer tax to local taxation organizations. 
  If consumer goods exported directly by taxpayers are 
rejected 
at the customs or if they are returned by foreign customers 
after receiving reimbursement of tax and reenter the country 
free of tax, the taxpayers may, with the approval of concerned 
taxation units, postpone the repayment of the exempted amount of 
consumer tax until such consumer goods are allowed for sale in 
domestic markets. 
  Article 24. If taxable consumer goods marketed by taxpayers 
are returned by purchasers for poor quality or other reasons, 
the amount of collected consumption tax may, with the approval 
of concerned taxation units, be reimbursed to the taxpayers. 
  Article 25. According to the stipulations of Article 13 of 
the "Regulations," if taxpayers market taxable consumer goods in 
other counties (cities) or if they entrust other people to 
market taxable consumer goods in other counties (cities), the 
taxpayers should, after the sales of those consumer goods, pay 
consumption tax to taxation units in their respective localities. 
  If the general office and branches of taxpayers are not 
located in the same county (city), the taxpayers should pay 
consumption taxes in places where taxable consumer goods are 
produced. However, with the approval of the State General 
Administration of Taxation or its branches, the consumption 
taxes may be paid by the general office to the local taxation 
unit having jurisdiction over it on behalf its branches. 
  Article 26. The Rules for the Implementation of the Interim 
Regulations of the PRC on Consumption Tax shall be explained by 
the Ministry of Finance or by the State General Administration 
of Taxation. 
  Article 27. The Rules for the Implementation of the Interim 
Regulations of the PRC on Consumption Tax shall come into force 
on the date of promulgation. 
  [Signed] Ministry of Finance 
  [Dated] 25 December 1993 

