BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Hookup" program] </F>
  [Excerpts] On the second day of his stay in Costa Rica, 
Republic of China [ROC] President Li Teng-hui, in additional to 
making official calls, met separately with leaders of El 
Salvador and several other nations who were in Costa Rica to 
participate in the inauguration of its new president. These 
meetings, which were among the most important items on the 
schedule of President Li's tour of Central America, are of 
considerable significance for enhancing the ROC's [word 
indistinct] with its friendly nations. During the meetings, it 
was expected that President Li would try to enlist the leaders' 
support for the ROC's bid to participate in UN activities. 
  The day's schedule of important meetings was as follows: At 
1030 on 7 May, President Li met incumbent President Alfredo 
Cristiani and President-Elect Armando Calderon Sol of El 
Salvador. At 1115, he met Angel Roberto Seifart, vice president 
of Paraguay. In the afternoon, he met with Honduran President 
Rafael Leonardo Callejas [as heard] and later with Guatelaman 
President De Leon Carpio. Besides President Li, other heads of 
state who came to participate in the inauguration included the 
leaders of Nicaragua, Honduras, El Salvador, Colombia, and 
Guatelama. 
  President Calderon of the Republic of Costa Rica presented 
Costa Rica's state medal to President Li yesterday. After 
accepting the medal, President Li emphasized that the medal is 
not only a personal honor but also symbolizes the noble and 
sincere friendship between China and Costa Rica. He pledged 
that the ROC Government would continue its efforts to enhance 
cooperation with the Costa Rican Government. China Broadcasting 
Corporation special correspondent Kang You-feng filed the 
following report: 
  The presentation ceremony was held on the evening of 6 May, 
Costa Rican time. Outgoing President Calderon presided over the 
ceremony personally. Former presidents and vice presidents of 
Costa Rica and diplomats from various countries, nearly 100 in 
all, were present. [passage omitted] 
  After accepting the medal, President Li expressed his 
appreciation. 
  [Begin Li recording] Confering this honorable [word 
indistinct] cross medal of state on me is not merely an honor 
for myself. It is also a symbol of the noble and sincere 
friendship between our two nations. I am deeply touched. The 
ROC Government and people treasure the noble friendship of your 
government and people. I would like to avail myself of the 
opportunity presented by the changeover of administrations to 
pledge continued efforts by the ROC Government in enhancing 
cooperation with the incoming administration. [end recording] 
  After the ceremony, President Li accepted congratulations 
from the distinguished guests. Afterward, President Calderon 
hosted a banquet in the presidential house in honor of President 
and Mrs Li, the ROC delegation, and distinguished guests from 
various countries. 

