Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Prime Minister Dr. 'Abd-al-Salam al-Majali has 
received at his office the Egyptian Foreign Minister Mr. 'Amr 
Musa. 
  During the meeting, they reviewed relations between the two 
fraternal countries, and developments in the peace process, as 
well as current international issues. 
  The meeting was attended by the Minister of State for 
Foreign 
Affairs Mr. Talal al-Hasan and the Egyptian ambassador in Amman. 
  Mr. Musa, who arrived in Amman this morning on a brief visit 
to Jordan, is also due to hold talks with his majesty the king 
and other senior officials on the Middle East peace process and 
several Arab and international issues, as well as bilateral 
relations. 
  In an arrival statement, Mr. Musa said he was carrying a 
message to his majesty the king from Egyptian President Husni 
Mubarak dealing with the peace developments. He also said the 
message deals with relations between the two brotherly 
countries, and is part of their consultations and coordination, 
particularly at this delicate phase of the peace process in the 
region. 
  Asked about inter-Arab relations, the Egyptian foreign 
minister said he hoped the beginning of the new year will 
witness a breakthrough in inter-Arab relations. He added there 
is no need to expedite efforts to restore these relations to 
normal, particularly that the special circumstances which the 
Arab region has recently passed through barred the improvement 
of such relations. 
  On Israel's rejection to return to the Taba talks with the 
Palestinians unless the PLO accepts the Cairo document as a 
basis for these negotiations, Mr. Musa said there was more than 
one paper and one document which the Israelis and Palestinians 
agreed upon. He pointed out that these papers or documents 
should be submitted to the leaderships concerned to approve, 
reject, or amend them; and this should be the basis for 
negotiations. 
  Mr. Musa said there is room for agreement or disagreement on 
these points, or on some of them, and for reaching solutions. 
  The Egyptian foreign minister described the proposed meeting 
between Syrian President Hafiz al-Asad and U.S. President Bill 
Clinton due to be held in mid-January as an important one which 
will expedite the peace process in the region. 
  The Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Talal al-Hasan 
welcomed Mr. Musa's visit to Jordan, saying it is part of the 
brotherly relations between the two countries, and constitutes 
an important development in the Middle East peace process. Mr. 
al-Hasan said the continued coordination and consultations 
between the Jordanian and Egyptian leaderships at this 
particular phase is an important and vital matter. 

