Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Geneva, Jan 18, SPA -- Foreign ministers of the 
Organisation of Islamic Conference have called for a just 
settlement of the situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Members of a 
ministerial contact committee, who concluded a meeting in Geneva 
yesterday issued a statement on behalf of the OIC, expressing 
their deep anxiety over the failure of the Security Council in 
shouldering its responsibilities toward the Bosnian problem and 
the council's failure to implement its resolutions in this 
connection. 
  The ministers from Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Tunisia, Pakistan, 
Senegal and Iran have expressed the OIC states' readiness to 
take part in the peace talks between the conflicting parties in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. They also regretted the diplomatic and 
military pressures being practiced against the Bosnian 
Government in order to accept the disintegration of the 
independent state of Bosnia-Herzegovina. The statement said the 
Islamic countries rejected the description of the conflict as "a 
civil war." 
  The ministers urged the world community and the chairman of 
the international conference on the former Yugoslavia to 
implement the U.N. resolutions and the principles of the 
international law. They paid tributes to the Bosnian Government 
for its flexibility and constructive stands during the peace 
talks. 
  The statement expressed OIC's deep sorrow over the 
continuation of aggression against the Bosnian people despite 
the current peace negotiations. It urged all conflicting 
parties in Bosnia- Herzegovina to implement the ceasefire and 
halt all offenses in order to create a conducive atmosphere for 
peace. 
  "The success of the peace process requires respect for the 
independence and sovereignty of Bosnia and the return of the 
land usurped by the Serbs with the use of force against 
Bosnia-Herzegovina." 
  The statement reiterated OIC's readiness to provide 
peace-keeping forces under the patronage of the U.N. and called 
on the NATO to carry out air strikes against Serb positions in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  It also expressed the Islamic states' grave concern over the 
volatile situation in Croatia. 
  The statement said the OIC calls upon the International 
Court 
of Justice to begin its work on the situation in Bosnia and to 
put before justice the war criminals. It appealed for 
maintaining the current boycott against Serbia and Montenegro 
until a final settlement is achieved. 

