BFN 

  [Text] Belgrade, 14 Apr (TANJUG) -- The Federal Assembly 
Chamber of Citizens today adopted a declaration resolutely 
condemning NATO's armed attacks under UN auspices on the Serbs 
in former Bosnia-Herzegovina, which brought about destruction 
and civilian casualties. 
  The declaration was supported by 71 votes, and nine deputies 
abstained. "By launching these armed attacks, the United 
Nations has abandoned its impartial peacemaking role and openly 
sided with the Muslim side in the civil war in former 
Bosnia-Herzegovina," the declaration states. It also says the 
Federal Assembly expresses concern over the negative 
consequences of the attacks for the attempts to put an end to 
the civil war and find a just political solution in former 
Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  The document notes that the escalation of the conflict took 
place because the Muslims were using the protected zones, 
Gorazde in particular, to attack Serb positions and because the 
United Nations failed to carry out disarmament within the 
protected zones, something it was duty-bound to do. Nor did the 
United Nations react to the Muslim military operations launched 
from these zones. 
  "In so doing, the United Nations took the risk and 
responsibility for every possible consequence, and they cannot 
be foreseen at the moment. It is a regrettable fact that it is 
precisely the United Nations, which under its charter is 
duty-bound to maintain peace and international security, is 
taking steps to escalate the war and threaten the peace 
process," the declaration says. 
  The Federal Assembly calls on the United Nations to 
immediately stop its aggressive operations against the Serbian 
people, to abandon their double standards applied to 
participants in the civil war in former Bosnia-Herzegovina, to 
restart a dialogue leading to the cessation of all military 
activities, and to seek solutions only by political means and 
through negotiations while heeding the interests of all sides. 
  The declaration stresses that the Federal Republic of 
Yugoslavia will continue its hitherto constructive policy of 
active participation in the peace process, but it cannot be 
indifferent to operations that are armed attacks against the 
Serbian people in former Bosnia-Herzegovina, and it will 
continue to follow further developments closely. 
  Dissatisfied with the fact that no debate preceded the 
adoption of the declaration, the deputies of the Serbian Radical 
Party and the People's Party of Montenegro walked out of the 
assembly hall. 

