BFN 

<F P=106> ["fy"-signed report: "Joint Military Exercises With Poland </F>
Agreed Upon"] 
  [Text] Bonn, 12 May -- The defense ministers of Poland, 
Germany, and Denmark have agreed that the three countries hold 
joint military exercises and thus meet Poland's wish to pave the 
way for the country's full membership within NATO as soon as 
possible. Poland not only intends to use the "Partnership for 
Peace" initiative to come closer to NATO. It also seeks to 
adjust its armed forces to the Alliance structures as fully as 
possible, and to hold joint military exercises with NATO member 
states. Through practical cooperation, the country is to be 
integrated into the planning of the Alliance's integrated 
military organization. German Defense Minister Volker Ruehe 
(Christian Democratic Union) and his Danish counterpart, Hans 
Haekkerup, back Poland's wishes. This became clear in the talks 
they held with their Polish counterpart, Piotr Kolodziejczyk, in 
Warnemuende on 12 May. How highly Ruehe assesses the importance 
of this meeting is shown by the fact that, on that day, he did 
not accompany Russian Defense Minister Pavel Grachev, who had 
come to Germany with President Boris Yeltsin. 
  In order to further Poland's wish to join NATO as soon as 
possible, the three defense ministers agreed to hold joint 
military exercises of the Polish, Danish, and German Armed 
Forces this year and in subsequent years. These maneuvers will 
initially be trilateral exercises in the responsibility of the 
nations concerned and will be coordinated with NATO. The first 
exercise will be a trinational naval exercise off the 
Mecklenburg coast in September. The next exercise, to be held in 
October, will be more important and will be held in Jutland by 
Polish, German, Dutch, and Danish engineer forces. It forms 
part of the NATO maneuver, "Chinese Eye." It is true that the 
Polish Army will only take part with one platoon of engineer 
troops (50 men), but what is decisive here is the status. Next 
year, a joint command post exercise will be held in Poland. 
Ruehe hopes that by 1996, the legal conditions will be created 
for the Polish Army to take part in a maneuver in Germany. 
  The talks showed that Poland would prefer the closest 
possible inclusion of Russia in the "Partnership for Peace" 
concept to any other form of cooperation between NATO and 
Russia. This holds also true for cooperation in the framework 
of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE). 

