Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by A.Kh.: "Attempt on Me Is Technically Unfeasible"] </F>
  [Text] A regular press conference by V. Siradegyan, 
minister of internal affairs of the Republic of Armenia, was 
held yesterday. The minister reported that a tendency toward a 
decline in criminal activity appeared in the republic: As 
compared with the corresponding period of last year, the number 
of registered crimes was reduced by almost 20 percent. The 
number of nonregistered offenses also decreased. This is due to 
the fact that, in contrast to past years, the "nonclear-up rate" 
[of crimes] no longer hangs like a sword of Damocles over the 
head of the militia. There are fewer premeditated murders and 
cases of malicious hooliganism and the fight against the drug 
mafia has been activated (today 47 so-called hustlers are 
imprisoned, whereas previously the fight was waged almost 
exclusively against drug users). The number of road-transport 
accidents decreased by 40 percent. However, the minister noted 
realistically that, probably, this is not so much to the credit 
of the traffic police--rather the cost of gasoline is to be 
"blamed" for this: Not everyone can afford to drive around in 
his own car. Along with this, a certain increase in offenses 
among adolescents has been noted. Second offenses remain at the 
previous level. The prosecution of counterfeiters has 
intensified. Fifty-three attempts to disseminate counterfeit 
dollars and Russian rubles have been stopped. However, the 
"center" of this activity still remains unknown and it is not 
ruled out that it is outside the republic. Fortunately, attempts 
to counterfeit drams (amateurish work is counted out) have not 
yet been registered. 
  On the whole, the clear-up rate of crimes remains at the 
level of 50 percent. The lack of coordination among 
corresponding services of CIS countries greatly hampers a rise 
in this indicator, which enables offenders to escape punishment 
by leaving Armenia. V. Siradegyan expressed the hope that a 
coordinating council of six administrations of ministries of 
internal affairs of all the commonwealth states will soon be 
established and begin to operate. Appropriate government 
agreements have already been signed and this will help an 
efficient coordination of the efforts of law enforcement bodies. 
Unfortunately, we have not yet succeeded in establishing 
constructive cooperation with our Georgian colleagues--and not 
through the fault of the Armenian side. Therefore, the question 
of the joint protection of transport and power infrastructures 
on the territory of this country continues to remain open. 
  According to the minister, the Ministry of Internal Affairs 
continues to fight against criminals in its own ranks as well. 
On the ministry's recommendation the procuracy instituted 18 
criminal proceedings against militiamen who broke the law. More 
than 700 people were dismissed from "agencies" owing to 
distrust. At the same time, there are cuts in the central 
apparatus, whose workers are sent to reinforce lower links. "The 
process of merging of the militia with the mafia is weakening," 
V. Siradegyan said. "This is largely due to the fact that most 
criminal elements capable of establishing relations with 
dishonorable workers of the Ministry of Internal Affairs are in 
places of detention today." The minister believes that, even if 
the last circumstance does not fully remove the danger of an 
emergence of a so-called mafioso state from the agenda, it 
reduces such a possibility markedly. 
  Many rumors and conjectures about Honda cars, which have 
entered the system of the traffic police, have arisen today. 
Discussing this, the director of the internal department noted 
that this purchase was much cheaper than the purchase of Russian 
Zhiguli would be. Furthermore, the efficiency of Japanese cars 
is incomparably higher, as is the speed. "In no way should the 
militia be inferior to criminals in operational efficiency," V. 
Siradegyan noted. "In Armenia today up to 2,000 Mercedes, BMW, 
and other most modern cars are under private ownership. It is 
known that many of their owners are potential criminals. We must 
have technical capabilities in order to at least not be inferior 
to them in speed." 
  To the question how V. Siradegyan assessed the fact of the 
liquidation of the Main Administration of National Security and 
reorganization of special services, the minister answered that 
this was a positive phenomenon. Possibly, he stressed, this will 
finally make it possible to seriously engage in the 
investigation of the murder of former KGB chairman M. Yuzbashyan 
and a number of crimes similar in the manner of execution and 
public response. V. Siradegyan did not rule out that specialists 
of the former USSR KGB "liquidated" Yuzbashyan. This attempt was 
organized very professionally. In particular, only one shot was 
fired, but several cartridge cases were planted at the site of 
the crime in order to "blur" the real picture of what had 
happened. "Yuzbashyan knew a great deal about the period when 
the processes around Nagorno-Karabakh originated and who did 
this and how and that is why he could have become completely 
`superfluous' for certain forces in Moscow," the minister 
stressed. 
  Speaking about the accusations leveled at him by Moscow 
businessman S. Dzhilavyan, the head of Armenia's Ministry of 
Internal Affairs stated that he would not want to react to such 
things, because this would mean the "formation of a certain 
political figure out of a complete nonentity." At the same time, 
he noted that, making these kinds of accusations (we would like 
to recall that S. Dzhilavyan declared that Siradegyan, 
allegedly, wanted to organize an attempt on him), the Moscow 
businessman made a very big mistake. "He himself will be killed 
sooner or later--either by creditors or by other mafiosos. 
However, no one will search for them and investigate this case 
in Russia. After all, Dzhilavyan himself pointed to the 
`Armenian trace.' After this it will hardly occur to anyone to 
seriously take up his case," V. Siradegyan noted. 
  Concerning rumors about an attempt on him himself, about his 
aspiration to hold the post of prime minister, and about his 
expected departure for residence in another country the minister 
said that an attempt on him was unfeasible from the technical 
point of view, he could not become prime minister, because he 
did not consider himself capable of executing this post, and, in 
general, similar jokes within the walls of the Council of 
Ministers were not particularly ethical. He did not intend to 
leave Armenia for anywhere: "There is no other country in the 
world where I would like to live." 

