BFN 

<F P=106> [Wilhelm Dietl/Frank Siering report: "Right in the Face"] </F>
  [Text] Adil Arslan, 33, from Krefeld refused to come. Then 
his visitor took out a 7.65-mm pistol and fired six times, 
several times right in his face. Arslan collapsed with severe 
injuries. 
  Arslan is a Kurd. The perpetrator is also a Kurd. The 
attack was ordered by the banned Workers Party of Kurdistan 
(PKK). The brutal attempted assassination reveals the new 
violent methods of the PKK. Arslan was supposed to die because 
he wanted to drop out. Insiders report that the 33-year-old man 
"lost his faith in the cause of Kurdistan." 
  Arslan is not an unknown person. He belonged among the best- 
known PKK functionaries in Germany. Together with 24 of his 
comrades, he was charged with membership in a terrorist 
association and criminal acts connected with it. In 1992 the 
Celle Higher Regional Court sentenced him to four years and two 
months in prison for severe deprivation of liberty and dangerous 
bodily injury. Arslan was released on probation. 
  Intelligence officers interpret Arslan's attempted 
assassination as a clear sign from Kurdish leader Abdallah 
Ocalan. Even after the PKK ban, he controls his adherents in 
Germany from Damascus, Syria. They are not to be intimidated 
despite the ban. And increasingly frequent attacks support his 
demands. 
  Flashback: In April the PKK started militant actions against 
travel agencies arranging holidays in Turkey. It threatened 
personal attacks on German visitors to Turkey. In Bensheim in 
Hesse the windowpanes of a travel agency were broken. 
Afterward, consulates and superhighways were occupied. The 
dramatic climax occurred when two women set themselves on fire 
on the occasion of the Kurdish spring festival in Munich. 
  In addition to this new wave of violence, a confidential 
analysis of the Federal Office of Criminal Investigation (BKA) 
proceeds from "increasing participation of German left-wing 
extremists" in the PKK actions. In order to give a "signal 
against the daily peaceful financing of the Turkish regime," 
autonomous persons glued the locks of several travel agencies in 
Hannover with super glue. According to a BKA member, 
threatening letters and letters with confessions from so-called 
leftist autonomous persons have lately arrived in the police 
headquarters in Wiesbaden more and more often. 
  The investigators of the Baden-Wuerttemberg Office of 
Criminal Investigation scored a success in the latest 
investigations against the PKK. Five presumed PKK members were 
arrested. The public prosecutor is conducting investigations 
against the suspects, among other things, because of attempted 
killing, extortion, kidnapping, armed blackmail, bodily injury, 
and support of or membership in a banned association. 
  The arrested men are said to be part of a gang that 
collected 
"protection money" on behalf of the PKK. The police 
investigation group for state security/terrorism conducted 
investigations in the PKK surroundings for months. The result: 
In the greater Stuttgart area, the PKK men presented themselves 
to innkeepers and called on the victims "to donate money," in 
order to finance "the Kurds' struggle for freedom" against the 
Turkish state. According to the police, the required sums 
amounted to up to 50,000 German marks in the case of monthly 
payments. 
  If the innkeepers refused to pay, a raiding squad turned up. 
Armed with iron bars, timbers, baseball bats, and pistols, the 
PKK activists would lie in wait for their victims in their 
apartments or near their cars -- and strike brutally. 
  This action against the PKK -- during the subsequent search 
of apartments the investigators found "receipts of donations," 
firearms, and knives -- shows that the PKK is still active in 
Germany despite the ban -- so active that their own people are 
also killed if they want to drop out. Adil Arslan can tell you 
a thing or two about that. He is still suffering from the 
severe gunshot wounds inflicted on him by his "friend and 
comrade." 

