Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Perla Baca] </F>
  [Text] The Huallaga Valley, which is located in San Martin 
in the northern Peruvian jungle, is a rich farming area that 
produces fine crops of cotton, jute fiber, palm oil, coffee, 
rice, corn, and fruits. It also has outstanding forest and river 
resources, wildlife, and nonmetallic mineral deposits. 
  It is also a very beautiful valley: beautiful lagoons, 
waterfalls, and thermal water springs. Its cultural and 
archaeological past is also outstanding, as is shown by the 
ruins of the fortress of Gran Patajen and Pucullo, which can be 
used as well for promoting tourism. 
  At the international level, however, the Upper Huallaga 
Valley is not known for these beauties but, unfortunately, 
because it is known as the place that produces 60 percent of the 
coca leaves used for preparing cocaine paste and cocaine 
hydrochloride, that is, two of the narcotics that have more 
seriously damaged mankind, especially U.S. and European 
societies. 
  This paradoxical situation has brought to the once peaceful, 
beautiful, and backward, but rich, Huallaga area the repugnant 
and growing criminal activity of international and domestic drug 
traffickers. 
  The area was flooded with dollars, violence, and corruption, 
becoming the "paradise of drug trafficking." The population, 
which grew because of increasing migration, became the active or 
passive accomplice to drug trafficking. 
  International drug traffickers for years engaged in the 
trade 
of illegal drugs uninterrupted, without any major problems and 
even with some security, until the current government sent a 
signal that it had the clear intention of forcefully confronting 
drug trafficking in the area. 
<H5>  Resolute Action by the State </H5>
  In 1992, after realizing that it was practically impossible 
to control such a big area by land with such irregular 
topographic features, the government of President Alberto 
Fujimori, through Decree-Law No. 25426 promulgated on 6 April, 
ordered the Peruvian Air Force [FAP] to take direct control of 
airports and airstrips in northeastern Peru, which accounts for 
almost one-fourth of the national territory. 
  After intense work for establishing the strategy and 
logistical support, the FAP assumed this responsibility. On 13 
June, FAP took control of the airport of Uchiza, a small town in 
the middle of our big jungle, from which an average of 20 small 
planes took off every week carrying drugs for the Colombian and 
U.S. "cartels" and Peruvian "firms." 
  This airport was followed by 13 other airports and 
airstrips. 
Several illegal airstrips also were closed, and more than $2 
million was confiscated along with thousands of kilograms of 
drugs. 
  At first, FAP's intervention was not expected to yield 
favorable results, on the grounds that corruption would end up 
buying "the Blue Ones" (this is how FAP members have been 
christened in the area). But this was wrong. The tidiness, 
morality, and devotion of FAP members are obvious in each one of 
their actions in the area. In addition, the strategy and 
intelligence adopted in the area have succeeded. 
<H5>  From 100 to 0 Flights With Drugs </H5>
  The results, after almost two years of FAP control, are 
obvious: 
  At the 14 airports and airstrips controlled by FAP, not a 
single drug traffickers' light plane has taken off carrying 
drugs. Planes usually loaded an average of 600 kg drugs and 
brought precursors for the production of drug. 
  The success reached its crowning point during the first 20 
days of April 1993, in which the Yurimaguas radar and U.S. AWACS 
and Orion planes did not detect a single drug traffickers' small 
plane in Huallaga airspace searching for an illegal airstrip for 
landing. 
  It should be noted that there are some 200 airstrips in this 
jungle area, of which approximately 70 are illegal. 
  During the first months of 1992 it was estimated that drug 
traffickers' aircraft made between 70 to 100 flights per month 
in the area. This average has been reduced to almost zero in 
the airports and airstrips controlled by the FAP; however, there 
are still "mules" who transport a few kilos of drugs concealed 
in their own cargo. Currently, drug traffickers' aircraft 
cunningly fly toward clandestine airstrips. 
  FAP patrolling or surveillance of the Upper Huallaga has 
forced the narcos to change their flight routes. 
  The Apurimac Valley (Palmapampa-Ayacucho) has now become the 
drug traffickers' cocaine PBC [cocaine base paste] stocking 
center. 
  In light of this, FAP took control of Palmapampa last 
November, and the Democratic Constituent Congress stepped up the 
antidrug struggle by granting the Armed Forces the authority to 
pursue and arrest drug traffickers in areas where there are no 
police stations. This law--No. 26247--was published by EL 
PERUANO on 25 November. This law gives FAP the authority to 
arrest drug traffickers, something it did not do in the past 
because that was not its duty. In the past FAP was only in 
charge of preventing air space violations and directly 
controlling area airports and airstrips. 
  Another achievement is that the air taxi services of 
airlines 
legally operating in the area have reduced their tariffs because 
they no longer have to pay "protection fees." 
  Moreover, the locals have confidence in FAP officials. FAP 
has created a youth organization called "Los Aguilucho" 
[Eaglets] that consists of clubs devoted to sports and civic and 
patriotic teachings offered by a dozen officers to some 1,400 
children and youths. 
  It should be noted, however, that the strict control of 
airports has brought poverty to the region because the 
substantial reduction of the drug trade has cut the flow of 
dollars to the region. 
  Area peasants have repeatedly stated, even at Government 
House: "We want alternative development in a rich agricultural 
area. We want to devote our work to legal and profitable crops 
but we need help." Uncertainty currently distresses the 
region's people. 
  The control exercised by FAP also has caused the drug 
trafficker mafias to resort to more sophisticated technology and 
methods. 
  The drug traffickers now have more modern and faster 
aircraft 
than the Tucano aircraft used by FAP to fight drug trafficking. 
  Moreover, the drug traffickers seem to be hiring more 
skillful pilots capable of skimming the tops of the forest trees 
to avoid being spotted; they fly zig-zag along the rivers and 
leave in groups of three in different directions to avoid being 
intercepted. At night they also light up three or four 
airstrips at a time in various points of Huallaga to confuse FAP. 
  Besides, FAP pilots do not have radars in their aircraft. 
They depend on information supplied by U.S. air and land 
radars. This hinders their autonomy and the speed with which 
they intercept the drug traffickers. The Tucano pilots use 
night vision systems at night. 
  Experts on antidrug operations have commented that never 
before in Peru has such important progress been made in the 
interdiction of drug trafficking, despite the fact that the 
struggle is carried out with a deficient infrastructure and a 
meager budget. The tents in which FAP personnel live in the 
area are proof of this. 
  Uncertainty has spread among the drug traffickers in the 
Upper Huallaga. Even more so with the recent arrest of the 
greatest drug trafficker Peru has ever had; Demetrio Limonier 
Chavez Penaherrera, aka Vaticano. 
  The coordinated action of all the security forces, that is, 
the Army, Navy, Air Force, police, and DEA, is beginning to 
yield results in the Upper Huallaga. 
  Drug traffickers are extremely nervous. They no longer enjoy 
the influence they did in the past. During the past few months 
many drug traffickers have ended as they started: in misery. 
  The new anti-narcotics strategy in the area is proving 
fruitful. Consequently, drug traffickers are trying to use new, 
uncertain routes still not controlled properly. 
  Coca is currently planted and harvested in La Mar 
(Ayacucho), 
Andahuaylas (Apurimac) and La Convencion (Cusco) Provinces. 
<H5>  The New Map of Drug Trafficking in Peru </H5>
  The drug traffickers' "firms" operated like any enterprise 
but clandestinely; they finance the purchase in bulk of drugs 
(stock), they make cocaine base paste, and act as bridges for 
the Colombian cartels. Their hierarchy structure is vertical, 
ranging from the "patron" [boss] or "duro" [strongman] to the 
"burro" [mule] or "traquetero" [middleman]. These firms finance 
the maintenance of the clandestine airstrips. 
  Currently, about 50 "firms" operate in the Upper Huallaga. 
"Vaticano," who was arrested by Colombian police as a result of 
a coordinated effort with the national intelligence service, 
according to President Alberto Fujimori, is regarded as the most 
powerful drug trafficker Peru has ever had. His organization 
traded approximately $900 million per year with the Cali cartel 
in Colombia. Now Demetrio Limonier Chavez Penaherrera is behind 
bars in a Lima prison. 
  Vaticano operated in Uchiza until last year but had to leave 
when FAP arrived. He then went to Campanilla and then to 
Bellavista... but also had to leave when "the Blue Ones" 
arrived. Vaticano then built a clandestine airstrip in Barranca. 
  Another achievement is the blockade with concrete blocks of 
the clandestine airstrips and part of the coastal and Federio 
Basadre highways--the area's main highways. The drug 
traffickers used the straight portions of these highways as 
clandestine landing strips. 
  This has caused drug trafficking to shift toward the 
Aguaytia 
Valley, Pichis-Palcazu, Jaen-Bagua, and the Apurimac Valley 
(Palmapampa-Ayacucho). Drug traffickers' aircraft now enter 
Peruvian airspace through the Amazon Trapezium (Leticia, 
Caballococha, Tabatinga) and the Brazilian jungle on the border 
with Ucayali in order to avoid being intercepted by FAP aircraft 
and to dodge the Yurimaguas radar. 
  At least another two radars are necessary due to the new 
coca 
map in Peru and its extremely uneven geography. 

