BFN 

  [Text] Antidrug forces have concluded that the most 
powerful drug trafficking organizations operate at least 50 
illegal airstrips located in strategic spots in the nine 
Peruvian coca producing areas, which Interior Ministry analysts 
consider critical narcoterrorist areas. 
  Despite the arrest of Demetrio Limonier Chavez Penaherrera, 
aka "Vaticano," drug trafficking in the Maranon River basin has 
not only remained active, but has also expanded because of the 
few antidrug operations and little infrastructure in the region, 
particularly in the departments of Cajamarca and Amazonas, which 
produce coca and poppies. 
  In recent operations, however, antidrug agents have seized 
large shipments of basic cocaine paste. The largest seizures 
were made in Piura Department, while 53 people involved with 
drug trafficking have been arrested. 
  Twenty illegal airstrips were spotted in the Huarmey sandy 
zone; in the Quiches, Chingalpo, and Siguas (Ancash) tablelands; 
in Imaga, Santa Maria de Nieva, Bagua, Rodriguez de Mendoza, and 
Chachapoyas (Amazonas); and in the valleys of Balbas, Celendin, 
Encanada, Chilete, and Tembladera (Cajamarca). 
  Analysts have said that because of the geographical features 
of the region in which the airstrips are located in the 
Cajamarca zone, only expert pilots flying planes fitted with 
sophisticated equipment can successfully land in the Chilete, 
Tembladera, and Encanada ravines. 
<H5>  In Alto Mayo Valley </H5>
  During the last couple of weeks, antidrug forces have also 
discovered that basic cocaine paste trafficking feeds mainly on 
the drugs coming from Alto Mayo Valley and going to Chiclayo, 
Trujillo, Piura, and Tumbes, especially by land and through the 
highway joining Moyobamba and the capital of Lambayeque. 
  According to the sources, the drugs are taken from Moyobamba 
to Rioja and from here to Bagua, where they are rearranged for 
continuing on their course to Jaen, Olmos, and finally Chiclayo. 
This way drug traffickers make sure that their merchandise 
cannot be easily discovered. 
  The sources explained that part of the basic cocaine paste 
is 
sold in small amounts in Chiclayo and Trujillo, and the rest is 
refined in laboratories operating in those places. The drugs 
are then taken to Ecuador. 
  On the other hand, an antidrug brigade has over the past two 
weeks been searching the region of Celendin (Cajamarca) and Luya 
(Amazonas), following an increase in the number of flights of 
small planes, presumably of Colombian origin. There is evidence 
that the drugs that are being sent abroad are produced by the 
organization of Elias Chavez Penaherrera, aka "Cristo" -- one of 
"Vaticano's" brothers. 
  During the last operation in the zone, the police seized 
105.579 kg of basic cocaine paste. The larger seizures were 
made in Cajamarca and Lambayeque, where drug traffickers were 
found to be in possession of 20 automatic arms, three vehicles, 
and two houses where they were keeping 300 kg of coca leaves 
that were about to be processed. The traffickers also had other 
substances and plastic bags, which are used for their criminal 
activities. 
  Interior Ministry sources have said that drug trafficking in 
northern Peru continues to supply Ecuador, and that to this end 
it uses public passenger transportation vehicles and private 
vehicles as well. 

