Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" PRENSA LATINA article entitled "Cuban </F>
Challenges; Balance the Cuban Budget in an Unbalanced World," by 
Jose Dos Santos, vice president of the Union of Cuban 
Journalists] 
  [Text] Havana -- Advance planning of income and 
expenditures for a certain activity during an established time 
is by definition the same as budgeting. In Cuba's case, it 
becomes a matter of top priority to get the most from what is 
available, which generally speaking when dealing with the 
economy is not much. 
  State Committee for Finance (CEF) authorities, when 
explaining the complexity of this field, pointed out that Cuba 
has had a formal budget for many years. It distributed what was 
available and obtained through stable economic and international 
trade relations, which Cuba maintained with the socialist field, 
especially the Soviet Union. 
  This mechanism began to run into difficulties while at the 
same time others did not keep their agreements, and trade rules 
and values were changed; consequently the Cuban economy began to 
collapse forcing changes, adjustments, and unprecedented 
measures, mostly economic in nature. 
  With the new conditions, it is very clear that Cuba cannot 
spend income it does not have, especially since most of its 
international credit sources are blocked by the economic, trade, 
and financial blockade imposed and advocated by the United 
States. 
  More than 50 percent of Cuba's general income budget comes 
from the state sector, the rest comes from nonstate entities and 
what is collected by the population; a ratio that could be 
proportionally modified according to increased joint ventures 
and self-employed workers' activities, which in turn are subject 
to taxes. 
  Basic state expenses have been aimed at enterprises, 
described here as budgeted (completely state controlled), 
business activities (that is partly self-financed), and other 
investments. 
  In the first group, which many times the state assumes 
without properly figuring the cost, are enterprises that 
guarantee social security, an expenditure that in 1993 amounted 
to 1.5 billion pesos (equivalent to dollars at the official 
exchange rate). Education, public health, and other basic 
sectors for citizens are fundamental and respond to the nature 
of the Cuban social system, but at the same time are high 
resource consumers. 
  The population has discussed these topics in depth the past 
few weeks. The assemblies convened by the Cuban union movement, 
called "Workers' Parliaments," have no doubts about free 
schooling and medical assistance among the other things that 
Cuban society is already used to. 
  Nevertheless, the reality has begun to sink into the 
mentality of the average Cuban who is used to watching sports 
competitions for free, which caused more than headaches during 
the organization of the Central American and Pan-American Games; 
or the reality of free, complex, and costly surgical operations, 
such as aesthetic surgery, for no clinical or humanitarian 
reason. 
  Expenditures which the state has mostly paid, like science 
and technology, sports, art and culture, have begun to be 
considered as important ways of generating resources and are 
rapidly becoming not only self-financed, but considered to be 
revenue earners. 
<H5>  Expensive Enterprises </H5>
  Cuba puts the most emphasis on the business sector to 
achieve 
increased efficiency and productivity to stem the economic 
deterioration caused by the new realities, which the condemned 
Torricelli Law plays no small role through increased harassment. 
  A high-ranking CEF official told this journalist that to 
reverse the current situation, state subsidies for losses by the 
state enterprises need to be reduced to a minimum. This past 
year, the sugar and agricultural sectors were the worst, needing 
more than 4 billion pesos. 
  Generally speaking, it has been said that 69 percent of 
Cuban 
productive businesses receive subsidies, therefore, only 31 of 
100 enterprises contribute to the state budget. 
  Therefore, it is not enough to reduce investments -- a 
development mortgage -- to effectively stop the budget deficit. 
<H5>  Steps </H5>
  The measures that have already begun to be applied with 
little publicity but with significant effect are aimed at 
decentralizing even further the administration of what has been 
budgeted by the state with a spending limit for certain 
financial allotments to prevent excesses (in salaries, for 
example, to avoid arbitrary job creations). 
  Likewise, the idea is for greater financial resource 
disbursement freedom and to make them more productive while not 
deviating from the general plan of overall economy development. 
  The course that is being followed contributes greater 
flexibility to budget activities so as to increase 
self-financing without forgetting to see that assigned funds are 
being used as they were intended. Therefore, each part of the 
economic puzzle should fit properly in the Cuban social pattern. 
  A complex struggle is taking place, and it must be won in 
order for Cuba's social income-expenditures to balance in an 
unbalanced world. Achieving this will guarantee future, stable, 
and harmonious development, which will allow one to remember the 
current special period Cuba is facing as the feverish state a 
body feels from the effects of a vaccine intended to save it 
from serious illness. 

