Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Army Commander General Ramiro de Leon Carpio 
yesterday announced "no reprimand is foreseen" against the 
corps, in reference to a report to be presented by the 
independent UN human rights expert in Geneva, Switzerland. 
  Referring to a report published yesterday by this newspaper, 
the president said Monica Pinto believes the Army should return 
to its barracks in areas where it is not needed, but a special 
situation should certainly prevail in the areas where its 
presence is really necessary. 
  "We accept it as an unofficial report," the president of the 
Republic said, adding "in fact, the Army High Command is 
reviewing the measures, but we believe the unofficial report has 
no specific charges." 
  Pinto's report, which will be presented to the commission in 
Geneva, cites the need to demilitarize Guatemalan society, to 
carry out a progressive reduction of its Armed Forces, to 
eliminate military commissioners, and to dismantle the PACs 
[Civilian Self-Defense Patrols], among others. 
  Government Minister Arnoldo Ortiz Moscoso has said the 
independent expert's latest report did not refer to social 
realities as the armed groups's responsibility within a context 
of national violence. 
  The official has admitted this and other economic 
realities-- 
including poverty in rural areas and others that are detrimental 
to society and result in a military confrontation--were not 
fully discussed because the expert could not possibily spend so 
much time in the country for her work. 
  He said: In general terms, it is a frank and honest report 
that reviews many of the country's realities. Although she does 
not fail to cite problems in many paragraphs, she also admits 
the progress achieved; for example, civilians' participation in 
society and the respect for freedom of thought. 
  Regarding the creation of an intelligence service, he said 
this is nothing new, because countries such as Honduras and 
Costa Rica have such a unit assigned to the Presidency, not to 
mention the fact it was also one of the recommendations the 
previous expert made. 
  He said our country is capable of doing this and has the 
support of other friendly countries, adding there are certain 
organizations that do not operate as civilian intelligence but 
could do so with the proper statistics, fiscal, banking, and 
planning coordination. 
  National Police Director Mario Rene Cifuentes has referred 
to 
the issue and said the report "objectively reviews the country's 
human rights problems and emphasizes we should pledge to improve 
and surpass ourselves in certain issues." 
  He said the civilian intelligence issue is a state security 
problem rather than a police problem, but he said a 
recommendation to create a central unit to investigate human 
rights violations was already carried out, and the UN expert was 
notified about this via her representative. 

