BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement by Hans-Ulrich Klose, Social Democratic Party of </F>
Germany Bundestag group chairman, at the Bundestag session in 
Bonn -- live] 
  [Text] Madam President, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
  NEUE ZUERCHER-ZEITUNG has called the list of tasks of the 
forthcoming German EU [European Union] Council presidency 
ambitious. However, at the same time, it reports that the 
German foreign minister has told the media, and I quote, that 
Germany is not claiming that all the items on the agenda will be 
dealt with, unquote. This, Ladies and Gentlemen, hits the point. 
  Grand announcements but, as usual, a loophole in case things 
develop differently. [applause, unintelligible interjections] 
  At the moment there are 18 million unemployed in the EU. 
However, in Corfu they did not talk about these people but only 
about one person, the future Commission president. This was the 
focus of the reports, as if this had been the most important 
decision to be made. [unintelligible interjections] 
  Mr. Foreign Minister, the EU is not in troubled waters just 
because of this question but because quite obviously it cannot 
think of anything to overcome mass unemployment. [applause] 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, 18 million -- this is dynamite for the 
EU. I am not a prophet, but I dare make a prediction: If it is 
not possible to reduce this figure and to reduce unemployment, 
the competition for jobs, which can already be seen in the EU 
nowadays, will weaken the EU's cohesion and will lead to 
renationalization in West Europe. This is an alarming prospect. 
[applause] 
  Those responsible in Europe and, above all the Federal 
Government, must, therefore, primarily deal with this problem, 
with employment and growth. It is right that they have been 
talking about it for approximately a year now. There is no lack 
of words, but there is a lack of deeds. Let us take the Federal 
Government for instance. The Federal Government sees three 
terms as the focus of its employment strategy: deregulation, 
flexibilization, and cost reduction. [unintelligible 
interjections] 
  Quite apart from the lack of style in publicly claiming a 
lack of technical knowledge in this respect to the Commission in 
Brussels, it is suggested that these are the appropriate recipes 
to improve the competitiveness of German industry. What has the 
Federal Government done in detail so far? What has it done to 
improve basic and advanced training? What has it done to reduce 
ancillary wage costs? What has it done to reduce the often 
deplored tax burden on the companies? The answer is: nothing. 
  It is not the Federal Government that has acted, but the 
companies that have set out to increase their productivity, 
primarily at the cost of the working people and with the 
consequence of even higher unemployment. And quite in keeping 
with the demand for solidarity in the economy, the trade unions 
have been restrained about wage increases and have accepted net 
losses in income. It was the trade unions and not the Federal 
Government. The Federal Government only pretends [applause] to 
be doing something, but in reality it is not doing anything. 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, does this also apply to Corfu: words 
and nothing more? 
  Let us take the trans-European networks. For weeks and 
months Brussels and industrialists have been complaining that 
the responsible German state secretaries obviously have only one 
goal, namely to prevent proposals for programs that have been 
presented. In Brussels the gentlemen made it quite clear that 
they think investment for the expansion of the trans-European 
networks is gross nonsense. Why am I sitting here? a German 
state secretary has been quoted as saying. Basically, I do not 
care whether or not he really did say this. However, I do care 
that, quite obviously, right up to the meeting of the European 
Council in Corfu, the Federal Government delayed the opportunity 
to provide stimuli for growth and modernization and deliberately 
impeded it. [applause, unintelligible interjections] 
  Now, finally, in Corfu the European heads of state and 
government agreed on a top priority list with a total of 11 
major traffic projects. Even though the agreement of the 
Federal Government comes late, we welcome it, because the 
trans-European networks will provide stimuli for growth, because 
-- hopefully --jobs will be created, and because Germany will be 
linked even more strongly to its neighbors. This is a gain for 
the people and also for the economy. 
  However, we emphatically call on the Federal Government to 
give up its current delaying tactics in implementing the 
decisions made in Corfu. 
  We still doubt that it would be prepared to do that -- and 
not only because of shortcomings in the past. First, the 
Federal Government did not consider it necessary to discuss the 
matter in the German Bundestag before applying for the priority 
traffic projects in Brussels. It did not want to do so because 
of the binding nature that this would have had. Second, it does 
not seem to be the German transport minister who decides 
important transport projects, but the finance minister, who has 
so far opposed solid financing. [Finance Minister Waigel 
interrupts: You are going to take that back immediately.] 
  I am not taking that back, even for you, Mr. Waigel. 
[applause] 
  And finally, the German share in investment in the networks 
is curiously modest, at about 18 percent. It is most concerning 
that the project for the Paris-Berlin high-speed link ends in 
Mannheim in its Saarbruecken version and the Strasbourg version 
ends in Karlsruhe. Where is the connection to Frankfurt? Where 
is the link to Berlin? [applause] We expect an improvement on 
this, with possibilities to extend the link beyond Berlin. 
Particularly from the German standpoint it is sensible and 
necessary to extend infrastructure networks in Central Europe 
with the help of the EU and to connect them to networks in West 
Europe. This is primarily for use in transportation and 
telecommunications, but also for energy, for supply and waste 
disposal. Since Germany is the best supplier of infrastructure 
systems, it is also in the German interest to support these 
systems. These are future investments in the true sense of the 
word. [applause] We hear that the federal chancellor agreed in 
Corfu, let me quote, to ensure that these priority projects will 
not meet with financial obstacles that endanger their 
implementation [unquote]. We would like to know, Mr. Chancellor, 
how you are going to do this, how this funding is ensured. Or 
is this the frequently quoted financial planning, of which we 
hear that it exists, but which is not put on the table because 
the financial part is missing? [applause] 
  I would also like to point to the undisputed fact that a 
change in the subsidy policy for the east German laender, which 
are to receive 26 billion marks from European funds over the 
next six years, had to be pushed through by the Commission 
against resistance from the German economics minister. In 
Brussels, the German subsidy policy has for some time been 
considered out of date. That is why not only infrastructure 
projects are to be promoted in the future, but also 
environmental, research and development projects, as well as 
projects for training and retraining. What, Ladies and 
Gentlemen, speaks against this? Nothing. Quite the contrary, 
anyone viewing the problems without prejudice, anyone wanting to 
change the situation, should be grateful for additional 
opportunities. The economics minister seems to hold a different 
view. He advocates a policy of inactivity and calls it the 
market. We call it the wrong policy. [applause] 
  We judge the achievements of the economics minister by his 
ability to reduce unemployment. In his years in office he has 
not achieved anything in that sense. Bad news for Germany, poor 
prospects for Europe. [applause] Ladies and Gentlemen, 
competition for jobs does not only weaken solidarity in the 
Union, it also reduces its chances of actively contributing 
towards stabilization in the East and the south. Europe 
continues to be divided into different zones of prosperity. In 
this divided Europe, Germany is a border country. As long as 
this imbalance continues, there will be no security in Europe. 
We have experienced just how rapidly economic and social 
problems can turn into open ethnic and religious conflicts, how 
fast they brutalize a society, how destructive they can become. 
But what does the Federal Government do to prevent such 
conflicts? Of course, Mr. Kinkel, it is right to open the 
European perspective to the countries in Central and East 
Europe. The perspect of membership for some, cooperation for 
others, you discussed this in a friendly way. Not to be 
unfriendly, but stating facts, I would like to add the following: 
  Our opportunities to fill associate membership and 
cooperation agreements with material contents must be viewed 
realistically. At the moment, these are extremely limited, as 
is the support for opening markets and cooperation on the part 
of the population when unemployment is and remains high, and 
when people have to fear a further loss in jobs through 
competition from low-wage competitors. We must take a realistic 
view of our limited possibilities for action, because illusions 
are highly dangerous. [applause] 
  This is one reason why I am against our foreign minister 
constantly traveling through Europe as an advocate for the East 
Europeans -- today he was even an advocate for all of Europe. 
We Germans do not have a special function, no bridging 
function, but should operate in the West European context. This 
is one thing. The other is that he who would like to give 
everything to everybody also has to say how he wants to pay for 
it. [applause] Even today, people from all the political camps 
say that Germany's contributions to Europe are too high. In his 
last declaration on Europe here in the Bundestag, the chancellor 
himself said that. So if we cannot and do not want to raise our 
contributions to Europe, then the necessary financing of the 
enlargement eastward can only be achieved by cutting funds for 
the south. My question is: Is this what we want? 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, I am sure that enlargement eastward 
will not be successful if it is achieved at the cost of southern 
Europeans. This is where the second crisis arc is developing, a 
potential of pressure and risk that nobody should underestimate. 
Let us look at purely demographic developments. While the 
native population in West Europe is decreasing, even in Catholic 
countries such as Italy and Spain, it is strongly increasing, 
for example, in the Maghreb. More than 55 percent of the people 
there are under 25. Within the next 30 years, the population of 
North Africa will more than double. Even today this region 
suffers from high unemployment, social conflicts, and ecological 
problems, most notably the shortage of water. The soil for 
political fundamentalism, religiously motivated and politically 
perverted, is dangerously fertile. Not to see this would be 
ignorant. 
  The fact that it is only, or primarily, the Bundeswehr 
inspector general who thinks or talks about this worries me 
greatly. Right now the problem is not yet a military, but a 
political one. Even if we find it hard, Europe needs 
institutionalized cooperation with the countries of the southern 
Mediterranean. Dialogue with these countries -- economically, 
ecologically, technologically, and culturally -- must be 
strengthened, and personal contacts enhanced and used to prevent 
further alienation. This dialogue is difficult enough, and has 
become even more difficult through Europe's failure in Bosnia. 
Nevertheless, we have to conduct this dialogue, and the EU must 
promote negotiations with the North African countries with 
determination, because otherwise -- I predict -- a new line of 
conflict will emerge, in which it will be military officers who 
will finally have to do the thinking. 
  Mr. Kinkel, in your declaration you did not mention the 
Mediterranean. Nevertheless, I assume that you are thinking 
about it. Still, I have to ask what the Federal Government is 
doing in concrete terms? Does it have among its ranks a single 
Hans-Juergen Wischnewski, who conducts dialogue with the Arab 
world on a permanent basis, with great expert knowledge and 
understanding? [applause] 
  Mr. Kinkel, what exactly are you planning to do to use 
Germany's presidency for more dialogue and cooperation in the 
Mediterranean? Will your policy ultimately be entirely reduced 
to insulating the EU against those countries? We agree with you 
when you emphasize the necessity for a European immigration and 
asylum policy. And we also agree that labor permits should be 
issued only restrictively now. However, this cannot be 
everything. Unless people's hopes for better lives in their own 
countries can be fulfilled, the pressure of immigration will 
increase on West Europe. Legal measures alone will be 
insufficient to withstand this pressure. So, please use the 
presidency to develop, in close cooperation with France, Spain, 
Italy, and Greece, a system of cooperation with the Arab world. 
Foreign minister, development cooperation means working for 
peace. [applause] 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, the opposition has usually supported 
the government on European issues. We will continue to do so as 
long as we are the opposition and you are the government. But 
as long as you are the government, we expect more of you than 
just nice words. [applause] 
  I do not want to speak of a crisis. Europe has every 
opportunity to be more than a rock in the surf. However, things 
will not work without prospects, without the will to shape the 
future, without optimism for action, and we miss precisely this: 
a realistic concept and purposeful action. 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, European reality has changed. The 
Central and East Europeans have returned to Europe. Sometimes, 
however, I wonder: to which Europe? To the Europe of the 
beginning of the 21st century or to the Europe of the end of the 
19th century. In any case, many problems and conflicts have 
returned that we believed we had overcome once and for all: 
poverty, unemployment, nationalism, and war. We are in 
troubled waters -- you are quite right, Mr. Foreign Minister -- 
but not because at the top echelon, under the rather clumsy 
German leadership, there is a controversy about the new 
Commission president. [applause] 
  The point is the real problems, the people's specific 
concerns and fears. What must be done? Gro Harlem Brundtland 
explained it as follows: We want to struggle for politics to 
get a grip on reality. We need more cross-border political 
measures so that people can shape their futures for themselves. 
And: Let us show that Europe shares responsibility for global 
justice. Finally, some people bear more responsibility than 
others, and some have better opportunities than others to take 
the initiative and to achieve goals. 
  The Norwegian prime minister is right. We should listen to 
her, Mr. Kinkel -- and so should you. [applause] 

