BFN 

  [Text] No particular results were achieved during the round 
of Estonian-Russian talks which ended today at Lohusalu. For 
this reason the parties have acknowledged that the talks between 
the two countries are deadlocked, as before. The Estonian and 
Russian delegations failed to agree on the agreements on both 
the troop withdrawal and social guarantees to military 
pensioners. During a news conference which followed the talks, 
both the Estonian and Russian delegation leaders accused each 
other of reluctance to approach the issues in question in a 
constructive manner. 
  During this talks round the Estonian and Russian delegations 
initialled only an agreement on educational cooperation and 
signed a border representatives' agreement. 
  Ambassador Vasiliy Svirin, the Russian delegation leader, 
told the journalists that there is no clause within the 
Estonian-Russian agreement on military pensioners which differs 
from a similar agreement initialled between Latvia and Russia. 
And for this reason Russia had been expecting success here. 
Unfortunately no agreement was reached due to the Estonian 
side's truculence. 
  Russia continues to demand that together with the general 
troop withdrawal agreement an agreement on military pensioners 
is also signed. Russia also demands that all military 
pensioners should have the right to obtain permanent residence 
permits in Estonia, and that the years they had served in the 
Soviet army should be included on their privatization 
registration cards. The Estonian side has not agreed to these 
demands because even for Estonian citizens the time served in 
the Soviet Army is not included. 
  Ambassador Vaino Reinart, the Estonian delegation's leader, 
stated that the situation in Estonia differs from that of 
Latvia, and one must operate within the laws which are in force 
here. According to Reinart, the Russian representatives have so 
far not agreed to discuss the particulars of the removal of 
Paldiski nuclear reactors by linking this to other issues. 
Svirin, too, stated to the journalists that Russia wants to 
sign a full agreement on the abolition of the military base of 
Paldiski, and the Estonian side is unfortunately dragging its 
feet on this. Reinart said that he did not fully understand 
which agreement Svirin was talking about. Russia has pledged to 
remove the nuclear fuel by the end of June and nobody knows why 
there is a delay. 
  The Estonian and Russian delegations did not agree a date 
for 
the 20th round of talks. Within the next two weeks the 
delegations' working groups will be meeting. They will 
recommend to the delegations ways for bringing the talks out of 
deadlock. 

