BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, 10 March (XINHUA) -- The State Council 
recently issued a circular to 18 provinces, autonomous regions, 
and municipalities including Shangdong, Hebei, Henan, Xinjiang, 
Jiangsu, and Hubei, urging them to conscientiously carry out 
this year's cotton production plan. 
  The circular said: Cotton is an important material which has 
a bearing on the national economy and the people's livelihood. 
To promote cotton production on the eve of spring planting, the 
following points are hereby announced: 
  1. It is necessary to try in every possible way to increase 
cotton acreage to ensure that this year's cotton production task 
ordered by the state will be accomplished. To increase cotton 
production, we should enlarge cotton acreage and focus on spring 
planting. Untilled and reserved farmland in the 
cotton-producing areas of the Huanghe, the Huaihe, and the Haihe 
shall be planted with cotton on a priority basis. Areas with 
suitable conditions should be planted with cotton this summer. 
Active measures should be taken to plant cotton in wastelands. 
Shandong, Hebei, and Henan should greatly increase their cotton 
acreage to their former levels. For cotton-producing areas in 
the south, efforts should be made to increase cotton acreage. 
In addition, those areas with suitable conditions should be 
planted with cotton plants after the wheat harvest or should 
receive large transplanted cotton seedlings. Xinjiang should 
gradually increase its cotton acreage. Agricultural departments 
should take measures to provide cotton seeds. 
  2. Great efforts should be made to support large 
cotton-producing counties so as to promote rapid economic growth 
in these areas. The state will arrange special loans for large 
cotton-producing counties to develop their economies. Such 
loans as well as future investment for the economic development 
of quality-cotton-producing counties shall be commensurate with 
their cotton acreage, production output, and amount of cotton 
sold to the state. 
  3. It is necessary to persist in the principle of increasing 
cotton production by relying on science and education. Great 
efforts should be made to increase the per unit-area yield. It 
is necessary to strengthen technical training, to popularize 
cotton-planting knowledge, and to actively promote such 
production techniques as the use of plastic films, seedling 
transplants, growing cotton after the wheat harvest, using 
chemical fertilizers and insecticides, employing model 
cultivation, and employing comprehensive pest management. The 
acreage planted with fine cotton strains should be increased. 
In some areas, cotton bollworms were found to lay more eggs 
last winter than in previous years. We should be careful about 
this problem. We should pay attention to preventing cotton 
bollworms right from the spring planting. 
  4. Governments at all levels in cotton-producing areas 
should 
immediately map out a plan for this year's cotton production. 
Major leading comrades should be directly in charge of cotton 
production. Great efforts should be made to publicize the 
state's policy concerning cotton production. It is necessary to 
encourage peasants to grow more cotton and to produce fine 
cotton. It is imperative to organize agricultural and other 
departments to go down to the grass-roots units in rural areas 
to provide concrete guidance. It is also imperative to organize 
well the supply of means of agricultural production and to help 
grass-roots units and peasants solve actual problems in cotton 
production. 

