BFN 

  [Text] Pyongyang, April 9 (KCNA) -- The Central Committee 
of the Workers' Party of Korea [WPK] hosted a reception for 
General Secretary of the Workers' Party of Turkey Yalsin 
Buyukdagli on April 8. 
  Speaking at the reception, secretary of the Central 
Committee 
of the Workers' Party of Korea Kim Chung-nin said the WPK 
supported the Workers' Party of Turkey, highly appreciating its 
energetic activities to strengthen the party and defend the 
political rights and interests of the Turkish working class and 
toiling masses and its staunch struggle for achieving peace and 
security against the war policy of the imperialists, remaining 
true to the socialist principle. 
  "It is of importance in defending and advancing the 
socialist 
cause and guaranteeing peace in Asia for the two parties to 
further strengthen the bonds of support and cooperation", he 
said, adding: 
  "The Workers' Party of Korea will in the future, too, make 
all efforts to strengthen and develop friendship and unity with 
the Workers' Party of Turkey." 
  Speaking next, General Secretary Yalsin Buyukdagli said that 
the Workers' Party of Turkey always remembers the great leader 
Comrade Kim Il-song and the Korean people who are defending the 
socialist cause, unshaken by the desperate moves of the U.S. 
imperialists and reactionaries. 
  "The U.S. imperialists and reactionaries are now crying that 
socialism has collapsed worldwide, but it is a sheer lie," he 
said, and added: "Today progressive mankind is convinced of a 
certain victory of socialism." 
  Noting that the socialism of Korea successfully advancing 
even under the present international situation is the future of 
mankind, he said Korea greatly inspires the turkish people 
struggling for a new society. 
  He said respected Comrade Kim Il-song has made great 
achievements in the revolution and construction by wisely 
leading the Korean people. "He is defending socialism and 
building a socialist paradise in Korea by relying on the 
strength of the people," stressed the Turkish party leader. 

