BFN 

  [Text] Santa Fe de Bogota, 3 May (DPA) -- Colombian Foreign 
Affairs Minister Noemi Sanin today asked the U.S. Government to 
normalize judicial relations between the two countries. 
Judicial relations were partially suspended by Washington 
following a disagreement with Colombian Prosecutor General 
Gustavo de Greiff. 
  The request was made after the Colombian Government told the 
United States that "under no circumstance" can it accept that De 
Greiff be criticized by U.S. State Department officials, who 
have publicly stated they do not trust him and therefore have 
stopped sending to Santa Fe de Bogota evidence against drug 
traffickers. 
  Sanin, in statements to the press, indicated that Colombia 
and the United States should uphold together the struggle 
against the common enemy, drug trafficking, which gets an upper 
hand when judicial authorities do not cooperate. Colombia's 
rejection of criticism against De Greiff was included in a note 
sent by Sanin to the U.S. State Department. The U.S. State 
Department on 18 April sent a letter to the Cesar Gaviria 
government denouncing the prosecutor general's behavior. 
  Washington's protest was prompted by a letter De Greiff sent 
the U.S. judge in charge of the case of Colombian drug 
trafficker Dandenis Munoz. In the letter De Greiff said that 
Colombia had no pending charges against this criminal concerning 
the attack against an Avianca airplane, which killed 107 people 
in November 1989. 
  The prosecutor general's letter was sent at the request of 
Munoz's lawyer. Munoz is serving a six-year sentence in New 
York for using illegal identification. U.S. political and 
judicial circles believe there was "improper meddling" by De 
Greiff in the case. 
  The U.S. Government, through the State Department protest 
note, criticized De Greiff and cast doubt on his resolve to 
fight drug trafficking, thus increasing tension over the past 
few months between U.S. judicial authorities and the Colombian 
prosecutor general. 
  The quarrel began in 1993 when de Greiff said in a news 
conference in the United States that it would be good to develop 
ways to legalize drug trafficking in view of what he called 
"little interest" by developed countries to halt consumption and 
at the same time reduce the mafia's economic power. 
  When referring to the protest note sent to the U.S. State 
Department, Sanin said that despite the fact the Gaviria 
government has conceptual differences with de Greiff, it does 
not accept that the prosecutor general be cast under a bad 
light, especially on an international level. 
  "Colombia does not accept, under any circumstance, 
statements 
against the prosecutor general, who is an efficient and properly 
qualified person, committed to fighting crime and drug 
trafficking," the foreign minister said. 
  Likewise, Sanin's diplomatic note criticized the position of 
U.S. Senator John Kerry, who invited a criminal to a 
Congressional session, who accused the Colombian Government, 
politicians, and the media of having been "corrupted" by the 
mafia's narco-trafficking money. 

