BFN 

<F P=106> [Boris Slavin report: "Fight for Khrushchev's Legacy"] </F>
  [Text] Tomorrow is the centenary of the birth of Nikita 
Sergeyevich Khrushchev, the famous reformer of socialism. The 
positive significance of his activity is growing as people 
become more aware of the socioeconomic catastrophe which Russia 
is experiencing today because of the destructive work of the 
so-called democrats. 
  In order to camouflage and justify the "fruits" of this 
work, 
they are turning to history. Thus, at a conference yesterday in 
the Hall of Columns, they tried to find appropriate analogies 
and parallels with N.S. Khrushchev's activity for themselves. 
Opening the conference, G.Kh. Popov, appealing for objectivity 
in the assessment of this historical figure, stated straight 
away: "Khrushchev was a distant relation of our transformations." 
  However, the main "reassessor" was the unsinkable former 
CPSU 
ideologist, now the ideological mentor of the "democrats," A.N. 
Yakovlev. In his report, he first called Khrushchev "the 
Bolshevik Aleksandr II," and then the forerunner of the 
contemporary "spiritual breakthrough." Admittedly, as usual it 
was hard to grasp the main idea of the report. But there was 
one. And it consisted in presenting Khrushchev as a Utopist who 
was hoping to reform the essentially unreformable socialist 
system. 
  However, the interesting thing is not what Yakovlev said 
about Khrushchev, but what he did not say. And he did not say 
that unlike the current democrats, Khrushchev was a genuine 
people's socialist. This man with a peasant's face built homes 
for the people, created a structured system for the provision of 
state pensions, helped launch the first man into space, and 
averted the aggression against socialist Cuba. Of course, 
Khrushchev was a multifaceted figure in history. Popular memory 
will preserve his corn-planting campaigns, and his desire to 
build communism and "bury capitalism" in 20 years, but 
nevertheless, this man was a creator rather than a destroyer. 
  Stalinists and democrats are united in their desire to turn 
Khrushchev into the digger of socialism's grave, but they will 
not succeed. Khrushchev will remain in people's awareness as a 
genuine democrat who dreamed of really giving socialism back its 
human face. And sooner or later this dream will come true. 

