BFN 

  [Text] The Angolan people are still victims of air raids 
carried out by aircraft of Eduardo dos Santos' government, an 
authoritarian, communist and warmongering government. 
Yesterday, when the [word indistinct] commemorated 50 years of 
the defeat of Nazi dictatorship, Popular Movement for the 
Liberation of Angola-Labor Party [MPLA-PT] aircraft did the same 
thing that Adolf Hitler did, killing civilians in the small Vila 
Nova District. Lourenco Bento, Vorgan [Voice of Resistance of 
the Black Cockerel] journalist in the area, reports that napalm 
and fragmentation bombs were dropped over civilian targets, 
causing considerable human and material losses. The aircraft 
which bombed Vila Nova yesterday came from Catumbela Airport. 
  This is the way the Luanda government wages war in Angola, 
increasing the number of deaths almost all over. A total of 37 
were killed in Lunda Norte and Lunda Sul Provinces over the past 
two days, victims of indiscriminate air raids carried out by the 
MPLA air force. The affected areas were Mutala, Cacolo, and 
Cuilo in Lunda Sul Province, and Cambulo, Lunda Norte Province. 
On 4 and 5 June, war planes of Engineer Eduardo dos Santos' 
organization had attacked civilians in Capenda-Camulemba 
District, Lunda Norte. 
  Meanwhile, the Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola 
[FALA] Command in the northeast area said yesterday that the air 
raids were a demonstration of phobia, peculiar to cowards and 
anti-democratic forces. 
  The MPLA-PT forces waging an offensive in Cabinda against 
areas liberated by UNITA in that area rich in oil, were defeated 
over the weekend. Vorgan correspondent in Cabinda Americo 
Chivala reports that at dawn on 3 June the counter-attacking 
UNITA forces took effective control of Ganda Cango District and 
the bridge over [name indistinct] River on the way to Buco Zau. 
There were about 1,200 MPLA troops led by General Jose de Pedro 
and they left 24 confirmed killed on the ground and considerable 
lethal materiel including 27 AKM weapons, two 60 mm mortars with 
86 shells, three RPG-7 rocket launchers with 14 rockets, 19 
AK-47 ammunition boxes, 13 PKM ammunition boxes. 
  Yesterday, the situation was calm in Ganda Cango, however, a 
source from the FALA Military Command said the troops were in a 
maximum state of alert. 

