BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with European Competition Commissioner Karel Van </F>
Miert by Willy Biesemans; place and date not given: "GAZET VAN 
ANTWERPEN Readers Meet European Commissioner Karel Van Miert -- 
`We Need More Europe'"] 
  [Excerpt] [passage omitted] 
<H5>  Excessive Labor Costs </H5>
  In his address, Van Miert points out that the economic 
crisis 
is reaching further than was expected. He urges to join all 
forces to combat the crisis and believes that the implementation 
of the Maastricht Treaty should be subordinate to fighting to 
crisis and unemployment. 
  [Van Miert] We must recognize that the present crisis is not 
just cyclical and that there are also structural weaknesses. 
For example there is not enough investment to get the engine of 
the economy working again. We cannot reduce unemployment 
without normal economic growth. With growth of 2.5 percent, we 
are only able to stabilize unemployment. Growth must be higher 
if we are to force it down. 
  We must look for other ways and in the meantime we have 
realized that it will become more difficult for a number of 
categories of people to find jobs. I am thinking of workers 
with little or no qualification. The cost of labor is far too 
high. I am not saying that people earn too much, but that the 
social charge is pushing wage costs up. And then right away you 
reach the problem of financing social security. This financing 
is a real problem, at least if you do not want to throw the 
basic principles of the system overboard. And neither I nor the 
Commission are prepared to repudiate these principles. Let us 
be honest: Even if we get some economic growth in the coming 
months, the unemployment problem will still not be solved. 
  All these problems are linked to one another. To solve them, 
European cooperation is necessary. Only "more Europe" offers a 
way out. Of course I can see that other trends are raising 
their head and calling for withdrawal into national approaches, 
in the false hope or false expectation that things will go 
better then. And note that I am saying a false hope or false 
expectation. 
  [Biesemans] But this position says nothing about the 
tendency 
of European companies to move and produce in areas where wage 
costs are lower and social protection represents virtually 
nothing. Aren't agreements in this field necessary? 
  [Van Miert] The European Union is indeed not an island and 
the problem of delocalization cannot be denied. We must 
certainly strive for rules which apply throughout the world. 
The recent GATT agreement on freer world trade does not solve 
everything. It is incomplete. We must strive to add social 
clauses and minimum agreements on environmental protection to 
international treaties. The fact that a number of developing 
countries or China are able to produce so cheaply is in part 
related to child labor or the forced employment of prisoners, 
while environmental standards are scarcely respected, if at all. 
Europe must work closely with the United States to push through 
such agreements. I believe that there is a common interest. 
[passage omitted] 

