BFN 

  [Text] Jakarta, April 25 (ANTARA) -- Vietnamese President 
Le Duc Anh is scheduled to discuss Vietnam's intention to join 
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) with 
Indonesian leaders during his visit here due to start on Tuesday. 
  "During his visit to Indonesia from April 26 to 29, 
President 
Anh will advance Vietnam's bid to join ASEAN," Minister of 
Foreign Affairs Ali Alatas said at a closing ceremony of the 
16th Foreign Office's staff and leadership course here Monday. 
  Alatas said Vietnam has so far actively involved in ASEAN 
regional forum and various activities of the non-communist 
group. Besides Vietnam, Laos has also actively involved in 
ASEAN's programs, he added. 
  "Indonesia has considered Vietnam and Laos as the two 
neighbouring countries which have close relations with ASEAN 
member countries. I think it's just a matter of time to receive 
the two countries as fully ASEAN member as all ASEAN member 
countries must first discuss the Vietnam's keeness to join the 
association," Alatas said. 
  According to Alatas, Indonesia and the other ASEAN member 
countries have no politicel objection to Vietnam's bid. 
  "Vietmam, however, should adjust its economic policy to 
economic system adapted by ASEAN member countries," He added. 
  ASEAN groups Indonesia, Malaysia, Brunei Darussalam, the 
Philippines, Thailand and Singapore. 
  During his four-day visit to the country, President Anh, a 
73- year-old former military commander, and his entourage are 
slated to be given Indonesian explanation about the Asia-Pacific 
Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum. 
  During President Anh's visit, he will be accompanied by his 
wife, three Vietnamese ministers as well as senior officials. 
It will be the first visit by President Anh who will arrive 
here to meet President Suharto's invitation. President Suharto 
visited Hanoi in 1990. 
  During his visit, President Anh is scheduled to have a 
discussion with President Suharto while Vietnamese ministers 
will hold other meetings with their Indonesian counterparts to 
discuss possible cooperation in various sectors. 
  Alatas said, two key issues to be discussed in Anh's talks 
here will be Indonesia's wish to speed up repatriation of about 
ten thousand Vietnamese boat people from its Galang Island 
refugee camp near Singapore and a boundary dispute in the South 
China Sea. 

