Language: <F P=105> Azeri </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The tense situation on the Nagorno-Karabakh front 
lines has eased. Considering the many men and armored vehicles 
they have lost in the fighting, the Azerbaijan military forces 
have reduced the number of their attacks. The Narogno-Karabakh 
Republic [NKR] military headquarters has disclosed that 
Azerbaijan lost 117 officers and men in the fighting that took 
place on the evening on 19 January. Four tanks were hit in the 
clashes. Meanwhile, the NKR's casualties were six men killed 
and 13 wounded. 
  Azerbaijan's military forces resumed their attacks against 
Mardakertskiy Rayon at 0700 this morning. Reports say that the 
fighting was still continuing at noon. The NKR forces quickly 
blocked the enemy's onslaught. 
  Two of Azerbaijan's military aircraft tried to violate NKR's 
airspace at 1330 today. 
  The number of deserters on the enemy side recently 
increased. 
In a statement to [name indistinct] news agency, Tahir Rakhimov, 
a prisoner of war of the Lezgin nationality, said that the 
Lezgins in Azerbaijan are immigrating to Russia. He also said 
that his community does not wish to fight for the sake of 
another community. 
  Clashes took place in the vicinity of Mardakert and [name 
indistinct] this afternoon. The NKR forces successfully blocked 
all the enemy attacks. Both sides suffered casualties in the 
clashes. The outcome of the fighting is still unknown. 
  Azerbaijan's military forces directed their attacks against 
Kenterly and Panakhly in Agdamskiy Rayon at 1600 today. 
However, the enemy was forced to retreat. Violent clashes took 
place at about 1800. The Azerbaijani troops and the Armenian 
forces alternated in achieving success in the clashes. 
  Meanwhile, two Azerbaijani military aircraft violated NKR 
airspace and fired on peaceful residential areas this afternoon. 
No information is available on casualties. 
  The sides have avoided serious operations in the 
southeastern 
sector of the front line. 

