Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Commentary" by "ZHONGGUO XINWEN SHE special commentator": </F>
"Who Is Harming Hong Kong's Freedom of the Press?"] 
  [Text] Governor Chris Patten made a speech on a public 
occasion the day before yesterday and talked a lot about 
so-called freedom of the press. He urged Hong Kong's media not 
to exercise "self-censorship," to bravely stand up and "strive 
to uphold a free press after 1997," and not to allow Hong Kong's 
freedom of the press and "the regional oasis to be infringed 
upon." To people in journalism circles, there is nothing new 
about this provocative speech, because recently Chris Patten and 
high-ranking officials of the Hong Kong Government have 
redoubled their "concern" for the media of Hong Kong and have 
constantly repeated such views together with some strange inside 
stories. Journalism circles have heard them for some time. 
<H3>  Exerting Pressure on the Media With the Theory of 
"Self-Examination" </H3>
  Although Chris Patten did not begin his life as a 
journalist, 
he seems to have a special liking for journalism. Evidently, 
the idea of "self-censorship" has come from his so-called 
"observation" of the media. During recent meetings with guests 
and in interviews, Chris Patten has often elaborated on his own 
initiative on the idea of "self-censorship." He holds that all 
media in Hong Kong have knelt before Beijing, and, therefore, 
the Hong Kong Government should deliver the media from its 
extreme misery and would "tramp over hill and dale" to defend 
the freedom of the press. In an interview by a reporter from a 
certain Hong Kong newspaper on 4 January, Chris Patten said that 
the Hong Kong Government "will not abuse the existing 
regulations and laws to hamper freedom of speech or freedom of 
the press," but will "study laws which may be abused and revise 
them." He implied that existing laws will be further relaxed. 
Chris Patten said encouragingly: "If the Journalists 
Association and other organizations make proposals, I am willing 
to take an active part in the debate." 
  With the governor leading the way, high-ranking officials 
have followed closely. A column disclosed that, by order of the 
governor, newly appointed Chief Secretary Anson Chan selectively 
feted people in charge of some newspapers at the beginning of 
this month. At the banquet, Mrs. Chan asked the chief editors 
if they felt any pressure from the Chinese side. "Is 
self-censorship very serious?" This implied that 
"self-examination" was the reason why chief editors did not 
support Chris Patten's proposals on constitutional reform. 
Unexpectedly, such "instructive remarks" caused resentment 
among the chief editors. They held that newspapers regarded 
serving their readers as their purpose and that there was no 
such thing as "self-examination." The column said that the 
chief editors expressed their resentment to her and greatly 
embarrassed her. 
  Chris Patten has always thought nothing of the Chinese 
newspapers in Hong Kong. Moreover, most Chinese newspapers in 
Hong Kong take a critical attitude toward Chris Patten on the 
constitutional issue. This has increased the governor's aversion 
to the Hong Kong media. Whenever there is any important 
information, Chris Patten is more willing to provide it to the 
media of his own country. The chief secretary meant to help the 
governor "pay attention to the so-called issue of 
`self-censorship.'" It turned out that the conversation was 
disagreeable and ended in embarrassment. 
  It is really difficult to explain why Chris Patten and high- 
ranking officials in the Hong Kong Government have shown their 
"concern" for freedom of the press in Hong Kong so frequently. 
It is as if the media were being seriously repressed and they 
were the only people who could relieve the media of their 
sufferings. This kind of unaccountable "attention" has caused 
uneasiness even among the media, which has seldom taken a 
critical attitude toward the British Hong Kong Government. 
According to a commentary carried by a Hong Kong newspaper, 
Chris Patten "often tells the British press that everyone in 
journalism circles in Hong Kong exercises self- discipline, and 
all the media have carried out self-examination and have 
automatically knelt down to Beijing." If one reads British 
newspapers, one can often come across this kind of article. 
After reading such articles, readers who have no idea about the 
situation may believe that journalists in Hong Kong keep their 
mouths shut and are out of the game. Such an image does great 
harm to journalism in Hong Kong. 
  This side stubbornly wants the media to admit to exercising 
"self-censorship" and the other side has already taken 
corresponding action. This is good coordination indeed. 
Recently, the so-called "Publishers Association," whose 
membership mainly consists of foreigners and which does not have 
much influence on journalism circles, issued a "Code of Conduct 
for Publishers" to some media organizations and asked them to 
jointly sign the code. It is said that one of the main contents 
of the code is to set up a "Publishers' Code of Conduct 
Committee," similar to the "press council," which would be in 
charge of criticizing, guiding, and assessing the contents of 
publications in Hong Kong. Keen observers have pointed out 
that, outwardly, the committee does not have the legal right of 
censorship, but in reality, the influence of public opinion on 
journalism circles is used to exert pressure. It is known 
through hearsay that a certain female member of the Legislative 
Council is promoting this work from behind the scenes. I 
remember that someone made a proposal to establish a press 
council in the past, but his proposal met with strong opposition 
among the majority of journalists. At present, the abnormal 
move by this organization, which is against the will of the 
majority of journalists, is echoing the governor's 
"self-censorship" theory in such a way that it has raised 
doubts. This is clearly a measure to restrict the press. Why 
should the label of "defending the freedom of the press" be 
stuck to it! 
  According to reports, this move has been positively 
responded 
to by an "enthusiastic" media organization which is favored by 
the governor. Recently, the organization published a quarterly, 
which regularly comments on various newspapers. Its contents 
included "a search for some contributed articles which have been 
modified, examined, or rejected, and the disclosure of inside 
stories behind this `information.'" The modification, 
examination, acceptance, and rejection of contributed articles 
are entirely normal procedures in the internal operations of 
press organs and are the normal duties of journalists at 
different levels. If people have to worry that even such 
operations and performance of their duties will be scrutinized, 
disclosed, and castigated in "black and white," what freedom of 
the press can people talk about! 
  At the same time, the British Hong Kong Government has also 
made full use of the electronic media and has professed on many 
occasions that it will revise the relevant restrictions on 
foreign corporations's purchase of Hong Kong media and will 
issue more satellite television licenses to western media in 
order to build Hong Kong into the so-called "satellite 
broadcasting center of Asia" and further internationalize the 
media in Hong Kong. 
<H5>  The Aim Is To Sow Discord and Split the People of Hong Kong </H5>
  We all know that Hong Kong is a pluralistic commercial 
society and that market orientation is, after all, an important 
factor for the media to consider. The media has the right to 
select what should or should not be published or broadcast. 
This should be part of the freedom of the press. What is 
difficult to understand is that the British Hong Kong 
authorities, which repeatedly talk about the freedom of the 
press, do not match their words with their deeds, thinking one 
way and behaving in another. Some changes in stock ownership 
took place in an English-language newspaper in Hong Kong, which 
in the past was regarded as the mouthpiece of the British Hong 
Kong Government. Chris Patten paid great attention to this 
change! This is a distortion of the freedom of the press rather 
than defending the freedom of the press! 
  Another example is that, last year, a reporter from a Hong 
Kong radio station was discriminated against by Mike Hanson, the 
Hong Kong governor's information coordinator, during an 
interview in the United States. The reporter argued strongly on 
just grounds. Mike Hanson went so far as to say threateningly 
that if the reporter did not behave properly, he would not be 
accredited by the Hong Kong Government in future news coverage. 
The radio station lodged a complaint with the governor and the 
matter ended up with nothing definite. Do people not often see 
incidents of wanton attacks and accusations, including by Chris 
Patten, or threats and lures with promises of gain, toward media 
which dare to take a critical attitude on Chris Patten? Is it 
not ridiculous for people who treat the media in this way to 
talk about defending freedom of the press! 
  Besides, resorting to the method of stealthily substituting 
one thing for another and doing scissors-and-paste work, the 
British BBC edited and broadcast "Mao Zedong, the Last Emperor," 
which slandered Mao Zedong. Such a trick did not conform to 
journalistic ethics and seriously hurt the feelings of the 
Chinese people. It was only right for the Chinese Government to 
lodge a protest. Television stations in Hong Kong did not 
broadcast the film. It can be said that they made a wise 
decision. However, Chris Patten, some members of the 
Legislative Council, and a few so-called personalities of the 
democratic movement who oppose the Chinese Government were 
greatly disappointed. They openly or secretly exerted pressure 
on the television stations. Chris Patten even publicly incited 
people and said he was waiting to see "whether or not it will be 
broadcast." In this way, he exerted pressure on the media. Some 
people even wanted to hold demonstrations because of this. Does 
it mean that Hong Kong has no freedom of the press if a 
television program made in a despicable way is not shown? On 
the other hand, only a small proportion of the dirty scandals 
made public by the media in foreign countries about the British 
royal family and cabinet members, who behave like thieves and 
whores, are published or broadcast by the media in Hong Kong. 
Has Hong Kong not lost all of its freedom of the press 
according to their logic? Why is it necessary for Chris Patten 
to "defend" it at all today! 
  The British Hong Kong authorities, which regard themselves 
as 
the apologists of freedom, have also linked freedom of the press 
with 1997, implying that there will not be freedom of the press 
in Hong Kong after 1997. Such incitation is even more 
ridiculous. Ensuring freedom of speech and freedom of the press 
in Hong Kong is an important factor for Hong Kong in practicing 
one country, two systems after 1997. This is clearly stated in 
Article 27 of the Basic Law. How come Chris Patten, who claims 
to have read the Basic Law more often than the Bible, is 
ignorant of this? 
  British colonial rule has always included stringent controls 
over the media. If one reads modern history about British 
colonies, one will find that it is full of the despicable 
records of notorious Britain. When were people under colonial 
rule given true "freedom of the press?" At present, Chris 
Patten has changed his normal behavior and has started showing 
"concern" for the freedom of the press. However, such 
performances has caused aversion and resentment among people of 
insight in journalism circles. They are worried that amid cries 
of "the wolves are coming," freedom of the press in Hong Kong is 
being infringed upon and trampled on by thieves crying "stop 
thief." Talking about "self-censorship," trying to "making 
comments on" the press, or relaxing relevant policies are 
nothing but attempts to coerce with the remnant powers of the 
colonial rule to continue and strengthen controls over the 
media. On the other hand, they are attempts to sow discords, to 
bring about splits and confrontations among the people of Hong 
Kong, to sow discord between the media and the Chinese side, and 
to fan feelings of confrontation. The prerequisite of all this 
is to shake and damage the objective and neutral position of the 
media. It is not difficult to see clearly whether Chris Patten 
is defending or damaging freedom of the press in Hong Kong. 

