Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "China's Stand on Hong Kong Has Been Declared </F>
to the World"] 
  [Text] Ma Yuzhen, the Chinese Ambassador to London, wrote 
a letter to the chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee [FAC] 
of the British House of Commons last week, clarifying the 
mistaken remarks that Hong Kong Governor Patten made at the 
committee's hearing regarding the Chinese Government's position. 
In absence of an agreement between China and Britain, Ma Yuzhen 
reiterated, the three-tier political framework of the Hong Kong 
British authorities, which include the Legislative Council 
[Legco], the two municipal councils, and the district boards, 
must all be disbanded on 30 June 1997. They will then be 
reorganized in light of the stipulations of the Basic Law and 
the decision of the National People's Congress [NPC]. 
  This solemn and just stand of the Chinese Government, which 
is well-known to the Hong Kong people, was expounded by the 
spokesman for the State Council's Hong Kong and Macao Affairs 
Office on 27 December last year. When Patten returned to 
London, however, he said that the Chinese Government in the end 
would not disband the three-tier framework organized by the Hong 
Kong British authorities before 1997. He also said that, if the 
Chinese Government were to do so, it would have to "justify 
itself before the international media." For this reason, 
Ambassador Ma Yuzhen made the necessary clarifications to 
Britain. Moreover, Sir Cradock, former British ambassador to 
China and foreign affairs adviser to the prime minister, also 
wrote to the FAC earlier, in which he refuted Patten's 
accusation and urged that the matter be placed on record. 
  In his letter and recently published memoirs, Cradock time 
and again pointed out that the "constitutional reform" 
introduced by Patten could only be "limited and transient" and 
would "bring more losses than gains." Cradock had participated 
in the Sino-British talks on Hong Kong's transitional issue and 
was told long ago: If the British side designs its own 
arrangements which do not converge with the Basic Law, there 
will be no political "through train" in 1997. It is certain 
that the Chinese side will disband the political framework 
arranged by the British side and reorganize it in light of the 
Basic Law. While refuting Patten, it is definite that Cradock 
was speaking in Britain's interests. He wanted to distinguish 
right from wrong, state the advantages and disadvantages, and 
urge the British rulers to examine their policies and reconsider 
the matter (though Cradock himself did not expect too much from 
that). The purpose of Ambassador Ma Yuzhen's letter is to 
clarify the Chinese Government's position, dispel 
misunderstandings, and explain in advance the measures to be 
adopted in 1997. As for the reckless course taken by the 
British hardliners, China will not cherish any illusion nor will 
it expect a change in the course of the British side. In light 
of the legal principle, China has stated that the three-tier 
councils will be disbanded in 1997, which reflects China's 
resumption of sovereignty over Hong Kong. As the statement has 
been made known to the world, will it be necessary for China to 
"justify itself" to international media in the future? 
  Through the 17 rounds of talks, the "gazettal" and "tabling 
of Patten's constitutional reform to the Legco," and a series of 
other tricks, China and the majority of Hong Kong people have 
realized that the British side has no sincerity in the talks. 
Unless the British side withdraws the partial "constitutional 
reform package" that has been submitted to Legco, it will be 
impossible for the Sino-British talks to resume. It is 
unnecessary for the Chinese side to cater to public opinion and 
urge the British side to return to the negotiating table. It 
would be irresponsible to raise the expectations of the Hong 
Kong people about the Sino-British talks. 
  The testimony at the hearing of the FAC had to acknowledge 
that Britain must hand Hong Kong over to China in 1997. Legco, 
the municipal councils, and the district boards are all 
components of the political framework of the Hong Kong British 
authorities, whose terms of office are stipulated in the "Royal 
Instructions." As the British administration of Hong Kong will 
end on 30 June 1997, the "Royal Instructions" and relevant laws 
will have to become void, as they contravene the "Basic Law," 
and the three-tier political framework will also have to be 
disbanded. In accordance with the provisions of the 
Sino-British Joint Declaration and the Basic Law, the Chinese 
Government will resume the exercise of sovereignty over Hong 
Kong on 1 July 1997 and will reorganize the political framework 
of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region in light of the 
Basic Law and the NPC decision. 
  Based on convergence with the Basic Law, the Chinese 
Government actually wanted to cooperate with Britain through the 
talks and make transitional arrangements for the members of the 
three-tier councils. The Chinese side also made positive 
efforts in this regard. Such a wish fell through, however, 
because of the deliberate sabotage by the British side. In his 
speech delivered at the party to mark the Lunar New Year last 
week, Premier Li pointed out: "The responsibility for the 
termination of the Sino-British talks lies with the British 
side." In his letter to the FAC, Ambassador Ma Yuzhen described 
in detail how the talks were terminated. Ma introduced the 
concessions made by the Chinese side and how the British side 
complicated the issue and unilaterally declared a termination 
when an agreement was about to be reached at the 17th round of 
talks, which was followed by the tabling of the partial 
constitutional reform package at Legco. If Patten's partial 
constitutional reform package is adopted by the Legislative 
Council of the Hong Kong British authorities in late February in 
the absence of a Sino-British agreement, it will be tantamount 
to voting for the disbanding of the three-tier organizations in 
1997. 

