Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Yu. Fedorov, chief specialist, Russian </F>
Federation State Committee for Sanitary-Epidemiological 
Oversight, by Valeriya Leina; place and date of interview not 
given:`` Will We Overtake the War Year of 1918 in Cholera and 
Typhus?''] 
  [Text] During the turbulent days of devastating civil war, 
starving Russia was overwhelmed by raging epidemics of 
diphtheria, typhus and cholera. The famous ``Uncle 
Gilyay''--Gilyarovskiy, who was sent on assignment to the places 
of devastation, wrote that people were dying like flies from 
cholera. Today, things are bad in the country not only in regard 
to politics and the economy. The number of infectious diseases 
has risen. And among them, once again we have cholera, 
diphtheria and typhoid fever. 
[Leina]Are we threatened by mass epidemics? 
[Fedorov] We're not threatened by a repeat of 1918. 
But still, the situation is rather serious. We have registered 
62 infectious diseases. Among intestinal forms, cholera is the 
most frightening. This disease is distinguished by an explosive 
course: If it is not bridled in time, the danger of an epidemic 
is great. In the past, cholera was a classical disease, but 
later on, in view of causes unknown to us, the agent changed. 
Cholera under the name of El Tor (Ogava) penetrated into our 
country with shoppers from countries in which the standard of 
living and, consequently, public health norms are very low. For 
example five tourists from Orekhovo-Zuyevo who visited Turkey 
fell ill. A total of 21 patients and eight virus carriers were 
registered. Four of them were discovered in Moscow--a person 
without a permanent place of residence, a nurse, and two foreign 
subjects--from Syria and Lebanon. With the exception of one 
fatality in Dagestan, all of them lived through it and, for 
practical purposes, recovered. Despite the fact that it is 
difficult to monitor the disease because of the influx of 
refugees from southern republics (Tajikistan, Azerbaijan and 
Georgia), where the situation is many times more stressful, 
cholera has been fully contained in Russia. 
  The number of typhoid fever cases has risen. Last year there 
were 267 of them, while this year there were 621. As a rule, 
cases of infection are associated with contamination of drinking 
water. For example in the city of Volgodonsk, Rostov Oblast 
sewage made its way into old leaky water supply pipes, as a 
result of which 217 persons fell ill. 
  Dysentery and salmonellosis are a real calamity. Fifty-four 
outbreaks were registered in recent months, and 5,200 persons 
have succumbed. The diphtheria situation is unfavorable. The 
number of patients has neared 6,000. Pediculosis and scabies 
chiefly strike citizens without a permanent place of residence. 
Finally, typhus, anthrax, rabies and some other infections occur 
in very small quantities. 
[Leina]Are medicines available? 
[Fedorov]Yes, for example, cholera is stopped by 
timely administration of chemically pure salt solutions. Its 
treatment is rather inexpensive, while on the other hand 
preventive examination of people who come in contact with 
patients costs money. Immunizations are the sole means against 
infections spread by airborne droplets, particularly diphtheria. 
Despite the rumors the quality of our vaccine is very high, 
which is confirmed by experts of the World Health Organization. 
[Leina]What preventive measures and sanctions are the 
sanitary-epidemiological services employing? 
[Fedorov]Oversight of water supply and sewage 
facilities and vacation places has been intensified. Officials 
who violate public health norms are fined up to 3 months' wages. 
A fine of up to 100 minimum wages has been established for 
selling food products without a license. Unfortunately it is 
hard to control private trade--flea markets and second-hand 
markets. Poisoning by food products from state trade enterprises 
has grown in frequency as well. In these cases the 
sanitary-epidemiological service files a so-called regressive 
suit against the culprit, requiring him to compensate for the 
economic damages he inflicted. 


