Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tehran, Feb. 9, IRNA -- Foreign Minister 'Ali Akbar 
Velayati, currently in Indonesia, said that the only solution to 
Bosnian tragedy was international military intervention. 
  He called on the U.N. Security Council to prescribe 
international military action to stop the genocide and force 
evacuation of the occupied territories. 
  Speaking at the meeting of the selected foreign ministers of 
the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) in Jakarta Tuesday, Velayati said 
that the latest Serbian aggression on, and genocide of, the 
Bosnian Muslims in Sarajevo, had left no doubt that the 
international community had "miserably failed to stop this 
savagery." 
  He added that the U.N. Security Council's resolutions 
calling 
for protection of safe areas including Sarajevo and those 
demanding the lifting of the siege of that city had remained 
only "dead letters." 
  The foreign minister drew attention to the fact that some 
certain European powers were to force the Bosnian government to 
accept surrender and a so-called peace which would be the 
begining of more tragedy and ethnic cleansing. 
  "The Security Council should at least allow Bosnia and those 
who are prepared to help this besieged republic to take action 
in individual or collective self-defense," he said. 
  In such circumstances, Velayati added, efforts aimed at 
ending the siege of these cities in any possible way, lifiting 
arms embargo against B-H, eliminating all impediments for the 
dispath of humanitarian aid to Bosnia and enforcement of 
sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro would constitue the 
least that could be done. 
  He called on the coordinating bureau and the NAM caucaus in 
New York to consider in close consultation with contact group of 
the Organization of Islamic Conference (OIC) the ways and means 
to move this agenda forward in the Security Council. 
  Velayati added that the above-mentioned groups could also 
consider various methods for taking the issue to the general 
assembly directly or under uniting for peace procedure in the 
event that the council failed once again to adopt a meaningful 
resolution. 

