Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Aleksandr Sychev report: "Lech Walesa: The Russian Bear </F>
Cannot Be Tamed"] 
  [Text] "The Americans want to tame the bear, forgetting 
that this cannot be done in the dense forest," Walesa declared 
in an interview in THE WASHINGTON POST. "Russia will never miss 
a good opportunity. Poland has always been just a tidbit to it. 
If the West panders to Russia over trifles today, tomorrow it 
will seize something a bit bigger. If the West does not heed 
Polish arguments, demons will wake up and something similar to 
Yugoslavia will happen." 
  "The `partnership for peace' is a fine idea from the 
viewpoint of the old democracies, but it does not fit the modern 
realities which have taken shape after 50 years of communism." 
  With these words Polish President Lech Walesa cast doubt on 
the hope which the NATO countries were pinning on the "Solomon's 
solution" which seemed to have been found to the problems of the 
bloc's relations with its former opponents in the late Warsaw 
Pact. The "partnership for peace" was to have enabled the 
alliance not to assume excessive obligations with regard to 
ensuring the security of the East European states which have 
embarked on a democratic path, but also not to destroy their 
dream of joining the bloc at some time. The program also made 
it possible to calm down Russia, which had started to get 
agitated on realizing that it might find itself alone, facing a 
"Berlin Wall" moved up to its external borders. 
  As a public opinion poll conducted by GAZETA WYBORCZA 
showed, 
IZVESTIYA's own correspondent L. Kornilov reports, Walesa was 
expressing the opinion of his fellow citizens. Some 70 percent 
of Poles are convinced that Russia threatens Poland militarily, 
65 percent believe that it is also dangerous from the political 
viewpoint, and 53 percent fear economic aggression. Those who 
are 40-50 years old, have some higher education, and are earning 
well fear Russian expansion particularly badly. 
  On the eve of the top-level Brussels meeting, which will 
take 
place 10-11 January, other East European countries have been 
following Poland's example. President Ion Iliescu has sent to 
Brussels a message expressing Romania's wish to join NATO. A 
meeting of the defense ministers of the "Visegrad Group" 
(Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, and Hungary), at which it 
is proposed to formulate these countries' unified position on 
the program being adopted within NATO, is scheduled for next 
Friday. 
  Polish Foreign Minister Andrzej Olechowski has held talks in 
Bonn with his German colleague, Klaus Kinkel. Virtually just 
one question was touched on: Poland must obtain guarantees of 
its security and gain a clear idea of how and when it will 
become a full member of NATO. "Everyone who walks like a duck, 
talks like a duck, and looks like a duck has the right to be 
treated like a duck," he told Kinkel, pointing out that Poland 
has traveled a considerable part of the way and can already 
count on a worthy place among the Western countries. 
  Western agencies report that Olechowski's statement about 
the 
duck was received with understanding in Bonn. The whole thing 
was spoiled slightly by the incautious statements of President 
Walesa, who illustrated another saying of Olechowski's about 
"political myths" which render simple things unattainable. 
  The minister included among such "myths" the fears that 
Moscow will remain isolated. But Walesa showed how cool and 
overloaded with suspicion and grudges the relations with the 
former Warsaw Pact allies are -- relations which Russia 
inherited from the times of the USSR's domination of East Europe. 

