BFN 

<F P=106> ["tl" report: "Kanther Calls On Industry To Take Better </F>
Protective Measures Against Espionage"] 
  [Excerpt] Bonn, 14 Apr -- FRG Interior Minister Manfred 
Kanther (Christian Democratic Union) has called on industry to 
make more intensive efforts against espionage. It suffers great 
damage if it does not protect itself against illegal spying, he 
said at the presentation of the 1993 Constitutional Protection 
Report in Bonn yesterday. 
  The FRG interior minister criticized with unusually harsh 
words the increasing activities of Eastern intelligence services 
in industrial espionage. It is "virtually crazy" that countries 
which have "nothing to eat" are spying on other people. This 
practice does not fit into friendly cooperation. 
  The best and most effective prevention of industrial 
espionage is, according to Kanther, the security check law, 
which has come into force these days. The recipient countries 
-- often states in the areas of crises in the Near and Middle 
East -- often use their intelligence services or other 
acquisition organizations, which work like intelligence 
services, to acquire illegally goods that are relevant for 
armament, the Constitutional Protection report says. The 
incorrect declaration of goods, the forging of end-user 
certificates, or the diversion of goods via third countries to 
cover up the true recipient are typical. The recipient 
countries of technologies, which are subject to export 
restrictions, also use their official or semiofficial 
representations in the FRG for illegal acquisition. For German 
companies it is not always clear, the report says, that their 
products are to be used for military purposes, in particular if 
they are not subject to export restrictions. 
  Another possibility to get access to protected technology or 
the corresponding know-how in Germany lies in the establishment 
or purchase of companies or the purchase of shares in German 
companies, the report adds. In particular smaller companies 
that are in economic difficulty could become the target of 
foreign intelligence services or similar organizations. 
Counterintelligence pointed to corresponding efforts by the 
Russian intelligence services already in the past. [passage 
omitted] 

