Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by (TA SR): "Swine Plague in Nove Zamky District"] </F>
  [Text] The first incidence on the territory of the Slovak 
Republic of the infectious classical-type swine plague was 
recorded on 7 December. The virus was detected in animals raised 
on a private farm in Chramec, in the district of Rimavska 
Sobota. The infection spread graudally to six more private 
farms. According to the information provided by the State 
Veterinary Administration, it was possible to identify the 
source of the infection: The virus originated in two wild boars 
recently shot in the vicinity of a breeding station owned by the 
Agricultural Cooperative in Chramec. Subsequently, the infection 
was also diagnosed in animals kept by privately operating 
farmers in the villages of Blhovce, Hodejov, and Janice. 
  As a protective measure, hunts for wild boars were then 
ordered in areas surrounding these places. From samples taken 
from the wild animals shot in these hunts, it was established 
that the plague virus was present only in those coming from the 
area of the villages of Drna and Hajnacka. As of now, there are 
no reports of the disease having spread to the large hog farms 
in the Rimavska Sobota district. However, on 29 December, an 
additional locality was added to the number of those affected by 
the infection. The Agricultural Cooperative Farm "Kolta" in 
Stara Dedina reported a number of animals infected by the virus. 
Strict preventive measures were immediately adopted on both that 
farm and in the local protected zones. On 30 December, the 
District Disease Prevention Commission decided to liquidate all 
exposed animals on the farm. Until last night, altogether 1,297 
animals either died or had to be destroyed. 
  In view of the current emergency, the State Veterinary 
Administration has published a reminder addressed to all 
breeders of hogs that states that it is their responsibility to 
follow and strictly apply all appropriate preventive measures 
authorized by the Central Commission for Disease Prevention on 
15 July. 

