BFN 

<F P=106> ["AL-THAWRAH Issues" column by Muhammad Khayr al-Jamali: </F>
"Syria's Dynamic Position"] 
  [Text] Dennis Ross, the U.S. overall Middle East 
coordinator, has emphasized Washington's appreciation of Syria's 
central and meaningful role in the peace process. 
  The renewed recognition of the Syrian role brings to mind 
the 
fact that there can be no peace in the region without Syria and 
that, with its intransigence, prevarication, and aggressive 
line, Israel is the only obstacle to the peace process. 
  That peace without Syria is impossible is now obvious. 
Syria's contribution to launching the peace process and 
correcting its course has been universally acknowledged. We now 
know with the benefit of experience that there is no ignoring 
Syria if the peace process is to be sustained and its objectives 
fulfilled. 
  If it were not for Syria's consent to the American 
initiative 
and its positive approach to all the efforts that set out to 
energize the peace process, the 30-month process would not have 
lasted long. 
  Syria has consistently been the party most committed to the 
peace process and the foundations and points of reference on 
which it was launched. The one condition Syria set for its 
participation in the process was that it be an effective 
framework and worthwhile means to achieve real and enduring 
peace predicated on principles of justice and international 
legitimacy. In other words, peace that assures all parties's 
rights -- the peace of the brave as President Hafiz al-Asad 
called it at the Geneva summit. 
  The peace process might have made strides. If only Israel 
took it as seriously as Syria did and tried to approach the 
whole exercise from the standpoint of a nation interested in a 
just and lasting peace. In practice, however, Israel is using 
the peace process as a means to buy time and a platform to 
distort the foundations of peace and replace the Madrid formula 
with separate deals that can only hinder the movement of the 
process and whip up regional tension that could erupt in an 
explosion at any minute. 
  Israel has deployed all its practiced skills in 
prevarication, trickery, and craftiness to make sure that the 
peace process never moves toward its set goal; that is, peace 
grounded in the Madrid formula and UN resolutions. Having 
failed in its effort to bring the peace process to a complete 
halt or deflect it from its course, it turned to open aggression 
and crimes with the aim of destroying the process. It is in 
this context that one can make sense out of the Hebron massacre 
and the ensuing savage escalation against the Palestinian people 
and the threats Israel is issuing against Lebanon for having 
spurned its blackmailing tactics and stuck to its national and 
pan-Arab principles. Lebanon is being targeted because it has 
opted for intra-Arab coordination as the road to a just and 
comprehensive peace under which national and pan-Arab rights are 
restored. 
  To break the logjam in the peace process and relaunch it 
toward its set objective will take a clear international stand 
in which the U.S. Administration plays a key role. Maximum 
pressure must also to be brought to bear if Israel is to be 
talked out of its current line of aggression and crime and into 
an open acceptance of the guidelines of the peace process as 
laid out in the Madrid formula and its key component -- the 
land-for-peace principle. There should be strict adherence to 
the substance of this formula on the part of Israel if a 
universal settlement on all fronts is to be achieved. Only such 
a solution will guarantee the establishment of complete peace in 
the region. The logic of aggression, crime, and occupation does 
not square with peace. 

