BFN 

    [Editorial report] The 3 June edition of the weekly 
magazine AL-MUSAWWAR publishes on pages 20-23 and 70-73 an 
unattributed 8,000-words report described as "part one" in a 
series of reports titled "AL-MUSAWWAR Publishes the Secret 
Documents of the Muslim Brotherhood." Introducing its report, 
the magazine states that "the Muslim Brotherhood's conduct at 
the Lawyers Association the Tuesday before last, and their clash 
with the security forces was neither accidental nor a 
spontaneous reaction to the death of an anonymous lawyer 
involved in terrorist acts, as substantiated by evidence and 
documents. As documents prove, this conduct was a well-studied 
move that was prepared for 27 years. The time for it to bear 
first fruits was at the Lawyers Association." The report adds 
that the Muslim Brothers are trying to build a public existence 
on the dead body of the law and the Constitution. "Their goal 
from now on is to establish themselves on the political map as a 
fait acompli, although legally they are an outlawed and 
illegitimate group," AL-MUSAWWAR says. 
  The magazine says that it has obtained "14 documents" 
belonging to that secret group, all proving that "the Muslim 
Brotherhood could only exist as an initial and fundamental 
secret organization screened by a public facade, a facade that 
acts merely as an instrument for public relations or a curtain 
to mask the truth about the group and its objectives." 
  These documents were seized from members of the "Salsabil" 
computer firm in February 1992, following a tip that the company 
headquarters was being used for secret meetings to set up a 
Muslim Brotherhood organization to overthrow the regime. Signed 
by Muslim Brotherhood General Guide Hamid Abu-al-Nasr, the 
seized documents included a complete plan for overthrowing the 
regime. the seizure came at a time when the Brotherhood 
spokesman, Ma'mun al-Hudaybi, was trying in court to obtain 
Government recognition of the Brotherhood. 
  Opening with the statement "we are a jihad group," the first 
document stresses that the "Muslim Brothers must establish their 
presence in the political arena." For this purpose, the 
document puts forward a number of approaches: To inspire a 
feeling within every brother that he has a mission to carry out 
and that he should act in public without fear of the law or the 
security forces; to make brothers understand that, despite the 
ban, they are exercising a lawful and legitimate right and that 
they are not criminals; and, to substitute the policy of running 
away with "a confrontation spirit" so as to emerge from the 
narrow circle of the brotherhood family into the larger society 
through involvement in public activity, because a decision had 
already been made to get recognition for the organization. 
  The document emphasizes the need to take practical action to 
set up "branches" in governorates through which the brothers can 
exercise their activities. It also stresses that popular Muslim 
Brother key figures must act in the governorates as "active 
cells" to whom public opinion can refer concerning the 
Brotherhood. It warns, however, against going too far both in 
publicizing the names of these figures and in keeping them 
secret. In other words, the document adds, "a balance should be 
maintained between secrecy and publicity and between the size of 
the Brotherhood and the degree of popularization. Everybody 
should seek to limit the amount of information that reaches the 
security apparatuses; this can be done through several methods, 
primarily through a constant change of faces and by giving an 
opportunity to youth to take the responsibility." According to 
the document, "this security policy must balance our needs until 
we can impose a kind of public existence, provided that we take 
care to avoid provoking the security apparatuses without strong 
reasons." 
  The "second document" explains that the aforementioned goal 
requires a general, understandable, and well-calculated security 
policy vis-a-vis the existing policy of the security agencies. 
This policy must take into consideration the unique 
circumstances of every area. Hence, the document stresses "the 
need to maintain pressure groups at all times to curb security 
pressure on the Brotherhood locally and abroad." 
  At the local level, the report adds, the document stresses 
the need for the Muslim Brothers to be active in trade and 
professional associations, student unions, and accredited 
charity organizations, leaving sectors like students to evolve 
naturally without restriction or planning. It also stresses 
that Brotherhood figures must be known to everyone in the 
various positions of responsibility and must appear at all 
occasions. 
  At world level, the document emphasizes the need for the 
Muslim Brotherhood to be represented in worldwide organizations 
that foster the cause of freedom, such as Amnesty International, 
and to have its own organizations--like the World Islamic 
Organization, the Islamic Human Rights Organization, and the 
Islamic Lawyers Organization--to put pressure on the Egyptian 
regime through all available means, like cables and contacts 
with embassies. 
  According to the report, the most serious point in this 
document is a question it poses about "the possibility of 
establishing channels of communication with the security 
apparatus through some known figures in the movement and by 
studying how much this contact can be used to achieve the 
Brotherhood's objectives and activities." 
  The document suggests that a security committee called "the 
liaison committee" be established to "promote a high security 
awareness among Brothers, monitor and analyze the security 
apparatus' activities, and work out ways to handle it." This 
committee, the document adds, must have links with the persons 
responsible for the different security sections to find out the 
impact of the security policy on them. 
  The AL-MUSSAWAR report cites "another document" on the 
Brotherhood's policy during the "preparatory stage." It says 
that the most important proposal in that document is "to 
guarantee the security apparatus' neutrality in the battle to 
overthrow the regime." Stating that the Egyptian public is made 
up of a silent majority and that a number of politicians aspire 
to control them one way or another, the document asks why the 
Muslim Brothers do not utilize this factor in working with the 
Egyptian public. 
  As for how to achieve this, the document contends that all 
leftist and rightist currents have opted to take the 
Government's side and this allows it to concentrate all its time 
and resources to resisting religious and other currents. To 
explain this conduct, the document says that none of these 
currents have any grassroots popularity, and hence, they were 
careful to seek the state's protection. The second reason is 
that these political currents thought that the Islamic current 
was determined to monopolize authority, and to them this is 
worse than the existing situation. That is why the confrontation 
heated up between the Islamic current and the state. 
  Moving on to the state's approach to fighting the Islamic 
current, which the document believes is more favorable to the 
Brotherhood than ever, the document contends that "the state 
lacks an organized and scientific approach to confronting 
political Islam, since policymakers are not qualified for this 
role" and adds that the public have no respect for the police, 
particularly after repeated attacks against police officers by 
the Islamic Group. 
  Elaborating further on this point, the document says that 
the 
state resorts to legislation and laws to curb the Muslim 
Brotherhood. However, Muslim Brothers should not fear such 
legislation since no measures have been taken so far in cases 
involving Muslim Brothers. The document explains that the state 
does not pursue these cases to trials, preferring to keep the 
persons involved under custody for several months until the 
court releases them and dismisses the case. 
  The document then shows the pros and cons of making 
confessions to the National Security Authority, the prosecution, 
and the court should a Brother get caught and be forced to 
confess. It then talks about the problems facing the 
Brotherhood internally; they involve cultural, educational, 
social, and economic problems. 
  The "fourth document" talks about the Brotherhoods' 
"organizational structure," and states that "the organization is 
ready indeed, its program and internal structure accurately 
determined, and it is waiting for the starting signal." 
  This document is a draft chart, showing the organization is 
headed by General Guide Hamid Abu-al-Nasr, who also chairs "the 
General Shura Council." He is assisted by his two deputies, 
Ahmad al-Malat and Mustafa Mashhur, and the "Permanent Bureau 
Panel," which is made up of an unspecified number of members. 
  The document then lists the members of the permanent bureau, 
specialized committees, and other affiliated bodies and outlines 
the organization's statute. 
  The last part of the magazine report cites a document on the 
results of recent elections for the "Guidance Bureau," listing 
the bureau's members. 

