Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Momentous Days"] </F>
  [Text] These are truly momentous days in Hong Kong. In 
spite of angry fist-shaking from that powerful neighbour across 
the border -- and future sovereign -- the Legislative Council 
[Legco] has approved the political reforms that pave the way for 
more democracy to come to the territory. The vote by all but a 
few voices in the early hours of yesterday morning will go down 
in history as a watershed. Councillors who made it possible in 
the full knowledge that they were doing what was best for the 
people, even though, if China carries out its threat, the worthy 
edifice they have now begun building will be destroyed in 1997, 
deserve great credit. Quite properly, there was some dissent 
but also, quite properly, the majority was vindicated. 
  Hong Kong's legislators are to be commended for a mature, 
responsible and fearless first step on the long and troublesome 
road of democratisation. There was a 100 per cent attendance 
for the debate that Beijing warned should not take place. Mr 
Patten, too, deserves a fair share of the praise. It is after 
all, his name which is attached to the reforms. He has defended 
them relentlessly and effectively both at home and abroad. 
Moreover, he possessed the courage and, it must be added, the 
sense to trust them in the hands of the legislature. That trust 
proved well-founded. 
  Now the twin pillars of Hong Kong's administration -- 
Executive and Legislature -- can face the uncertain future 
hand-in-hand. As Mr Patten noted yesterday, it was never the 
intention of the British to dump the reforms on Legco and then 
scarper [run away]. Rather, what was being formed was a new 
partnership. The legislators who voted the way they believe 
their constituencies wanted have embraced that concept. 
  There is, however, a rather serious gripe with Mr Patten. He 
consistently reassured the legislators moved to support his 
reforms that there was no secret deal being hatched in Beijing. 
And he solemnly promised that a "full account" of the failed 17 
rounds of talks with the Chinese would be published so they 
could see that was so. It is a shame that a week such as this 
should be so marred by the decision to publish only a 
"distilled" version of the negotiations. To be precise, the 
document summarises the content of the first 14 rounds of talks 
and then provides a detailed account of the last three. More 
disturbingly, only details of the final negotiating position of 
the British is included in the account of the last three rounds 
of talks. There is not even an intimation of the other options 
put forward but withdrawn or rejected. 
  Mr Patten, who on one hand saw fit to entrust Hong Kong's 
political future in the men and women of Legco, apparently 
decided, as one source suggested, that he did not want to 
"bombard Legco, the British Parliament and the people of Hong 
Kong with a barrage of papers". 
  The MPs in London may have found little to interest them in 
such a pile of documents, but Mr Patten should realise the 
people of Hong Kong would have no objection to being bombarded 
with paper if it is important to their future. And what can be 
more important than the content of secret talks carried out on 
their behalf with their future sovereign country? Surely they 
can decide for themselves whether they want to read the whole 
account or skip parts. An unpleasant suggestion could be 
leveled at the government that rather than "distilling" the 
contents of the rounds of talks, the result may have been to 
dilute or distort them. Furthermore, is not Mr Patten handing a 
propaganda coup to the Chinese? They have already provided a 
partial account of their version of the talks. Now they will 
have the opportunity to provide a fuller account no doubt 
differing from, and taking issue with, that of the British. 
  The unfortunate man in the street will be unable to decide 
which is the correct version. He will be aware, however, that 
the British baulked at giving him a "full accounting". He will 
undoubtedly wonder what has been left out. 
  It is to be hoped that in the days to come, the Chinese will 
accept that Legco carried out what it properly considered to be 
its duty and will react in a calm and thoughtful manner. Let us 
further trust that their response to the British publication of 
their account of the talks will be measured. Mr Patten 
delivered yesterday's document calmly. It was devoid of the 
vitriol or blame that may have been felt as talks ran 
frustratingly foul of success. Now is not the time for more 
bickering, recriminations or retaliation. Time has moved on. 
Hong Kong has moved on. 

