CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Yuriy Voronin, chief of the Organization of </F>
Pension Services Administration of the Russian Federation 
Ministry of Social Protection, by ROSSIYA correspondent Svetlana 
Bakulina: "Intrigues and Pensions"] 
  [Text] The Russian Federation Ministry of Social 
Protection has worked out a concept for pension reform. This 
concept, which has already been approved by a number of 
ministries, is the prototype for a draft law on pensions. Yuriy 
Voronin, chief of the Organization of Pension Services 
Administration of the Ministry of Social Protection, answers 
some questions by a ROSSIYA correspondent. 
  [Bakulina] How are the roles assigned among the services in 
charge of pensions? 
  [Voronin] The Ministry of Social Protection and this 
ministry's system organize the work of assigning and paying the 
pensions. The Pension Fund is a special financial organization 
whose purpose is to collect the pension taxes from enterprises 
and finance the payment of pensions in accordance with 
applications from the social protection organs. In addition, 
communications enterprises and the Savings Bank, which deliver 
pensions directly to the recipients, operate in our network as 
well. 
  [Bakulina] Previously, everyone knew only what the sobes 
[Social Security] said, and everything was understood. Now the 
Pension Fund, which does not have any money, for some reason, 
has made its appearance... 
  [Voronin] The idea belonged to the union's ministries of 
labor and finance. It was Vladimir Shcherbakov, who was chairman 
of the USSR Goskomtrud [State Committee for Labor and Social 
Problems] at the time, and later vice premier in the last union 
government. And Valentin Pavlov, the minister of finance. They 
maintained: if we take the pension money out of the state budget 
(the overall budget) and transfer it to an independent budget, 
pensions will not be financed in accordance with the residual 
principle, as before, but the principles of self-sufficiency. 
  [[Bakulina] That is, the pension money should grow as if it 
were in yeast? 
  [Voronin] It was a very clever maneuver when a tax increase 
was disguised under social needs. Because the insurance rate 
under the previous social security system did not exceed 7 
percent from enterprises' wage fund. When they passed the USSR 
pension law, they calculated that 26 percent of the wage fund 
would be required to implement it. But they set the insurance 
rate at the figure 37 under the Pension Fund. When they formed 
the Pension Fund, the decision was made that 11 percent of this 
37 percent would be put into an economic stabilization fund. 
This was done in accordance with Gorbachev's directive. I do not 
think anyone except Pavlov knows what kind of a fund this is and 
where he spent the money. 
  [Bakulina] But how did this manage to get through the 
Supreme 
Soviet? 
  [Voronin] But who will raise his hand to vote against the 
pensioners? When they began preparing the Russian pension law, 
they did it mainly to spite the union's law, saying that 
everything was bad under the Soviet Union, but everything will 
be fine in Russia. They imitated everything related to the 
Pension Fund, however. Even that 37 percent. Though in the 
Soviet Union the Pension Fund was subordinate to the government, 
it was considered at the time that the best people were 
assembled in the Supreme Soviet, so they made the Pension Fund 
subordinate to the Supreme Soviet. At first it did well: 37 
percent for pensions was too much, all the same. It was possible 
to put money aside and invest it. Later on the interest rate 
dropped to 28. And the problems began. Both because of this and 
our worsening economic situation in general. In addition, the 
Pension Fund was used by the former Supreme Soviet in its 
struggle with the executive authority. The Supreme Soviet made 
decisions that were deliberately populist, but it presented them 
as concern for the pensioners. These decisions were not backed 
up by anything financially, although the Pension Fund promised: 
we will finance everything. But things came apart later on. The 
Pension Fund promised indexing and an increase in pensions, 
planning that wages would also increase. But the Supreme Soviet 
was concerned with pensions and the government was concerned 
with wages. Wages rose more slowly than the pensions. Which 
should not be the case, in principle. A pension cannot be larger 
than wages. 
  [Bakulina] Then what do you say about the nonstate pension 
funds that are being developed? 
  [Voronin] There is no future for them in the form they are 
being established today. Foreign experience shows that funds 
such as these can be developed when an enterprise either 
contributes all the money for its employees or when 
contributions from the enterprise and its employees are added 
together. Counting exclusively on employee contributions, as we 
are starting to do today, is not a serious approach. The overall 
insurance rate for all types of insurance is roughly 40 percent. 
Add the taxes to this, and it will be a huge sum. Enterprises 
have no incentive to transfer such an amount of money to 
nonstate pension funds--they have to deal with the state taxes, 
for God's sake. As far as working citizens are concerned, who 
will risk putting something away for some unknown purpose? 
  [Bakulina] Aren't they really given any guarantees? 
  [Voronin] The risk is very high. For example, I formed my 
own 
fund, I invested money in the KamAZ [Kama Automotive Plant], and 
I want to receive dividends. But the KamAZ went bankrupt. So my 
fund went bankrupt as well, 
  [Bakulina] Are you prepared to protect citizens in the event 
that there are any excesses in these funds? 
  [Voronin] They have not come to us with any complaints yet. 
But they may come. They went to Chubays with complaints about 
"Tekhnicheskiy Progress," although the checking fund had no 
investment license. Chubays is not responsible for it, but he 
had to get involved. The same thing may happen to us. And 
although I am not formally responsible for the funds' activity, 
I will obviously have to become familiar with the details. We 
have formed a small subunit of three individuals to compile a 
register of the funds. 
  [Bakulina] What is the nature of the reform being proposed 
by 
your department? 
  [Voronin] We are proposing the formation of a normal pension 
insurance system, in which a unified pension insurance 
institution collects the insurance contributions, finances the 
pensions, and assigns and pays them. The institution may be 
established only after a record of individualized insurance 
payments is introduced. It should contain all the information: 
the amount each citizen has deducted for the pension fund, how 
much time he has been deducting, and what his earnings were. 
Then we will not need labor books or earnings statements, 
because everything will be in the data bank. This cannot be 
quickly implemented technically. For this reason, we consider 
creation of a mechanism to protect pensioners from the 
unfavorable consequences of the shift to the market to be our 
priority task. Legislation has not responded to these processes, 
unfortunately, so a new market pension law is needed. 
  [Bakulina] Will the parliament pass new legislation? 
  [Voronin] A great deal depends on organization of the work. 
In Germany, as an example, they passed a law aimed at the year 
2015. All the political parties--the ruling and opposition 
parties--met and worked out the norms suitable to everyone. I 
think we should organize our work this way--we should sit down 
in parliament and together with the members of parliament, go 
through each article in the new draft law. 
  [Bakulina] Let us assume that the deputies discuss the 
problem of working pensioners. What have you prepared in this 
regard? 
  [Voronin] When the union's law of 1956--which lasted for 30 
years--was introduced, there was no provision in it on the 
possibility of receiving a pension during a working period. A 
precedent was set when Kosygin visited one of the defense 
plants. Uncle Vasya, a fitter who was unique in his field, had 
been pensioned and there was no one else to make certain parts. 
Then Kosygin proposed that an exception be made in his case, 
enabling him to receive his pension and wages at the same time. 
Then there was a second, then a third case... The list of 
situations in which a pension was being paid gradually became 
larger, as is usually the case. 
  [Bakulina] Only the intelligentsia has been "unworthy" of 
such a privilege. 
  [Voronin] Indeed. I do not think that a return to the 
previous situation, in order to do away with a pension during a 
period of work, will be successful, and there is no need to do 
this, of course. But we obviously do not have to index the 
pension of those who are working. But after all, what do we end 
up with? A working pensioner is indexed twice--for his pension 
and for his wages. Secondly, taking into account that there is 
not enough money in the Pension Fund, there should be a certain 
limitation on pensions in accordance with the principle which 
applied previously for servicemen, when a person's pension plus 
his wages should not exceed his earnings when he began his 
pension. This is very widespread in the West, by the way. 
  [Bakulina] Try to explain this in an example. 
  [Voronin] Very simple. If you were working and your pension 
was figured from earnings of 100,000 rubles [R], you were 
assigned a pension of R60,000 or R70,000. You can continue to 
work and receive any wage, but you will be paid your pension in 
such a way that your earnings, plus your pension, do not exceed 
your R100,000. This is one of the versions. Perhaps they will 
select a different one. Only bear one simple fact in mind: when 
there is no money left in the Pension Fund, a decision on some 
restrictive measures--either on payment, or age, or some other 
factor--must be be made without fail. And we will be making the 
decision under conditions that are worse. And that decision will 
be more painful for society than the current one--a gradual and 
prepared decision. 

