Language: <F P=105> Azeri </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Rustem Kamal: "Strong Customs Control Can Impede </F>
Smuggling And Narcobusiness"] 
  [Text] A meeting was held between the Republic Customs 
Committee and the Chief Administration for the Struggle Against 
Smuggling and the Violation of Customs Regulations. The meeting 
was devoted to summing up work done last year and defining the 
duties standing before them. Shahin Jahangirov, head of the 
Chief Administration, in his analysis of work done in 1993, 
stated that last year serious shortcomings were allowed in this 
sector. He mentioned the names of workers who were lax in this 
job. The speaker also said that in the sector of the struggle 
against smuggling and customs violations the work of the customs 
houses in Bilesuvar, Sumgait, Khachmaz, Aghstafa, Imishli, 
Khudaferin, Balaken and Yevlakh were especially deficient. In 
some cases instances of smuggling and customs violations were 
not accepted by the court because they were incompetently 
prepared from the legal standpoint. Along with this, he noted 
that following just criticism leveled at customs workers by 
Heydar Eliyev, a serious turning point had been reached in the 
committee's work. 
  In the last two months alone, 23,700 US dollars, 6,300 
Iranian Riyals, 40 truckloads of iron pipe, 1,633 tons of metal, 
3,129 aluminum plates, 620 grams of mercury, and various types 
of night vision and other optical equipment in the process of 
being smuggled out of the country were seized and held by 
workers of the Chief Administration. 
  There was also serious conversation about a question which 
created excitement at the meeting. This was the search for 
effective ways to conduct the struggle against the 
narcobusiness, which is a world problem. Last year seven 
kilograms of narcotic substances were seized and confiscated by 
customs workers.. On the basis of investigations conducted and 
facts obtained they were able to come to the conclusion that 
those engaged in narcobusiness consider Azerbaijan to be a 
critical place, since it is the shortest route from the Orient 
to Europe and they want to use it as a transit point. From the 
speeches it became clear that the use of specially trained dogs 
from Russia has led to good progress in this sector. It was also 
stressed that the cooperation of all law enforcement agencies of 
the republic in the fight against narcobusiness is essential. 
  One of the speakers at the meeting, Huseyn Memmedov, a 
responsible worker at the Ministry of National Security, also 
emphasized the importance of such cooperation. Participants at 
the meeting considered Azerbaijan's membership in the 
International Association against Narcomania and the 
Narcobusiness to be a positive event.. It is considered 
important that cooperation with it in this sector continue in 
the future. 
  There was also discussion of the customs workers being 
subjected to the use of weapons in some places. Thus, issuing 
customs workers engaged in the struggle against smugglers 
weapons was noted as a demand of the day. 
  In addition, committee workers expressed their disturbance 
on 
the inappropriate interference by law enforcement organs 
exceeding their authority in regions where customs houses are 
operating. 
  Speakers noted that Azerbaijan as an independent state 
maintains free economic relations with the countries of the 
world, and a number of foreign states transport goods out of our 
republic. As a result of this, customs workers come across new 
illegal types of international trade. Some of these involve 
extremely expensive goods. These open up new possibilities for 
potential smugglers. There are also many who wish to smuggle 
valuable national and historically important art works and 
strategic goods abroad. Speakers noted the important of 
establishing customs intelligence in order to conduct an 
effective fight against those wishing to do our country material 
or spiritual harm. 
  In the course of the meeting one reached the conclusion that 
workers of the Customs Committee understand well how much damage 
can be done to our country by criminals smuggling valuable goods 
abroad. Now the basic question is the transition from the word 
to the deed in this difficult time for our country because the 
economic power of a country which has been drawn into war and 
part of which is occupied depends on the activity of its customs 
workers. 

