BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special article" by Yu Wen-ching (0205 2429 3237)] </F>
  [Text] Hong Kong 8 Apr (ZHONGGUO TONGXUN SHE)-- Hong Kong 
MING PAO reporter Xi Yang, who was found guilty of stealing 
state secrets, was sentenced to 12 years in prison in the first 
trial at the Beijing Municipal Intermediate People's Court not 
long ago. When the news spread, it was understandable that Hong 
Kong residents showed great concern over the case. However, 
some people have taken action before they have acquired a clear 
picture of the case, and a small handful of people who want to 
stir up trouble have taken advantage of the incident to attack 
the Chinese Government, repeating the slogan that "Xi Yang is 
innocent' and demanding that the authorities "release Xi Yang." 
Consequently, this has posed a serious question: Is Xi Yang 
guilty or not guilty? 
<H5>  The Irrefutable Facts of Xi Yang's Crime </H5>
  Xi Yang was detained by the PRC State Security Authorities 
in 
accordance with the law on 27 September 1993 and was officially 
apprehended on 7 October 1993, with the Beijing Municipal 
People's Procuratorate's approval. On 28 March this year, he 
was found guilty of "stealing and prying into secret information 
of the state" in the first trial at the Beijing Municipal 
Intermediate People's Court and was sentenced to 12 years in 
prison and was deprived of political rights for two years. 
  What crimes have Xi Yang committed? In actual fact, in the 
wake of Xi Yang's apprehension, the relevant PRC departments 
somewhat published the facts of his crimes. On the very day 
that Xi Yang was detained, XINHUA sent a dispatch, saying that 
Xi Yang "was detained for stealing and spying on state financial 
secrets in violation of the PRC State Security Law." On the 
very day that Xi Yang was officially apprehended, XINHUA gave a 
truthful report on the criminal facts regarding Xi Yang. The 
report indicated: "Xi Yang engaged in stealing and gathering 
our state banking secrets, with conclusive evidence of his 
activities. The banking secrets stolen by Xi Yang included an 
unpublished People's Bank of China deposit and loan interest 
modification plan, its secret policy decision on participating 
in the international gold trade, and other important secrets. 
The compromise of these secrets has had serious consequences. 
The state security organs have obtained conclusive evidence of 
activity which jeopardizes state security." 
  Everyone knows that XINHUA is China's national news agency, 
and the information it dispatches is authoritative. Under the 
prerequisite that no state secrets are to be revealed, the news 
agency had already revealed the content and consequences of Xi 
Yang's case specifically enough. In addition, according to the 
XINHUA report, "Xi Yang has confessed to behavior endangering 
state security"; at the same time, Xi Yang's employer, MING PAO 
enterprise president Mr. Yu Ping-hai acknowledged in Beijing 
that Xi Yang "violated PRC Law" in his news gathering 
activities, and openly "apologized to the relevant authorities." 
  The above clearly showed that Xi Yang has truly violated 
China's penal code, and he has been found guilty. It is very 
important to clarify whether Xi Yang is guilty or not guilty, 
which is a prerequisite. As long as we have a clear picture of 
the facts of Xi Yang's crime and see that his criminal behavior 
has already resulted in serious economic losses to the state, 
people will not disregard the solemnity of the law based on 
their sympathy for Xi Yang. 
<H5>  Who Was Actually Being "Lawless"? </H5>
  An extremely small handful of people, who have always been 
hostile to the Chinese Government, intentionally threw mud at 
China and misled the public. They attacked the Chinese 
Government for being "lawless" in handling Xi Yang's case. 
However, the facts are simply the contrary. 
  The truth is that Xi Yang violated the PRC criminal code. 
This being the case, it is natural for the relevant Chinese 
law-enforcement department to conduct the investigation, 
apprehension, and sentencing based on facts in accordance with 
the law. This is precisely an expression of doing business 
according to the law. The trial of Xi Yang's case was not held 
publicly in order to ensure that state secrets would not be 
revealed in an open trial in accordance with Article 111 of the 
"PRC Criminal Procedure Law," which explicitly states: "Cases 
involving state secrets or the private affairs of individuals 
are not to be heard in public." In the wake of passing sentence 
in the first trial, it was reported that Xi Yang has filed an 
appeal, and his employer was also looking for a lawyer to defend 
his case. All this is sufficient to show that his case has been 
handled strictly in accordance with legal procedures. The 
party, the government departments, and individuals are forbidden 
from intervening in the trial of the case, and they have not 
intervened. Why then should China be charged with "being 
lawless"? 
  In fact, the speeches and actions of the extremely small 
handful of people who have maliciously attacked the Chinese 
Government by taking advantage of Xi Yang's case are out and out 
"lawless." This little handful of people are insisting that 
someone like Xi Yang -- who has already admitted being guilty of 
violating the Chinese penal code -- is "innocent," and are 
demanding his "release." If things are handled according to 
this model, all people who steal state secrets will be found not 
guilty and none of them will be apprehended. Would not that be 
truly "lawless?" The PRC Criminal Procedure Law explicitly 
stipulates that trials of cases involving state secrets will not 
be held in public; furthermore, Xi Yang's case is undergoing a 
further hearing and is not yet closed. However, this small 
handful of people are demanding an "open trial" and the 
"publication of the trial's results." Who are actually being 
"lawless?" 
  Xi Yang's Case Has Nothing To Do With "Freedom of the 
Press" 
  Recently, some people have linked Xi Yang's case with 
"freedom of the press," saying that the Chinese side has dealt 
a blow at freedom of the press in Hong Kong by taking advantage 
of Xi Yang's case. Some commentaries have even linked this 
incident with conditions after 1997, saying that Xi Yang's case 
shows that Hong Kong will lose its freedom of the press after 
1997. If that was not stated out of ulterior motives, it was at 
least a muddle-headed understanding. 
  We must bear in mind that Xi Yang was not ignorant of 
Chinese 
law and political operations -- he had gone to Hong Kong from 
the hinterland only two or three years before. His "coverage" 
in question was not "mistakenly trespassing in a restricted 
zone," but knowingly committing a crime to spy on state secrets. 
That being the case, Xi Yang's actions had gone far beyond the 
realm of ordinary news coverage. To apprehend a criminal who 
has stolen important state secrets according to the law and 
"suppressing press freedoms" are two entirely different kettles 
of fish; how could the two issues be placed on the same level? 
  Chinese law protects all reporters in their normal news 
gathering activities; of course, activities that are not in line 
with the reporter's status are not included. Since reform and 
opening up, the Chinese Government has provided conveniences for 
reporters from Hong Kong and Macao in their coverage of the 
hinterland, ever simplifying procedures. Since 1993, the number 
of Hong Kong reporters leaving for the hinterland for news 
coverage has totaled more than a thousand; they have come and 
gone freely, and have experienced smooth sailing in their news 
gathering. Of course, when reporters cover the Chinese 
hinterland (as in any country in the world) Chinese law must be 
observed; this applies to reporters as well as businessmen and 
travelers. If other people are sanctioned for violating the law 
in the hinterland, why should reporters alone be exempt? The 
fact is, so many reporters from Hong Kong went to the hinterland 
to cover news last year, and only Xi Yang was prosecuted. This 
fact alone has vividly demonstrated that the Chinese Government 
protects reporters' normal news gathering activities. 
  The author believes that some people intentionally or 
unintentionally regard reporter's activities as being free from 
all legal restrictions as one of the contents or major contents 
of the freedom of the press. This is actually opium to 
reporters and misguides Hong Kong residents. Such an 
understanding will harm reporters and will inevitably hurt the 
press itself. Therefore, such an erroneous understanding must 
be clarified. 
  In the final analysis, regarding Xi Yang's case, as long as 
we clarify whether he is guilty or not guilty, it will be easy 
to understand the other issues. A responsible person from the 
PRC State Security department put it well: "Xi Yang's behavior 
has violated the PRC criminal code and has nothing to do with 
the normal news gathering activities of a reporter; his is 
purely a criminal case." 

