BFN 

  [Text] The sessions on money hoarders began today in Havana 
Province. In the meeting of Combatants of the Revolution, 
details on the application of Decree-Law No. 149 were announced. 
  (Pedro Saenz), second secretary of the Communist Party of 
Cuba [PCC] in Havana Province, announced that a provincial 
group, as well as four sub-groups in different parts of the 
province, have been created. Each one of these groups is headed 
by a prosecutor. He also advised that [words indistinct] 
municipal command posts for the practical support to this 
decree-law. In the meeting with combatants of Havana, some 
expressed concern over effectiveness and justice in the 
application of this decree, whether, as a combatant from Jaruco 
said, they would not continue mocking the Revolution. 
Nevertheless, Candido Palmero, first secretary of the PCC in 
Havana, stressed that the work is being done seriously and 
meticulously. 
  [Begin Palmero recording] In other words, we will do things 
so that they cannot move. By then, some will have hidden the 
motorcycles, others will have reported them stolen, and others 
will have hidden the cars. [end recording] 
  He added that emphasis will be placed on those who have 
gotten rich on state resources, and that money hoarders would 
not have too many opportunities to cheat or make changes to 
their advantage. He insisted that it was about joint action. 
  [Begin Palmero recording] I do not think they will have too 
many chances. This has become a task of the people, of the 
revolutionary people. In other words, there must be justice in 
this process. We need to be patient because we are not going to 
do things in a disorganized manner. We will do things little by 
little. 
  I just received a note about someone in a municipality who 
has a rice combine, two tractors, a (Moscovi) car, a (William), 
a motorcycle, and a truck. According to sources, he has eight 
cars [chuckles] and a great sum of money. By now, he must be 
pulling his hair out. There is no hurry. That law is not for a 
few months only; that law is here to stay. [end recording] 

