BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, May 12 (XINHUA) -- China named new 
ministers today for the Ministry of Geology and Mineral 
Resources and the Ministry of Radio, Film and Television, and an 
auditor-general for the auditing administration. 
  The appointments of Song Ruixiang, Sun Jiazheng and Guo 
Zhenqian to the top seats of the three ministries were 
respectively passed by the country's parliament at the Seventh 
Session of the Standing Committee of the National People's 
Congress [NPC], which ended today. 
  Song Ruixiang, 54, has been working at grass-roots 
geological 
and mineral resource departments for a long time. He is cited 
to be "decisive, daring and resolute in work." 
  Since 1980, Song held the posts of deputy director of the 
provincial geological bureau of hunan, and deputy director and 
director of the geological bureau of Qinghai Province. 
  He became deputy secretary of the Qinghai Provincial 
Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and governor of 
Qinghai Province in 1985. In 1989, he was named vice-minister 
of the geology and mineral resources. 
  The former geology minister Zhu Xun is now secretary-general 
of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference. 
  Sun Jiazheng, 50, replaced Ai Zhisheng as minister of radio, 
film and television, who became deputy director of the 
ideological and media work group under the CPC Central Committee. 
  Sun, a university graduate, is noted for his "reliable and 
safe methods in working." He held the posts of secretary of the 
Nanjing City Committee of the Communist Youth League of China 
(CYLC), deputy secretary and later secretary of the CYLC Jiangsu 
Provincial Committee. 
  He became a member of the Standing Committee of the CPC 
Jiangsu Provincial Committee, its secretary-general and 
secretary of Xuzhou City Party Committee in 1983. In 1986 he 
became deputy secretary of the Jiangsu Provincial Party 
Committee and head of the committee's propaganda department. 
  He is also an alternate member of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee. 
  The former vice auditor-general Guo Zhenqian, 61, replaced 
Lu 
Peijian as auditor-general of the auditing administration. Lu 
has been appointed chairman of the board of auditors in China's 
new policy-lending bank, the Development Bank. 
  Guo is said to be "familiar with the macro-economy and a 
capable leader." 
  He was once director of the Hubei branch of the People's 
Construction Bank of China, and then vice-governor of Hubei 
Province, and later its governor. 
  Guo became vice-governor of the People's Bank of China in 
1990. 

