Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["cri"-attributed report: "Exports to East Asia Rising </F>
Strongly This Year Again"] 
  [Text] Frankfurt/Main -- As a result of the continuing 
strong growth in most East Asian countries, domestic exports to 
this region of the world are expected to increase strongly again 
this year. However, according to the Institute of German 
Economy (DIW), this will not result in stimulating economic 
development. In order for this to happen, exports would have to 
grow by more than 10 percent, which was the average rate 
achieved over the past few years. "However, a noticeable 
acceleration of demand from the East Asian countries cannot be 
seen." 
  Furthermore, the relationship between imports and exports is 
essential in order to assess the economic effects of business 
with East Asia. Imports from East Asia are, however, still 
clearly higher than exports to this region. "Without a further 
reduction of the deficit in trade with these countries, one 
cannot expect expansion of exports to have an economic effect on 
the overall economic development." For the current period it is 
not certain whether the deficit will continue to go down. Last 
year, the trade deficit amounted to 26 billion German marks 
[DM], according to DIW estimates, following DM32 billion during 
the previous period. As a result of German unification, the 
deficit skyrocketed from almost DM22 billion in 1990 to about 
DM38 billion in 1991. Scientists doubt that the reduction will 
continue during the current period. "The East Asian states have 
become cheap and internationally dominant suppliers of important 
electronic goods, and will try to keep their markets abroad 
despite the continuing weak economic development." Therefore, 
imports from this region will probably stagnate in 1994 or even 
rise a little, the institute thinks. 
  Machine-building, about 26.5 percent, made the greatest 
contribution to German exports to East Asia in 1992. 
Road-vehicle construction followed with 18 percent, the 
chemical industry with 16.5 percent, and electrical engineering 
with 14 percent. Thus, together these four branches composed 
three-quarters of the exports to this region. Yet, they only 
contribute about 58 percent to overall German exports. The most 
important purchasers of German products are Japan, China, and 
Taiwan. Thus, in 1992 more than 16 percent of machine-building 
exports to East Asia went to Japan; China's share was similarly 
high. 
  However, the rising exports to East Asia must not cover up 
the fact that there is a large pent-up demand in this region. 
One-fifth of total U.S. exports already go to East Asia. In the 
statistics for Germany, this proportion is only about 10 percent. 

