BFN 

<F P=106> [Klaus Rost article on opinion poll conducted in eastern </F>
Germany by Infratest Burke Berlin: "CDU Registers Some Gains in 
the East"] 
  [Text] 
<H5>  Which Party Do You Like Best Now? </H5>
  In March, one-third of those polled said "no party." That is 
4 percent fewer than a month ago, but those who are dissatisfied 
are still well ahead of the rest. The SPD [Social Democratic 
Party of Germany] still enjoys the most support among citizens 
in the new laender, although with 21 percent, it has lost 3 
percentage points since February. The CDU [Christian Democratic 
Union] was able to increase its support from 14 to 18 percent. 
This might be due to the CDU congress in Hamburg, which was 
based around Helmut Kohl. Alliance 90/Greens have overtaken the 
PDS [Party of Democratic Socialism] (8 percent) and are third 
with 10 percent. The FDP [Free Democratic Party] is still well 
behind with 3 percent, only 1 percent ahead of the Republikaner. 
  The SPD (22 percent), Alliance 90/Greens (16 percent), and 
PDS (14 percent) fare best among the better educated. The CDU 
only has 11 percent. The CDU enjoys the greatest support among 
those with a low level of education (29 percent). The Alliance 
90/Greens are the least convincing for this group and only 
obtained 3 percent. 
  The growth in support for the CDU is primarily due to gains 
in Saxony-Anhalt and Saxony. In both laender, the CDU beat the 
SPD. The SPD obtained its highest rating in Brandenburg (31 
percent). Berlin and Brandenburg are still strongholds for the 
PDS; Alliance 90/the Greens fare better in Berlin, 
Saxony-Anhalt, and Thuringia than in Mecklenburg-Western 
Pomerania and Saxony. 
<H5>  What Is the Most Important Problem in the East? </H5>
  The high level of unemployment occupies first place for the 
citizens in the new laender in March: Eighty-two percent want 
convincing solutions for combating unemployment. Nineteen 
percent of those polled complain about a lack of social security 
and justice in Germany as well as about poor economic growth. 
Seventeen percent stress a lack of internal security and rising 
crime in Germany; 12 percent stress a shortage of housing and 
excessively high rents. As in February, wage parity between east 
and west Germans occupies sixth place, but it is only considered 
an urgent problem by 8 percent of those polled rather than 12 
percent. 
  Difficulties stemming from the unification of east and west, 
environmental problems, hostility toward foreigners, right-wing 
extremism, and asylum-seekers are considered a "serious problem" 
to a much lesser extent are mentioned by between 6 and 2 percent 
of those polled. 
<H5>  In Which Party Do You Have the Most Confidence for Solving </H5>
these Problems? 
  Confidence in the ability of political parties to solve 
these 
problems has risen compared to the previous month. In February, 
between 40 percent and 55 percent did not believe in the ability 
of the parties to solve such problems. In March, the lack of 
confidence was between 35 percent and 45 percent. 
  The two major parties have gained the most in confidence: 
The SPD is still in the lead in every area. In the case of 
combating crime and the housing shortage, it has even gained 5 
percentage points. The CDU has made gains with regard to 
economic policy. Compared to the previous month, 7 percent more 
of those polled believe in the ability of the CDU to promote 
Germany's economic development and 3 percent more believe that 
the CDU can tackle unemployment. There was an increase of 9 
percent in those who think that the CDU can bring about income 
parity, and even in the case of providing more social security 
and justice, the CDU could gain 4 percentage points. The PDS by 
contrast has registered a loss of confidence in its ability to 
solve social and economic problems. 
<H5>  Questions and Views Concerning the PDS </H5>
  The main result of the poll is that the SED [Socialist Unity 
Party of Germany] successor party, the PDS, has by and large 
lost its negative image in the new laender. Of east Germans, 55 
percent consider it a good thing if the PDS were represented in 
the Bundestag in the fall. A quarter are opposed to the PDS 
being in the Bundestag and 17 percent are not sure. The 
majority of those polled consider the PDS to be a new, 
democratic party. Only 44 percent think that the PDS hardly 
differs from the former SED in its goals. Somewhat more than a 
third still view the party as being "yesterday's people 
forever," a majority of 77 percent, however, rejects the view 
that the PDS is a party that is as hostile to democracy as 
right-wing parties. 
  Now that the party's image has changed in this way, the PDS 
has created conditions for acquiring a relatively broad 
electorate. Of east Germans, 24 percent say that they would 
consider voting for the PDS in the next elections. A further 18 
percent do not rule out such a possibility. The PDS 
particularly appeals to the more educated. Of east German who 
have finished high school, 30 percent would contemplate voting 
for the party. The workers and low ranking white-collar workers 
in the former worker-peasant state are more cautious and only 16 
percent would consider the PDS. In regional terms, the largest 
potential electorate is in the north: In Brandenburg, the PDS 
has the support of 38 percent and of 36 percent in Mecklenburg. 
Support for the PDS is lowest in the south: 14 percent of the 
inhabitants of Thuringia and 18 percent of the inhabitants of 
Saxony would vote for it. 
  The PDS' appeal seems to be based on emotional matters and a 
lack of confidence. The party evidently draws support by its 
efforts to preserve the "east German identity and interests." 
In addition, 83 percent of its potential voters are of the 
opinion that the PDS represents hope for a society that is more 
just. 
  This stands in stark contrast to the PDS' poor image when it 
comes to concrete political work: Only a quarter of those 
polled agreed with the view that the PDS does a good job at the 
local level. A total of 56 percent are of the opinion that the 
PDS promises a lot, but offers few solutions. A total of 54 
percent have doubts about the PDS' ability to deal with economic 
policy and the same percentage believes that if the party were 
successful in the elections that would frighten away investors. 
Overall, the PDS does not seem to represent a political 
alternative to the established parties. It would appear to 
stand for a kind of east German identity and serves as means of 
threatening the politicians in Bonn so that they do more. 
<H5>  Which Politicians Enjoy the Most Credibility? </H5>
  What is striking is that compared to their fellow citizens 
in 
western Germany, east Germans are not guided to the same extent 
by traditional party ties. They are more influenced by current 
party policies and the credibility of their representatives. As 
in February, Regine Hildebrandt, Brandenburg's minister of labor 
and social affairs, fared the best and was unrivaled. 
Irrespective of party and land boundaries, over 70 percent of 
east Germans were convinced that she is doing her job well. 
  In second place is Minister-President Manfred Stolpe, who 
has 
50 percent. However, the new accusations and the collapse of 
the SPD-FDP-Greens coalition only occurred after the poll, so 
whether this has affected the support given Stolpe by 78 percent 
of Brandenburg's voters and to what extent remains an open 
matter. 
  The head of the government in Saxony, Kurt Biedenkopf, and 
Berlin Mayor Eberhard Diepgen have both lost credibility. 
However, they were still well ahead of their colleagues 
Bernhard Vogel, Berndt Seite, and Christoph Bergner, who are 
considered as performing their functions well by hardly anyone 
outside their laender and by only a minority within their own 
laender. 
  At the federal level, things are looking up for CDU/CSU 
[Christian Social Union] personalities. Helmut Kohl in 
particular has gained support (26 percent). He has thus reduced 
the gap between himself and his challenger Scharping, for whom 
support has fallen from 35 to 31 percent. Labor Minister 
Norbert Bluem is particularly popular among the elderly 
population in eastern Germany, especially as a result of the 
efforts that he has made for nursing-care insurance. Along with 
Bundestag President Rita Suessmuth, he enjoys the highest 
approval rating (38 percent) among federal politicians. 
  Leading federal politicians from the new laender are treated 
with reserve by their countrymen. Gregor Gysi and Wolfgang 
Thierse have seen their support drop, now 32 percent and 29 
percent respectively. However, they are still well ahead of 
Angela Merkel, Helmut Kohl's CDU deputy chairman, who obtained 
20 percent. 
<H5>  Who Is the Best Candidate for President </H5>
  As in February, 36 percent of east Germans would vote 
Johannes Rau into the office of president. Jens Reich, the 
candidate from the new laender, was able to obtain second place 
with 12 percent. He made gains among the better educated. He is 
followed by Hildegard Hamm-Bruecher (11 percent) and Roman 
Herzog (8 percent). Herzog, who is something of an unknown 
"political newcomer" in the new laender, receives no bonus 
points. He evidently lacks credibility, even CDU supporters 
view him with reserve. 

