BFN 

  [Text] Interior Minister Chawalit Yongchaiyut yesterday 
issued a stern warning to the mass media, threatening tighter 
controls if they continue to publish or broadcast reports which 
affect innocent people. 
  The warning came amid much coverage in the press and other 
media on allegations of drug trafficking involving politicians. 
  The controversial reports were fuelled by a broadcast on 
Thursday by the radio Independent Network News (INN), which gave 
the initials of a number of politicians, government officials 
and police who were allegedly involved in the drug trade. 
  "Take it as my last request," Chawalit said. "I will not 
stand it if their reports affect innocent people again. Don't 
blame me if I take drastic action. I may ask to see the 
information before publication or broadcast." 
  Chawalit said if his warning was not heeded, his tough 
actions might start with reporters being prohibited from 
entering the Interior Ministry's compound for three days. 
  "From now on we must get tough with the mass media on their 
news presentation," Chawalit said. "If it is not true as 
reported, innocent people will be affected. This will also 
affect the credibility of the radio announcers if their reports 
are not true." 
  Chawalit said he would ensure that the affected party 
receives fair treatment in news coverage and presentation. 
  "We must deal with this problem seriously to bring about 
fair 
treatment. The mass media are not free to write anything and 
broadcast it the way they like. We must control the mass media 
to be up to standard to protect innocent people from being 
affected." 
  INN, quoting unnamed anti-narcotics officials, reported on 
Thursday that three government MPs were involved in narcotics 
trafficking. It identified them by their initials and 
positions, and said they belonged to a political party whose 
leader is the prime minister. 
  Later the agency said three opposition MPs were also 
involved 
in narcotics trafficking. Although it identified them only by 
their initials, it provided other details such as constituencies 
and party affiliations which made identification easy. 
  Senior anti-drug officials on Thursday denied INN's claim 
that staff of the Office of the Narcotics Control Board (ONCB) 
passed evidence of drug trafficking to the agency. 
  Speaking at a press conference at the Interior Ministry, 
Chawalit said he summoned the INN editor to question him about 
the sources of the news. 
  "He still insisted that he had received the correct 
information and had verified the information. But he refused to 
identify his sources," Chawalit said. Chawalit said he would 
like INN to apologize formally to the mentioned people to 
prevent more problems. 
  "I think the mentioned people are ready to forgive so that 
there would be no more trouble," the minister said. But, 
Chawalit said, he expected more trouble because the news agency 
insisted it had done nothing wrong. 
  Three Democrat MPs have vowed to sue INN while opposition 
members were also reported to be considering similar action. 
  A senior police official accused by the agency also 
threatened to seek damages of Bt20 million. The minister said 
he would not revive the annulled Decree 42, which once allowed 
police to shut down newspapers without seeking court orders. 
  Chawalit said many complaints had been made against the mass 
media recently. He cited a headline by SIAM POST newspaper, 
partly saying "the Parliament of duo lions on the globe" -- a 
reference to a brand of heroin -- as an example of a news report 
which affected innocent people. 
  "All parliamentarians were angry at being accused this way," 
Chawalit said. The minister said he would like the mass media 
to act with honor and credibility by not publishing untrue 
reports. 
  "I would like them to identify their sources more clearly," 
the minister said. 
  Late Thursday night, INN radio news identified more 
businessmen and politicians it alleged were involved in drug 
trafficking. INN quoted sources again quoted from the ONCB. 
This time, though, INN gave full names and surnames of the 
alleged drug traffickers. 

