Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Mitsubishi Heavy Industries (MHI) developed and will 
embark upon the commercialization of a self-advancing ultrasonic 
flaw-detecting robot that looks for cracks in a nuclear reactor 
vessel. The robot can reduce the time needed for a periodic 
inspection of the reactor vessel to less than one-half the time 
needed with conventional devices, and it can lessen the danger 
of workers being exposed to radiation. In addition to talking 
business with Japanese electric power companies, MHI also plans 
to sell the robot in Europe, the U.S., Taiwan, and Korea, where 
there are increasing demands for safety guarantees because of 
deterioration in reactor vessels. 
  The product name of this device is "advanced reactor vessel 
ultrasonic crack-detecting device (A-UT machine)." When the 
robot is submerged in the cavity of a reactor vessel that is 
filled with cooling water, it automatically sticks to the wall 
of the reactor vessel and then crawls around until it finds a 
crack. This is the first time in the world that a water-swimming 
crack-detecting robot has been made practical. Using the new 
device shortens the inspection time by nine days, and the job 
can be done by seven or eight workers. 
  Crack-detecting devices in the past were produced as 
auxiliary parts of a nuclear reactor and had to be assembled and 
then disassembled for every inspection. They were elaborate 
contrivances, such as the probe boards that ascended and 
descended a main column inside the reactor vessel. Inspections 
took as long as 20 days and required 15 workers. 
  The new robot has a six-axis manipulator that extends from 
the turtle-shell-shaped main body. The manipulator is rotary 
driven in six places, so the probe at the end of the manipulator 
can reach anywhere in the reactor vessel. Information obtained 
from the probe is sent from the main body's UT (ultrasonic 
testing) signal oscillator through optical fiber to the 
ultrasonic crack detector then is processed by a data-gathering 
and analysis unit. 
  The robot uses a propeller-type thruster to move through the 
water. It advances along the reactor vessel wall like a 
four-wheel-steering (4WS), four-wheel-drive (4WD) car. The 
underside of the main body of the robot is furnished with a 
fastening plate to fix the machine to the surface of the vessel 
wall. 
  To determine the A-UT's position, "position ranging devices" 
affixed in three places around the reactor vessel emit argon 
laser beams and home in on the machine to measure its distance. 
The setup is such that the A-UT body "target" is always across 
from a position ranging device and reflects the laser light. 
  The robot weighs 300 kg, and the main body without the 
manipulator is 1.5 m&lt;sup&gt; 2&lt;/sup&gt;  in area. Although the price of 
the robot has not yet been announced, MHI says "100-million-yen 
units." Demand in Japan is expected to be limited to just a few 
robots, but in France and other countries there is big demand 
for automated inspection of mainly pressurized water reactors. 
Before selling the new robot MHI will make reliability 
improvements, etc., of the prototype that was completed in 1991. 

