BFN 

  [Text] Buenos Aires, 29 May (NA) -- The Defense Ministry's 
most immediate projects are the privatization of the San 
Francisco and Rio Tercero Military Factories and the Domingo 
Matheu Portable Weapons Factory; the liquidation of the company 
Tecnologia Aerospacial; and the franchising of airport auxiliary 
services. 
  The ministry headed by Oscar Camilion already has the 
feasibility study for the privatization of the company Aerea 
Material Cordoba, linked to airplane construction, which was 
produced by the Netherlands consulting firm ING Bank. 
  Also approved are the documents for the bidding and 
privatization of the San Francisco Military Factory in Cordoba 
Province. 
  The options for implementing this operation are two: selling 
the assets; or renting the installations for 10 years with a 
purchase option that includes the transfer of personnel. 
  According to the Economy Ministry's last report on 
privatizations, the Defense Ministry is analyzing the 
possibility of bidding the chemistry and metallurgical areas of 
the Rio Tercero Military Factory, and has already requested an 
evaluation of the installations' worth. 
  The privatization of the Domingo Matheu Portable Weapons 
Factory, through the sale of 75 percent of company shares, is 
ready. The factory has been transformed into a new shareholding 
company in order to implement the operation. 
  The proposal provides for the sale of another 20 percent of 
company shares in a second stage. Four percent of the shares 
will be used for the participating property program, and 1 
percent will remain in the hands of the state. 
  The Defense Ministry is also planning to liquidate the 
company Tecnologia Aeroespacial S.A., which is 99.96 percent 
state owned, as well as Sidinox, a company that is 50 percent 
owned by Acerinter S.A. 
  The ministry is also thinking of privatizing the Center for 
Mining and Geological Exploration and the Minister Manuel Garcia 
Shipyard. 
  The Defense Ministry has also proposed franchising the 
exploitation of the different units of the "Fanazul" Black 
Powder and Explosives Military Factory. Pending are measures 
for implementing the privatization of the companies Sisteval 
S.A., the Fray Luis Beltran Military Factory, the Villa Maria 
Explosives and Black Powder Military Factory, and Satecna S.A. 
  Finally, still pending is the project to deregulate airport 
auxiliary services -- customs clearing houses, ramp services, 
duty free shops -- in order to privatize them. 

