Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Irina Ivanovna Piskarevaya, head of </F>
department for organizing oversight of the public's food 
products, by V. Semenenko under the ``Visiting Card'' rubric: 
``Are They Storing Bananas in Morgues?''; first paragraph is 
boldface MOSKOVSKAYA PRAVDA introduction] 
  [Text] The long-awaited market has finally arrived, 
bringing abundance with it. At any hour of the day or even night 
one can acquire the most necessary products by using the 
services of stores operating around the clock and various 
delicacies since there are plenty of merchant's booths in 
Moscow. The prices, of course, do not gladden the popular 
consumer. But that is the subject for another conversation. 
Today's subject is the quality of the products we buy. And we 
are speaking with I. Piskarevaya, head of the department for 
organizing oversight of the public's food products of the Moscow 
Center for Sanitary-Epidemiological Monitoring. 
[Semenenko]Irina Ivanovna, please briefly outline the 
scope of your service's concerns. 
[Piskarevaya]We monitor the quality of the food 
products sold at Moscow's food industry enterprises, track 
merchant organizations' adherence to public health standards and 
rules and the quality of their products, and conduct analogous 
monitoring of public kitchen enterprises. 
  There are other problems of concern to us related to correct 
organization of feeding individual categories of the population 
organized into collectives such as students and workers in 
different occupations. In addition, matters of dietary and 
therapeutic nutrition as well as prevention of food poisoning 
and intestinal illnesses also fall within in our jurisdiction. 
[Semenenko]Considering the uncivilized nature of our 
market, let's begin with a topic that is of interest to every 
Moscow resident. Please tell us about the measures your service 
and the city authorities are taking to protect us against food 
poisoning. 
[Piskarevaya]Beginning this year, we have begun 
working in earnest on the problems of hygiene certification of 
products, guaranteeing both their safety and quality. To do this 
we take random samples of batches of incoming goods and perform 
laboratory tests on them. We issue a certificate on the basis of 
the test results. But two other commercial organizations created 
under the State Committee for Standards [Gosstandart] 
(Rost-Test-Moskva [Growth-Test-Moscow] and Soyeks) also issue 
so-called certificates that generally only certify the quality 
of products provided by foreign seller-firms. 
  Although, we have not, thank God, had any outbreaks of mass 
food poisonings, there are reasons to worry in connection with 
the absence of proper monitoring of the quality of incoming 
products. There are cases where we reject products that have 
certificates of compliance. The question of a single procedure 
for certifying products is now before the Moscow government, and 
we hope that it will be decided in favor of the consumer. 
[Semenenko]Such matters must of course be decided at 
the government level; however, the good Russian proverb ``Hope 
in God, but don't take a false step'' involuntarily comes to 
mind. So how about this? Is it possible to guard against 
unpleasant consequences by buying expensive imported goods in 
colorful packaging? 
[Semenenko]Quality is, alas, determined only by 
taste. And it is absolutely necessary to see the date of 
manufacture. Meat products, confections, canned goods, and 
packages in which juices, water, and beer are sold are generally 
marked with an expiration date. Sometimes they also have a date 
of manufacture so that one can get a rough idea of at least a 
product's degree of freshness. 
[Semenenko]Of course. But what do you advise in 
relation to alcoholic beverages? How safe is it to buy them in 
the nongovernment commercial network? Indeed, as is well known, 
they are a most popular product. 
[Piskarevaya]We recently raided merchant enterprises 
under all forms of ownership and in all administrative districts 
of the capital to take samples of wine and vodka products not 
manufactured in Moscow. The laboratory studies showed that 40 
percent of them do not meet State Standard [GOST] requirements. 
[Semenenko]What kinds of preventive punishment does 
your service use upon discovering a low-quality product, a 
product being sold after its expiration date, a storage 
condition violation, or a failure of merchant enterprises to 
adhere to public health rules? 
[Piskarevaya]We stop the sale of low-quality 
products, close the enterprises, and impose fines on managers 
and other accountable individuals who violate trade standards. 
In August alone, we issued 40 decrees halting the operation of 
small retail and commercial food facilities and more than 90 
decrees imposing fines totaling about 3.5 million rubles. 
[Semenenko]There is a certain clarity regarding 
preventing food poisonings. Now let us turn to intestinal 
infections, another extremely timely topic, especially in 
connection with the spread of cholera in Central Asia, from 
where we traditionally get outstanding fruits and vegetables. We 
know of cases of this disease in Moscow as well. 
[Piskarevaya]Our service monitors all the capital's 
markets. As far as the spontaneously developing trade in produce 
on the city's squares and streets is concerned, it is banned by 
decree of Moscow's Chief State Sanitary Inspector for the sake 
of citizens' safety. 
[Semenenko]But they still are still selling... 
[Piskarevaya]They are only selling because people are 
buying. And no city police forces would be sufficient to 
constantly drive these uncontrolled markets away. As soon as 
they arrive, the merchants scatter. After they [the police] 
leave, it is if they sprout up from under the ground. 
[Semenenko]Well, what is the answer? 
[Piskarevaya]There is only one answer: Take 
responsibility for one's own health. Do not risk buying products 
from the hands of a seller who does not have the appropriate 
medical documents granting him the right to sell. In addition, 
there is another danger lurking here. No one knows how these 
fruits and vegetables were grown, how much chemical fertilizer 
was put on them, and finally under what conditions they were 
stored and transported. 
[Semenenko]The problem of storage is also of great 
interest to our readers because it is directly linked to the 
quality and safety of food products. We know that previously all 
fruits and vegetables went to fruit-and-vegetable bases. But 
now? Not long ago I read a newspaper report about how it is 
known for a fact that bananas are being stored in morgues 
allegedly right alongside corpses. Please comment on this 
information. 
[Piskarevaya]The fruit-and-vegetable bases have been 
retained. Both government and private sector suppliers are now 
using them. Part of their produce proceeds via direct channels 
into the commercial network. As far as the monstrous details 
regarding bananas are concerned, we do not have any such 
information, although a check of the promulgated facts was 
conducted. I am inclined to think that it is all the fruit of 
someone's wild imagination if only because heat-loving bananas 
do not need below-zero storage temperatures. 
[Semenenko]Thank you. I think you have calmed many 
lovers of the exotic fruit. And now I will turn to yet another 
matter that is also directly linked to quality control of food 
products. What efforts are being made there? 
[Piskarevaya]There are 125 sanitary inspectors and 
about 200 of their assistants working in city and district 
epidemiology centers plus the directors of these departments. 
[Semenenko]Irina Ivanovna, you are fighting a losing 
battle. A little over 300 workers for our enormous city? But 
certainly it must be understood that most of them are women who 
are naturally simply afraid to cross the threshold of a merchant 
or storage organization, especially as uninvited guests? 
[Piskarevaya]This is a very serious problem that must 
be solved. The number of personnel must be increased in view of 
the development of the commercial network, and perhaps other 
forms of operation should be examined. Perhaps a public health 
police force should be created. 
[Semenenko]Thank you for talking to me. It is the 
tradition of this newspaper to publish phone numbers to call to 
receive additional information. 
[Piskarevaya]Our telephone number, 287-31-41, 
operates around the clock. 


