Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> ["Charter of `Greater Europe' Commission"] </F>
  [Text] 
<H5>  Concerning the Idea of a Greater Europe </H5>
  Europe is not simply a geographical concept. Europe embodies 
a distinctive cultural, socioeconomic, and political 
understanding of freedom and diversity, individuality, and 
tolerance. 
  The question of the expansion of Europe's borders has down 
the ages been solved variously, particularly as far as the 
eastern borders are concerned. In Russia the debate concerning 
relations with the West, with Europe, in other words, is an 
inalienable part of the search for national identity. 
  In the times of the cold war one of the most impenetrable 
borders in human history ran across Europe. The "Iron Curtain" 
separated Central and East Europe from the process of 
integration that had encompassed the western part of the 
continent and postponed for a long time, both in the West and in 
Russia itself, discussion of the question of a commitment to the 
European principles of liberty and democracy. 
  The idea of a Greater Europe was born of the desire and need 
to take advantage of the truly new opportunities that have been 
afforded since the end of the cold war. 
  The idea of a Greater Europe has nothing in common with 
so-called Westernization--the expansion of Western influence. 
The European affiliation to the Christian world incorporates the 
most diverse creeds, including that of the Orthodox Church. As 
far as national and linguistic affiliation are concerned, in 
this sense also Europe is distinguished by diversity, with the 
Slavic component being a principal integral part. European 
culture cannot be complete without Slavic culture. 
  Nor is the idea of a Greater Europe an alternative to the 
process of European unification, which was initiated by the 
historic decision on the rapprochement of France and Germany. 
  Shortly after World War II, thanks to the decisive position 
of the most farsighted politicians, the process of the building 
of a new Europe with the purpose of overcoming once for all the 
legacy of the past began. This was courageous opposition to the 
past. And it has been rewarded by the peace, freedom, and 
prosperity that have reigned in the past four decades and have 
shaped West Europe. 
  New approaches to European problems, which are comparable in 
terms of their critical nature and uniqueness with those 
proposed 40 years ago, are needed today. This is necessary so 
that citizens of the part of Europe that was separated off by 
the Berlin Wall might as a result of the gradual clearing away 
of the impedimenta of the cold war be introduced to a peaceful, 
free, and prosperous life. 
  Proceeding from what has been said above, the idea of a 
Greater Europe is proclaimed and four specific proposals are 
advanced: 
  preparation of a Grand Charter of Free People of Europe; 
  creation of a Greater European Market; 
  formation of a Great European Cultural Space; 
  preparation of an All-European Security Convention. 
  The concept of a Greater Europe is thus an essential organic 
supplement to the idea of the European Union. 
<H5>  Grand Charter of Free People of Europe </H5>
  For the population of East and Central Europe 1989 brought a 
general awakening and a change toward the civil society. Despite 
many difficulties and the fact that forward progress will vary, 
depending on the country, a general trend toward the formation 
of a civil society--a society whose citizens adopt an 
increasingly critical attitude toward the government and the 
authorities--may be discerned, nonetheless. 
  But simultaneously with the collapse of the totalitarian 
systems a new threat to freedom in the form of aggressive 
nationalism, racism, and religious fundamentalism has arisen. 
  Both these processes--the change toward the civil society on 
the one hand and the revival of nationalism and intolerance on 
the other--are challenges to the very idea of a Greater Europe. 
Coping with them is beyond the capacity of the current 
institutions of European cooperation alone. Too much has changed 
since the time they were formed. 
  This is why a Grand Charter of Free People of Europe is 
essential. This would be a grand charter legally enshrining the 
unique situation, which has taken shape for the first time in 
European history, where people are free on territory from 
Reykjavik to Vladivostok. 
  The Grand Charter, as the constitution of a Greater Europe, 
should concentrate on the provisions that are fundamental for 
the peaceful coexistence of free people of Europe and should, 
thus, contain: 
  a list of the main human rights in the civil society; 
  the recorded status of minorities; 
  recognition of the commitment to observe the law; 
  a declaration on the need for control of the authorities and 
the separation of the branches of power. 
<H5>  Greater European Market </H5>
  Peace and stability in Europe will depend on the general 
well-being of the peoples. Building this well-being on the basis 
of the exclusion from the European Community of the needy 
peoples means sowing tension and military antagonism in Europe. 
  For advantage to be taken of the fruits of liberty obtained 
as a result of the struggle against authoritarianism and 
totalitarianism the speediest spread of economic well-being and 
progress to the entire territory of Greater Europe is essential. 
  As in the case of the movement toward the creation of the 
European Community, so in the formation of a Greater European 
Market also it is essential to be guided by a pragmatic 
approach, progressing step by step toward the goal and starting 
in the fields where results may be obtained most quickly by 
virtue of the greatest interest in success of all parties. 
  As starting points for realization of the idea of a Greater 
European Market it is essential: 
  to create a common energy community of Greater Europe; 
  to approve the main directions and timeframe of the process 
of liberalization of trade within Greater Europe; 
  to formulate an agreement within the framework of Greater 
Europe on the extension of inter-nation cooperation in business 
and to ensure the security of investments. 
<H5>  Great European Cultural Space </H5>
  The immense diversity of cultures is the most pronounced 
singularity of Europe. But there is that which is common that 
imparts to this diversity features characteristic precisely of 
Europe--an aspiration to individualism and pluralism and the 
struggle for these values, which, given a favorable confluence 
of circumstances, has led to success. 
  Following many departures from this line throughout this 
century, Europe is today once again moving toward a revival of 
its cultural diversity. 
  Profoundly rooted in European culture is recognition of the 
fact that the state cannot do that much for its development. 
Nonetheless, governments should contribute to the creation of 
conditions wherein culture can flourish. 
  With the ideological confrontation having receded into the 
past, there can be no justification for an artificial division 
by culture of the states that are and are not members of the 
European Union. 
  The creation of a common European cultural space 
presupposing 
the free exchange of ideas and artistic works and stimulating 
support for all kinds of cultural activity will thus be a most 
noble goal of a Greater Europe. 
<H5>  All-European Security Convention </H5>
  At the end of the 20th century Europe has found itself faced 
with the most acute problems of survival in the demographic, 
political, economic, environmental, and cultural spheres. The 
European Union is being challenged on the part of Japan and the 
United States in technology, finance, and trade; on the part of 
the Near East, North Africa, and Central Asia, in the cultural, 
religious, and demographic spheres; China is rapidly gaining in 
importance as a new economic and military superpower; and the 
so-called Asian tigers are challenging Europe with new 
industrial commodities and technology. 
  In this situation it is particularly dangerous for Europe to 
appear in the eyes of the world community as a disconnected, 
disoriented continent which is in a state of stagnation. 
  A new dynamic vision of all-European interests and a new 
approach to the problem of European security not only within the 
framework of the European Community, NATO, or the Western 
European Union but within the framework of a Greater Europe also 
is essential. 
  In the event of the concept of a Greater Europe being 
embodied in practice, the adoption of an All-European Security 
Convention, which would include the United States and Canada, 
will be essential. 
  Its two main goals should be: 
  assurance of peace in Europe by way of the adoption of a 
joint security pact which would be signed by all the 
participants; 
  defense of common external interests of European security 
incorporating not only the military threat but also an entire 
set of challenges of a civilization nature threatening peace, 
social stability, and freedom in Europe. 
  This text of the charter is not final. It may be amended 
with 
regard to the observations which, as the members of the "Greater 
Europe" Commission hope, will be offered by those who join in 
the debate on the Charter. 
  [Signed] Jacques Chirac, mayor of Paris, leader of the Rally 
for the Republic; Anatoliy Chubays, deputy head of the 
government of the Russian Federation; Count Otto von Lambsdorff, 
chairman of the Liberal International, leader of the Free 
Democratic Party of Germany; Alois Mock, minister of foreign 
affairs of Austria; Galina Sidorova, policy adviser to the 
minister of foreign affairs of the Russian Federation; Urs 
Schoettli, vice president of the Liberal International; Andreas 
Kohl, chairman of the Foreign Policy Committee of the Austrian 
Parliament; Pierre Lellouche, speaker of the French National 
Assembly for defense; Yevgeniy Ambartsumov, member of the 
Presidential Council; Konstantin Borovoy, chairman of the 
Economic Freedom Party; Gennadiy Burbulis, leader of the 
Strategy Center; Erhard Busek, vice chancellor of Austria; 
Wilfred Martens, chairman of the European People's Party, former 
prime minister of Belgium; Masud Ilmas, member of the Turkish 
Parliament; Sergey Karaganov, deputy director of the Russian 
Academy of Sciences Europe Institute, member of the Presidential 
Council; Herbert Kraus, former member of the Austrian 
Parliament; Sir Geoffrey Pattie, member of the British 
Parliament, deputy chairman of the Conservative Party, former 
minister of defense; Anatoliy Sobchak, mayor of St Petersburg; 
Ilka Suominen, chairman of the CSCE Parliamentary Assembly, 
chairman of the Finnish Parliament; Vitaliy Tretyakov, chief 
editor of NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA; Steingrimur Hermansson, member of 
parliament, chairman of the Progressive Party, former prime 
minister of Iceland; Willem van Eekelen, general secretary of 
the Western European Union; Gleb Yakunin, deputy of the State 
Duma. 

