Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Cape Town March 3 SAPA -- The Freedom Alliance [FA] 
would make a decision on registering for the elections once 
there was a clear response to its proposal for international 
mediation, its leaders decided in Cape Town on Thursday [3 
March]. At a meeting in a Constantia hotel it was decided to 
appoint a committee to investigate all the ramifications of 
mediation action. 
  The decision to go ahead would rest with the Inkatha Freedom 
Party's [IFP] Central Committee on Friday, which must consider 
IFP leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi's offer of provisional 
registration for the election. 
  The leaders of the Freedom Alliance, Mr Buthelezi, President 
Lucas Mangope of Bophuthatswana, Dr. Ferdi Hartzenberg of the 
Conservative Party and Gen Constand Viljoen of the Afrikaner 
Volksfront [National Front] met at the cellars in Constantia and 
started their deliberations shortly after 10:30AM on Thursday. 
  After almost three hours of talks the Bophuthatswana Foreign 
Minister Rowan Cronje made a brief statement on their behalf. 
  He said in view of the present state of affairs the alliance 
members had endorsed Mr Buthelezi's initiative to break the 
deadlock -- his call for international mediation. "It would be 
presumptuous of us to say who should be called to mediate." He 
said that would still have to be decided. "We are waiting for a 
response of Mr Nelson Mandela to the proposal put by Chief 
Buthelezi." 
  Only then could the framework and agreement to the terms of 
mediation be determined. "Time is important. It is important 
for both mediation, which can take place very speedily, and for 
registration." 
  Mr Buthelezi was asked whether he believed mediation could 
take place and registration effected in time for the elections. 
"That is not determined by myself, it doesn't depend on me. If 
the (IFP) Central Committee decides to register then it means 
that it is accepted in principle." 
  He stressed that he personally had not decided to register 
but had suggested mediation in that regard, a proposal which 
would be put to the IFP Central Committee. 
  For this purpose he had moved forward Saturday's Central 
Committee meeting by one day. In that way he could not be 
accused of meaningless gestures as the deadline for registration 
is on Friday midnight. 
  Dr. Hartzenberg also confirmed the alliance's stand. "The 
whole matter of registration is connected to mediation," he 
said. He would not speculate on the hypothetical ANC agreement 
to the mediation proposal. 
  Asked about possible dissension within CP ranks regarding 
participation or non-participation in the elections, he said it 
had been thoroughly discussed and a decision had been taken. 
  The alliance leaders were concerned about what Mr Cronje 
called the unilateral suspension of negotiations by the 
government. "Does it mean they don't want us in the election?" 
Mr Buthelezi asked. "We would like an inclusive settlement 
before the elections." 

