BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Foreign Minister Dr. Husayn Abu-Salih by </F>
unidentified correspondent in Tunis; date not given] 
  [Text] [AL-HAYAH] Do you expect any progress in achieving 
a peaceful solution to the southern Sudan problem? 
  [Abu-Salih] The conflict in the south would not have 
continued had it not been for the aid the rebel movement is 
receiving. It could not have gone on fighting all this time had 
it not been for foreign aid and support in terms of armament, 
training, and food. 
  In the days of (former Ethiopian President) Mengistu Haile 
Mariam it used to obtain the aid from Eastern Europe and the 
Soviet bloc, which set up camps for it. The movement was 
expected to weaken and disappear following Mengistu's collapse, 
but the rebellion continued as a result of the change in the 
movement's and its supporters' direction. 
  This issue and the accusations raised about it reflect a lot 
of bias and distortion of the real picture of what is happening 
in Sudan. 
  I believe that the issue was tackled in various periods in 
accordance with the wish of Sudan -- people, government, and 
public organizations -- since 1985 to secure a peaceful and 
rational solution to the problem through dialogue. 
  But due to the rebel movement's adherence to its position 
and 
the support it received from some forces, it is still an 
obstacle to a peaceful solution -- which has caused us to hold a 
gun in one hand and an olive branch in the other. The Armed 
Forces should play their role not in order to impose a military 
solution, but to curb and weaken the movement so that it will 
submit and come to the negotiating table. 
  At one point there was bias with regard to Sudan because of 
inaccurate information, like describing what is happening as a 
war launched by the Arab north against non-Arab southerners, or 
by Muslims against Christians, or as forcible Islamization of 
southern Sudan. All these accusations are absolutely untrue. 
We organized a conference which irrefutably proved that the 
problem is political. It analyzed its roots and drew up a 
solution to it. 
  The issue is to produce an equation that achieves fair 
power-sharing so that no party, group, or entity will be 
deprived of political participation. Power can be shared 
through decentralization and a federal system, namely by 
dividing the country into small units to achieve real 
distribution of power and the various natural resources and thus 
move toward balanced development. 
  In this way religion can have a place and people can live 
equally without the majority imposing their view on the 
minority. This is why we agreed on the need to describe Sudan as 
a miniature Africa. It is characterized by diversity and 
unified history at the same time. This is why we decided not to 
focus on using phrases, but instead, define what we want, namely 
a multiethnic, multicultural, multireligious, and multilingual 
Sudan. Identity should be "Sudanese." Citizenship be based on 
participation. These ideas can form the foundation of a just 
peaceful solution. But the reason behind this intransigence is 
that the movement is a hostage of foreign forces that do not 
want these principles to be complied with. 
  [AL-HAYAH] From where does Colonel John Garang's movement 
get the foreign aid? 
  [Abu-Salih] The aid comes through the Sudanese-Ugandan 
border, and the arms are smuggled through a small strip a few 
kilometers wide. Contacts are being made with the Ugandan 
Government so that the two parties will undertake not to harm 
one another or provide facilities to smuggle arms across the 
border. Such commitment shortens the road to peace. 
  [AL-HAYAH] What did the U.S. envoy convey to the Sudanese 
Government, and what was the aim of her recent visit to Khartoum? 
  [Abu-Salih] We note that the West in general was biased with 
regard to Sudan, although the present Sudanese Government has 
never said anything about boycotting or being hostile toward the 
West or sought such a thing. Its view has been that there 
should be cooperation with the West, especially in the spheres 
of development, science, technology, and other sectors. 
However, what we reject is that there should be a kind of 
superiority, domination, and interference in Sudan's internal 
affairs. The West did at one point adopt tough positions on the 
basis of erroneous information about Sudan. Perhaps that 
encouraged the rejection of dialogue with the Sudanese 
Government or encouraged working to topple it. 
  [AL-HAYAH] Who conveyed the wrong picture about Sudan? 
  [Abu-Salih] First, Britain did a great deal to spread 
erroneous ideas and false rumors to distort Sudan's image; it 
conveyed to the United States untrue pictures of the situation 
in the country. This is why the dialogue with the Americans is 
aimed at conveying a real picture about Sudan with regard to its 
willingness to cooperate with other countries. 
  [AL-HAYAH] When did the dialogue begin? 
  [Abu-Salih] The dialogue stage began after the visit by 
Madeleine Albright, U.S. permanent representative to the United 
Nations, to Khartoum this year. It means that there is 
willingness to listen and there are attentive ears. The mere 
fact of engaging in a serious dialogue makes us optimistic about 
the possibility of reaching a model for cooperation with a major 
state like the United States. 
  [AL-HAYAH] Do you expect this understanding to influence 
Sudan's position on the Middle East peace process? 
  [Abu-Salih] The United States and the West exerted pressures 
on Sudan because of its position on the peace process. They 
thought we were going to lead Arab and Islamic opposition and 
all the parties opposed to the process, which is why we were put 
on the terrorism list. 
  But Ambassador Albright came out with a good impression 
regarding this question after its recent visit to Sudan. She 
pointed to her belief that Sudan shelters and sponsors 
terrorists, but we explained to her that these accusations are 
absolutely untrue. And we stressed the need for further talks, 
contacts, and visits. 
  The Sudanese people are very remote from terrorism, in terms 
of their nature and behavior. They refuse to harm others. The 
Americans had thought that there were camps in Sudan to train 
foreigners and send them to some states to undermine stability 
there, but the camps in the country are only used to train 
Popular Defense men who support the the Sudanese Army in its 
task in the south. We challenge anyone to prove that a single 
foreigner has been trained in Sudan; ON the contrary, we are 
harmed by others' interference in our affairs. 
  [AL-HAYAH] Perhaps your special relationship with Iran 
provoked these accusations. 
  [Abu-Salih] The United States and other Western states talk 
about Sudan as though it is controlled by Iran or is a base for 
Iran in the region. Our relations with Iran are like our 
relations with any Western state. There is nothing more between 
us and it. In fact maybe the level of our relations with Iran is 
lower than the level of our relations with some Western states. 
Ambassador Albright's visit came to clarify this matter, 
especially as it coincided with our appeal to some neighboring 
states like Kenya, Uganda, and Ethiopia to sponsor the peace 
process in the south. 
  We are in the process of preparing a document regarding 
participation in power and dialogue so as to ensure the success 
of the process. We have also asked the Americans to offer us 
technical assistance regarding the federal system so as to 
provide us with a plan that would help us to achieve the formula 
we are seeking for Sudan, namely a multiethnic, multilingual, 
and multireligious Sudan, provided the identity is "Sudanese." 

