BFN 

<F P=106> [By Lilian Wu] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, April 2 (CNA) -- Some operations of 
government agencies may be enlarged or cut under a revision of a 
statute covering the organization of the Executive Yuan, the 
Research, Development and Evaluation Commission (RDEC) of the 
Executive Yuan said Saturday [2 April]. 
  According to the RDEC, an immigration and a firefighter 
administration may be added to the Ministry of Interior, while 
social affairs, which are now managed by the Social Department 
under the Ministry of Interior, may be turned over to a newly 
created ministry. 
  The RDEC also said aborigines affairs, which are now part of 
Ministry of Interior operations, may be turned over to the 
Tibetan and Mongolian Affairs Commission, which will be enlarged 
to include minority affairs. 
  RDEC officials said that some environmentalists have 
suggested that wildlife conservation operations be turned over 
to the Environmental Protection Administration (EPA), but added 
that the Executive Yuan would have to carefully evaluate such a 
switch before a final decision is made because of complicated 
underlying issues. 
  Whether the Executive Yuan's Council for Cultural Planning 
and Development will be upgraded to become a Cultural Ministry 
has not been finalized, the officials said. Many legislators 
have appealed for such a change to put more emphasis on cultural 
development in Taiwan, which has been called an island of greed 
after its rapid economic development. 
  Regardless of whether it is upgraded to a ministry, the 
council will now be the chief agency responsible for the 
protection of copyrights and the maintenance and restoration of 
cultural relics, RDEC officials added. 
  The officials said that they are also studying whether the 
council should take charge of motion picture and television 
affairs, which are currently under the management of the 
government information office. 
  Each government agency has submitted proposals and 
suggestions concerning what adjustments should be made to their 
agencies, they said, and added that they are studying ways to 
curtail overlapping operations of the agencies. 
  The RDEC will submit its findings to a task force 
considering 
the Executive Yuan's reorganization. 

