CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sergio Levit: "The PJ Devises a Chamber of </F>
Deputies Strategy To Safeguard Olivos Pact"] 
  [Text] No risk: To prevent the pact from failing, the 
ruling party is reportedly promoting a reform of the Lower 
Chamber's procedures. 
  The Justicialist Party (PJ) is reportedly backing a 
modification of the Chamber of Deputies' procedures in order to 
prevent the Olivos Pact from running the risk of failing during 
the Constituent Convention due to a procedural matter, one 
highly placed source in the Chamber has admitted. 
  "We have the strong impression that the party in power will 
try to change Chamber procedures, which means modifying the 
rules of play for the Convention," LA NACION was told by Raul 
Galvan, president of the UCR [Radical Civic Union] bloc of 
deputies. 
  The first step in that direction was the appointment of 
prominent deputies to the Commission on Petitions, Powers, and 
Bylaws of the Lower Chamber, a parliamentary body traditionally 
enjoying little importance. 
  The convention will be governed by Chamber of Deputies 
bylaws, whose Article 176 states textually that: "All voting 
will be done on a single, specific article, proposal, or term, 
but when any of the latter contain several ideas that may be 
separated, the parts may be voted on separately if so requested 
by any deputy." 
  In other words, any delegate to the Constituent Convention 
could ask that the core of basic agreements be voted on 
separately. If the motion garners enough votes, reelection of 
the president, creation of the post of head of the Cabinet, 
direct election of the intendant of Buenos Aires, and 
standardization of the terms of the Executive and Legislative 
branches would have to be considered one by one. 
  Although this would at first glance appear to present no 
difficulty for the government, one has but to recall that Alvaro 
Alsogaray, the leading candidate for the Constituent Convention 
for the rightist alliance from Buenos Aires, has stated 
repeatedly that he opposes the pact "because it implies a 
modification which conceals a desire for reelection. It would 
have been better if the statement of the need for reform 
contained a single article allowing reelection," he explained 
during the Chamber's debate. 
  This example, which is apparently valid in terms of the 
governing party's intentions, could endanger the survival of the 
pact since everything would be debated with an unpredictable 
outcome. "Fear did in fact exist with respect to what the 
Constituent Convention might decide, for which reason it was 
explicitly stated that voting would be done on the package of 
measures," one deputy from the ruling party admitted. 
  However, Galvan places more emphasis on a proposal gathering 
dust in the Commission, one that sets time limits on the 
statements of lawmakers, which could open the door "to other 
modifications." 
<H5>  Commission </H5>
  Any amendment to Chamber procedures must be considered by 
the 
Commission on Petitions, Powers, and Bylaws that was appointed 
yesterday. 
  The Commission is chaired by Radical Mario Negri and 
includes, among other PJ members, Humberto Romero, Horacio 
Macedo, Marcelo Lopez Arias, Alberto Balestrini, Damaso 
Larraburu, Eduardo Varela Cid, Osvaldo Borda, and Miguel 
D'Alessandro. The UCD [Democratic Center Union] is represented 
by Francisco de Duranona y Vedla, the Salta Renewal Party by 
Jorge Folloni, and, in addition to Negri, the Radicals include 
Leopoldo Moreau, Antonio Hernandez, Sergio Montiel, and Rene 
Balestra, among others. 
  The UCR's concern over any modification of the bylaws has 
prompted the scheduling next week of a meeting of its deputies 
sitting on the Commission. The meeting could result in clashes 
because while Moreau is a staunch defender of the pact, Montiel 
detests the Menem-Alfonsin accord. 
  The alleged intention of the defenders of the accord, led by 
the government, is to ward off any possible risk of witnessing 
the failure of an agreement put together with such zeal. 

