BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by James Adams: "The Red Death"; Subtitled "The </F>
Untold Story of Russia's Secret Biological Weapons"; described 
as "Exclusive extract from The New Spies, his forthcoming book"] 
  [Text] Vladimir Pasechnik was born in 1937 in Stalingrad, a 
city soon to be ravaged by the World War II. He became one of 
the brightest young scientists in the Soviet Union, determined 
to use his talent in the cause of peace, never allowing his 
research in biophysics to play any part in the kind of 
destruction that had cost the lives of his family. 
  After graduation, he did research at the Institute of High 
Molecular Compounds in Leningrad, working on new antibiotics and 
treatments for supposedly incurable illnesses such as cancer. 
  In 1974 he was approached by a general from the Soviet 
Ministry of Defence with an irresistible offer: to set up and 
run a laboratory in Leningrad, with an unlimited budget to buy 
equipment in the West and recruit the best staff from all over 
the Soviet Union. It would be known as the Institute of Ultra 
Pure Biochemical Preparations. 
  For Pasechnik it was an opportunity to realise many of his 
most cherished ambitions in the fight against illness. His 
early research was promising; he felt he could produce a cure to 
some forms of cancer. Until then he had thought he would never 
have the resources to complete his work. Now he was being given 
the chance to develop one of the Soviet Union's most advanced 
laboratories in biotechnology. He accepted. 
  The fact that the offer came from the Ministry of Defence 
did 
not worry him unduly. In the Soviet Union, the military was the 
engine of most scientific research; it had the cash and the 
people to run it. Even if a scientific project had a strictly 
civilian application, the military was still in charge. It was 
the Soviet way. 
  From 1974 to 1981, Pasechnik built up his special 
laboratory, 
scouring the country until he had 400 people on his staff, a 
lavish budget and enough hard currency to give his scientists 
constant access to the latest biotechnological advances in the 
West. The laboratory began its work in 1981. Over the next two 
years Pasechnik realised the truth: far from being the heart of 
a new civilian research operation, he was at the centre of a 
vast network of factories and laboratories working on deadly new 
weapons of war. 
  "Officially we were involved in vaccine development and in 
producing preparations for protecting crops," said Pasechnik. 
"In fact, we were developing methods of production and 
equipment for a huge biological warfare programme." 
  To begin with, Pasechnik had little idea of the scale of the 
operation. Only later did he discover that, as well as his 
laboratory in Leningrad, there were two more in Moscow, two just 
outside it and one in Novosibirsk, all working on the same 
project. Five manufacturing plants employing 15,000 people were 
operating in other parts of the country. The operation, known 
as Biopreparat, had a budget of 200m roubles and tens of 
millions of American dollars a year. It was one of the best 
kept secrets of the cold war. 
  Its task was to develop new strains of diseases, more 
powerful than anything known to science and to produce them in 
aerosol form. The germ also had to be resistant to antibiotics 
available to the NATO armies of the West. The specific job 
allocated to Pasechnik's laboratory staff was to make them 
effective weapons of war: They had to find ways of delivering 
the germs by artillery shell, bomb or missile, to ensure that 
they had a long life in the open air and that they could be 
dispersed over a wide area. 
  The breakthrough came in 1983 at the research institute of 
applied microbiology at Obolensk, 60 miles south of Moscow. 
There, with the help of work done at Pasechnik's laboratory, 
scientists developed their first super-plague: a new strain of 
tularaemia. A severe infectious bacterial disease of man and 
domestic animals, carried by contact or insect bite, it is named 
after Tulare, California, where it was discovered. The tests on 
it were sufficiently encouraging for Moscow to give permission 
for full-scale development and production. 
  Two years later, the scientists at Obolensk were asked to 
develop an even more deadly germ based on pneumonic plague, 
another airborne infection. Pasechnik's job was to refine the 
production processes to make the operation more efficient. As a 
result, by 1987 the Soviet Union had sufficient industrial 
capacity to manufacture 200 kilos of the super-plagues every 
week, enough to kill up to 500,000 people. 
  The super-plague germ was, of course, never manufactured on 
this scale. The germ had a short life and only enough was made 
for testing. But the Biopreparat network stood on standby, 
ready to begin fullscale production when instructed, at a time 
in the future that was designated Day X. 
  Here then was a programme for producing the most devastating 
genetically engineered weapons ever seen, just waiting to be 
given the go-ahead. Tiny quantities of the Russian super-plague 
could devastate any city in the West, killing millions while 
leaving buildings, factories and raw materials intact. They 
would be the perfect designer weapon. 
  At the Soviet defence ministry, high-ranking generals were 
fully aware of this biological capability and built it into 
their military planning. Known as the Weapons of Special 
Designation, they would be used not only as a last resort but as 
support weapons in a conventional non-nuclear conflict, to 
attack the enemy's troop reserves and hamper his operations at 
ports and rail centres. 
  Every part of this programme was in breach of the 1972 
Biological and Toxin Warfare Convention, an international 
agreement which the Soviet Union had signed. It was also 
against the spirit of glasnost and perestroika that had been 
proclaimed by Mikhail Gorbachev. 
  For Pasechnik, the Gorbachev era was a chance to try to 
change the direction of the programme at his laboratory. In 
late 1985 he pressured senior officials in Biopreparat to let 
him switch some of his research effort to the civilian purposes 
for which it had ostensibly been established. He got nowhere. 
  "I was told many times just to get on with my work and stay 
in my place," he said. Pasechnik did just that. By 1988, he 
had risen to a rank equivalent to that of major-general and was 
in charge of two manufacturing plants and three research 
laboratories. Two of these were working on biological weapons; 
the third was given to him to placate his desire to do civil 
work -- and also as a cover for the biological warfare research. 
  But Pasechnik was increasingly uneasy. He had no idea that 
his work was in breach of the 1972 treaty; he did not know such 
a treaty existed. But he felt that the weapons he was helping 
to develop were an abuse of his scientific skills -- and 
demonstrated hypocrisy in the Russian military command about the 
Gorbachev revolution. Above all, he felt passionately that 
genetically engineered biological weapons were a crime against 
humanity. 
  In late 1988, he began to think about defecting. Despite his 
long and illustrious scientific career, Pasechnik had never been 
allowed to travel outside the Soviet bloc. Then, in the summer 
of 1989, Biopreparat began negotiations with a factory in 
Toulouse, France, which manufactures equipment for chemical 
laboratories. Pasechnik volunteered to go to finalise the deal. 
As a reward for his overall performance, permission was granted. 
  He arrived in France at the beginning of October. He had 
thought carefully about how to escape the KGB watchers who 
travelled with his group. One morning he telephoned the British 
embassy in Paris and in a brief conversation with a surprised 
diplomat announced himself, his position and his wish to defect. 
  The news of his offer reached the Secret Intelligence 
Service 
(SIS, otherwise known as MI6) in London at a critical time. For 
the previous five years, SIS, the American CIA and a number of 
Nato military intelligence organisations had been trying to 
piece together the snippets of information they had about the 
Soviet biological warfare programme. 
  In May 1979, American intelligence had heard reports of an 
explosion at a secret Soviet research facility on the outskirts 
of Sverdlovsk, 850 miles east of Moscow. A leak of anthrax had 
killed up to a hundred people; an area three miles downwind of 
the factory had been contaminated. The Russians had tried to 
contain the damage with a widespread immunisation programme but 
it had proved largely useless. 
  Throughout the 1980's, the leak had been raised by both 
British and American officials with their Soviet counterparts. 
But the official line remained the same: that a handful of 
people had died in the city after eating contaminated meat 
bought on the black market. There was no biological weapons 
programme. 
  Snippets of information from sources in the Soviet Union 
suggested otherwise. Satellite pictures showed plants and 
testing sites apparently configured for the manufacture of 
biological weapons. The DIA (the Defence Intelligence Agency, 
the Pentagon's spies) estimated that the Russians had up to 
eight sites for developing and storing biological weapons. SIS 
largely concurred with that view, and a series of reports were 
circulated to intelligence chiefs and British ministers, warning 
that the Soviet biological programme had not slowed down as a 
result of the Gorbachev reforms. 
  As frequently happens when intelligence is fragmentary, the 
politicians refused to hear the message. At the time, all 
Western governments had been seduced by Gorbachev's reforms. 
The cold war was thawing and no prime minister or president was 
prepared to risk a confrontation with the Soviet Union that 
might change the delicate balance of international relations. 
At the same time, there was a sense that Gorbachev was an 
honourable man who would not allow anything as terrible as 
biological weapons to be developed while he was president. The 
intelligence warnings were ignored. 
  When the SIS station chief in Paris flashed the message to 
London about the would-be defector in Toulouse, it caused 
considerable excitement. At last, here was proof that would 
satisfy even the most sceptical politician. Pasechnik was 
driven to Paris and caught a British Airways flight to Heathrow, 
travelling on false papers supplied by British intelligence. 
  As his feet touched British soil, Pasechnik burst into 
tears. 
The decision to leave his country and his family had placed a 
terrible strain on the defector. He had convinced himself that 
the work he had been doing was so terrible that he would 
probably face serious charges and perhaps prison in the West. 
It is a measure of his courage that, despite his fears, he 
stepped off the plane ready to tell all. As soon as he was 
settled in a safe house outside London he was reassured that he 
had found a new home and not a prison cell. 
  There was the normal nervousness in SIS about any defector: 
was he a plant? All the indications were that he was bona fide. 
He did not know how to drive, a clear sign that he was a member 
of the privileged elite in the Soviet Union; the distress he 
showed when he recounted the work he was doing was impossible to 
fake; then there was his love of Mozart sonatas, which he would 
listen to in the evenings after yet another dinner with his 
guardians. The SIS debriefers were quickly reassured. 
  He brought with him a wealth of new information. "It was 
stunning," said one of the debriefers. "A whole ministry 
exposed, billions of roubles spent, a complete organisation 
shown to be a front; then there was the clear involvement of 
Gorbachev, this friend of the West. It just went on and on." 
  To cope with all the information Pasechnik produced, SIS, 
the 
Ministry of Defence and other government departments set up a 
special task force of scientists, intelligence officers and 
analysts to assess the intelligence and put it into a wider 
context. 
  It was painstaking work, but very fruitful. As he described 
his entire life, education and work, the taskforce understood 
for the first time the real relationship between the Academy of 
Sciences, previously considered a purely civilian body, and the 
Soviet military. 
  As is usual in such cases, the intelligence gleaned from 
Pasechnik was shared with the CIA; on both sides of the Atlantic 
the mosaic of Russia's biological weapons programme was 
gradually filled in. As the picture cleared, so both the CIA 
and SIS began to brief their respective political masters. For 
the first time, the politicians were given unambiguous reports, 
clearly prepared on the basis of information from a 
highly-placed defector. To underline the seriousness of the 
problem, Pasechnik was brought out to brief senior officials on 
both sides of the Atlantic. 
  The evidence was so compelling that even the politicians who 
had no wish to confront Gorbachev were left with no choice. In 
April 1990, the British and American governments jointly 
confronted the Soviet Union with the evidence and spelled out in 
detail what they knew. There was no reaction. 
  Then, in June 1990, President George Bush and Margaret 
Thatcher met separately with Gorbachev. Both raised the 
question of biological weapons; Gorbachev denied all knowledge. 
Thatcher, who believed she had a specially-close relationship 
with the Soviet leader, told him that unless the programme was 
stopped, the West would go public. Gorbachev promised that he 
would look into the matter. 
  Two months later, the Soviet foreign minister, Eduard 
Shevardnadze, sent a formal reply, rebutting the charges. By 
this time, both the CIA and SIS had produced an even more 
exhaustive briefing for Bush and Thatcher. Having succeeded in 
forcing action at the highest levels after so many years of 
frustration, the intelligence community was determined to press 
its case until the Russians confessed. 
  In December 1990, the Russians issued an invitation to 
Washington and London to visit four of the sites that had been 
named. A joint Anglo-American delegation was dispatched. 
  If the trip was intended to be reassuring, it had the 
opposite effect. In Obolensk the British discovered a chamber 
for testing biological weapons suspended in an aerosol. The 
steel room which was 50 feet square, had posts on the floor to 
which animals could be tied while vents in the ceiling allowed 
poisons to be sprayed into the room. 
  The team also discovered a chamber used to test delivery 
systems for biological weapons. At another site, there was row 
after row of fermenters used to mass produce hundreds of kilos 
of biological weapons -- a chilling confirmation of everything 
Pasechnik had revealed. 
  Nevertheless, the Russians continued their denials. In 
September 1991, a month after the attempted coup, John Major, 
the new British prime minister, met Gorbachev in the Kremlin. 
Publicly the two-hour meeting was confined to economic issues, 
but Major confronted him with the evidence of the secret weapons 
programme. 
  Again Gorbachev denied everything and moved the normally 
unflappable Major to wave an angry finger in the face of the 
Russian leader. "We've got the goods on you," he shouted. 
  As the intelligence community continued adding to the file, 
the confrontations with Moscow continued through the fall of 
Gorbachev and the rise to power of Boris Yeltsin. On February 
1, 1992, Bush and Yeltsin met for their first summit. In 
advance of the meeting at Camp David, American diplomats made 
clear that the biological weapons programme was a major 
stumbling block between the two allies and a gesture by Yeltsin 
in this area would be seen as a sign of a new era in 
U.S.-Russian relations. This time Yeltsin came prepared. He 
admitted, for the first time, that there had indeed been a 
secret programme and that he had ordered it to be shut down. 
  But it was not for another month that Yeltsin was told by 
his 
own officials of the full extent of the programme. In March, 
the Russian military finally came clean: they had secretly 
developed bombs and missiles capable of carrying the 
super-plagues in defiance of international agreements. Yeltsin 
signed a formal decree cancelling the programme. 
  But the disinformation did not stop there, as prominent 
Russian officials involved in the Biopreparat programme set 
about trying to minimise the work they had been involved in. It 
was a campaign filled with the kind of lies and evasions that 
were supposed to have vanished in the new era of democracy in 
Russia. 
  For example, General Valentin Yevstigneyev assured the 
newspaper NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA: "There were not as many people 
involved as it might seem." He maintained that the work of the 
various laboratories was essentially for civilian purposes. He 
also tried to diminish the role of Pasechnik. 
  Reactions like these contributed to growing scepticism in 
both London and Washington that Yeltsin's order to dismantle the 
Biopreparat project was being carried out. Although the main 
testing site was reported to have been shut down, those 
monitoring the project were hardly reassured when it was 
announced that the man put in charge of the dismantling of 
Biopreparat would be General Anatoliy Kuntsevich, the architect 
of the Soviet Union's chemical weapons programme. His 
appointment was seen as a sop to the hardliners in the military. 
  One senior Western intelligence official said: "Here was 
this man who had done nothing but lie to us for years on 
chemical weapons, and now suddenly we are supposed to accept 
that he is willingly going to set about destroying his life's 
work. We could hardly be expected to take Yeltsin's promises at 
face value." 

