Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Abdallah Oul Mohamedi: "Bloody Tribal Clashes </F>
Over Results of Mauritanian Municipal Elections"] 
  [Text] Nouakchott -- One person was killed and a number of 
others were wounded in bloody clashes between members of two 
tribes in the town of el 'Ayoun in eastern Mauritania because of 
a dispute over the results of the municipal elections. 
  According to travelers from the area, the clashes between 
the 
tribes spread throughout the entire town and the neighboring 
villages, necessitating the intervention of police units in the 
area to separate the combatants. Army reinforcements were also 
summoned to the area. Despite the scarcity of reports from the 
town yesterday morning, informed sources have told AL-SHARQ 
AL-AWSAT that tribal leaders are threatening to take the battles 
to other areas. 
  According to the same sources, the clashes throughout the 
town broke out after the announcement of the results of the 
election of the chairman and deputy chairman of the town's 
Municipal Council. Two tribes competed for control of these 
posts. They are the Awlad el Nasir tribe, which supports the 
ruling party, and the el Aghlal tribe, which supports one of the 
opposition parties. The clashes began as soon as it was 
announced that the candidates of the ruling party had won. 
  Some Mauritanian officials accuse the authorities of 
encouraging tribal rivalry in the area by having the ruling 
party present a list of candidates controlled by a single tribe. 
That made the opposition play the same game by putting up a 
list of rival candidates also from a single tribe. The conflict 
in the area also assumed a religious dimension when a young man 
from a family that traditionally inherited religious leadership 
of the Hamawi sect appeared as a candidate on the opposition's 
list. According to a Mauritanian reporter who has been watching 
the situation there, "yesterday's events threaten a relentless 
war." 

