Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Ismail Kassim] </F>
  [Text] Kuala Lumpur -- Prime Minister Datuk Sri Dr. 
Mahathir Mohamed yesterday declared that he would do everything 
possible to preserve the unity of the six-member ASEAN grouping. 
  He said that ASEAN, which groups Brunei, Indonesia, 
Malaysia, 
the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand, was central to the 
future of the region. 
  "Indeed, I confess, without any sense of guilt, that I will 
fight every impulse, contain every force, and confront any 
danger that will damage or destroy the ASEAN family," he said. 
  "For this, I make no apology. I express no reservation." 
  His unequivocal endorsement of ASEAN came in his opening 
address to the 10th Pacific Economic Co-operation Council (PECC) 
meeting in which he tried to place the grouping in the context 
of other regional associations. 
  Diplomats here said that his remarks underlined Malaysia's 
concern that the future development of the Asia Pacific Economic 
Co-operation forum (APEC) might drive a wedge through ASEAN. 
  Of all ASEAN members, Malaysia has the greatest reservation 
over APEC, arguing strongly that it should not be 
institutionalised. 
  In his speech, Dr. Mahathir urged the ASEAN community to 
open 
itself further so that its members could all become stronger, 
more competitive, and prosperous. 
  At a press conference later, he expressed optimism that the 
ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA) could become a reality sooner than 
the 15-year deadline set at its first summit in Singapore. 
  "I am confident that the AFTA will not only lower the 
internal barriers but also the barriers to outside economies," 
he said. 
  Dr. Mahathir also called for the establishment of an 
egalitarian Pacific community in his keynote address. 
  "We cannot accept a Pax Sinica; we cannot accept a Pax 
Nipponica; we cannot accept a Pax Americana," he said. 
  "Instead, we believe in the establishment of a Pax Pacifica, 
a pax without an imperium, without a protector, and without an 
overlord." 
  But he also said that the Pacific community should be 
committed to open regionalism, adding that the best option was 
global free trade. 
  "Can we not all agree that global free trade, like democracy 
-- with all its inherent imperfections -- is by far the best 
option, ensuring the greatest good for the greatest number?" he 
asked. 
  "Given that trade blocs are not going to go away and may 
even 
proliferate, it surely requires statesmanship of the highest 
calibre to ensure they will be as open as possible to 
non-members and that they will contribute positively to global 
liberalism rather than global protectionism," he added. 

