CSO 

<F P=106> [Summary of report from Business Desk: "Economic Barometer </F>
At a Standstill"] 
  [Text] 
  Estonia's Institute of Economic Projections [EKI] 
conducted several surveys in March to find out how entrepreneurs 
in industry, construction and trade rate the economic conditions 
within their sector and within their company. They were also 
asked to give their projections for the upcoming quarter. 
<H5>  Industry's First Quarter Was Not Successful </H5>
  One hundred and seventy four companies responded to EKI's 
industrial barometer. It revealed that the beginning of this 
year was not as successful for Estonia's industry as was the 
fourth quarter of last year. The volume of production had to be 
reduced by 28 percent of the companies responding to the survey 
(by 21 percent during the previous quarter); it was increased by 
27 percent (46 percent), and stayed at the same level for 45 
percent (33 percent) of the companies. 
  The biggest setback occurred in the building materials 
industry. At the same time, the sewing, footwear, timber and 
furniture industries were relatively successful. 
  Cited most frequently among factors hampering production 
were 
difficulties in marketing and low demand for goods. This was 
pointed out by 59 percent of the companies responding, primarily 
those producing building materials, food items and machinery. 
Increased demand for their production was reported by 41 percent 
of the companies, which included a 36 percent increase in the 
demand for exports. 
  During the first quarter, the problem of raw materials 
intensified even further: reserves of raw materials were rated 
as being too low by 43 percent of the companies responding 
(compared to 36 percent in December). This is linked to the 
shortage of available funds which was also not alleviated, 
compared to the previous quarter, and which was cited by 29 
percent of the companies as a factor hampering production. 
  On the whole, the state's industry started out the new year 
with the same problems it had at the conclusion of the previous 
one. The only thing that changed was their intensity by the 
different sectors of industry. 
  Nevertheless, the new quarter was seen in an optimistic 
light 
by the respondents in March. An increased production volume, 
compared to the first quarter, was projected, and that by 55 
percent of the companies. Only 4 percent of them thought that 
the decline will continue. 
  The possibilities for exporting their production were seen 
to 
be holding at the same level by 67 percent of the respondents. 
And, as many as 64 percent of the companies producing building 
materials, anticipate increasing their exports. 
  Most (80 percent) of the companies plan to retain their 
employees. Reductions in their labor force, however, are planned 
by 42 percent of the textile companies, and by 23 percent of the 
companies in electronics and electronic technology. The need for 
additional specialists was found to be greatest in the 
industries for machine construction, metal processing, timber 
and furniture. 
<H5>  Construction Market Is Unsatisfactory </H5>
  Among respondents to the March EKI survey were also 22 
construction companies. In 45 percent of these, the volume of 
business had dropped during the first quarter. The utilization 
level of production capacity, that had been at 74 percent during 
the fourth quarter of 1993, went down by another 2 percent this 
year. Insufficient demand was noted in the responses made by 30 
percent of the companies. Orders are down from the fourth 
quarter level of 1993, and they will guarantee work for only 3.8 
months (compared to four months indicated by the December 
survey). 
  Even though the barometer characterized the construction 
market unsatisfactory at the beginning of the year, projections 
of construction companies were optimistic about the second 
quarter. Close to three quarters of them anticipate increasing 
the volume of their production for new construction as well as 
renovation. These hopes are linked to increased investment 
activity among those placing the orders. Only 5 percent of those 
responding do not believe in the possibility of increasing their 
volume of production. 
  Intentions of increasing their number of employees were 
indicated by every other construction company, while 90 percent 
of those responding predict increased construction prices for 
the second quarter. 
<H5>  Quiet Season for Trade </H5>
  Despite the general drop in consumption during the first 
quarter, the economic climate was rated satisfactory by 71 
percent of the stores, 19 percent of them even rated it good. 
Cited among factors hampering expansion were insufficient demand 
(27 percent), first; shortage of selling space (20 percent), 
second; and keen competition (18 percent), third. 
  Despite the last-mentioned factor hampering sales, 77 
percent 
of the stores had increased their sales prices during the first 
quarter. At the same time, one third of the stores (including 
two thirds of the food stores) reported that retail prices 
increased faster during the first quarter than they did during 
the fourth quarter of the previous year. Actually, there were no 
food stores among those whose prices remained at last year's 
level. 
  Of all the stores responding to the survey, 26 percent 
reported that their financial situation improved during the 
first quarter, while 13 percent of them reported it had 
worsened. (Also see table for financial barometer). 


Projected Increase/Decrease of Sales Volume Compared to Previous Month 

Distribution of Companies' Responses (in percentages) 

Quarter Ending    Increase           Decrease           Balance (approximate) 


June 91           31                 55                 -25 

Sep 91            22                 41                 -15 

Dec 91            39                 22                 15 

March 92          13                 54                 -40 

June 92           26                 37                 -10 

Sep 92            28                 35                 -5 

Dec 92            38                 31                 10 

Mar 93            13                 20                 -5 

Jun 93            67                 12                 55 

Sep 93            65                 8                  60 

Dec 93            57                 18                 40 

Mar 94            40                 30                 10 


  The EKI forecast calls for a considerable livening of retail 
trade in the second quarter. Improvement in business conditions 
is supported by projections made by 57 percent of the stores. No 
projections called for worsening. There were also no projections 
for any decreases in prices. To the contrary--two thirds are 
predicting the same rate of price increases as was experienced 
during the first quarter. 

