Language: <F P=105> Afrikaans </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lorette Grobler: "Only 30 Percent of Black </F>
Matriculants Will Succeed"] 
  [Text] A large cloud of uncertainty is hanging over the 
final exams being taken starting on Monday by some 360,000 black 
students. 
  It is generally accepted that this year's success rate will 
be just this side of 30 percent. 
  Educational organizations agreed yesterday that the 
countrywide remedial review programs have done nothing to fill 
the gap. In most cases those programs died before birth because 
the teachers were already overworked and the students overloaded. 
  "There were a handful of teachers who offered extra morning 
classes, but in the majority of the cases the teachers were far 
too overloaded with work to be able to also offer any remedial 
programs," said Mr. Nkoane Maloka, regional coordinator for the 
South African Democratic Teachers Union (SADTU), yesterday. 
  Mr. Desmond Thompson, national information officer for the 
National Education Crisis Committee [NECC], corroborated this. 
"Operation Catch Up was not a success and students' morale is 
still very low." 
  Even the additional two weeks by which Mr. Sam de Beer, 
minister of education and training, delayed the final exams, did 
not help. 
  "The majority of the teachers were not even able to handle 
half of the study plan with the children. Students whose 
teachers did rush them through the study plan were not able to 
keep up with all the new information," said Mr. Maloka. 
  The circumstances are particularly difficult in schools in 
the Eastern Rand where students are afraid they might get shot 
while taking their exams. 
  "Perhaps there will not be any strikes now, but the 
situation 
is far from normal," stated Mr. Makola. 
  Mr. Thompson said that it does not do any good to be too 
enthusiastic about black education, which is on the brink of 
total collapse. 
  "Our only hope is that the new National Education and 
Training Forum will be more effective next year and that 
students will be able to take the exams over if they want to." 
  The Department of Education and Training was cautiously 
optimistic yesterday about what can be expected in the upcoming 
final exams. 
  "We hope that students have made the best of the additional 
two weeks available to them, but we would prefer not to make any 
predictions about the possible success rate," said Mr. Geoffrey 
Makwakwa, spokesperson for the department. 
  On Monday, the students will be taking typing and shorthand 
exams, and on Tuesday it will be history, French and several law 
courses. 
  Educational organizations expect that numerous students will 
be returning to school. Next year's classes will be even more 
overcrowded, with broader age differences among the students. 
The exams end on 30 November. 

