Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by E. van Wyk] </F>
  [Text] Pretoria March 17 SAPA -- The Freedom Front's [FF] 
participation in the elections was a last resort to avoid 
conflict and ensure a peaceful solution in the quest for a 
"volkstaat" [Afrikaner homeland], CP [Conservative Party] MP 
Pieter Mulder said on Thursday [17 March]. 
  The Front's final participation in the polls depended on an 
accord with the African National Congress [ANC] which involved 
that the recommendations of the so-called Volkstaat Council, 
provided for in Constitutional Principle 34, would be 
guaranteed, Dr Mulder said. Talks with the ANC on this matter 
would continue next week, he said. 
  Dr Mulder was addressing a press conference in Pretoria 
where 
the Front's candidates list, headed by FF leader Gen Constand 
Viljoen and containing 31 national legislature candidates and 
219 for the provinces, was announced. 
  Dr Mulder conceded there was tension in right-wing ranks 
over 
participation in the elections. "We don't want to actually take 
part in the African National Congress elections but 
Constitutional Principle 34 (providing for a volkstaat council) 
gives us the opportunity to prove our support for an Afrikaner 
homeland." 
  Research had shown a large number of CP supporters would 
vote 
in spite of the CP executive's decision to boycott the polls, he 
said. On the split in CP ranks, Dr Mulder said Gen Viljoen and 
CP leader Ferdi Hartzenberg held talks on Thursday, but he did 
not know the outcome. This follows Dr Hartzenberg's earlier 
announcement that any CP member belonging to another party and 
standing for the elections would automatically be suspended from 
the party. 
  The Front viewed participation in the polls as a plebiscite, 
said Dr Mulder. The Afrikaner Volksfront [National Front] had 
earlier been demanding a white plebiscite or a referendum to 
determine support for the volkstaat and which people wanted to 
be included in the homeland. 
  A Freedom Front candidates' conference would be held on 
Saturday to work out a strategy. Gen Viljoen, as leader of the 
Front, would be the backbone of the campaign. 
  The Natal and Orange Free State CP leaders, Carl Werth (in 
position no 8) and Abrie Oosthuizen (no 10), and Transvaal 
deputy-leader Dr Pieter Mulder (no 2) and CP Cape deputy leader 
Mr W. A. Botha (no 4) appear on the national list. Dr Pieter 
Mulder's brother Corne is no 3 on the list, followed by CP MP 
Willie Botha (no 5) and CP MP Joseph Chiole (no 6). 
  Although the former Afrikaner Volksfront directorate of 
generals is understood to back the front, apart from Gen Viljoen 
only Gen Kobus Visser appears on the list at no 19. Gen Tienie 
Groenewald had decided not to make himself available as a 
candidate, Dr Mulder said. 
  Also on the list is South Africa's head of mission in Berlin 
Mr J. C. Landman, who is to resign from the post, and a former 
National Party MP for Springs, W. S. J. Grobler. 
  For the provincial legislatures Mr Werth heads the list in 
Natal, with Mr Abrie Oosthuizen (Orange Free State), Dr Pieter 
Mulder (Northern Cape), Mr P.W. Grobbelaar (Western Cape), Dr 
Willie Botha (Northern Transvaal), Mr Pieter Groenewald (North 
West Region), Dr W. J. van Niekerk (Eastern Transvaal) and Mr 
W.A. Botha (Eastern Cape). 

