BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with National Assembly Chairman Aleksandur </F>
Yordanov by Valeriya Veleva; place and date not given: "No 
Translator Was Needed When I Talked to Gligorov"] 
  [Veleva] Mr. Yordanov, in his speech to the Bulgarian 
parliament Albanian President Sali Berisha called Serbia a 
source of "war, conflicts, instability, and aggression" in the 
Balkans. How would this be accepted in diplomatic circles? 
  [Yordanov] I am sure Mr. Berisha's speech will be read 
carefully both in Athens and Belgrade. This is normal. 
Regardless of how his speech is accepted in various countries, 
one cannot deny the sincerity and openness of his position. I 
have a high regard for the speech, because it named clearly, and 
I would say in a nondiplomatic manner, some of the greatest 
dangers in our region. By this I mean the communist heritage, 
imperial ambitions, and radical nationalism. These are Balkan 
illnesses. It is much easier to heal an illness when you have 
diagnosed it. In this sense Berisha, who is a noted politician 
who has made a great contribution to the democratic reforms in 
Albania, met with understanding in the National Assembly. 
  [Veleva] Do you share Berisha's position on the situation in 
the Balkans and the danger of the Yugo-conflict expanding to the 
south? 
  [Yordanov] I have always stressed that the war in former 
Yugoslavia is a result of several factors: traditional 
nationalism, xenophobia, and ethnic intolerance -- a sinister 
remnant from the past which was activated very much in the 
postcommunist situation. We should also not forget the very 
legacy of the communist way of thinking that remains in many 
people and politicians. In addition, democratic changes are 
taking place very slowly in former Yugoslavia, where communist 
structures and the former communist leaders continue to 
dominate. This by itself represents a danger. One should not 
forget who first started the war. It is a result of the Serbian 
striving to expand their territory. Sometimes people in 
Bulgaria forget this historical fact, which must be remembered. 
  I expect that in the near future formulas for resolving the 
Balkan crisis will be found and Bulgaria will be the state that 
will best defend the European principles and values. The more 
quickly we integrate our country in the European economic and 
parliamentary structures and the closer our relations with NATO 
become, the more Bulgaria will be a peaceful, secure, stable, 
and prosperous state. This will be its contribution to the 
all-European process. 
  [Veleva] Do you think that events around 17 May, when the 
Turkish "Blue Helmets" head for Bosnia-Herzegovina, will again 
stir the Bulgarian parliament? 
  [Yordanov] I do not divide the Blue Helmets up into Turkish, 
American, Russian, and Finnish. A soldier with a blue helmet is 
a symbol of peace and understanding. However, we have 
repeatedly warned that the presence of precisely Turkish Blue 
Helmets could have a destructive role in Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
where nationalism is very strong. Whoever speaks against Turkey 
serves a non-Bulgarian and non-European policy. However, since 
the conflict in Yugoslavia was created on the basis of the 
continuing nationalism, there is the danger that the appearances 
of precisely Turkish soldiers with blue helmets could activate 
nationalism and prompt historical associations. In this context 
during the visit of Mr. Cindoruk I repeatedly stressed that from 
the point of view of the existing complexes related to the 
Balkan nations' nationalism, the presence of Turkish blue 
helmets in the conflict region is undesirable. However, let us 
not forget that they were called to Bosnia- Herzegovina not by 
the Turkish Government, but by the United Nations. 
Subsequently, our position is that the United Nations should 
take closer note of historical and specific realities when it 
sends troops from a certain country. 
  [Veleva] Mr. Yordanov, do you not have the feeling that we 
are being slowly dragged into the conflict? 
  [Yordanov] I would not say that. The European and world 
communities are simply looking for ways to resolve the conflict. 
If we begin to think that the world wants to create a war in 
the Balkans, it would encourage an exceptionally populist and 
provincial attitude in our country. This is a provincial policy 
that could be discussed in street taverns. However, this is not 
the way one should be thinking at the end of the 20th century. 
If it is true that the world is so evil that it wants to kindle 
new conflicts, and that the major statesmen are such monsters, 
then there is no hope for the world! How could we oppose this? 
Obviously, we must believe, and I absolutely do believe, that 
the efforts of the United Nations, the EC, the United States, 
Russia, and all Balkan countries must be directed precisely 
toward resolving the conflict. Real steps have already been 
adopted to try to stop the conflict, and there have been real 
achievements. 
  [Veleva] Did Macedonia [The Former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia -- FYROM] not strain our relations with Greece? What 
can we expect from the upcoming visit of the leader of "New 
Democracy" to our country? 
  [Yordanov] I do not think so. Greece's policy is clearly 
oriented toward Europe. The Greeks have reason to express 
certain concerns. Some articles of the Macedonian Constitution 
really do not correspond to the principles that are 
characteristic of the member-states of the Council of Europe. 
There are no outstanding problems between Bulgaria and Greece, 
and it is impossible for our relations to be strained. These 
relations are founded on principles that have a noble place in 
our historical memories. It is a fact that we view Greece as a 
country through which we really could come closer to the 
European structures. 
  [Veleva] Upon his return to Macedonia Kiro Gligorov said 
that Bulgaria must walk its share of the road toward recognizing 
the so-called "Macedonian" language, in which the Macedonian 
literature supposedly is written. Do you think that the future 
will see a "Macedonian" nation and language? 
  [Yordanov] I cannot make any forecasts, but when I talked 
with Gligorov there was no need for a translator. In fact, the 
translator only created a noise. I think Gligorov understood 
absolutely everything I said without any translation. As far as 
the "Macedonian" language is concerned, I have examined this 
issue and studied the activity of the Miladinov brothers [noted 
Bulgarian culture and history researches in the first half of 
the 19th century], and share the opinion of Bulgarian science. 
Therefore I categorically supported the position that the 
expression "in the official languages of the two countries" 
should be included in the documents that were supposed to be 
signed. Since the official languages are determined by the 
appropriate articles of the Constitutions, there were no 
obstacles to signing important documents, except emotional 
reasons of a domestic political nature. I am convinced that 
sooner or later these language and emotional problems related to 
the interpretation if history will be eliminated, because they 
do not have an important part in feeding the people! Interests 
of economic, trade, and purely humane character will become ever 
more important. The border that exists between Bulgaria and 
Macedonia will separate us less and less, and unite us more and 
more. When this border becomes a border of rapprochement, it 
will suddenly become clear that we speak the same language. 

