BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, May 19 (YONHAP) -- Street demonstrations 
during the first four months of this year nearly doubled 
compared with the same period last year due to political issues 
such as the opening of the country's rice market and the 
Sangmudae scandal, according to the prosecution. 
  Reports released by the Prosecutor General's Office Thursday 
said that 2,774 street demonstrations were staged from January 
to April this year compared with 1,578 during the same period 
last year. 
  The number of people taking to the streets in the four-month 
period this year reached 814,900 while 537,100 Koreans 
participated in street demonstrations during the same period 
last year, according to the reports. 
  Student demonstrations topped the list this year with 1,590 
cases involving 432,200 students, followed by 772 protests by 
249,300 people calling for settlement of such grievances as 
establishment of a garbage dump in their region, the reports 
said. 
  More than 130,000 people took part in various peace marches 
on 393 occasions during the first four months of this year while 
labor-management disputes triggered 19 street demonstrations by 
25,000 workers in the same period, according to the reports. 
  The number of violent demonstrations involving wooden sticks 
and steel pipes increased to 41 this year compared with last 
year's eight. The number involving stone-hurling also climbed 
to 39 this year from eight a year ago, the prosecution reports 
said. 
  The only exceptions to the increase in violent 
demonstrations 
were those involving firebombs. Students hurled only 40 
firebombs on three occasions this year, a drastic reduction from 
last year's 900 firebombs thrown during five demonstrations, 
according to the prosecution, which attributed the decrease to 
the public's unfavorable view toward use of firebombs by student 
activists. 
  On 21 occasions this year, demonstrators seized railways and 
roads while 14 demonstrations involved attacks on public 
buildings and facilities. The numbers contrast sharply with 
those of last year, eight and two, respectively, according to 
the prosecution. 
  Political issues including the Uruguay Round trade 
negotiations and the Sangmudae scandal contributed to the sharp 
increase in demonstrations this year compared with last year, 
when people found few political issues to protest amid the Kim 
Yong-sam administration's reform drive involving far-reaching 
probes of wrongdoings and irregularities under past 
administrations, said a prosecution spokesman. 

