Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Ling Guangzhi (0407 1639 1807)] </F>
  [Text] Guangzhou, 15 Feb (XINHUA) -- Vice President Rong 
Yiren recently inspected work in Guangdong and emphatically 
noted: In establishing a socialist market economy, it is 
necessary to attach importance to and meet people's increasing 
demands for material and spiritual culture. Every economic 
activity should be profitable, but that does not mean we should 
be intent on nothing but profit. As long as we develop material 
civilization as well as spiritual civilization, the prospects 
for developing a socialist market economy are great. 
  In the company of Lin Ruo and Xie Songkai, chairman and vice 
chairman of the Guangdong Provincial People's Congress Standing 
Committee, and Vice Governor Li Lanfang, Rong Yiren visited 
large state enterprises, Zhuhai Special Economic Zone [SEZ], a 
high agro-technology breeding base, and farmers' markets for 
inspection from 1 to 15 February. 
  In Jiangmen Fufa Glass Factory, Rong Yiren was briefed on 
the 
factory's situation. Production has been in a depression since 
operations began in 1988. The factory registered over 10 
million yuan in losses in 1991. In the past two years they 
strived to develop markets and vigorously set up joint ventures, 
and last year they registered 140 million yuan in profits and 
taxes. After the briefing, Rong Yiren said happily: It was not 
easy for you to withstand losses and develop at such a rate over 
the past two years; you should seriously sum up experiences and 
lessons. Under the new situation of an increasingly changable 
market, output of some products should be cut back, whereas that 
of others should be increased greatly. It is very good that you 
have met the market's demands and enhanced the enterprise's 
staying power by relying on scientific progress, engaging in 
sophisticated processing, and developing new products. State 
enterprises can expand their scale of production and business 
scope by running joint ventures with foreign capital, but they 
should pay attention to properly assessing state assets and make 
sure that their value is maintained and increased. While 
foreign investors are making money through the joint ventures, 
we should not be suffering losses. This is equality and mutual 
benefit. 
  Rong Yiren visited Zhongshan Weili Group Corporation's two 
production lines for washing machines and air conditioners, 
carefully inquiring into the company's production, management, 
and development plan. He emphatically noted: Enterprises 
should grasp the word "competition" in development. An unwaning 
competitiveness should be built up by constantly meeting 
people's demands. This will require excellent product quality, 
a steady stream of new products, and good after-sale service. 
Many enterprises with difficulties should study your new 
development method of upgrading technology and developing new 
products on your own. 
  At the beginning of the [lunar] new year, Rong Yiren 
inspected western Zhuhai's port and airport, still under 
construction, in spite of the rain and was briefed on Zhuhai's 
development by Liang Guangda, party secretary and mayor. He 
expressed his satisfaction with the achievements made in Zhuhai 
SEZ and its overall development program currently under way. He 
hoped that comrades in Zhuhai would make meticulous plans, 
develop steadily, and do a good job in two important tasks -- 
collecting capital for construction and absorbing persons of 
different skills. Rong Yiren also went to Jiangmen Ostrich 
Breeding Farm and three farmers' markets in rural areas of 
Zhongshan City. He encouraged agrotechnologists in Jiangmen 
City to promote ostrich breeding -- a highly technological 
project with good economic returns -- strive to industrialize, 
and create a new industry through scientific means. 
  On the eve of the Spring Festival, Rong Yiren extended his 
holiday greetings to citizens of Zhongshan City and Overseas 
Chinese via TV in Zhongshan City -- a city known as hometown of 
many Overseas Chinese. He warmly welcomed "fellow townsmen" 
abroad to come back and have a look at their hometown and 
generously support its economic construction. 

