Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yosi Melman] </F>
  [Text] Ann Arbor, Michigan. According to foreign reports, 
Israel's missile testing grounds are located on the seacoast in 
the Yavne-Nahal Soreq region, not far from the nuclear research 
reactor that Israel obtained from the United States in 1955. The 
foreign reports state that it was from this range that, in the 
past six years, Israel has made two successful space lift-offs 
of "Shavit" launchers carrying "Ofeq" photoreconnaissance 
satellites. 
  Nonetheless, Israel's most successful space launching 
occurred about 70 km from President Bill Clinton's home. Camden, 
a city in Arkansas, is home to the Atlantic Research Company's 
(ARC) rocket-engine factory. Camden, says James Waller, editor 
of the local newspaper, THE CAMDEN NEWS, is a small, quiet 
"typical Arkansas town where nothing special happens." It is 
south of Little Rock, the state capital, and less than an hour's 
drive from Hope, the President's hometown. Some 15,000 people 
live in Camden, most them employed by the lumber industry and a 
number of defense companies such as ARC. 
  About a year ago, Rafa'el signed a joint venture agreement 
with ARC to develop space-launching technology. Israel Military 
Industries (IMI) is holding talks to sign a similar agreement 
with ARC, a subsidiary of a large defense company, Seiko 
Corporation, which also has factories in Virginia, Maryland, and 
New York. The corporation makes engines for tactical missiles, 
including the "Stinger" ground-to-air missile, listening 
equipment, space radar, and other items for the U.S. Air Force 
and Army. It employs about 4,000 workers, including retired 
generals. For Israeli defense facilities, the object of forming 
ties and linking up with American companies--Israel Aircraft 
Industries (IAI) is also negotiating with some American 
companies, including Fireshield--is to gain a foothold in the 
vast space market, both the international one in general and the 
American one in particular. This tactic, among others made 
possible through the contacts in Arkansas, has definitely proved 
itself. The Clinton administration informed the Israeli 
Government three weeks ago of a change in American policy. 
  The previous administrations of Ronald Reagan and George 
Bush 
had prohibited American companies that manufacture missiles and 
technology for launching missiles into space from forming any 
ties to Israel. As explained by Henry Sokolsky, who was the 
Pentagon official responsible for preventing proliferation of 
technology and strategic weapons systems (nuclear, biological 
and chemical weapons, missiles and components for such systems), 
this policy had several aspects. 
  The first aspect was anchored in an arrangement called the 
"Missile Technology Control Regime" (MTCR), which was 
established in 1987 in conjunction with other Western nations on 
the initiative of the United States. Its purpose is to prevent 
"dangerous" countries from obtaining missiles. The arrangement 
was designed to make it harder for nations in regions of 
international tension or those with unstable governments to 
acquire strategic weapons systems such as missiles. Israel 
refused to join the compact. According to foreign reports, she 
had been cooperating since the 1970's in producing missiles with 
Iran under the Shah and had provided information and technology 
to South Africa, Taiwan, and China. 
  Again, according to foreign reports, Israel was the first 
nation to introduce nuclear weapons into the Middle East. That 
happened as early as the end of the 1950's, aided by the French 
M-D 66 missile. Foreign reports also state that Israel has not 
only ballistic missiles but the capability to build cruise 
missiles (missiles that fly on a straight trajectory). This 
capability, the reports allege, has been translated into a 
series of ground-to-ground missiles called the "Jericho," 
"Gabri'el" sea-to-sea missiles, air-to-air missiles, and the 
Shavit launcher, which serves as a launcher for space 
satellites. IAI is the primary contractor for the launcher and 
is now developing what is called in professional lingo the 
"pipe," or the platform, and the satellite that it carries. 
Rafa'el and IAI are building rocket engines for the project and 
other companies are contributing electronic, navigation, 
landing, control and oversight systems to producing the "Shavit." 
  Israel's refusal to join the compact prevented her from 
receiving or acquiring American information, equipment, and 
technology relating to missiles and made her a target of the 
preceding administrations' criticism. The gravest accusation was 
leveled in 1992, in a report issued by the General Accounting 
Office [GAO] contending that Israel, without permission and in 
violation of law, was selling China information and technology 
from the American "Patriot" missile. Israel vehemently denied 
the charge. In 1991, Israel announced a change in its position: 
she did not formally bind herself to the regime on controlling 
transfer of missile technology but declared that she would 
observe its terms and act in accordance with them as Russia and 
South Africa have. 
  The second aspect, as explained by Clay Mowry, who handles 
these matters for the U.S. Department of Commerce, relates to 
American import policy regarding missile and space technology. 
This policy establishes that all missiles carrying any equipment 
into space must be produced in the United States. That 
restriction applies to both military hardware (satellites 
carrying photographic instruments, satellites carrying warning 
devices, such as those used during the Gulf war, and 
communications and listening satellites) and the civilian market 
(communications satellites linking up computers, telephones or 
television transmissions), as well as to equipment intended for 
research, especially for NASA [National Aeronautical and Space 
Agency], the U.S. space agency. The reasons for this rule are 
mainly defense based; the idea is to prevent secrets from 
leaking to foreign elements. Foreign companies seeking to 
participate in American projects for launching equipment into 
space, or American companies that have sought to use foreign 
missile launchers, have had to apply to the Commerce Department 
and the GAO to seek an import license. And although some 
European companies and even Communist China have received a 
license from time to time, it has been denied to Israeli firms. 
  As in other security-related fields, attempts to break into 
the American space market have been led by IAI through its 
representative in the United States, Marvin Klimo. With help 
from the Israeli Defense and Foreign Ministries and AIPAC 
[American Israel Public Affairs Committee], the pro-Israel 
Washington lobby, he has attempted to organize a faction in 
Congress. IAI previously had negotiated in vain with local 
companies such as Delta Research. "All our efforts in the past," 
says Klimo, whose title is vice president of IAI International, 
"were always blocked by the administration's policy of 
preventing proliferation" of strategic weapons systems. 
  Now, as noted, that policy has been changed. Two senior 
administration officials, Dennis Ross from the State Department 
and Martin Indyk of the National Security Council, arrived in 
Israel some weeks ago with a letter for the Prime Minister from 
the President. In the letter, Clinton promised Rabin that he 
would change the previous policy. Administration officials 
explained that although the details of the new policy relating 
to Israel are still being worked out, it is already clear that 
the prohibition on exports of missile and space technology 
pursuant to the arrangement will continue. Nonetheless, the 
prohibitions on imports from Israel will be lifted. "Israel will 
no longer be considered a security risk," a senior State 
Department official puts it. From now on, American companies 
will be able to import space and launch technology from Israel 
and Israeli companies will obtain licenses for participating in 
American projects with NASA, the Air Force, and civilian firms. 
The timing of the message--the President's letter arrived in 
Israel direct from Geneva after his meeting with Hafiz 
al-Asad--was interpreted as American prodding, and perhaps even 
as compensation for the future, to induce Israel to show 
flexibility in its negotiations for an agreement with Syria. 
Another explanation, also correct, is based on Clinton's 
sympathy for Israel and his promise made when he met Rabin in 
March 1993, to do all he can to assure Israel's technological 
superiority and promote strategic cooperation between the two 
states. 
  Yet another reason, and no less important, derives from 
Arkansas. In forging business ties to Atlantic Research, Rafa'el 
and IMI are erasing the modes of action that IAI, with no small 
success, developed during the past decade in selling drones 
(through its partnership with a firm from San Diego called TRW). 
The simple rule: establish business partnerships with an 
American company and use them to advance economic interests and 
accumulate political influence. 
  The partnership between Rafa'el and Atlantic Research gained 
a political boost from Arkansas' two Democratic senators. In 
November, Dale Bumpers and David Friar sent a letter to their 
friend and fellow Democrat from Arkansas, Bill Clinton. Their 
letter pointed out that the partnership would contribute to 
Arkansas' economy and add another 200 jobs to the Camden 
factory, which now employs about 500 people. Even if that was 
not the most important reason, it was clear to all involved that 
this connection did not hurt. No president whose main concern is 
internal affairs and reviving the economy can remain indifferent 
to pleas to fight unemployment and aid the economy. 
  Klimo, Rafa'el's representative in the United States, says 
that, under the agreement, Rafa'el provides ARC a license to 
manufacture engines (third-stage engines) in its own plant. The 
price of each engine ranges from $500,000 to $10 million. By the 
same token, IAI and IMI will sell licenses to American companies 
to make their products. According to Klimo, the relatively low 
price of the "Shavit" launcher, which in the United States goes 
by the commercial name "Next," affords them an advantage in 
finding a niche in an important market in the United 
States--launching of small satellites (weighing 1,000 kg). Most 
American manufacturers, such as McDonnell Douglas, make missile 
launchers for large, heavy satellites, at a time when the 
development trend in the space market is for launching small 
satellites, most often for communications. 
  Even so, despite their elation at the breakthrough, they are 
still proclaiming that the path is strewn with mines. There are 
more than a few officials in the various bureaucratic strata who 
are not pleased by the President's decision. As the WALL STREET 
JOURNAL recently reported, they are liable to raise obstacles so 
that Israeli companies will not obtain the import permits 
requested. And launch technology is already known to many; so 
even when they receive licenses, Israeli companies will face 
stiff competition from other foreign firms discovering the 
economic potential of space. 

