BFN 

<F P=106> [Fujian Province Government Work Report delivered by Fujian </F>
Governor Jia Qinglin to the Second Session of the Eighth 
Provincial People's Congress on 10 April] 
  [Text] Fellow Deputies, 
  On behalf of the provincial people's government, I now 
submit 
the report on the work of the government for your examination 
and approval, and also for suggestions and comments from members 
of the provincial committee of the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference and other observers. 
  In the past year, under the guidance of Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics and in the spirit of the party's 14th congress 
and the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, 
governments at all levels in Fujian have persistently focused 
their work on economic construction; conscientiously implemented 
a series of major policy decisions and arrangements of the party 
Central Committee and the State Council; actively pushed forward 
reform, opening up, economic construction, and social 
development; and successfully fulfilled all tasks put forward by 
the First Session of the 8th provincial people's congress in 
1993. 
  The national economy maintained sustained and 
high-speed growth. During the year, we persistently 
focused our work on optimizing the structure, strengthening 
management, and enhancing economic efficiency; reinforced 
macroeconomic control and regulation; carefully organized work 
in economic fields; and brought about continued comprehensive 
development to the national economy. The GNP for the year was 
96.79 billion yuan, up by 25.4 percent over the previous year, 
thus quadrupling the gross annual value of industrial and 
agricultural production in two decades, seven years ahead of 
schedule. The total agricultural output value stood at 39.526 
billion yuan, registering an increase of 11.3 percent. A sample 
survey has showed that the total grain output reached 8.69 
million tonnes (9.42 million tonnes according to overall 
statistics), while the total quantity of foodstuffs increased by 
860,000 tonnes. Fujian made new headway in reforesting barren 
mountains last year, and won the title of "advanced province in 
reforesting barren mountains." Last year, the planting of fruit 
trees, tea plants, and tobacco also underwent the biggest 
development in recent year. The total output of aquatic 
products was 1.9 million tonnes, up by 19 percent. The total 
output of township and town enterprises amounted to 110.25 
billion yuan, representing an increase of 94 percent. The total 
output value of industrial production reached 149 billion yuan, 
up by 48.2 percent; and the economic performance of the 
industrial sector was apparently improved. With a comprehensive 
indicator standing at 106, Fujian now ranks among the most 
advanced provinces in China. Society-wide fixed assets 
investment totalled 33.82 billion yuan, an increase of 71.4 
percent. Notable results were attained in "the year of 
infrastructural construction," and 13 key projects across the 
province were put into operation or basically completed. The 
construction pace of transportation, telecommunications, and 
power projects was accelerated; the Yinxia electric railway was 
opened to traffic, and the transformation of national highways 
was unfolded in a comprehensive way. The magnitude of 
telecommunications business increased by 64.9 percent, and 
797,000 new telephone sets were installed during the year. The 
generating capacity of the province increased by 220,000 kw over 
the previous year. The monetary order took an apparent turn for 
the better, the excessive issuance of currency was brought under 
control, and market exchange rates remained basically stable. 
The province's financial revenue totalled 11.058 billion yuan, 
registering an increase of 46.7 percent. The undertaking of 
people's insurance underwent healthy development, with the 
volume of business exceeding 2 billion yuan. Both urban and 
rural markets enjoyed brisk business, and the total volume of 
retail sales amounted to 42 billion, up 31.4 percent. 
  New results were scored in reform and opening up. 
Focusing on establishment of a socialist market economic 
structure, reform was gradually deepened in all fields. In 
carrying out enterprise reform, we focused our efforts on 
changing operational mechanisms of enterprises. Experiments 
with reform of the general input-output contract system and with 
unified management of economic performance unfolded in 340 
enterprises across the province, share-holding systems of 
various types were adopted by 343 enterprises, reform of 
state-own and people-run system was put into practice in 2,623 
enterprises engaged in domestic trade, and 92 enterprise groups 
were organized and established. 
  Meanwhile, we lifted 
control over grain prices across the province, and accelerate 
development of commodity markets as well as markets for major 
means of production, including capital, labor, technology, and 
information. We continued to open Fujian wider to the outside 
world. A number of policies guiding the free port of the Xiamen 
Special Economic Zone were further implemented, and both the 
Fuzhou Mawei and the Xiamen Xiangyu bonded zones were completed 
and put into operation. Foreign trade maintained strong 
development momentum. The total amount of newly approved 
foreign contracted investments reached $11.37 billion yuan, 
while the total foreign funds actually used amounted to $3.02 
billion, up by 79 and 106 percent respectively. Large-scale 
land exploration underwent steady development. Last year's 
revenue gained from land leases totalled 3.1 billion yuan. 
During the year, the 109 development zones across the province 
introduced a total of 1,077 foreign-invested projects, of which 
478 were put into production or will be completed in the near 
future. Export volume for the year totaled $5.825 billion, 
representing an increase of 36.3 percent. Economic and trade 
cooperation between Fujian and Taiwan was further promoted. A 
total of 1,010 new Taiwan-invested projects were approved during 
the year, which entailed Taiwan contracted investments of $1.549 
billion, up by 73.7 percent. The total trade volume with Taiwan 
stood at $2.037 billion, registering an increase of 290 percent. 
The total amount involved in construction projects contracted 
abroad reached $680 million, while foreign exchange earned from 
international tourism was equivalent to 910 million renminbi, up 
by 32.3 and 14.6 percent respectively. 
  All social undertakings attained steady 
development. We persistently placed science and technology 
and education in a strategic position and gave priority to their 
development. The provincial party committee and government 
issued a "Decision on Several Issues Concerning Acceleration of 
Reform and Development of Social Undertakings," put forward a 
series of preferential policies, set up a "foundation for the 
development of social undertakings in Fujian Province," and 
started constructing 10 such major projects. We further 
readjusted the structure of education, and as a result, the 
quality of teaching and the efficiency of school-running were 
enhanced. Elementary compulsory education was made accessible 
to 95 percent of the population and secondary education to 62.3 
percent of the population, up by 10 and 22 percentage points 
respectively. Good results were scored in tackling key technical 
problems and in commercializing scientific and technological 
results. A total of 187 research results won provincial-level 
awards for scientific and technological progress, while 850 were 
patented. New headway was also made in social scientific 
research. On the cultural front, both the "fragrant grass" and 
"a hundred flowers plans" attained breakthroughs at the present 
phase. We successfully held the second provincial children's 
art festival, as well as a cross-straits local opera festival 
and the 19th session of provincial theatrical festival. In a 
national appraisal of best publications, Fujian won the second 
largest number of awards among all domestic publishing houses. 
Public health was further improved in both urban and rural 
areas, and our ability to prevent and control diseases enhanced. 
Sports activities were extensively carried out among the masses. 
Fujian's athletes won good results in the 7th national sports 
meet, while both the 1st session of international taijiquan 
invitational tournament and the 5th Sino-Japanese taijiquan 
exchange competition proved to be successes. The work of family 
planning was promoted as a whole. For the first time in 
history, both the birth and natural growth rates of Fujian's 
population dropped to a level lower than the country's average, 
and the province has successfully fulfilled the population 
control tasks set by the state for three consecutive years. 
  The living standards of urban and rural residents 
continued to improve. After allowing for price rises, the 
annual average amount of per capita income that urban dwellers 
used for living expenses reached 2,605 yuan, while the average 
per capita net income of people in the countryside totaled 1,211 
yuan, representing increases of 6.8 and 7 percent respectively. 
The volume of bank savings of both urban and rural residents at 
the end of the year increased by 7.2 billion yuan. During the 
year, over 5 million square meters of floor space was added for 
the urban population, thus raising the per capita living space 
of urban dwellers to 10.8 square meters. Meanwhile, with an 
additional floor space of 1.8 million square meters, the per 
capital living area of rural residents reached 22.4 square 
meters, and 120,000 rural families moved in new houses. 
Consumption levels of both city and country people rose 
steadily, and their cultural life was enriched on a constant 
basis. Through the concerted efforts of all departments as well 
as governments at all levels, the provincial party committee and 
government successfully solved 15 major problems for the masses. 
  Public security and the general mood of the society 
were further improved. While accelerating development of 
the economy, governments at all levels adhered to the principle 
of "paying simultaneous attention to two types of work, 
attaching equal importance to both," and made vigorous efforts 
to strengthen the building of socialist spiritual civilization, 
clean administration, and the legal system. We conducted 
ideological and ethical education on patriotism, collectivism, 
and socialism on an extensive scale; carried out mass activities 
on building spiritual civilization, in which all units vied with 
each other in becoming civilized units; and unfolded activities 
of "dual support." We attained results in the present phase of 
implementation of major policy decisions of the central 
authorities on combatting corruption. Leading cadres at the 
county level and above conscientiously conducted self-criticism 
among themselves. Supervisory and procuratorial organs at all 
levels across the province dealt with and solved 1,218 cases of 
violation of law and discipline, and punished a number of 
corrupt cadres. Great efforts were taken to rectify a number of 
unhealthy practices, such as arbitrary collection of fees, 
making overseas travels at the expenses of the state, and the 
running of enterprises by party and government organs. As a 
result, unhealthy trends in government departments and trades 
were brought under control to a certain extent. The 
comprehensive rectification of public security was stepped up, 
and notable results were scored in special-purpose struggles 
against smuggling, illegal immigration, crimes committed by 
criminal rings, highway and railway robberies, and pornographic 
practices. 
  A review of the past year shows that we have attained great 
results in our work. Today, Fujian is enjoying rapid economic 
development, social stability and unity, and progress in each 
and every social undertaking. The living standards of the 
people have improved, and the entire society presents a picture 
of prosperity. It is the people of the whole province who, 
through their hard work in unity under the leadership of the 
party Central Committee, the State Council, and the provincial 
party committee, have made all these achievements possible. 
Moreover, we also attribute our accomplishments to the 
effective supervision of people's congresses at all levels, to 
the active participation of CPPCC committees at different levels 
as well as all democratic parties, to the vigorous support of 
the vast numbers of officers and men of the PLA and the armed 
police garrisoning Fujian, and to the sincere cooperation of our 
compatriots in Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macao and those residing 
overseas, as well as our international friends. On behalf of 
the provincial people's government, I wish to extend my 
heartfelt gratitude to all these people mentioned above. 
  During the past year, there were failings and mistakes in 
the 
work of the government, and some contradictions and difficulties 
still remain conspicuous in our way ahead. These are chiefly 
the following: The foundation of agriculture remains fragile, 
the total area under cultivation has been reduced by 130,000 mu, 
and a lack of enthusiasm has been shown among peasants in 
growing grain. "Bottleneck" restrictions in energy and 
transportation have deteriorated, railway transportation 
capacity is seriously inadequate, and highways, airports, and 
ports fail to meet the needs of current development. Power 
supply falls short of demand by 1.5 to 2 billion kw, and 
sometimes we find it hard to ensure the daily electricity supply 
for urban residents. Commodity prices still remain high, rising 
by 13.4 percent during the year, a level which is higher than 
the price control target of 10 percent. Rises in the prices of 
grain and non-staple foodstuffs, in particular, have impaired 
the living standards of the masses to a certain extent. 
Relatively slower progress has been registered in the 
development of social undertakings as a result of insufficient 
input and less perfect facilities. Problems still remain 
conspicuous in providing medical care and education for the 
masses. We have failed to bring fundamental changes to the 
backward look of some poor areas, or to find stable solutions to 
the problem of insufficient food and clothing for 800,000 people 
across the province. There still exist many problems with 
public security and production safety. The corrupt practices of 
a few government functionaries, as well as formalism and 
bureaucratism in government organs, have impaired close ties 
between the government and the masses. In carrying out our 
future work, we ought to face up to reality, acknowledge our 
shortcomings and mistakes, and seek careful and practical 
solutions to all problems in our work. 
  The year 1994 is an important year in our effort to maintain 
sustained, rapid, and healthy development of the national 
economy, and also a vital year for the establishment of the 
socialist market economic structure. We must seize current 
favorable opportunities, deepen reform, open Fujian wider to the 
outside world, bring about further development, and maintain 
social stability. This is the center of work for the whole 
party and country, and we must make sure that all our work is 
subordinate to and serves this endeavor. Development is the 
goal, reform is the motive, stability is the guarantee. These 
three form an organic whole. Correctly understanding and 
carefully handling relations among reform, development, 
stability, and making the three well-coordinated and 
complementary to each other is of vital importance to our 
accomplishment of all tasks set for this year. 
  The guiding 
ideology for this year's government work is as follows: Guided 
by Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics, as well as by the party's basic line, 
we should put into practice in every field of work the spirit of 
the 14th party congress, the Third Plenary Session of the 14th 
CPC Central Committee, the Second Session of the Eighth National 
People's Congress, and the Eighth Plenary Session of the Fifth 
Fujian Provincial CPC Committee; firmly seize current 
opportunities; speed up reform and the building of a socialist 
market economic structure; carry out opening up at higher 
levels, in more fields, and in a greater depth; maintain 
sustained, rapid, and healthy development of the national 
economy; promote the progress of all social undertakings and 
maintain social stability; and strive to fulfill major economic 
indicators set in the Eight Five-Year Plan one year ahead of 
schedule. The following are our concrete development targets: 
We have set the growth rate of the GNP at 11 percent and above. 
Primary industries are expected to grow by 7 percent; secondary 
industries, 15 percent, and tertiary industries, 12 percent. 
The total investment made by state-owned units in fixed assets 
will amount to 27.5 billion yuan, up by 17 percent, of which 
investment in infrastructural facilities totals 14.8 percent, 
registering an increase of 20.7 percent. Export volume will 
amount to $7 billion, while the amount of foreign funds actually 
used will reach $3.5 billion, up 16.7 percent. Financial 
revenue is expected to reach 11.8 billion yuan with a comparable 
growth rate of 11 percent. The total volume of retail sales 
will stand at 50.4 billion yuan, up by 20 percent, while price 
rises will be controlled at around 10 percent. The per capita 
income that urban dwellers use as living expenses and the per 
capita net income of peasants are both expected to grow by over 
13 percent. The natural growth rate of the population will be 
controlled below 12.59 per thousand. 
  In view of aforementioned guiding ideology and development 
targets, we need to pay special attention to work in the 
following 10 fields: 
<H5>  I. Center Around the Establishment of a Socialist Market </H5>
Economic Structure, and Further Deepen Reform in Every Field 
  This year, we are going to deepen economic structural reform 
in more fields than ever before and put forward the largest 
number of reform measures which are most intensified and most 
difficult to accomplish. Governments at all levels must make 
greater efforts to make breakthroughs in some key areas and, at 
the same time, press ahead with the whole project of 
establishing a socialist market economy, strengthen their 
leadership over reform, carefully guide implementation of reform 
measures, and made substantial headway in setting up a basic 
framework for the socialist market economic structure. 
  To successfully carry out reform in enterprises, we must 
further change their operational mechanisms and explore 
effective ways to establish a modern enterprise system. We will 
make good preparations for establishing a modern enterprise 
system; conscientiously carry out the "Enterprise Law," the 
"Regulations on Changing the Operational Mechanism of 
State-owned Large and Medium Enterprises," and the "Detailed 
Implementation Provisions" of the regulation; continue to deepen 
reform on the labor, personnel, and distribution systems of 
enterprises; and grant more decisionmaking power to enterprises. 
This year, operational autonomy will be granted in real terms 
to 300 state-owned enterprises across the province, supervision 
carried out on the state-owned assets of 30 key enterprises, and 
experiments conducted with the modern enterprise system in 50 
selected state-owned large and medium enterprises, among which 
five to 10 will experiment with the establishment of public 
corporations. We have selected the city of Nanping to conduct 
experiments with the modern enterprise system by carrying out 
comprehensive package reforms. State-owned commercial sectors 
and enterprises will continue to carry out reform of the 
state-owned and people-run system, while state-owned medium and 
small enterprises can be run under lease or under the 
share-holding system or even sold. We will make vigorous 
efforts to step up reform on the management system of state 
assets and strengthen and replenish relevant management organs. 
We will carry out experiments with the reform of assets 
management companies and property right exchange markets, and 
continue to appraise fixed assets and circulating funds, define 
the property right, and evaluate assets, thus preserving and 
increasing the value of state-owned assets. 
  In carrying out the fiscal and taxation reform, we must 
conscientiously implement the revenue-sharing system set for 
Fujian by the central authorities, step up the reform of 
financial management structure under the revenue-sharing system 
set for prefectures, cities, and counties by the provincial 
authorities, and restructure the financial management system. 
We will strive to take into consideration of the immediate 
interests of prefectures, cities, and counties to arouse 
enthusiasm of all levels in increasing income, reducing 
expenses, and managing finances well, and at the same time 
provide for increases of financial resources of provincial 
authorities, make flexible use of financial resources at the 
provincial level, and enhance the ability of the provincial 
authorities in exercising macroeconomic control and regulation. 
To make a success of fiscal and taxation reform, we should 
ensure that the new taxation and revenue-sharing systems can 
function normally. Meanwhile, we will actively reform the profit 
distribution system of state-owned enterprises, and make 
rational readjustments to and standardize profit distribution 
relations between the state and enterprises. 
  To reform the banking system, we should act in accordance 
with the requirements of the central authorities, accelerate the 
pace of changing the functions and role of people's banks, 
change the operational mechanism of specialized banks, and make 
all necessary preparations for establishing state policy banks 
on behalf of the state. We will create conditions for relevant 
state banking institutions to set up branches in Fujian, 
experiment with the establishment of urban and rural cooperative 
banks, and set up more credit cooperatives in both cities and 
the countryside. Efforts should be made to set up a unified 
banking market which allows only orderly and fair competition 
under strict management. We will reinforce the currency market, 
tighten control over interbank lending, and do a good job in 
issuing state bonds. We will continue to issue Fujian local 
enterprise bonds and trust beneficiary bonds, and conduct 
experiments with transferrable enterprise bonds. A good job 
needs to be done in issuing stocks to the public, thus 
standardizing the issuance, listing, and transactions of stocks. 
We will provide correct guidance for steady development of 
non-banking institutions, such as insurance, trust investment, 
and securities companies. The insurance industry should 
separate the operation of life insurance from that of non-life 
insurance, and we will see to it that the provincial life 
insurance company starts business as soon as possible. 
Supervision and management of the collection of export proceeds 
in foreign exchange should be reinforced to avoid any failure or 
delay in such collections. 
  To carry out the reform of the investment and financing 
structure, we should give full play to the role of the market in 
regulating investment and finance activities. It is important 
to reinforce the risk constraint mechanism for investment, and 
enhance the efficiency of investment. We will adopt a legal 
person responsibility system in all newly started construction 
projects to hold ourselves responsible for the whole process of 
these projects. Earnest efforts should be taken to strengthen 
control and regulation of the total amount and overall pattern 
of investment, reinforce the control and management of 
self-provided funds, and ensure that the investment structure is 
optimized and funds for key constructions guaranteed. We will 
adopt a systematic management method for fixed assets 
investment. Enterprises are responsible for investment in 
competitive projects, and they are required to raise funds 
through market channels and assume responsibility for the 
construction and management of such projects. The government 
will mainly take charge of infrastructural investment; it will 
pool financial and material forces from different sides, make 
investments through economic entities, and adopt a legal person 
responsibility system in these projects. Investment in public 
welfare projects will be mainly covered by the government's 
financial budgets. We should pay close attention to first-stage 
preparations of these investment projects, and see to it that 
more projects can be listed inthe state plan and greater capital 
support can be won from the State Development Bank. 
  To successfully carry out reform of the foreign trade 
system, 
we should persistently draw up unified policies, relax control 
over daily operations, carry out competition on an equal 
footing, be responsible for our own profits and losses, 
integrate industry with trade, and put into effect an agent 
system. Efforts will be made to accelerate reorganization of 
foreign-related economic and trade enterprises, revamp 30 
percent of foreign trade enterprises of various types into 
companies or share-holding companies with limited liability, and 
to complete reorganization of all foreign trade enterprises in 
three years. We will continue to grant import-export operations 
rights to qualified enterprises and scientific research 
institutions. A standardized distribution system will be 
adopted for rationed imported and exported commodities, and a 
strict supervision system of assets declaration and financial 
auditing set up in all enterprises located in overseas areas. 
We will help foreign trade enterprises of various types develop 
into industrialized international trade groups by means of joint 
investment, cooperation, joint operation, equity participation, 
and investment for redevelopment. To promote foreign trade to a 
new level, we will organize and set up a few more large-scale 
foreign trade groups which enjoy an annual export volume of over 
$100 million and an annual profit revenue of over 10 million 
yuan, as well as a number of transnational companies featuring 
integration of industry, agriculture, technology, and trade. 
  When carrying out reform on the social guarantee system, we 
should expand the coverage and scope of insurance and set up a 
perfect and unified social guarantee management system. It is 
important to reform and perfect the system of pension and 
unemployment insurance for workers and administrative staff in 
cities, carry out experiments with reform of the medical 
insurance system in more units, and establish an industrial 
accidents insurance system in all enterprises. Meanwhile, we 
will carry out experiments with a unified social guarantee 
management system in special economic zones as well as in cities 
and counties which have been selected for experiments with 
comprehensive reform packages. 
  Efforts will be made to 
expand the scope of unemployment insurance and gradually set up 
a unified unemployment insurance system which can cover 
enterprises of all categories. We should make good and flexible 
use of premium income, gradually adopt a double budgetary 
management system, and set up a rolling increment mechanism. 
The housing reform is focused on actively selling public 
houses, increasing their rental, establishing a housing 
provident fund system, carrying out the "project of comfortable 
homes" and the "project of grand mansions," and accelerating 
development and construction of economically appropriate houses. 
  Institutional reform should start from the provincial level 
and be carried through to all levels step by step. Organs at 
the provincial level will start institutional reform during the 
first half of this year, while different localities are required 
to start the reform during the latter half of the year. 
Meanwhile, we will put forward a reform program for organs at 
the county, township, and town levels, thus enabling them to 
complete institutional restructuring by the end of 1995. We 
will actively put into practice a civil service system, and 
basically try to set up this system in all government organs 
across the province before 1995. While pushing forward reform in 
all fields, we will continue to experiment with comprehensive 
reform packages of the new structure in a number of selected 
localities, and build the city of Quanzhou into a national-level 
experimental city with comprehensive reforms, and the Ningde 
Prefecture into a national-level comprehensive reform 
experimental prefecture focusing on promoting the aid-the-poor 
work through opening up, thus gaining useful experience for the 
reform of the entire province. 
<H5>  II. Focus on Stabilizing and Increasing Grain Output, and </H5>
Bring About a Comprehensive Development to the Rural Economy 
  Agriculture and the rural economy are the basis of the 
national economy and also a foundation stone for maintaining 
social stability. Governments at all levels should consistently 
place agriculture above everything else, continue to deepen 
rural reform, promote the comprehensive development of the rural 
economy in accordance with the requirement of "providing 
guidance, support, protection, and control and regulation," and 
ensure that agriculture can maintain stable growth, peasants can 
earn bigger incomes, and social stability remains sound in rural 
areas. 
  Special attention should be paid to grain production. This 
year, the total area sown to grain should stand at 30 million 
mu. It is important to expand the scope of interplanting, 
increase per-unit yields, and make sure that the total annual 
grain output exceeds 9 million tonnes. We will further mobilize 
the enthusiasm of peasants for grain growing, live up to all the 
promises made on grain purchases in relevant preferential 
policies, and refrain from applying preferential policies with 
some discount at different levels. The provincial authorities 
have decided to readjust this year's grain prices with a view to 
increasing the income of peasants. It is necessary to improve 
the system of stockpiling reserves and establish risk funds for 
grain production. We should conscientiously fulfill 
requirements put forward by provincial authorities for setting 
up a 200-million-yuan grain risk fund and setting aside 557,000 
tonnes of grain as reserves. Efforts will be taken to 
strengthen control and regulation of the grain market, and make 
sure that the task of purchasing 1.2 million tonnes of grain, 
which was set by provincial authorities, can be completed 
satisfactorily. We will continue to do a good job in production 
and supply of means of agricultural production and also in the 
distribution of agricultural loans. To stabilize prices of 
chemical fertilizers produced by small-scale factories, we have 
decided that preferential prices of electricity and coal used by 
these small factories will remain unchanged, and their tax 
exemptions will also remain in effect. While giving vigorous 
support to major grain-producing areas to help them stabilize 
and increase their grain output, we will actively promote a 
diversified economy and pay close attention to development of 
township and town enterprises to help increase the income of 
both grain growers and major grain-producing areas. We will 
give continued support to counties that are major producers of 
commodity grains and provide more funds and materials to these 
counties. We will see to it that all defaulted payments due to 
grain enterprises will be paid up, thus arousing enthusiasm of 
such enterprises for grain production. While stabilizing grain 
production, we will try to find more sources of foodstuffs 
through various channels and increase the total amount of 
foodstuffs to 800,000 tonnes. 
  Vigorous efforts will be made to develop a highly efficient 
type of farming that provides greater and better yields. We 
will adapt ourselves to the needs of the market, invigorate 
agriculture by applying scientific and technological advances 
and by promoting education, bring about development to all 
facets of agriculture, and enhance the comprehensive production 
capacity and the commercialization level of agriculture. It is 
imperative to readjust the pattern of planting and develop a 
number of high quality, well-known economic crops and 
fine-quality rice which enjoy high market demands and a 
relatively high economic value. 
  Focusing on the 
development of forestry, fruit, tea, and bamboo production, we 
will consolidate results already attained in afforestation, 
optimize the planting pattern of forestry, and develop a high 
quality green industry. It is expected that areas sown to 
fruits and tea will increase by 1 million mu and that to bamboo, 
by 500,000 mu, while 1 million mu of low-yield orchards and tea 
gardens will be transformed. Efforts will be made to develop 
production of poultry and livestock of fine breeds and to 
increase the supply of meat, poultry, eggs, and milk. We will 
pay close attention to the construction of "farmland on the 
sea," step up development of coastal areas and shoals, far-sea 
fishing, and fish breeding by means of nets and cases, and 
strive to increase output of aquatic products by 200,000 tonnes 
this year. It is imperative to set up a perfect system for the 
reproduction and spread of improved strains of agricultural 
products, actively introduce fine varieties and advanced 
agrotechniques from other parts of the country and the world, 
and do a good job in the research, assimilation, and spread of 
these improved varieties and advanced agrotechniques. A total 
of 10 provincial-level agricultural demonstration areas 
featuring high yields, fine quality, and high efficiency will be 
set up with a view to bringing along the development of 
thousands upon thousands of rural production units. We will 
make active use of preferential loans granted by the World Bank, 
the Asian Bank, and other foreign banks to promote an 
export-oriented agriculture. 
  Vigorous efforts will be made to push development of 
township 
and town enterprises to a new level. We will exert great 
efforts to develop rural shareholding cooperative enterprises in 
line with the principle of "making joint efforts in raising 
funds, sharing interests and accumulations, and undertaking 
risks together." Based on advantageous industries, products of 
famous brands, and pillar enterprises, a number of township and 
town enterprise groups will be established, thus enhancing scale 
efficiency as a whole. We will introduce funds, technologies, 
and management experience from outside China through various 
channels and means, and transform township and town enterprises 
and graft them to enterprises of other kinds. Qualified 
township and town enterprises will be granted import-export 
operations rights so that more enterprises can earn foreign 
exchange through exports. We will guide and support qualified 
township and town enterprises to concentrate their efforts on 
large-scale development, help them enhance their operational 
scale, level, and efficiency, and strive to attain a total 
annual output value of 150 billion yuan. 
  Efforts will be made to increase input into agriculture. 
Governments at all levels should gradually direct more state 
infrastructural investment, budgetary funds, and credit funds 
toward agricultural production, enhance the utilization 
efficiency of agricultural funds, and prevent any outflow and 
misappropriation of funds earmarked for agricultural production. 
We will fully mobilize all social forces, and increase input 
into agriculture through various channels and means. We will 
improve the profit deduction, reserve, and accumulation system 
of rural collective economic organizations, and see to it that 
the biggest part of collective accumulations are used for 
expanding reproduction. We will continue to promote water 
conservancy and basic farmland construction, thus improving the 
conditions of agricultural production. Unremitting efforts will 
be made to lighten the heavy burdens of peasants, absolutely 
abolish charges already banned by the central and provincial 
authorities, and never loose control over this issue. 
  We will continue to care about and support construction of 
old revolutionary bases, ethnic minority regions, remote areas, 
islands and islets, and poverty-stricken areas. It is important 
to institute a unit-to-unit aid-the-poor system, ensuring that 
aid-the-poor policies will remain unchanged and relevant funds 
stay intact. We will give guidance to different types of areas, 
organize and implement the "project of bringing benefits to the 
people," and, on a voluntary basis, resettle in newly built 
villages 100,000 poor people originally residing in remote 
mountain areas where natural conditions are harsh and there are 
no good prospects for future development. During the seven 
years from now to the year 2000, financial departments at both 
the provincial and prefectural (city) levels will allocate 3 
million yuan every year to subsidize the "project of bringing 
benefits to the people." Meanwhile, we will also reinforce 
construction of infrastructural facilities in poor areas and 
make every effort to improve the production and living 
conditions of poor areas. 
<H5>  Industrial Production </H5>
  This year's industrial production will continue to be 
focused 
on optimizing the industrial structure, strengthening 
management, and enhancing economic efficiency. Governments at 
all levels should pay close attention to work in the industrial 
field, and ensure that industrial production can maintain rapid 
growth on the basis of improved economic performance. 
  Continued efforts will be made to optimize the industrial 
structure. We will work out a detailed plan for readjusting 
both the industrial structure and the product mix in line with 
industrial policies and market demands. 
  It is imperative to 
give key support to development of such industries as 
petrochemistry, electronics, machinery, light and textile 
products, forestry, building materials, and metallurgy, and to 
successfully organize the production of famous brand industrial 
products, which are highly competitive both inside and outside 
the country and enjoy apparently good prospects for further 
development. Provincial-level industrial enterprises will focus 
their attention on developing products which "rank among the 
country's best," while those at the prefectural and city levels 
will put their emphasis on the development of products "ranking 
among the province's best." We will make every effort to 
achieve the goal of "three 100's," that is, we will try our 
utmost to reach the goal by 1995 that 100 enterprises can attain 
an annual output value of over 100 million yuan, 100 enterprises 
can enjoy a total amount of revenue taxes and profits exceeding 
15 million yuan, and 100 enterprises can earn over 50 million 
yuan from delivery of exported goods. We will continue to 
readjust the organizational structure of enterprises; make use 
of market competition mechanisms by which the efficient prosper 
while the inefficient are eliminated, and close down, suspend 
production, merge, or transform the functions of enterprises 
which have been long plagued by unmarketable and slow-moving 
goods. Guided by production of fine-quality, famous brand or 
highly competitive products, we will rely on large and medium 
pillar enterprises, organize transregional and transdepartmental 
cooperation for specialized production, set up lateral ties with 
other parts of the country, and guide enterprises to seek 
further development by means of annexation. To enhance scale 
efficiency in enterprises, we will organize and establish 
enterprise groups from a high starting point and build them into 
export-oriented specialized conglomerates with distinctive 
features. 
  Earnest efforts should be made to reinforce management of 
enterprises. We will extensively carry out the activity of 
"changing operational mechanisms, reinforcing management, 
improving professional skills, and enhancing economic 
efficiency" with a view to enhancing the overall quality of 
enterprises. We will vigorously adopt modern management methods 
in enterprises, focus our attention on implementation of "two 
regulations," strengthen financial control of enterprises, 
reduce consumption levels and production costs, accelerate 
circulation of funds, and improve the efficiency of capital 
circulation. It is necessary to improve internal management 
mechanisms of enterprises, speed up reforms of their personnel, 
employment, and salary systems, and fully mobilize the 
enthusiasm of all workers and staff of enterprises. Efforts will 
be made to perfect quality control systems and enhance the 
competitiveness of products in the market. It is important to 
step up the marketing and sales of products, provide 
satisfactory follow-up services, and raise production and sales 
rates of our products. Measures will be adopted to reinforce 
prevention of disasters and damage and to minimize losses of 
state property incurred by accidents of various types. 
  Vigorous efforts will be taken to step up technological 
progress in enterprises. This year's investment in the 
technological transformation of state-owned industrial 
enterprises is expected to reach 4.5 billion yuan, up by 25 
percent over last year, of which 2.73 billion yuan will be 
invested in 26 key projects. Priority will be given to 
technical transformation of transportation, energy, postal and 
telecommunications industries, and raw and semi-finished 
materials industry, the technical transformation of highly 
efficient state above-the-line projects, and to a number of 
state key projects using new and high technologies introduced 
from abroad. It is important to vigorously develop new 
products, spread the use of new technologies, and focus our 
efforts on 30 development projects which are highly competitive 
and can bring along the development of all other enterprises to 
engage in technical cooperation of various forms with 
universities, colleges, and scientific research institutions, so 
new and high technologies can be extensively commercialized and 
applied to production. 
<H5>  IV. Focus on Energy and Transportation, and Accelerate the </H5>
Construction of Infrastructural Facilities 
  Making a success of infrastructural construction is not only 
an important task in accelerating the modernization drive, but 
also a key link in Fujian's efforts to ease bottleneck 
restrictions and maintain sustained, rapid, and healthy national 
economic development. While continuing to keep control over the 
scale of fixed assets investment, we will make every effort to 
optimize the investment pattern, and put the focus of investment 
on the construction of infrastructural facilities in the fields 
of transportation, power, and telecommunications. This year, 
the provincial authorities plan to invest 27.5 billion yuan in 
Fujian's infrastructural construction, representing an increase 
of 17 percent over last year's figure. A total of 30 large and 
medium projects have been arranged, 21 of which are involved in 
transportation and power production. 
  To improve our 
transportation facilities, we have made plans to build a new 
international airport, the Fuzhou Changle International Airport, 
continue construction of the Hennan and Zhangquanxiao railways, 
engage in second-phase construction of the Fuzhou New and Xiamen 
Dongdu ports, and start construction of the multi-purpose 
Zhangzhou port. Meanwhile, we will pay close attention to 
implementation of the "pioneer project," and unfold the overall 
construction of the Quanzhou-Xiamen section of the Fuzhou-Xiamen 
expressway. To boost power production, we will continue 
construction of the Shuikou hydroelectric station, the Xiamen 
Songyu power plant, and the no. 2 Zhangzhou power plant; try to 
start construction of the Mianhuatan and Muyangxi terraced 
hydroelectric stations; and strive to increase generating 
capacity by over 1 million kw this year. As regards 
telecommunications, we will pay close attention to construction 
of a key long-distance telecommunications project in Fuzhou and 
try to install 800,000 more program-controlled telephones across 
the province this year. In the field of water conservancy, we 
will continue construction of a key water conservancy project in 
Shanzai, Lianjiang; a water supply project on the northern bank 
of the Meizhou Bay; and a diversion works on the Min Jiang in 
Fuqing. Moreover, plans have been drawn up for construction of 
a water supply project on the southern bank of the Meizhou Bay. 
To improve our infrastructural facilities, we will continue 
construction of the Fujian oil refinery, the Shaowu bamboo pulp 
factory, and the expansion project of the Qingzhou paper mill, 
and make plans to start a number of new projects, including the 
Gonglongyan Prefectural paper mill and the Sande cement factory. 
Governments and departments at all levels should take into 
consideration the interests of the whole, strengthen 
coordination and management, promptly solve problems and 
difficulties that may crop up during construction, and ensure 
that all key projects, which have a great bearing on the overall 
economic development of the whole province, can start 
immediately and bring about economic returns at an early date. 
We will make continued efforts to raise construction funds 
through various channels and means, see to it that large-scale 
key infrastructural construction projects can be listed into the 
state's 1995-2010 development program, and make every effort to 
obtain loans for long-term development. Meanwhile, we will also 
try our utmost to secure loans from the World Bank, the Asia 
Bank, and other international financial institutions. It is 
important to adopt the practice of establishing project 
companies and shareholding companies with limited liability, and 
attract diversified economic elements to participate in 
construction of infrastructural facilities. We will reinforce 
management over infrastructural construction projects, pay close 
attention to first-stage preparation of these projects, and make 
sure that they can be started whenever conditions have matured. 
We will put into practice the system of public bidding for 
construction projects and a supervision system for the 
construction process, so that we can ensure that all projects 
under construction can be completed on schedule on the basis of 
fine quality and high efficiency. 
<H5>  V. Open Fujian Wider to the Outside World in Line With the </H5>
Requirement for Upgrading, Expanding, and Deepening Opening up 
  New breakthroughs should be made this year in attracting and 
utilizing foreign investment. We will give better guidance to 
the utilization of foreign investment, expand the scale of 
project reserves, and grant preferential policies to foreign 
investors to direct foreign investment mainly to projects of 
basic industries and infrastructural facilities, including 
ports, power production, airports, and highways, as well as to 
developmental agricultural projects and projects of transforming 
old enterprises. We will make every effort to encourage 
different industries and trades, such as banking, retailing, and 
tourist industries, to make more use of foreign investment. It 
is necessary to introduce more projects using advanced 
technologies and which can earn foreign exchange through 
exports. We will pay close attention to the coordination of 
major projects using foreign funds, simplify administrative 
procedures, provide better services, reinforce management, and 
ensure that more contracts on projects using foreign funds can 
be fulfilled, more contractual capital can be put into actual 
use, and more projects can start construction. 
  Vigorous efforts will be made to expand exports and foreign 
trade. We will continue to uphold the strategy of developing a 
pluralistic market, and open up new markets on a constant basis. 
We should seize current favorable opportunities brought by the 
new round of the foreign trade structural reform, continue 
implementing supportive measures and policies, extensively 
arouse the enthusiasm state-owned foreign trade enterprises of 
all types at all levels for expanding the scale of exports, 
improve day-to-day operations, and earn more foreign exchange 
through exports. It is important to give better play to the 
advantages of foreign-invested enterprises in expanding exports, 
and to continue to encourage the establishment of more 
export-oriented foreign-invested enterprises. We will do a good 
job in examining and approving import-export operations rights 
which are to be granted to productive enterprises, scientific 
and technological units, commercial materials enterprises, and 
large-scale township and town enterprises; give better guidance, 
support, and supervision to enterprises which have already 
obtained autonomy in handling import-export operations; and 
actively encourage them to undertake export tasks assigned by 
the state and try their best to play a part in increasing the 
foreign exchange revenue of the state. We will develop 
production of export commodities in light of market demands and 
readjust the mix of export commodities. It is imperative to 
provide enterprises with more information and consultative 
services; vigorously support enterprises to reinvigorate their 
export business by means of exchange, tax, and interest rates, 
and to improve management and supervision of product quality to 
enhance the quality of exported commodities. 
  A good job needs to be done in handling overseas Chinese 
affairs. We will further close ties with overseas Chinese and 
all Chinese residing in foreign countries, give full play to the 
forces of overseas Chinese, and through them try to introduce 
more funds, technology, and able personnel from overseas areas. 
We will vigorously promote economic and trade cooperation with 
Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macao. Proceeding from the interests of 
the whole under the principle of "peace and unification, and one 
country, two systems," we will continue to consolidate and 
promote existing economic and trade ties with Hong Kong and 
Macao, pay close attention to promoting economic and trade 
exchanges with Taiwan, and do a good job of attracting Taiwan 
investment and boosting Taiwan-bound exports. 
  Continued efforts will be made to promote economic and 
technological cooperation with foreign countries. We will 
further perfect macro-management mechanisms for construction 
projects contracted abroad and the export of labor services. It 
is imperative to reinforce management over enterprises located 
in overseas areas and to adopt a contracted responsibility 
system in these enterprises with a view to enhancing their 
economic performance. On the basis of consolidating the 
existing labor market, we will try to open up markets in 
Southeast Asian countries, Japan, and South Korea through 
various channels. Strides will be taken to promote 
international tourism as well as scientific and cultural 
exchanges with foreign countries. 
<H5>  VI. Increase Income and Economize on Spending and Do a </H5>
Good Job in Handling Financial and Taxation Work 
  This year, we are faced with arduous tasks in maintaining a 
balance between financial revenue and expenditure. To 
successfully fulfill these tasks, we need to vigorously open up 
new financial sources and increase financial revenue. Under the 
prerequisite of fulfilling the task of increasing revenue set by 
the central authorities, we will make careful studies and 
analyses of tax items which are under the jurisdiction of local 
governments, ensuring that we can not only expand existing 
financial sources, but also open up and cultivate new financial 
sources on a regular basis. In line with the unified 
arrangements of the central authorities, we will pay close 
attention to establishing tax organs under the central and local 
authorities, reinforce control and management of tax collection, 
collect taxes and give exemptions according to the law, and 
prevent any possible losses of state's tax revenue. While 
establishing a tax declaration system in all sectors, we will 
actively put into practice an agent system by which intermediary 
organs, such as accounting and auditing firms and tax 
consultation institutions, can act as agents in handling tax 
affairs. As a result, a mechanism will take shape under which 
taxpayers, tax-handling agents, and tax collection authorities 
can exercise restrictive functions on each other. In line with 
the principle of keeping expenditures within the limits of 
income, we will make rational readjustments to the expenditure 
structure, exercise strict management of the budget, refrain 
from making a deficit budget or rashly putting up 
establishments, absolutely put brakes on irrational spending, 
and ensure a balanced financial revenue and expenditure. 
<H5>  VII. Take Earnest Measures to Control Commodity Prices and </H5>
Further Enliven Market Circulation 
  Keeping commodity prices at a basically stable level is not 
only an important condition for smoothly carrying out reform and 
construction, but also a vital issue in maintaining social 
stability. Governments at all levels should regard as an 
important task keeping commodity prices under control. Under 
the prerequisite of giving full consideration of the tolerance 
of different sectors of the society, we should appropriately 
push forward price reform, continue to carry out a 
responsibility system with specific price- control targets, and 
make sure that the system can be put into practice at every 
level. Special attention should be paid to the "shopping basket 
project," successfully building up production bases of 
non-staple foodstuffs, and increasing effective supplies. The 
"shopping basket project" will be regarded one part of the job 
responsibility system for mayors and appraisals made on the work 
results of mayors every year. Governments at all levels across 
the province should allocate a total of 100 million yuan as 
price subsidies to support the "shopping basket project." To 
maintain a normal price order, it is important to strengthen 
management and supervision over prices of market commodities, 
keep watch over prices of 50 daily necessity goods and services 
of nine categories, including grain, cooking oil, meat, poultry, 
eggs, aquatic products, fresh vegetables, condiments, milk and 
dairy products, and household groceries, put goods on sale and 
provide services with prices and charges clearly marked, conduct 
general inspections over price rises, put an end to the 
practices of price discrimination and frauds, and hand down 
punishment according to the law on those who wantonly raise 
prices or exceed their power to charge more for their services. 
We must see to it that price rises for the year are controlled 
at about 10 percent, while the prices of daily necessities and 
services are controlled within the limits of tolerance of the 
majority. 
  We will make greater efforts to deepen reform of the 
circulation structure and do a good job of building markets. 
While trying our best to complete and put into operation 20 
large-scale commercial networks as scheduled, we will also set 
up 20 self-contained, multi-functional regional wholesale 
markets for agricultural and sideline products in a number of 
prefectures and cities, including Fuzhou and Xiamen, establish 
20 well-organized large-scale industrial products wholesale 
markets which mainly rely on highly competitive products, and 
develop a number of rural and border trade fairs. Vigorous 
efforts will be made to open up rural markets and to send to and 
sell marketable goods in rural areas with a view to satisfying 
the demands of the vast numbers of peasants. It is important to 
perfect supervision and management methods of the market, firmly 
abolish and ban sham and shoddy commodities, and ensure that 
business deals and competition can be carried out on an equal 
footing. 
<H5>  VIII. Based on Well-Coordinated Economic and Social </H5>
Development, Vigorously Push Forward Progress in Science and 
Technology and Other Social Undertakings 
  The development of social undertakings is an important 
aspect 
of the socialist modernization drive, and also a significant 
guarantee for the smooth progress of reform, opening up, and 
economic construction. To put an end to the current relatively 
backward state of Fujian's social undertakings, we must continue 
to implement the "Decision on Accelerating Reform and 
Development of Social Undertakings," and make all social 
undertakings flourish. 
  To boost scientific and technological work, we need to 
firmly 
establish the concept that science and technology are primary 
productive forces, continue to carry out in depth the principle 
of "relying on and gearing ourselves to the needs of the 
masses," provide good services for the main battlefield of 
economic construction, develop industries using new and high 
technologies, and reinforce basic research, thus closely 
integrating science and technology with the economy. In line 
with the principle of "concentrating on scientific and 
technological research and at the same time encouraging the 
commercialization of research results," we will step up the 
institutional reform of scientific research institutions, 
accelerate the pace of structural readjustment and personnel 
divisions, and gradually set up a modernized research and 
development system which features optimized structures, a 
rational setup, high efficiency, and great vitality. We will 
integrate production with scientific studies and research, speed 
up commercialization and industrialization of scientific and 
technological results, try to fulfill in a comprehensive way all 
targets and tasks set in the "rejuvenation program," 
successfully organize "10 major provincial-level scientific and 
technological research projects," concentrate our energy on 
running the Fuzhou and Xiamen new- and high-tech industrial 
development zones well, step up efforts to transform traditional 
industries with new and high technologies, and give support to 
developing a number of enterprises and enterprise groups using 
new and high technologies, which can attain an annual output 
value of over 100 million yuan. We will organize special forces 
to tackle a number of key technical problems in scientific 
research and certain scientific fields which are closely related 
to economic development. It is important to strengthen 
agrotechnical work, thus providing a scientific and 
technological backing for future agricultural development. 
Special attention will be paid to the research and spread of 
improved varieties, give play to the special features of these 
improved varieties, put them into scale production, and enhance 
their economic returns. We should score substantive results in 
"rejuvenating marine production through applications of 
scientific and technological advances," make breakthroughs in 
marine breeding skills, develop a number new skills and 
techniques in the manufacture, extraction, and processing of 
living marine resources, marine medicines, and marine health 
foods, and accelerate the transformation and development of 
marine industries. 
  To promote education, we should further carry out in depth 
the "Outline of China's Educational Reform and Development" and 
the "Law on Teachers," administer education according to the 
law, enhance the quality of education as a whole, and strive to 
build Fujian into one of the best provinces in providing 
education. We will speed up the pace of basically making 
universal the nine-year compulsory education, expand the scale 
of junior middle schools, and see to it that more graduates of 
higher primary schools are able to continue their studies in 
junior middle schools. We will strive to spread elementary 
compulsory education to 100 percent of our population, and 
secondary compulsory education to over 72 percent of the 
population. This year, we will take more effective measures to 
eliminate illiteracy, try to realize the goal of turning 200,000 
people into literate persons, enhance the literacy level of 
310,000 people, and bring the illiteracy rate down to 5 percent 
or lower among young and middle-aged people. Efforts will be 
made to strengthen senior middle school, as well as preschool 
and special education. We will vigorously develop vocational 
and technical, adult, and televised education of various forms, 
continue to implement the plan of training 1 million 
peasant-technicians, and accelerate the pace of developing all 
kinds of specialized technical personnel and skilled laborers 
who suit the needs of economic construction. 
  Educational 
reform should focus on readjusting the structure of education 
and enhancing both the quality of education and school-running 
efficiency. It is important to continue carrying out 
comprehensive reform of higher, rural, and urban education. 
Experiments with self-financed studies should be conducted in 
colleges and universities. We will continue to carry out reform 
at Yangen University, and make good preparations for the 
establishment of Jimei University and Yuanhong College. 
Governments at all levels should increase input into education 
in real terms, try to solve more practical problems, and make 
more solid accomplishments in the educational sector by 
economizing on spending in other fields. We will persistently 
raise educational funds through various channels, and vigorously 
encourage our citizens, people from all walks of life, overseas 
Chinese, and compatriots in Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macao, to run 
schools in Fujian or to make donations to schools across the 
province. We will advocate the sound general practice of 
respecting teachers and education, care about the working and 
living conditions of the vast numbers of teachers, and set up a 
guarantee mechanism by which teachers can receive their full 
salary on time without worrying about any defaults of payment. 
While actively developing able personnel, we will also pay 
attention to introducing and making rational use of them, 
striving to create an environment and conditions under which 
people of talent who can give full display of their talents and 
skills come forth in large numbers. 
  The focus of public health should be on rural areas. We will 
continue to carry out plans for building rural medical care 
stations and epidemic prevention stations, maternity and child 
care centers, and township and town hospitals; consolidate and 
develop the medical treatment, epidemic prevention, and health 
care networks at the county, township, and village levels; 
concentrate our efforts on building a number of township and 
town central hospitals; and develop and perfect cooperative 
medical systems of various forms. We will continue to carry out 
activities to create advanced cities and county towns in 
promoting public health and do a good job in the rural patriotic 
health campaign which mainly features transformation and 
enhancement of water and toilet facilities. Medical workers in 
urban areas should constantly improve their medical skills, 
adopt sound medical work styles, and provide patients with 
services of the best quality. We will accelerate reform of the 
medical and health care system, gradually perfect management of 
the free medical service system in urban areas, and work out 
appropriate contributions respectively borne by financial 
departments, units, and individuals. It is important to 
reinforce medical supervision and inspection, take earnest 
measures to prevent and control epidemic, local, and 
occupational diseases, focus our efforts on eliminating the 
disease of polio as well as diseases caused by insufficient 
iodine, and consolidate results we have already attained in the 
prevention of snail fever. Efforts will be done to rejuvenate 
traditional Chinese medicine. We will do a good job in building 
demonstration colleges of traditional Chinese medicine, and 
actively and steadily experiment with both the appraisal of 
hospitals and the leveled management of traditional Chinese 
medical hospitals. Further efforts will be made to strengthen 
our control over production and sale of pharmaceuticals. 
  To promote our cultural undertakings, we must adhere to the 
principles of "serving the people and the cause of socialism" 
and of "letting a hundred flowers bloom and a hundred schools of 
thoughts contend," continue to organize the implementation of 
the "project of a hundred flowers" and the "project of fragrant 
grass," actively advocate literature and art works of noble 
taste, make literature and art creation flourish, and at the 
same time, strictly ban and wipe out all harmful works from the 
cultural market. It is imperative to strengthen cultural work 
at the grass-roots level, namely in enterprises, schools and 
universities, and rural areas, enliven the cultural life of both 
urban and rural residents, and strive to make a success of the 
second session of Fujian Art Festival. Efforts will be made to 
promote sports. Athletes are required to make good preparations 
for the eighth national meet, step up training, and strive for 
better results in competitions. It is necessary to carry out 
mass sports activities on an extensive scale and to encourage 
counties to turn themselves into national-level advanced sports 
counties of the fifth batch. Greater efforts will be taken to 
promote the undertakings of radio and television and to provide 
the vast numbers of the masses with healthy and colorful 
entertainment programs. We will build up more satellite up-link 
stations, set up cable television networks in all counties 
across the province, and constantly expand the population 
reached by radio and television. We should pay close attention 
to the work of the press and publishing, provide the media with 
a correct opinion guide, enhance the overall quality of 
publications, and do a good job in the examination and appraisal 
of fine literature works published by publication funds. We 
will run archives well, pay attention to exploring information 
sources, and accelerate the modernization pace of archives 
management. A good job needs to be done in compiling and 
editing local annals, and the pace of compilation should be 
expedited. 
  XI. Uphold Basic National Policy, Exercise 
Population Control, Strengthen Protection of Environmental 
Resources, and Make Rational Use of Land 
  Governments at all levels should unswervingly pay close 
attention to family planning, and see to it that existing birth 
control policies, fixed population control targets, and the 
practice by which principal party and government leaders take 
personal charge of family planning work remain unchanged. 
Fujian has successfully fulfilled the state's birth control 
tasks for three consecutive years. To consolidate this 
accomplishment, we will continue to further perfect the 
management responsibility system with specific targets on 
population control and family planning, strictly implement the 
"Regulations of Fujian Province on Family Planning," focus our 
attention on the birth control of rural and floating 
populations, strengthen family planning work at the grass-roots, 
especially the village, level, carry out propaganda and 
education among and provide services for the masses, and ensure 
that Fujian's birth rate continues to be controlled below 18.59 
per thousand. Meanwhile, we will attach great importance to 
environmental protection. At present, Fujian's environmental 
protection falls far behind its economic development, and some 
localities are still engaged in creating waste water, waste gas, 
industrial residues, and noise. To counter such a situation, 
governments at all levels should bring environmental protection 
into their economic and social development programs in real 
terms, adopt a strict responsibility system with specific 
targets, and regard the results of environmental protection as 
one of major aspects of the appraisal work of governments. We 
will further reinforce education and propaganda on environmental 
protection and enhance the awareness of the people of the entire 
province, especially cadres at all levels, of the need to 
protect the environment. In accordance with the law, we will 
conduct strict evaluations on newly built, transformed, and 
expanded projects to see if they pose serious hazards to the 
environment, and, at the sametime, require that affiliated 
environmental protection facilities be designed, built, and put 
into use together with these projects. We will intensify 
environmental supervision and management, focus our attention on 
prevention and control of pollution incurred by township and 
town enterprises as well as by foreign-invested enterprises, 
place emphasis on the comprehensive control of the "four pests," 
and bring Fujian's overall environment more in line with its 
economic construction. We will deepen reform of the land use 
system, strengthen management of the first-grade land market, 
put into practice across the province the system of compensated 
sales of land use right with limited terms, gradually increase 
the proportion of land leases, perfect approval procedures of 
land leases, and enhance the transparency of compensated land 
sales. We will treasure every inch of arable land, strengthen 
farmland protection, institute a system on establishing basic 
farmland protection zones, firmly ban the practice of leaving 
farmland uncultivated, keep strict control over the occupancy of 
farmland for non-agricultural uses, vigorously develop farmland 
reserve resources, such as waste hills and shoals, and strive to 
increase the total sown area by 40,000 mu this year. 
<H5>  X. Earnestly Strengthen Building of Socialist Spiritual </H5>
Civilization, Democracy, and the Legal System on the Basis of 
Maintaining Social Stability and Progress 
  We will attach great importance to the building of socialist 
spiritual civilization. Vigorous efforts will be made to 
strengthen ideological and ethical education, unremittingly 
conduct education on the party's basic theories and basic line, 
step up study, propaganda, and education of the theory on 
building socialism with Chinese characteristics, give wide 
publicity to the 64-character pioneering spirit advocated by 
Comrade Jiang Zemin, guide the vast numbers of party members, 
cadres, and masses to enhance their senses of self-respect, 
self-confidence, and self-improvement, help them establish 
correct ideologies, beliefs, as well as outlooks on life and 
value, and enhance their ability to guard against the corrosive 
influences of various kinds of decadent ideologies and to remove 
various kinds of obstructions. We will continue to carry out 
the activity of creating civilized units in both urban and rural 
areas, consolidate and promote results we have already attained 
in the mass building of spiritual civilization, and give form to 
a healthy and sound general mood in the society. It is 
important to reinforce civil administration work, and do a good 
job in giving special care to and resettling disabled servicemen 
and families of revolutionary martyrs and servicemen, in 
providing disaster relief, and in giving mutual social aid. We 
will make every effort to enhance the awareness of the whole 
people of the need for national defense, reinforce the building 
of the militia and reserve services, continue to do a good job 
in giving "dual support," and consolidate and promote unity 
between the army and the government and between the army and the 
people. 
  Vigorous efforts will be made to push forward the building 
of socialist democracy and the legal system. We will develop a 
democratic style of work, and protect the rights of the masses 
as masters of the country. Governments at all levels should 
voluntarily subject themselves to the supervision of people's 
congresses and their standing committees, and give full play to 
the roles of the local CPPCC committees, democratic parties, 
mass bodies, and non-party personages in providing political 
consultation and democratic supervision. We will 
conscientiously implement the party's policies on nationalities 
and religions, and make every effort to provide correct guidance 
to nationality and religious work. It is important to 
strengthen the building of the legal system, and pay close 
attention to formulating laws, rules, and regulations which are 
closely related to the socialist market economy. We will 
reinforce and improve supervision over judicial and 
law-enforcement work,; persistently administer the government 
according to the law, and put an absolute end to the tendency to 
ignore laws, neither observing nor enforcing them to the letter, 
as well as failure to punish lawbreakers according to the law. 
It is necessary to set up and develop special legal service 
organs, carry out in depth education on the legal system, and 
enhance the legal concept of the whole people. 
  Efforts will be made to improve all facets of public 
security. Leading cadres at all levels should regard the task of 
maintaining social order as one of the work targets during their 
tenure of office, gradually establish a work mechanism of 
rewards and punishments, constantly explore new ways to improve 
public security under the new situation, and carry through 
measures for comprehensive rectification of public security down 
to the grass- roots level. We will continue to increase the 
intensity of the crackdown campaign, promptly hand down heavy 
punishments to offenders for various serious crimes according to 
the law, and carry out in depth the struggles of "eliminating 
six evils" and of "wiping out pornographic activities." Strides 
will be taken to strengthen coastal defense, deal severe blows 
to smuggling, and make every effort to stop illegal immigration 
activities. We will correctly handle contradictions among the 
people, do a good job in dealing with letters and visits of the 
masses, mediate disputes among them in a timely manner, and 
protect against possible troubles. We will strictly administer 
police forces, and constantly enhance the political and 
professional qualities of the judicial contingent. 
  We will carry out the struggle against corruption in a 
thoroughgoing, sustained, and more effective way. In line with 
the two "five-point stipulations" set out by the central 
authorities, we will urge leading cadres to remain honest and 
clean and make self- criticism when carrying out their official 
duties. We will continue to pay close attention to 
investigating and dealing with major cases which involve the 
abuse of power for personal gain, graft and bribery, practicing 
favoritism, perverting justice for bribes, and dereliction of 
duties. Persons who have degenerated and violated the law or 
rules of discipline must be punished unsparingly according to 
the law. It is important to increase the intensity of 
eliminating unhealthy practices, such as arbitrarily collecting 
fees and overseas travel at the expenses of the state, and urge 
party and government organs to sever their links with 
enterprises and commercial sectors. We will make every effort 
to perfect the legal system, set up an effective mechanism of 
supervision and restriction, guard against and eliminate corrupt 
practices by establishing strict systems, and ensure that new 
results can be scored at the present phase of the 
anti-corruption campaign. 
  Fellow Deputies, 
  This year is the fourth year since we started to carry out 
the Eighth Five-Year Plan. Generally speaking, we did a good 
job in implementing the Eighth Five-Year Plan during the first 
three years, and this year we can expect to fulfill all major 
tasks set out in the plan one year ahead of time. In light of 
the implementation of the Eighth Five-Year Plan, as well as the 
current economic development trend, provincial authorities have 
called many meetings to study a development strategy for the 
Ninth Five-Year Plan period as well as the first decade of the 
next century. The following is our tentative plan: To improve 
the economic structure, we will further deepen reform, 
vigorously cultivate the main body of a pluralistic market, 
perfect the market system, improve macroeconomic control and 
regulation as well as the social guarantee system, give play to 
the basic regulatory roles of the market mechanism, and provide 
economic development with a strong motive power. To optimize 
the economic structure, we will give full play to the advantages 
of Hong Kong and Taiwan and engage in large-scale 
infrastructural construction; while transforming and tapping the 
production potentials of existing enterprises, try to cultivate 
new economic growth points, give rise to new pillar industries, 
including petrochemistry, machinery and electronics, light and 
textile industries, and biological engineering, develop an 
export- oriented economy, and accelerate development of tertiary 
industries, thus bringing about a leap forward in Fujian's 
economy. To promote development of the region, we will expedite 
exploration of southeastern Fujian, and turn it into a 
prosperous area west of the Taiwan Straits, thus bringing about 
the joint development of both mountain and coastal areas in 
Fujian. As regards the economic growth rate, we expect that the 
GNP will grow by 11 percent during the Ninth Five-Year Plan and 
by 10 percent in the decade afterwards. 
  According to this 
tentative development plan, during the Ninth Five-Year Plan 
period, Fujian will basically set up a socialist market economic 
structure, and fulfill the plan of doubling the GNP for the 
third time; and our people will attain a fairly comfortable life 
ahead of schedule. By the year 2010, that is, 10 years after 
the Ninth Five-Year Plan, Fujian's socialist market economic 
structure will become more mature and perfect; an advanced 
transportation and telecommunications system and a reliable 
energy guarantee system will be set up; most areas, led by 
southeastern part of the province, will basically realize their 
goals of modernization. In that case, Fujian will rank among 
the best provinces of the country in general economic quantity, 
per capita income, and major indicators of social development, 
and the living standards of people in Fujian will reach the 
level of moderately advanced countries. By that time, a more 
prosperous and civilized Fujian will stand like a giant on the 
southeastern coast of our motherland. To make this strategic 
goal come true, the people of the whole province should forge 
ahead with full confidence. 
  Fellow Deputies, 
  It is a great historic task of the new period to establish a 
socialist market economic structure and to accelerate the pace 
of the modernization drive. Therefore, it is the scared 
responsibility of governments at all levels to unite, guide, and 
organize the people of the entire province to fulfill this grand 
yet arduous task. To smoothly accomplish the tasks of reform, 
development, and stability, we must take earnest measures to 
improve the self- building of the government, constantly enhance 
the political, ideological, ethic, and professional qualities of 
government functionaries, and meet new challenges with a new 
attitude. 
  Firstly, we must promote unity and work with concerted 
efforts. In the past, we relied on the strength of unity to 
attain glorious accomplishments in reform, opening up, and 
economic construction. Today, to strive for new victories in 
reform, development, and stability, we need all the more to hold 
high the banner of unity and cooperation, unite all forces that 
can be united, mobilize all positive factors, give good 
guidance, protection, and play to the enthusiasm of the vast 
numbers of cadres and masses, and try hard to create a political 
situation of unity, harmony, stability, and progress. 
Governments at all levels should take into consideration the 
interests of the whole, place the interests of the party and 
country above everything else, and appropriately handle 
relations between higher and lower levels, between departments, 
inside leading bodies, and among leading bodies of different 
fields. Government workers at both the higher and lower levels 
should help each other and work in coordination. Different 
departments should establish the concept of "playing the same 
game of chess," work with concerted efforts, and give play to 
their functions and role as a whole. Leading bodies and comrades 
in different fields should respect, understand, support, and 
help each other. Governments at all levels should safeguard the 
party's leadership, voluntarily subject themselves to the 
supervision of people's congresses at all levels and their 
standing committees, tighten ties with the CPPCC, democratic 
parties, mass bodies, and people from all walks of life, and 
give better play to their roles in participating in government 
and political affairs and in exercising democratic supervision. 
By so doing, our modernization cause can unify forces from all 
sides, and can advance with great vitality. 
  Secondly, we need to change work styles and carry out our 
work in a down-to-earth manner. It is important to advocate 
more study and less entertainments, more investigations and less 
subjective conjecture, and more solid work and less empty talks. 
These three points are of vital significance to our efforts to 
improve the work style of leaders. Leading cadres at all levels 
should go to the forefront of reform and construction, carry out 
careful investigations and studies, acquaint themselves with the 
overall situation at the grass-roots level, actively explore new 
ways to promote reform and development, and appropriately solve 
all kinds of complicated social contradictions that may crop up. 
Governments at all levels should proceed from meeting the needs 
of the socialist market economic structure, act in accordance 
with the principle of separating functions of the government 
from those of enterprise, and place the focus of the 
government's functions on making unified plans, formulating 
policies, providing information and guidance, organizing 
coordinated actions, providing services, and conducting 
supervision and inspection. Departments at all levels should 
give play to their new functions, further enhance their sense of 
dedication and responsibility, remain industrious in their work, 
and improve their work efficiency. Leaders at all levels should 
maintain close ties with the masses, care about the difficulties 
and problems of the masses, earnestly protect the legitimate 
rights and interests of the masses, and try hard to accomplish 
more solid work for the masses. Continued efforts will be taken 
to deal with the 15 tasks set by the provincial party committee 
and government which are closely related to the daily life and 
production of the masses, thus winning the trust and support of 
the masses of the people. 
  Third, we must make conscientious studies and enhance our 
quality. Leading cadres at all levels should conscientiously 
study Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory of building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics, especially the third volume of the 
"Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping," grasp the essence of Deng 
Xiaoping's works, apply theories to practical work, and 
constantly enhance their work efficiency and decisionmaking 
ability. Meanwhile, they also need to read more books on the 
theory and basic concepts of the market economy, and learn and 
master more knowledge about modern economics, science and 
technology, laws, and society, with a view to widening their 
vision and enhancing their leadership skills. 
  Fourth, we should remain honest and clean when carrying out 
official duties, and engage in hard struggles. Government 
functionaries at all levels should bear in mind the party's 
principle of serving the people wholeheartedly, place the 
interests of the people before everything else at all times, and 
regard it as a basic work requirement to build a clean and 
industrious administration. Leading cadres at all levels should 
remain clean and honest, rouse themselves for vigorous efforts 
to make the country prosperous, and exercise good control of 
power on behalf of the people. It is important to carry forward 
the pioneering spirit of hard struggles during the new period, 
never break away from the masses, stand in no fear of 
difficulties and problems, guard against the tendency of seeking 
ease and comfort, oppose extravagance and waste, be industrious 
and frugal, make unceasing efforts to improve ourselves, and 
score new results in our cause on a constant basis. 
  Fellow Deputies, 
  Reform, development, and stability are the call of our 
times, 
and also the aspiration of the people. We should further 
enhance our senses of mission and urgency, rally more closely 
around the party Central Committee with Comrade Jiang Zemin at 
its core, and under the guidance of the party's basic theories 
and basic line and under the leadership of the provincial party 
committee, closely rely on the people of the entire province, 
work with one heart and one mind, carry out hard struggles, and 
strive for greater victories in Fujian's reform, opening up, and 
modernization drive! 

