CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Agnes Jurgens: "Negotiations Pave Way to </F>
 the 
European Market"] 
  [Text] 
  Free trade negotiations are taking place between 
Estonia and the European Union. The round of talks concluded in 
Tallinn yesterday was considered unofficial by the European 
Union because participation was limited to experts. It will 
count as a full round nevertheless, in relation to the entire 
negotiation process, said Foreign Ministry's vice chancellor 
Priit Kolbre, who headed the Estonian delegation. 
  The negotiations held in Tallinn lasted for two days. Talks 
on the competition law and custums issues proceeded without any 
major debate. The competition law of the Republic of Estonia was 
formulated to conform to the legal framework established by the 
European Union, and this is why it was considered compatible. 
The group of customs experts, however, formulated two protocols. 
One of them establishes mutual aid between the customs 
organizations of the European Union and those of Estonia, 
consisting mainly of exchanging legislative information. The 
other protocol touches on the regulations of the free trade 
agreement, and provides for setting up some additional 
conditions for us. 
  Much more difficult is the progress of talks dealing with 
concessions for bringing textile and agricultural products into 
the countries of the European Union. The Tallinn round of talks 
did not deal directly with the textile issue, because experts in 
this area could not come here. However, the request of the 
Estonian delegation to that effect was submitted. 
  In the area of agricultural production, it so happens that 
the states of the European Union have the same exact production 
as we do. This is why there is no interest in the import of our 
food items. According to Ruve Shank, vice chancellor at the 
Ministry of Agriculture, our side had prepared a listing of 100 
products, for which we requested concessions. This was 
considered unrealistic by the experts of the European Union, 
both for its number of items and for its volume. The EU experts, 
for example, consider it unrealistic to apply special 
concessions for the export of 300 tonnes of pork, which 
represents roughly the annual requirement for one restaurant. 
Estonia's proposed exports to Europe call for 15,000 tonnes of 
milk powder and 3,000 tonnes of cheese. Even these amounts are 
supposedly too large despite the fact that, back in 1938, 
Estonia used to export 15,000 tonnes of butter to the European 
countries. 
  Out of the hundred items on the list, the Estonian 
delegation 
was allowed to retain about 20. Discussions on these will 
continue during the negotiations set for May 19 and 20. 
  There was also talk about applying protective measures on 
Estonia's borders. The European Union, the experts think, can do 
that. The final decision will have to be made by the government 
of the Republic of Estonia and Ruve Shank thinks that these 
restrictions will have to be applied to some products anyhow, 
because we want to join the European Union. 
  Clyde Kull, Republic of Estonia's embassador in Brussels, 
thought that free trade negotiations between Estonia and the 
European Union show that Estonia is regarded as a serious 
partner. In his opinion, the joining of the Baltic states with 
the European Union may take place before the turn of the century. 
  The free trade agreement takes effect in January of 1995 
and, 
in that context, we are already a part of European Union's free 
trade zone. 

