Language: <F P=105>Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed talk: "Upholding The Great Leader Is a </F>
Decisive Guarantee for Inheriting and Completing the Socialist 
Cause] 
  [Text] Today our revolution is vigorously advancing along 
the single road of chuche. Even now, after a long time has 
passed since our revolution was pioneered, our revolution 
constantly and victoriously advances. This is because the issue 
of inheriting the leadership has been brilliantly resolved and 
because we have upheld the great leader [yongdoja] as the head 
of party and the revolution. 
  The great leader Comrade Kim Il-song has taught: The issue 
of inheriting the leadership has already been brilliantly 
resolved in our country, because Comrade Kim Chong-il has wisely 
led the overall work of the party, state, and Army for a long 
time. 
  The way to inherit the generation of revolution is an 
important matter related to the destiny of the revolutionary 
cause of the working class -- the socialist cause. The 
socialist cause is an historic cause that can be carried out 
generation after generation. Therefore, the working class party 
and people must firmly inherit the generation of revolution to 
achieve the socialist cause. 
  The fundamental question in inheriting the generation of 
revolution is to firmly guarantee the inheritance of leadership. 
The prospect of the revolutionary cause of the working class -- 
the socialist cause -- depends on how to inherit the leadership 
of the leader [suryong]. 
  The leader [suryong] occupies an absolute position and plays 
a decisive role in the revolutionary struggle of the working 
class. As the leader [yongdoja] plays a decisive role in the 
struggle for independence, he also plays a decisive role in the 
revolutionary struggle -- the struggle to adhere to independence 
and to completely achieve it -- which has continued generation 
after generation. 
  To consummate the revolutionary cause pioneered by the 
leader 
[suryong] and to firmly inherit the generation of revolution, 
therefore, we must brilliantly resolve the issue of inheriting 
the leadership. 
  The historical lesson of the recent collapse of socialism in 
some countries shows that correctly resolving the issue of 
inheriting the leadership is a fundamental question in endlessly 
consummating the revolution generation after generation and that 
the success of the revolution depends on it. 
  In the revolutionary cause of the working class, the issue 
of 
inheriting the leadership is, in essence, a matter of inheriting 
the position and role of the political leader [chongchijok 
suryong], who pioneered the road of revolution. As the 
revolution guides the historical inheritance, the 
leadership-oriented position and role of the leader [suryong] 
must be inherited without change. 
  The working class party and people must uphold the people's 
leader [chidoja], who is endlessly loyal to the party, the 
revolution, the fatherland, and the people, and who has a noble 
character and capacity to satisfactorily carry out political 
leadership throughout society. For the people who struggle to 
inherit and consummate the socialist cause, there is no other 
greater luck than to uphold and follow the leadership of the 
leader [yongdoja], who is absolutely trusted by the popular 
masses because of his immortal achievements based on his 
brilliant wisdom, outstanding leadership ability, and noble 
virtues. 
  Today the issue of inheriting the leadership has been 
brilliantly resolved in our country. This is because we firmly 
uphold the dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il as the supreme head 
of the party and the revolution. 
  The dear leader Comrade Kim Chong-il is the outstanding 
thinker and theoretician, the great politician, and military 
strategist, as well as the people's true leader [chamdaun 
yongdoja] who is boundlessly loyal to the party, the revolution, 
the fatherland, and the people. Our people are now overflowing 
with a boundless national dignity and pride of carrying out the 
revolution under the leadership of the dear comrade leader, thus 
having confidence in the final victory of the chuche cause by 
the leadership of the leader [suryong], who is brilliantly 
inheriting and consummating the chuche revolutionary cause 
generation after generation, thus upholding the high intent of 
the great comrade leader [suryong]. 
  The dear comrade leader's leadership traits are truly very 
prominent. These traits include boundless loyalty to the party 
and the revolutionary cause, a spirit of devoted service to the 
fatherland and the people, unparalleled courage and will, 
extraordinary organizational ability, and leadership ability. 
  Today the dear comrade leader is absolutely trusted by the 
people because he has gained immortal achievements in the 
revolution and construction with his best qualities and 
characters as the true leader of the people. 
  The dear comrade leader has strengthened and developed our 
party and the revolutionary ranks into the invincible ranks of 
single-hearted unity and opened a great golden age in all fields 
of the socialist construction, including politics, economy, and 
culture. With his energetic, ideological, and theoretical 
activities and his practical struggle, he has also gained 
achievements which will shine in the world for the fatherland, 
the people, and the revolution without sleep or rest. 
  Under the experienced and tested leadership of the dear 
comrade leader, our revolution is firmly and constantly 
advancing along the road of the chuche idea pioneered by the 
great leader [suryong]. Today the issue of inheriting the 
leadership has been brilliantly resolved and the generation of 
revolution has also been firmly succeeded in our country. This 
is because we have firmly established the leadership system that 
can successfully achieve the dear comrade leader's leadership. 
  To endlessly inherit and consummate the revolution, the 
leadership system that can achieve the dear comrade leader's 
leadership must be thoroughly established along with the 
upholding of the great leader [yongdoja]. 
  Today the system that can achieve the dear comrade leader's 
leadership has been firmly established in our country. As a 
result, the revolution and construction are being successfully 
carried out as demanded and intended by the great leader 
[suryong]. Because of the thorough establishment of the party's 
leadership system, today the ideology and intent of the leader 
[yongdoja] have been timely conveyed and penetrated into the 
entire party and the whole society; an iron-like discipline in 
which the entire party, the whole country, and all people move 
as one by firmly uniting around the leader [yongdoja] has been 
established; and the revolution and construction have been 
vigorously accelerated under the monolithic leadership of the 
leader [yongdoja]. 
  The entire party, the whole country, and all people will 
breath and act as demanded by the ideology and will of their 
leader [yongdoja], no matter where and what they work. If it is 
the intent of the party and the leader, they will even move 
mountains and fill up the sea with earth. This faith of loyalty 
and the spirit of the single-hearted unity are firmly being 
filled throughout a society. 
  This firmly proves that our revolution will firmly maintain 
its life in the future, too, along the road of the chuche idea 
under the leadership of the dear comrade leader, and that it can 
be inherited and consummated generation after generation. The 
proud history of our revolution and today's reality tells us the 
noble truth that for the working class party and people to 
firmly inherit the generation of revolution, they must uphold 
the people's true leader, who can brilliantly inherit and 
consummate the revolutionary cause pioneered by the leader 
[suryong], and thoroughly establish his leadership system. 
  Because the dear comrade leader is leading our party and the 
revolution, the generation of our revolution has been strongly 
inherited and the victory in the chuche cause has been firmly 
guaranteed. Because of his leadership, our revolution is 
vigorously advancing forever along the single road of chuche 
pioneered by the great leader [suryong]. Also, the victory and 
glory will be laid in the future road of socialism of our own 
style. This spirit is a firm faith, as well as the will of our 
people who have cherished it deep in their hearts. Firmly 
inheriting the generation of revolution by upholding the great 
leader [yongdoja] is the great dignity, pride, and luck of our 
party and people. 
  All party members and working people must vigorously 
struggle 
to consummate the chuche revolutionary cause, the socialist and 
communist cause, by cherishing boundless national dignity and 
revolutionary pride. 

