BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Jesus Eduardo Brando] </F>
  [Text] The militarization of the struggle against drugs as 
a priority of the Venezuelan state will be proposed to President 
Rafael Caldera, who will receive an analysis of the country's 
problem and an action plan to fight it. The plan was studied 
yesterday during a joint meeting between civilian and military 
organizations. 
  The secret conference at the Palacio Blanco was presided 
over 
by Division General Alberto Emerich Esqueda Torres (Army) and 
Brigadier General Jesus Antonio Rojas Salazar (National Guard), 
executive secretary and assistant secretary of the National 
Security and Defense Council (Seconasede), respectively; 
representatives of the Defense Ministry and National Border 
Council; and chiefs of narcotics in the Army, Navy, Air Force, 
and National Guard. 
  Dr Vladimir Gessen, former chairman of the Chamber of 
Deputies Drug Commission and chairman of the Foundation for a 
Drug-Free Venezuela, was invited to address the closed meeting. 
<H5>  THE CONTINENT'S PROBLEM </H5>
  In its initial analysis of the problem, Gessen's lecture 
referred to the basic factors of regional and continental 
security, including the production and processing in Peru, 
Bolivia, and Colombia of 1,170 tons of cocaine whose final 
destination is the U.S. market. 
  According to international organizations' figures, the 
production of this volume of drugs in those countries costs 
$5,000 per kilo, which represents an investment of $5.85 
billion. The average price on the U.S. wholesale market 
increases to $25,000 per kilo, which represents an approximate 
income of $29.835 billion. International drug trafficking 
organizations' profit margins fluctuate around these suggested 
amounts. 
  Moreover, the overall volume per year, approximately 1,170 
tons, has another angle of benefits for the cartels. When the 
drug is "cut," through mixtures that reduce its level of purity, 
the volume increases to 1,649,700 kg. 
  Calculations on the illegal activity indicate the retail 
sale 
of that amount for an average price of $98 per gram yields 
traffickers an income of approximately $161,670,600 per year. 
Meanwhile, other drugs yield them an income of approximately 
$90,113,212 per year. In other words, the U.S. market yields 
$251,783,812 per year. The volume sent to the United States 
represents 75 percent of the Peru, Bolivia, and Colombia 
cartels' annual production; and the remaining 25 percent is sent 
to the European markets. 
<H5>  VENEZUELA'S SITUATION </H5>
  In Venezuela's case, it is estimated that 200 tons of drugs 
are brought to the country every year. Based on production 
costs, this represents approximately $1 billion. But once the 
drug reaches the U.S. market, the amount increases to $5.1 
billion. 
  The following give an idea of the importance of shipments 
that pass through the national territory: 1) A shipment of 
concrete poles was seized at the United States (Miami) in 
December 1991. The poles contained 15,700 kg of cocaine with a 
net cost of $78.5 million, approximately 10,754,500,000 
bolivares (at the exchange rate quoted during the last quarter 
of 1993). An additional 2,700 kg of drugs, with an approximate 
value of $13.5 million (1,849,500,000 bolivares) and hidden 
inside some aluminum ingots, were seized in New Jersey in 
December that same year. 
  Another shipment of aluminum poles was intercepted at 
Holland 
in February 1994. The structures contained 3,000 kg of cocaine 
valued at approximately $15 million (2.055 billion bolivares). 
The confiscation of other contraband in England was reported in 
April. The drug was hidden inside crude oil drums and had an 
approximate value of $375 million (51.375 billion bolivares). 
  Reports received this month indicate a drug laboratory 
dismantled in Cucuta, on the Venezuelan border, maintained 
average production of 400 kg of cocaine per week, meaning 20,800 
kg per year, at an average value of $104 million. 
<H5>  A STATE PRIORITY </H5>
  These issues were reportedly reviewed during the meeting 
attended by the state's high-ranking drug and security 
officials, who believe the problem should be handled as such. 
Regarding this issue, they discussed the possibility and 
advisability of assigning an Army division general as chairman 
of the National Commission Against Illegal Drug Use (Conacuid). 
This would clearly indicate the importance and essence of the 
problem for the country, and it would be an unequivocal sign to 
internal factors, foreign governments, and international 
organizations of the determination to face the problem as a 
threat to the Venezuelan state. 
  It was learned that the topics analyzed and proposals 
submitted on objectives, goals, and specific actions to be 
carried out at different periods would be briefed to the 
president of the republic yesterday afternoon, in a special 
report by Ministers Rafael Angel Montero Revette (defense) and 
Pompeyo Marquez (borders). 

