Language: <F P=105> Hebrew </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Yo'el Marcus: "Wiped the Smiles Off Their </F>
Faces"] 
  [Text] Some matters become boring to read and talk about 
just an hour after they are first mentioned. Such is the 
bombshell about the referendum. It is simply hard to believe 
that in such a short time, so many people said so many words 
about this unborn issue. A nonsense issue from beginning to end. 
  Yitzhaq Rabin does not feel he should ask the people 
anything, certainly not at this time, for the simple reason that 
he knows the answer himself. The answer is that he does not 
even think of surrendering to President al-Asad's unequivocal 
demand to get back all of the Golan Heights, down to the shores 
of Lake Tiberias. Not only does this contradict his preelection 
commitments and his concepts as defense minister, the price 
al-Asad has named as self- evident is not acceptable to Rabin in 
any event. 
  At the end of the "historic summit" day, at midnight on 16 
January Dennis Ross and Martin Indyk came knocking at the door 
of Rabin's Jerusalem home with a smile that, according to an 
eyewitnesses, was 20-inches long and 10-inches wide. According 
to the eyewitness, Rabin wiped the smile of their faces in 15 
minutes. He complained that the administration had lent its hand 
to al-Asad's demand on banning Israeli reporters. And how come 
al-Asad mentioned UN Resolution 425 as applying only to Israel 
when, according to its own words, it also applies to the Syrian 
presence in Lebanon? 
  Regarding the normalization clause, they said happily: We 
did it. [last three words in English] To which Rabin replied, 
somewhat disparagingly: You did it. [last three words in 
English] He meant that Clinton had done al-Asad's work for him. 
While al-Asad kept a poker face on certain issues, Clinton 
spoke about them. Rabin was certain the U.S. envoys came to 
brief him about the new things that al-Asad whispered in 
Clinton's ear regarding the nature of peace. To his surprise, 
but mainly to his disappointment, he heard nothing that the 
Israelis could not have seen on television. The envoys did their 
best to beautify al-Asad's intentions, providing complex 
Talmudic interpretations of his vague remarks. Rabin was left 
with the impression that, speaking on the issue of 
normalization, al-Asad still uses riddles. Yet, speaking with 
Clinton, al-Asad was very clear on the nature of withdrawal: No 
territorial compromise. He wants a withdrawal from every inch. 
This proves that when he so chooses, al-Asad -- sick or not -- 
suffers no problem in articulation. 
  The two American envoys left the prime minister's home with 
their wings clipped. Rabin asked them questions they could not 
answer: Does al-Asad understand that Israel will demand that he 
drastically cut back the Syrian Army deployment deep to the east 
of the Golan Heights? Has he agreed to precise mapping of the 
demilitarization lines combined with long-term dates? Has he 
realized that he will be asked to rid himself of most of his 
chemical weapons? President 'Ezer Weizman also deflated the 
spirits of the two emissaries when they dined with him. 
"Al-Asad maneuvered Clinton," he told them candidly, adding: 
"You may tell him that I said so." 
  Indeed, the impression was created here that Clinton, a 
novice in foreign affairs, is not too well versed in decoding 
seemingly innocent utterances. He misinterpreted al-Asad's 
condition for agreeing to close a deal with Israel as doing it 
in the framework of a comprehensive peace. This condition means 
that even if we get off the Golan Heights, there will be no 
normalization before we sign agreements with Lebanon and Jordan, 
finalize the status of the territories with the Palestinians, 
solve the problem of Jerusalem and, who knows, perhaps also make 
peace with Pakistan and Saudi Arabia. 
  Ross and Indyk also tried to sell their sweeping 
interpretation directly to the Israeli public. In an 
extraordinary move, they met the political correspondents and 
columnists, and gave interviews to Israeli television stations 
in an attempt to portray the Geneva summit as an incredible 
achievement. The impression here, however, is that the only 
achievement made during the summit was the rapprochement between 
the United States and Syria, which the two countries have an 
interest in promoting. Al-Asad shed crocodile tears when, 
during the press conference, he said that in every Syrian house 
there is a family mourning a son who fell "to defend Syria." 
This false presentation of the facts simply cries to high 
heaven. They fell because of Syria's repeated attempts to 
destroy the State of Israel; not to mention the 20,000 grieving 
families of the people slaughtered in Hamah on personal orders 
from al-Asad. The Syrian president does not feel there is a 
price for aggression. Just the contrary. He feels he deserves 
trophies and the royal treatment for failing to destroy Israel. 
It is also worrying that even the current friendly U.S. 
Administration wants us in borders that even UN Resolution 242 
does not call for. 
  This new beginning is not encouraging on the eve of the 
resumption of the Washington talks. Their commitment to the 
comprehensive settlement already made the Americans invite the 
Palestinians to the talks. If the negotiations tracks are 
joined, with Syria leading the way in coordination with the 
Americans, there is a justifiable fear that the administration 
might be tempted to pressure Israel to work according to a 
timetable, with terms set by al-Asad. The referendum affair, 
therefore, could be perceived not as a brilliant tactic, but as 
a surface-to-surface missile expressing Rabin's displeasure. 
The warhead of this missile carries a simple message: I have a 
mandate for territorial compromise with solid security elements; 
I would have no mandate nor a majority's support if the issue in 
question is returning to the 1967 borders -- so, let us ask the 
people. To be sure, Rabin has primarily placed constraints on 
himself. This shows us that along the long, very long way to 
peace with Syria, many a smile stands to be wiped off faces. 

