Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Singapore -- Ships sailing through Southeast Asian 
waters last year enjoyed some respite from marauders. In 1993, 
the Regional Piracy Centre in Kuala Lumpur received only eight 
reports of pirate attacks in the region, compared with 73 in the 
previous year and 107 in 1991. The figures were disclosed in a 
report released from Kuala Lumpur on Friday. 
  Piracy seems to be on the decline worldwide. The centre, 
which was set up in 1992 and is part of the International 
Maritime Bureau, received 103 reports of piracy incidents last 
year. By comparison, there were 107 incidents in 1992 and 115 
in 1991. Most of the incidents took place in the first half of 
last year. Between January and June last year, 76 raids on ships 
took place. From July onwards, the number fell to just 27. 
  Asia remained the piracy hot spot, with a total of 81 
attacks 
taking place on ships sailing through Asian waters. Another 
seven robberies occurred on vessels parked at various Indonesian 
ports. 
  While attacks in Southeast Asia have abated, more incidents 
have been reported in the Hong Kong-Luzon-Hainan (HLH) area. 
Last year, 33 attacks were launched against vessels passing 
through the HLH triangle. 
  Another 20 took place in the East China Sea, with a further 
12 on vessels sailing through the South China Sea. In its 
latest update, the centre also disclosed that there were three 
reported attacks on ships in the first two weeks of this year. 
  One was an attack on the GYOKO MARU on January 10. Three 
pirates boarded the vessel while it was in international waters 
approaching the Singapore Strait at the Philip Channel. The 
attackers got away with more than U.S.$6.000 in cash. 
  Another incident took place in the South China Sea on 
January 
5 when 20 pirates raided the JUI HO. The marauders took over 
the vessel for two-and-a-half days, before escaping with more 
than 5,000 cartons of cigarettes. And on January 11, 10 armed 
men wearing Chinese uniforms tried to board the PEDER MOST. 
However, they gave up after trying unsuccessfully for 
half-an-hour. 

