BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Beata Pavlovova, of the Center for Empirical </F>
Research (STEM): "Slovakia Through Eyes of Czech Public"] 
  [Excerpt] According to a public opinion survey carried out 
by the Center for Empirical Research (STEM) under the title 
"Trends," more than one-half (54 percent) of the Czech public 
expressed regret at the beginning of this year over the breakup 
of Czechoslovakia. The proportion of Czech citizens who 
expressed regret in May 1993 was 62 percent. 
  Those who do not regret, in hindsight, the division of the 
common state mostly subscribe to two views. First, they are 
convinced that the independent Czech Republic can achieve 
economic prosperity sooner. This is borne out by the 69 percent 
of respondents who said last May that economic reform would 
progress faster in the independent Czech Republic. The second 
group of those who do not regret or no longer regret the 
division of the common state is convinced that the Slovak nation 
had to undergo the process of self-realization that culminated 
in the assertion of independent statehood. A total of 35 
percent of respondents in the Czech Republic wish for the 
reunification of the two republics. 
  Other questions in the STEM survey, which was carried out in 
February of this year, concerned assessment of the Czech 
Republic's relations with other states, including Slovakia [SR]. 
The respondents were asked to try to grade their personal 
attitude toward individual states by means of school marks [on a 
one to five scale used in Czech schools]. With regard to the 
SR, most respondents, a third, gave their own attitude toward 
the SR a two. About a quarter gave it a three, and one fifth a 
one. 
  The public's assessment of the dynamism of the evolution of 
the Czech state's attitude toward the SR was the aim of STEM's 
question in the February 1994 survey on whether the Czech 
Republic's relations with the SR have improved in the course of 
the last year, have remained the same, or have deteriorated. 
Some 56 percent of citizens believe that these relations have 
deteriorated, 37 percent assume they have remained the same, and 
5 percent are convinced that they have improved. [passage 
omitted] 

