Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Diplomatic Panorama" feature: Reports by </F>
diplomtic correspondents Dmitriy Voskoboynikov, Igor Porshnev, 
Vitaliy Trubetskoy, and others] 
  [Text] Relations with China remain "one of the priorities 
of Russia's foreign policy, moreover, one of the permanent 
ones," Russian Foreign Minister Andrey Kozyrev told his Chinese 
counterpart Jian Qichen during the Russo-Chinese official 
negotiations in Beijing, according to INTERFAX's special 
correspondent, Igor Porshnev, accompanying Kozyrev on his visit 
to China. 
  The minister said he could only wish that these talks were 
"the beginning of the Russo-Chinese relations' transition on to 
a qualitatively new level of wide-ranging constructive 
partnership." In his opinion, this partnership should extend to 
cover not only bilateral cooperation, but also the two 
countries' approach to solving issues of international 
importance. 
  In the course of the negotiations, the two ministers 
discussed a number of economic issues. Kozyrev pointed out that 
Russia would like to launch some the joint projects, in 
particular, the construction of a hydroelectric power station on 
the river Yangtze. The two sides agreed to use the principle of 
combined commercial activities on disputed sections of the 
border as a temporary measure. 
  The talks also produced an agreement to continue the two 
countries' military and technical cooperation, strictly 
observing both their mutual interests and international 
obligations. 
  The two sides signed a protocol between the Russian and 
Chinese foreign ministries and an intergovernmental agreement on 
the status of checkpoints on the Russo-Chinese border. 
  Speaking in the Chinese Association of People's Diplomacy 
after the end of the talks, the Russian foreign minister pointed 
to "the Asian Pacific region's increasing importance for the 
future of Russia," connected with the greater economic role 
played by the Asian part of Russia. This makes the ties with 
Asian neighbors even more important, as they already account for 
about one third of Russia's trade turnover. 
  Kozyrev believes that the system of international relations 
in the region, as in the whole world, "is gaining a stable 
multipolar character," while the ideology of regional and global 
alliances of some Asian Pacific countries against others "is 
becoming a thing of the past." The future of the region lies 
not in power competition, but rather in cooperation and 
interaction, he pointed out. The minister said the principle of 
stable and balanced relations was the cornerstone of the 
treaties Russia concluded with all countries of the region. He 
added that the danger of large-scale armed conflicts in the 
region had been reduced to a minimum today. 
  The Russian foreign minister described the XXI century as "a 
century of the Pacific region," since the Asian Pacific region's 
economic role would have special importance. Asian countries' 
international positions will be determined, in the first place, 
by the extent of their involvement in the region's economic 
relations. Russia is convinced building up the region's economic 
potential is of no threat to its neighbors, but instead, it 
creates the conditions for a dynamic economic growth, the 
minister pointed out. "Competition in this sphere is a mutually 
profitable competition which all members of the Asian community 
need," he added. 
  After the talks, Kozyrev's political advisor Galina Sidorova 
said Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin was likely to 
pay an official visit to China this year. 
  It is supposed that the main goal of the prime minister's 
visit will be preparing a Russo-Chinese summit in Moscow. The 
Chairman of China's State Council, Jiang Zemin, is expected to 
come to Russia on an official visit in the third quarter of this 
year, while Chernomyrdin is likely to visit China this May. 

