Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The agriculture ministers of Brazil, Paraguay, 
Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay -- Sinval Guazelli, Raul Torres, 
Felipe Sola, Juan Figueroa, and Pedro Saravia, respectively -- 
on 24 February held the sixth ministerial meeting of Conasur 
[Southern Cone Consultative Council for Cooperation in the Farm 
Sector] and the fourth meeting of the Animal and Plant Health 
Committee (Cosave). 
  During the deliberations, which were held at the Uruguayan 
Mercantile Chamber of Products headquarters, the ministers 
worked on coordination of matters linked with farm policies, 
production, and commerce. 
  Figueroa said that "there was some turbulence because of 
delays in the integration movement," adding that this caused a 
delay in the meetings of top agricultural officials. This 
meeting, he went on, is particularly significant because 
technicians and ministers "have reached total consensus on the 
health agreement for the exchange of animals and farm products." 
  Figueroa emphasized the "great importance" of the agreement 
that was reached for Southern Cone countries because of the 
progress involved in the harmonization of sanitary policies by 
Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Chile, and Uruguay. The ministers 
also pointed to the need to impose tighter controls on the 
admission of subsidized products to the region. 
  The resolution by the five ministers confirms the 
methodology 
used for "harmonizing health procedures to facilitate the 
international commerce of animals and farm products in Conasur 
countries." 
  The resolution sets forth that "health conditions" will be 
imposed for the admission of cattle and farm products in 
commerce between Conasur countries and with third countries. The 
document approved by the ministers states that the objective is 
to preserve animal health conditions in the region and each 
country. 
  The priorities picked up by the Regional Animal Health 
Committee (Coresa) also were ratified. The priorities seek to 
harmonize, strengthen, and improve an emergency system for 
high-risk disease. 
  Among other decisions made on 24 February is the adoption of 
"new techniques" that will regulate the exchange of farm, fish, 
and industrial products. Among such products are crude sugar, 
fresh fish, canned fish, canned tuna, UHT [ultrahigh 
temperature] milk, butter oil or anhydrous milk grease, yogurt, 
packing material, food processing equipment, cream, and cheese. 
  Figueroa emphasized that Conasur is a clearly operational 
organization in light of the "relative success" of the Uruguay 
Round of GATT talks, noting that the strengthening of 
international trade is based on regional agreements, which are 
"a powerful lever for promoting this wealth-generating activity." 
  He said the process through which the region is going gives 
rise to "new problems that we must resolve. The fact that we 
negotiate on friendly terms creates fraternal ties between 
countries, and matters that previously were difficult to analyze 
and resolve -- the foreign ministries had to intervene -- are 
today rapidly solved with a phone call." 

