CSO 

    [Editorial Report] 
<H5>  Charges of Media Bias </H5>
  Conservative Party presidential candidate Andres Pastrana's 
campaign director Luis Alberto Moreno has lodged a protest with 
the National Television Council against the Inravision (National 
Institute of Radio and Television) network because of its 
decision not to broadcast an interview with Pastrana on the 
television program "Very Personal." Inravision rebutted Moreno's 
charge, arguing that candidates may only appear on opinion 
programs. Moreno responded by pointing out that an interview 
with Ernesto Samper had recently been aired during the "Very 
Personal" program. He reportedly also complained that Inravision 
had twice returned tapes of Pastrana's television commercials 
citing technical deficiencies, but later authorized the airing 
of those same tapes. (EL TIEMPO, 7 May) 
  In his 8 May commentary discussing the Samper campaign, EL 
TIEMPO columnist Enrique Santos Calderon referred to the 
Pastrana campaign's charges, saying the reported actions by 
Inravision represent "decisions which could indicate partiality 
on the part of that official institute, and which do not help 
the image of Ernesto Samper who doesn't need assistance of this 
kind." Referring to reporting by another network, Santos 
Calderon commented: "Nor is it in the best interest of the 
Liberal Party ticket for news programs, such as that of Caracol 
[network], to show such favoritism towards Samper. The 
appearance of being discriminated against or being `persecuted' 
by that network could generate sympathy for Pastrana." 
<H5>  Antioquia Tour </H5>
  Andres Pastrana conducted an intensive campaign tour in 
Antioquia Department which included some 40 municipalities, 
according to EL ESPECTADOR (23 April). Pastrana criticized his 
main rival, Liberal Party presidential candidate Ernesto Samper, 
who he said had promised to obtain funding to complete the 
Medellin metro system and then failed to fulfill that pledge. 
According to Pastrana, Samper had made the statement during a 
visit to Medellin months earlier while still serving as 
Ambassador to Spain. 
  While in Antioquia, Pastrana met with nearly 600 Medellin 
militia members encamped at Media Luna. He was accompanied by 
Monsignor Hector Fabio Henao who has participated in the 
demobilization talks with militia members. (EL TIEMPO 25 April) 
<H5>  Nohra Pastrana Addressess Conference </H5>
  Nohra Pastrana, who accompanied her husband on his tour of 
Antioquia, addressed the Latin American Congress for the Family 
in the 21st Century, stressing the role of the family in 
building a peaceful society and ending corruption: 
  "Of what use is modernization, the opening of markets, the 
integration the world seeks, and science and technology, if we 
have a society without values. Only with values acquired through 
a good upbringing can we make use of the innovations in order to 
give dignity to the individual and the community and not destroy 
it. A bad family produces a bad citizen." 
  Mrs. Pastrana added that her husband had promoted policies 
that favored the family--a theme he continues to stress in the 
current campaign--while serving as mayor of Bogota, and that he 
has shown himself to be a person who kept his campaign promises. 
(EL ESPECTADOR, 23 April) 
<H5>  Focus on Youth </H5>
  Pastrana's campaign tours continue to include numerous 
visits 
to university campuses. On a recent tour of Valle del Cauca, for 
example, Pastrana visited at least four universities. In 
Pastrana's words, he has found "extraordinary receptivity" among 
the country's youth. (EL ESPECTADOR, 23 April) However, in one 
negative incident, a student threw a container of garbage at 
Pastrana as he responded to questions at the University del 
Valle on 28 April. Pastrana was quickly surrounded by 
bodyguards, and the audience applauded when a student announced 
over the microphone that this attack did not reflect the 
attitude of the majority of the university's students. (EL 
TIEMPO, 29 April) 
  Ernesto Samper has also spoken at a number of university 
campuses in recent weeks, often accompanied by his running mate 
Humberto De la Calle. 
<H5>  Tour of Several Departments </H5>
  Pastrana visited several municipalities of Cundinamarca on 
29-30 April where he discussed his social policy and proposed 
establishing a special type of insurance for temporarily 
unemployed persons who are unable to pay rent. Pastrana then 
traveled to Arauca Department and Bucaramanga, Santander 
Department. (EL TIEMPO, 3 May) On 4 May, following campaign 
appearances in Bogota, Pastrana toured several municipalities of 
Boyaca Department. 
<H5>  Visits to North Coast, San Andres Island </H5>
  Pastrana campaigned in Barranquilla in early May where he 
declared "the North Coast will give us the victory, because we 
are working for this region." Pastrana discussed his economic 
program with ranchers and representatives of business 
associations, and noted that, due to the prevailing 
circumstances in the North Coast departments, the region 
requires the adoption of a "veritable shock program" which, with 
cooperation between the private and public sectors, will allow a 
"reorientation of the productive sector" that will favor 
economic growth. (EL TIEMPO, 9 May) As a means of helping the 
agricultural sector, Pastrana said, more highways were needed to 
better integrate the North Coast departments with the rest of 
the country. He declared that this would be a better use of 
federal funds than the construction of a metro in Bogota 
proposed by Ernesto Samper. While in Barranquilla, Pastrana met 
with leaders of all the municipalities in Atlantico Department. 
He also spoke to students at the Universidad Autonoma del Caribe 
and the Universidad del Norte. (EL TIEMPO, 6, 7 May) 
  After spending three days in Barranqilla, Pastrana visited 
San Andres Island, where he discussed plans to promote tourism 
as a means of generating employment, describing tourism as one 
of the best potential sources of income for the country, 
according to EL ESPECTADOR (9 May). 
<H5>  Counternarcotics Policy </H5>
  In an 8 May interview published in EL ESPECTADOR Andres 
Pastrana stated: 
  "While it is necessary to have policies to prevent drug 
addiction and promote crop substitution, and to strengthen these 
policies, the state must stand firm in its policy of 
energetically repressing the trafficking and distribution of 
various drugs." 
  Pastrana pledged that, if elected, he would "redouble" 
efforts to make the Prosecutor General's Office "more 
effective," so that it would function as a "complement" to 
agencies engaged in the counternarcotics struggle. 

