CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Cai Yan (5591 6056) titled: "Looking at the </F>
Budget, Talking About Government Bonds"] 
  [Text] This year's budget report contains something that 
has attracted people's attention, and this is the fact that in 
1994 total debt will reach 129.245 billion yuan. In a country 
like China, with a marked contradictions between the supply of 
and demand for funds, this debt figure is a strong indication of 
the difficult situation faced by central financial organs. 
  Just how is this debt figure of 129.245 billion yuan 
calculated? The report reflects the three major parts to the 
calculation: first, a total of 66.919 billion yuan through the 
issuance of domestic bonds to meet normal financial revenue and 
expenditure difference; second, 48.081 billion yuan in bonds to 
repay this year's matured debts plus interest; third, there is 
the state's foreign borrowing of money, amounting to 14.245 
billion yuan, used for national key construction projects. In 
short, there is the need to make up for the deficit, and 
borrowing new debt to service old debt and adding in key 
construction projects. 
  One major change in the debt plan is that from this year on, 
the financial deficit will not again be made up through the 
expedient of overdrawing on the central bank, but will be solved 
through the issuance of government debt instruments. This, from 
an objective point of view, will enable China to even more 
clearly determine the economic situation and financial 
conditions. Because under conditions that the government is 
financially overdrawn, if the bank does not tighten lending, the 
overdrawn condition will surely lead to the issuance of more 
currency, due to the fact that there is no corresponding 
guarantee of commodities and labor services, the result will 
inevitably be an increase in inflation. For this reason, the 
change described above will be beneficial for macroeconomic 
regulation and mitigating inflationary pressures. 
  The issuance of state bonds to raise funds has always been a 
major method for governments to regulate the economy. In the 13 
years since 1981 that China has returned to the issuance of debt 
obligations, government issuance of bonds has had an active 
effect on the raising of construction capital and on the 
development of a government debt instrument market. In 
particular, after 1988 attention has been given to using market 
methods (such as the establishment of a state bond trading 
market, and buying and selling of contracts), and after the 
launching of state bonds, there has been a great change in the 
government debt situation, though after the second half of 1992, 
due to market changes there has been no choice but to return to 
administrative measures to promote sales of government debt 
instruments. What has made people think hard was why 
administrative measures did not work and market methods have a 
difficult time stabilizing the market? The key lies in reform 
of the government debt market, which has not really been 
established on the basis of a socialist market economy, and in 
addition, there has been no corresponding reforms and policies. 
For this reason reform in government debt issuance should be 
linked with the development and improvement of the financial 
markets, to make state bonds become the major linking point 
between fiscal policy and monetary policy, through the 
implementation of state bond mortgage and discount policies to 
push financial organs to hold a certain proportion of government 
debt, and make government debt into a major method for the 
central bank to take in and put out currency and strengthen 
monetary management. 
  From the budget report, we can look at the debt, and 
consider 
the reality of the year by year expansion of the financial 
deficit, and note that the national debt is also progressively 
expanding. If state finances progressively increase their 
reliance on the issuance of bonds, this is bound to 
progressively add to the interest burden, and have an adverse 
effect on the improvement of the financial situation. For this 
reason, as commenting on the debt, people place hope on reform 
of the financial and tax systems, and this is a major factor for 
reform and development, and is also a basic condition for 
fundamentally improving financial conditions. 

