Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Standpoint" column: "Clinton, Ignorance, and Zionist </F>
Motives" by 'Isa Isma'il al-'Abbadi] 
  [Text] The U.S. Administration is using the concepts of 
democracy and human rights in a manner that evokes a contempt 
and disdain for all the peoples and nations of the world. 
  These concepts, which are presumed to be humane, are being 
used as a political card to harm peoples' interests and 
influence their independent political decisions and options. 
  U.S. concepts of human rights and national security seem to 
overlook the fact that other world nations also have human 
rights and national security. 
  Since democracy is based on dialogue, how can anyone be 
democratic and talk about democracy when he rejects the 
principle of dialogue and wields the big stick against anyone 
with a different opinion.? 
  In his periodic report to Congress, U.S. President Clinton, 
as misguided by his Zionist advisers, spoke about what he termed 
Iraq's sponsorship of terrorism and violation of human rights. 
He claimed that Iraqi policy is still based on threatening U.S. 
national security and foreign policy which, he says, calls upon 
the United States to continue imposing economic sanctions on 
Iraq. 
  President Clinton seems to purposely ignore the fact that 
there is a clear UN Resolution 687, which Washington forcibly 
obtained from the Security Council, that Iraq has fulfilled all 
its obligations under this resolution, and that it remains for 
the Security Council to immediately implement Clause 22 of this 
resolution by lifting the blockade on Iraq. This is an Iraqi 
right which the Council must recognize under existing 
international laws. 
  Therefore, Clinton's talk about additional conditions when 
the blockade is approaching another review in the Security 
Council this month is not finding receptive ears among most 
council member states, especially the permanent member states, 
whose positions have undergone a clear change after establishing 
that Iraq has indeed fulfilled its obligations under Resolution 
687. 
  It is inconceivable for the U.S. President to adopt stands 
that show clear ignorance of the geopolitical facts of the Arab 
world, the nature of the firm political system in Iraq, and the 
Iraqi people's solidarity with their national leadership. 
  The U.S. President speaks about nonexistent, meaningless 
things which he wants to stick on Iraq. Clinton must 
understand, if he still does not, that talk about terrorism as 
far as Iraq is concerned is meaningless. Everyone knows that 
Iraq is far removed from terrorism, that terrorists are 
completely unknown to it, and that it is not involved in this 
game whose sides have become well known. The game of hostage 
taking and bargaining between the United States and the West on 
the one hand, and certain political sides in the Middle East on 
the other, serves as clear proof of the involvement of the 
United States, the West, and those sides in terrorism and Iraq's 
complete dissociation from it. 
  As for U.S. drum-beating on human rights whenever the 
blockade is approaching another review in the Security Council, 
it has become absolutely disgusting. 
  If a few days ago China has thrown the ball in the U.S. 
court 
by referring to the millions of destitute, hungry Americans who 
are without homes, we in Iraq are proud that even under the 
unfair blockade we share our livelihood with rare equality, 
especially with regard to the distribution of food among 
citizens, which UN agencies have recognized as very fair. 
  If Clinton's ignorant advisers think Iraq will change its 
skin and start begging at the doors of the imperialist 
embassies, as some traitors do, then they are grossly mistaken. 
The United States is called upon to follow an evenhanded policy 
toward Iraq and the Arab homeland. It is not in its interest to 
weaken Iraq as some Clinton advisers suggest. Iraq is an 
important factor for the region's development, progress, 
balance, and stability, just as it is an important factor for 
world peace and security. As for the blockade, it is bound to 
go, whether Clinton likes or not. So, we will wait and see. 

