SUMMARY 

                                       With the deadline for a U.S. decision on renewing most-favored- 
nation (MFN) trading status for China fast approaching, Beijing 
has made a gesture on human rights by releasing Tiananmen-era 
dissident Wang Juntao even while continuing to reject formal 
linkage between MFN and human rights.  Seeking to influence the 
annual MFN debate as the deadline for renewal approaches, Beijing 
has also widely publicized its alleged compliance on a number of 
other issues of concern to Washington.  In addition, it has 
reemphasized the negative economic consequences that will result 
should the Clinton administration fail to grant China MFN trading 
status this year.  However, Beijing's current anxiety about 
stability suggests that repression of dissidents will continue. 

                                  END SUMMARY 

   Playing an important trump card in the annual MFN debate, Beijing 
has repeated its practice in recent years of releasing a jailed 
dissident as the deadline for MFN renewal draws near.  According 
to a spokesman for the Ministry of Justice on 23 April, Wang 
Juntao--who had been serving a 13-year sentence for his alleged 
role in the Tiananmen Square prodemocracy protest--was released 
"on bail" because of the "conditions of his illness" and had 
"left for medical treatment abroad" (Xinhua, 23 April).  Last 
year Beijing had similarly released from jail Democracy Wall 
activist Xu Wenli. 

   Wang's release, however, does not appear to reflect a fundamental 
change in Beijing's attitude toward dissident activity.  Western 
media since mid-March have reported the detention of a number of 
leading dissidents, including Xu Wenli himself and his former 
colleague, noted dissident Wei Jingsheng.  Although in most cases 
the detentions have been brief, Xu and Wei are still in custody. 
According to a 13 April report carried by the French press agency 
AFP, Xu appears to be under some sort of "house arrest."  A 
"special dispatch" in the 15 April edition of the PRC-owned Hong 
Kong daily Ta Kung Pao quoted a PRC Foreign Ministry spokesman, 
at a press conference on the 14th, as indicating that Wei may be 
facing criminal charges.  He reportedly said that the case of Wei 
is "not an issue of human rights" and that the "so-called human 
rights" issue does not mean "simply releasing criminals." 
   Beijing in recent days has been taking a particularly hardline 
stance on human rights, rejecting Washington's insistence that 
progress on human rights is a condition of MFN renewal.  Minister 
of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation Wu Yi, for example, 
showed no flexibility on the human rights issue during her recent 
trip to the United States for the eighth session of the Sino-U.S. 
Joint Committee on Commerce and Trade.  In a 6 April interview 
with Xinhua, she reiterated Beijing's longstanding "opposition" 
to the U.S. practice of "linking" MFN with human rights, warning 
that "proper handling" of China's MFN status is an "important 
condition" for the further development of bilateral trade and 
economic relations.  Echoing these remarks at a speech in New 
York, the MOFTEC head said that associating trade issues with 
human rights is "extremely unwise (feichang bumingzhi)" and shows 
a "lack of strategic foresight" (Xinhua, 16 April). 

   PRC commentary has also underscored this hardline stance on human 
rights.  An article in the 18 April edition of Beijing's current 
affairs journal Liaowang, for example, highlighted the 
differences between China and the United States on human rights. 
Exploring the reasons for these divergent views, the article 
concluded that they do not just stem from differences in 
"cultural ideas" or reflect Washington's "hegemonic mentality." 
Instead, the article claimed the United States is attempting to 
use the human rights issue as a "point to break through to 
threaten China's existing system so that China will be in a state 
of chaos or weakness." 

   Images of Compliance 

   In an apparent effort to demonstrate Beijing's compliance on 
other MFN-related issues of concern to Washington, even while 
rejecting Washington's demands on human rights, PRC media have 
claimed progress in protecting intellectual property rights 
(IPR), stemming illegal textile exports and emigration, and 
cracking down on traffic in endangered species.  In addition, 
they have warned of sizable economic losses if MFN is not 
renewed. 

   IPR Protection 

   Beijing in recent days has taken particular pains to emphasize 
its efforts to protect intellectual property rights.  Speaking at 
the recent National People's Congress (NPC) session on 15 March, 
Supreme People's Court President Jen Jianxin, for example, 
claimed that China's new system of IPR courts has demonstrated 
the "great importance" Beijing attaches to IPR protection by 
handling "2,777 cases of IPR and technological contract disputes" 
last year--an increase of 16.39 percent over 1992 (Xinhua, 25 
March).  A 29 March article in Beijing's English-language paper 
China Daily also enumerated Beijing's progress in prosecuting IPR 
cases.  Quoting an unnamed "court official," the paper noted that 
Beijing's IPR courts, since being established last July, have 
"heard 125 cases and issued rulings on 87 of them," while the 
courts in Fujian have "investigated 47 suits."  According to the 
official, the courts in Shanghai have been even more active, 
handling "more than 600 cases" since their establishment in 
February this year.  Suggesting that Beijing intends to expand 
its efforts in this area, the official indicated that more courts 
are being established as "part of a nationwide effort to 
safeguard trademarks, copyrights, and patents." 

   At the same time, a 17 March report in Hebei Ribao on the work 
report of the Hebei Provincial Higher People's Court suggested 
that, even without the establishment of special IPR courts, the 
provinces are prosecuting IPR violations.  Delivering a report to 
the second session of the eighth provincial people's congress on 
1 March, Ping Yujie, president of the court, said that in 1993 
the provincial courts tried "8,907 cases on compensation for 
damage, intellectual property rights, and labor disputes." 
Other Chinese media reporting has also sought to demonstrate 
China's progress in protecting IPR: 

   -- A 25 March Beijing radio report on an international seminar in 
Kunming on copyright protection and economic and cultural 
development in Asia claimed that China has made "major progress" 
in IPR protection, bringing its own legal system "into line" with 
international practices and "basically establishing a copyright 
system."  The report claimed that the State Copyright 
administration and local copyright administrations have "strictly 
enforced" China's copyright laws and "cracked down on all kinds 
of serious copyright infringement cases."  In particular, the 
report noted that the State Copyright Administration has 
investigated a "batch of key copyright infringement cases 
concerning foreigners" and has taken "disciplinary action" 
against 11 domestic units and individuals. In addition, the 
report noted that a "collective copyright administration system" 
and a "copyright agent system" have been established and 16 
copyright agencies have been set up to "act as a bridge" in 
introducing Chinese works overseas and bringing foreign works 
into China. 

   -- In an interview carried by Beijing radio on 2 April, Gao 
Lulin, director of the State Patent Office, noted that in 1993 
the Chinese Government accepted over 77,000 patents and that the 
courts and patent offices, according to "incomplete statistics," 
handled "2,000 cases of patent disputes." 

   Most recently PRC media have highlighted Beijing's effort to 
crack down on the pirating of audio and video material.  Kicking 
off a new campaign on 19 April, Xinhua carried a "joint circular" 
issued by the CPC Propaganda Department, the Press and 
Publications Administration, the State Planning Commission, 
MOFTEC, the General Administration of Customs, the State 
Administration for Industry and Commerce, and the State Copyright 
Administration calling for "strengthened control" over the 
industry and the "strict investigation and severe punishment" of 
those guilty of copyright infringement.  Reporting on the 
crackdown in Guangdong Province, Xinhua's Hong Kong service on 21 
April claimed that teams had just completed searches of "1,657 
vendors and had seized 140,000 compact discs, 1,322 laser discs, 
and 85,000 audio and video tapes."  Xinhua went on to say that 
the Guangzhou City Copyright Administration publicly "destroyed" 
more than 63,000 pirated compact discs and audio and video tapes. 
Suggesting that additional measures are in the offing, Xinhua 
said that Guangdong Province will place "all" of the province's 
16 compact disc factories under the control of its press and 
publication department. 

   Illegal Textile Exports 

   PRC media have also touted Beijing's success in stemming the flow 
of illegal textile exports, the focus of PRC media reporting on 
the "fourth national work conference to curb and crack down on 
illegal entrepot trade in textiles."  According to a 10 April 
Xinhua account of the meeting that day, four more Chinese 
enterprises have been "severely punished" for their illegal 
textile exports. 

   -- Two companies in Guangdong Province's Shantou City--Shifa 
Dressmaking Company, Ltd. and the Yongjia Garment Manufacturing 
Company, Ltd.--had their goods seized and their textile export 
rights "suspended" for two years.  In addition, Guangdong's 
textile quota for 1995 was "reduced" and MOFTEC "suggested" that 
"administrative punishment" be meted out to those "directly 
responsible" for the fraud. 

   -- Xiamen City in Fujian Province also had its textile quota for 
1995 reduced as a result of transshipments by the Guangyu 
Shareholding Xiamen Company, which in turn was fined a sum equal 
to "20 percent of the value of the contract" and lost its textile 
export rights for two years. 

   -- However, the harshest penalty was meted out to a company in 
Shenyang--the Shankou branch of the Dongmao Industrial Company- 
-whose shipment of goods was "tracked down and seized" by U.S. 
Customs.  The company lost all its textile product export quotas 
as well as its right to apply for an export quota in 1994.  In 
addition, MOFTEC "ordered" Shenyang City's Foreign Trade and 
Economic Cooperation Commission to "suspend all business 
activities" of the Shankou branch of the company and "suggested" 
that "administrative punishments" be meted out to those "directly 
responsible." 

   While MOFTEC has announced punishments for illegal third country 
textile transshipments in the past, the punishments this time 
appear harsher than those given five firms at the "third national 
working conference. on cracking down on illicit textile transfers" 
last December.  At that conference, it was announced that, while 
all five firms were to have their "illegal incomes" confiscated, 
only three would have their textile trading rights and their 1994 
"home regions'" export quotas "slashed." 

   In addition to announcing punishments for the four textile firms, 
the speakers at the conference indicated that MOFTEC plans new 
steps to stop illicit shipments.  Speaking on 10 April, MOFTEC 
Vice Minister Shi Guangsheng said that the ministry would 
"strengthen" its efforts to prevent illegal shipments, even 
though the "amount of illegal transit textiles exported after 
clearing customs is really insignificant" (Xinhua, 10 April).  In 
1994, he noted, M0FTEC will continue to carry out "random checks 
of key areas and enterprises."  In addition, he said the ministry 
would "strengthen" its training of personnel assigned to crack 
down on illegal shipments and "coordinate closely" with other 
countries and the authorities in "relevant regions" in order to 
curb the illegal transit trade. 

   Illegal Emigration 

   Reporting on Beijing's efforts in this area, a 4 April report 
carried by the Hong Kong-based PRC-affiliated press agency 
Zhongguo Tongxun She pointed out that in 1993 China "cracked" 95 
cases of attempted illegal emigration involving 1,970 people.  In 
addition, the report said that the "303 organizers" of these 
attempts were arrested.  More recently, on 22 April, the press 
agency reported that public security forces and border guards in 
the "cities of Shantou, Huizhou, and Foshan of Guangdong 
Province" had broken "three major cases" of illegal emigration, 
detaining "153 illegal emigrants from Fujian and Hunan and 
seizing four organizers from Taiwan and the mainland."  In one 
case, the report said, the ship captain stated that he had been 
ordered to carry "more than 100" illegal emigrants "to Mexico." 

   Endangered Species Protection 

   Beijing has also been projecting an image of compliance in the 
fight to protect endangered species.  A "special article" carried 
by Zhongguo Tongxun She on 21 March, for example, highlighted 
Beijing's efforts to crack down on the illicit trade in 
rhinoceros horns and tiger parts.  Beijing's progress in 
protecting wildlife was also showcased in a 3 April Xinhua report 
describing provincial steps to protect and breed Siberian tigers 
and in a 12 April Xinhua report that quoted U.S. Interior 
Secretary Bruce Babbit as saying, at a meeting that day with PRC 
State Councillor Song Jian, that he was "deeply impressed" with 
China's efforts to protect the giant panda and other rare animals 
and with its "enforcement" of laws against the trade in 
endangered species. 

   At the same time, Beijing, at a 6 April conference sponsored by 
the Environment and Resources Protection Committee of the 
National People's Congress, indicated that it plans to take 
"tougher" measures against those who "severely violate" the 
country's environmental laws (Xinhua, 6 April).  In addition, the 
conference noted that the committee plans to seek "modification" 
of China's present laws in order to punish environmental 
violators "as severely" as those caught smuggling or drug 
trafficking. 

   Warning on Economic Losses 

   In addition to publicizing its efforts to address U.S. concerns 
on a range of issue, Beijing has used a tactic frequently 
employed in the past in its quest for renewal of MFN status, 
pointedly reminding the Clinton administration of the economic 
consequences that could result from a failure to renew its MFN 
trading status.  Taking this approach in her Xinhua interview on 
6 April, MOFTEC Minister Wu Yi outlined China's plans to offer 
"800 investment projects" for discussion and to purchase "goods 
worth hundreds of millions of dollars" in what she said would be 
China's "largest trade and investment activity in the United 
States in the past 15 years."  However, she went on to suggest 
that U.S. involvement in these activities would depend on 
Washington's "proper handling" of the MFN question.  Providing 
further evidence of the potential for negative economic fallout 
if MFN is not renewed, Chinese media continue to routinely quote 
American corporate executives concerning the losses their 
companies will face if China's MFN status is not renewed. 

   Outlook 

   Although Beijing has not backed away from its official position 
that human rights must not constitute a condition of MFN renewal, 
its release of Wang Juntao suggests that the leadership will make 
calculated conciliatory gestures to promote MFN renewal.  China's 
leaders have apparently calculated that a media blitz claiming 
compliance with U.S. conditions across a broad spectrum of issues 
combined with a human rights gesture at the final hour will tip 
the political scales in Washington in their favor.  However, 
given Beijing's concerns about domestic stability, it is unlikely 
that China will alter its fundamental approach to human rights. 
   (AUTHOR:  HEBBEL.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
CHINA ANALYSIS TEAM, (703) 733-6069.) 
EAG/HEIPLE/CL 26/1940Z APR 

