CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by German Duque; first paragraph is EL ESPECTADOR </F>
introduction] 
  [Text] A glance at the presidential economic programs: Is 
Pastrana the same as Gaviria? Does Samper make the difference? 
Do Conservatives and Liberals have practically identical plans? 
Everyone talks about reconversion in their economic policies, 
but generally speaking, they have not restructured their ideas 
and programs. Pastrana preserves almost everything in Gaviria's 
program, even the same statistics. Some differences can be found 
in Samper's proposals, especially because of his emphasis on 
employment policy and the farm sector. 
  Although the country may be in the same economic situation 
as 
it was four years ago, it does not seem logical that the 
proposals for dealing with the problems would be just as 
identical, or at least very similar to those put forward four 
years ago. 
  It is clear that the country's statistics are out of date, 
but it is also true that the structural problems are still here. 
It is sad, however, to see things being treated just the same, 
while at the same time the "great change" is trumpeted. 
  The overall diagnosis, indeed, could be the same: a minority 
with great prosperity surrounded by ever-greater opportunities, 
and a majority with serious survival problems and a lack of 
opportunity. 
  In this regard, in the spirit of change that the various 
political campaigns are promoting, one might hope that, for 
example, some Conservative proposals would be markedly different 
from those made by the Liberals, and of course, clearly 
different from those of a Liberal government. Otherwise, we 
could not talk of change but of continuation. 
  On the latter point, however, it would be worth considering 
the possibility--appropriate, in many cases--of a Liberal 
candidate continuing the strategy of a Liberal government, as 
predecessor and current administration. 
  Nonetheless, in both situations, one would expect more 
ambitious and aggressive proposals coming from the opposition 
parties, since the idea is to close the gap between the haves 
and the have-nots, if the central diagnosis is really true and 
correct. 
  An initial face-value analysis of the features of Gaviria's 
"Peaceful Revolution" plan, compared to Pastrana's and Samper's 
current proposals, clearly reveals that there are tremendous 
similarities among them, especially between the first two, those 
of Gaviria and Pastrana. 
  It could be said that Pastrana liked what Gaviria did so 
much 
that he wants to keep it all practically unchanged; but it could 
also be said that Gaviria left so many things unfinished that 
Pastrana and Samper would like to continue them. That is not 
necessarily a bad thing, either, because a highway should not be 
left half done or an aqueduct without water simply because of a 
change in government. 
  The surprising thing is that some people seem to want to 
copy 
others' programs to the letter, plain and simple. For example, 
in the area of infrastructure, Pastrana proposes rehabilitating 
1,600 kilometers of railways. Gaviria's plan contains the same 
figure, but it is unlikely in that sector, with Ferrovias going 
full steam ahead, that even 10 percent of the network has 
managed to be improved. Pastrana would be right to propose it 
again if indeed nothing had been accomplished in that sector 
except for the payment of huge sums of compensation to the trade 
unions. 
  Another example: Pastrana says he will seek to turn 500,000 
hectares into suitable farmland. Gaviria proposed this same 
figure four years ago. (And if I recall correctly, Lopez 
Michelsen proposed the same thing 16 years ago when he created 
the Himat for the same purpose.) It could be argued that 
Pastrana is right for undertaking such a project, since it was 
apparently too much for the Gaviria administration to accomplish. 
  In the case of water, Gaviria contended that 11 million 
Colombians did not have potable water service (a serious symptom 
of poverty, or of NBI [Unsatisfied Basic Need], as it is called 
now). Pastrana is concerned about the same 11 million people's 
need for this vital liquid. Can it be that the country has not 
added a single liter of water to its service in the last four 
years? 
  It would appear that the Samper camp, or the Samper case 
(surely because he spent part of the time away from the Gaviria 
administration) has not been as anesthetized or as supportive of 
the "Peaceful Revolution." 
  Regarding the initiatives we have been commenting on in the 
area of infrastructure, they are not clear because the 
government platform has not been presented in its entirety. 
  On the other hand, it is clear that in the macroeconomic 
sphere, Samper is interested in making all of the economic 
machinery revolve around massive job creation. 
  He thinks that jobs are the starting point for prosperity in 
any Colombian family, and he has specifically pledged to create 
more than 1 million new jobs. 
  Maybe this is the characteristic that most distinguishes 
Pastrana from Gaviria: his emphasis on jobs. 
  With regard to the liberalization of the economy, both 
Pastrana and Samper propose that it be consolidated, but the 
latter is not as enamored of "wholesale" imports without 
"reciprocity" in trade relations, a key element in the 
internationalization of the economy. What this means is that 
Colombia would only buy from those who buy its products. 
Something like the fight that has already started between the 
United States and Japan, serious advocates of "free trade." 
  All of the proposals, from Gaviria to the present, have in 
common ideas for industrial reconversion, export promotion, job 
training, productivity, competitiveness, etc., etc.,--in short, 
the usual menu for counteracting drastic liberalization programs. 
  This is a contrast to the now-famous Asian tigers, 
who first reconverted and made technological and human-capital 
advances, and then went out into the international market to 
bare their sharp teeth. 
  Here is a chart comparing Gaviria's government program and 
Samper's and Pastrana's proposals: 
<H5>  Economy </H5>
<H5>  Cesar Gaviria </H5>

  -  Accelerated growth predicted, until an average of 5 
percent a year is reached by the end of the presidential 
term. 
  -  The number of people whose basic needs are still unmet 
will shrink by more than 3 million if the proposed targets of 
the social programs are reached. 
  -  The most important reform is 
economic liberalization, eliminating administrative controls, 
creating the conditions for our products to become truly 
competitive on international markets. 
  -  In second place are the 
labor reform measures aimed at bringing flexibility to one of 
the most rigid elements of the economy, without which the 
success of the liberalization would be hampered. 
  -  A mechanism of 
flexible tariffs is established to regulate international trade, 
and a system of compensatory actions will be set up to eliminate 
unfair practices that harm Colombian producers. 
  -  The quest for 
economic gain under the guise of legal or administrative perks 
bears hidden costs for society as a whole, the magnitude of 
which, though difficult to calculate, is significant and very 
harmful. 

<H5>    Ernesto Samper </H5>

  -  The strategy for attaining full employment will be based 
on economic growth rates above 5 percent a year, the adoption of 
a new style of economic and social development, and the 
implementation of specific employment programs. 
  -  A social policy 
that will go beyond the traditional benefit-oriented approach 
limited to reducing the number of poor people by assuring them 
of a basic-level of existence or meeting their basic needs. 
  -  A 
macroeconomic policy that will prevent a revaluation and 
stimulate investment and growth in an atmosphere of price 
stability; the consolidation of the economic liberalization and 
progress toward an internationalization that will give priority 
to exports and jobs. 
  -  The specific employment programs will be 
aimed at overcoming the structural problems of the labor market. 
They will focus on the training and placement of unemployed 
youths and women. 

<H5>    Andres Pastrana </H5>

  -  Strong foundations will be laid to achieve growth rates 
above 8 percent (as Chile and China have done). 
  -  Development will 
be sustainable. Its objective will be to benefit the weakest 
within a policy of environmental conservation. 
  -  A pledge to 
enhance and consolidate the economic liberalization, to 
guarantee macroeconomic stability, to strengthen the productive 
capacity of the private sector. 
  -  To conquer foreign markets and 
make exports one of the pillars of economic growth, the 
disadvantages faced in the labor force, technology, and 
infrastructure will be addressed. 
  -  Elimination of the barriers to 
our competitiveness, beginning with continuation of the tariff 
restructuring. 
  -  The government will not favor any particular 
sector or specific groups, nor will it regard the private 
interests of one segment of society as the engine of economic 
growth. 

<H5>    Education </H5>
<H5>  Cesar Gaviria </H5>

  -  Achieve universal primary education and greatly expand 
secondary education while raising the quality of education at 
all levels. 
  -  Establish a national quality evaluation system for 
primary and secondary education. Provide free textbooks and 
educational materials for all primary school students and 
teaching guides and support materials for teachers. 
  -  An effort 
has begun to modify the structure of scientific and 
technological activities with a view to establishing a national 
science and technology system. Total public spending could reach 
$116 million. 
  -  In accordance with the new standards for 
scientific and technological development, promote the creation 
of employment training programs in the private 
sector. 
  -  Discourage double sessions in public and private schools 
where there is universal attendance. 

<H5>    Ernesto Samper </H5>

  -  A program to strengthen and improve the quality of 
education for the development of the individual and the 
modernization of society. 
  -  Creation and implementation of 
Productivity and Technological Development Centers at the 
sectoral and regional levels. 
  -  A striving to consolidate a 
national scientific base in universities and centers of 
excellence, supporting basic research in strategic 
areas. 
  -  Reinforcement of channels for achieving the transfer of 
technologies that are economically and environmentally 
efficient, and modernization of legislation and procedures for 
registering intellectual property and obtaining patents. 

<H5>    Andres Pastrana </H5>

  -  At present millions of children cannot go to school, but 
by the end of the decade, it will be assured that there will not 
be a single Colombian between the ages of five and 15 who is not 
receiving a basic education. 
  -  Improvement in the quality of 
education, taking development needs into consideration and 
offering children and young adults the educational tools they 
need, synchronizing higher education and technology with the 
demands of our economy. 
  -  Increasing public spending on science 
and technology from the current 0.4 percent of GDP [gross 
domestic product] to 1.5 percent. 
  -  Eliminating double sessions so 
that students will spend less time in the streets. 

<H5>    Water and the Environment </H5>
<H5>  Cesar Gaviria </H5>

  -  Increase, between 1990 and 1994, the national averages for 
the availability of potable water and sewage from 66 percent to 
76 percent for water service and from 51 percent to 57 percent 
for sewage systems. This means bringing water service to nearly 
6 million inhabitants and sewage service to 4 million, and 
attaining international levels of availability. 
  -  As for water 
quality, the objective is to increase potability from 50 percent 
to 100 percent so that all water delivered to the community 
through aqueduct systems is potable. 
  -  Eleven million people do 
not have water service to their homes. 
  -  Design a strategic plan 
for sewage service in the major cities, and begin taking the 
first steps, using efficient technology that can be sustained 
over the long term. 
  -  The government will promote a 10-Year Land 
Management Plan (1991-2000) at a total cost of an estimated 
$1.061 billion. As a result, some 535,500 hectares will be 
improved. 
  -  To conserve the microbasins that supply aqueducts, 
municipalities will be encouraged to purchase the land and use 
it for ecotourism, botanical gardens, and environmental 
education. 
  -  The Forestry Action Plan for Colombia will develop a 
program for the commercial reforestation of at least 110,000 
hectares between 1992 and 1995. 
  -  Although there is no consensus 
on how much land is subject to deforestation, estimates range 
from 360,000 to 600,000 hectares each year. 

<H5>    Ernesto Samper </H5>

  -  There is a need to invest more in land management, 
protection of water sources, and environmental clean-up. 
  -  An 
ambitious environmental education campaign. 
  -  Effective programs 
for pollution control, following the principle that it is 
polluters who must pay. 

<H5>    Andres Pastrana </H5>

  -  By the end of the presidential term, 90 percent of the 
population will have potable water service and at least 80 
percent will have adequate sewage service. 
  -  Eleven million 
Colombians do not have water service. 
  -  Provide incentives for the 
use of unconventional technologies in sewage and waste water 
treatment with a view to preserving our natural resources. 
  -  For 
purposes of soil conservation, promote irrigation and drainage 
policies that will make it possible to incorporate 520,000 new 
hectares of land into farming. 
  -  Promote environmental tourism, 
education, and recreation so that Colombians will all become 
defenders of our most precious natural resources. 
  -  It will be 
necessary to get the business sector involved in an ambitious 
program of reforestation and appropriate development of forestry 
reserves and the timber industry. 
  -  There is indifference while 
600,000 hectares. [as published] 

<H5>    Agriculture and Agroindustry </H5>
<H5>  Cesar Gaviria </H5>

  -  Investment in irrigation and drainage gives the farm 
sector the flexibility it needs to deal with international 
competition. To get the farm sector effectively involved in the 
internationalization of the economy, the government must renew 
investment in additional land management districts. 

<H5>    Ernesto Samper </H5>

  -  Put the countryside to work under our 
Agriculture-Livestock Reconversion Plan. It will enable us to 
overcome critical short-term problems in a lasting way, to 
protect rural employment, and to adapt the sector to the 
changing circumstances of the international market. 
  -  Adoption of 
selective stimuli and stable rules. 
  -  Application of a coffee 
policy oriented toward reducing costs and encouraging 
participation in international marketing. 

<H5>    Andres Pastrana </H5>

  -  The economic liberalization has exposed the weaknesses of 
the agriculture-livestock sector. Farmers are not the only ones 
to blame for the crisis. Now it is up to the government to 
remove obstacles so that we can produce more efficiently and be 
more competitive on the international market. 

<H5>    Infrastructure </H5>
<H5>  Cesar Gaviria </H5>

  -  Cutting costs and thereby increasing efficiency and 
competitiveness will make a major contribution to the country's 
economic development. 
  -  The target network, once completed, will 
cover approximately 6,300 kilometers. This means that during 
this decade, 1,000 kilometers of roads must be built, and 3,770 
kilometers must be improved. 
  -  The rehabilitation plan is aimed at 
rehabilitating 1,606 kilometers of railways between 1991 and 
1995. 

<H5>    Ernesto Samper </H5>

  -  Competitiveness and the rate of expansion of productive 
activities are often limited by deficiencies in the country's 
physical infrastructure in terms of transportation, energy 
supplies, communications, land management, and water 
management. 
  -  Existing options and projects will come under 
detailed scrutiny with a view to selecting those that will have 
the greatest impact on competitiveness and the expansion of our 
productive system, and establishing a rigorous order of priority 
for their execution. 

<H5>    Andres Pastrana </H5>

  -  Deficiencies in communications, roads, and energy raise 
the costs that businesses must pay for products, as well as 
those paid by society, and they make us less competitive. It is 
time we brought our infrastructure up to date. 
  -  Build the first 
750 kilometers of sophisticated freeways and 4,000 kilometers of 
new roads, improve 9,000 kilometers of existing roads, and 
provide adequate maintenance for 70,000 kilometers of 
roads. 
  -  Rehabilitate 1,600 kilometers of railways. 

<H5>    Final Message </H5>
<H5>  Cesar Gaviria </H5>

  -  Upon presenting the National Development Plan, dubbed the 
"Peaceful Revolution," the president and his aides are 
concluding a very arduous intellectual voyage during which they 
have studied problems, debated solutions, compared alternatives, 
and worked out possibilities. 

<H5>    Ernesto Samper </H5>

  -  The challenges of internationalization and development 
require that the government, trade associations, labor unions, 
social organizations, and civil society in its entirety join 
forces to win in international competition and in the struggle 
against economic and social underdevelopment. 

<H5>    Andres Pastrana </H5>

  -  This program is not just the fruit of scientific analysis; 
it is not in vain that I have spent so much time touring the 
country, listening to the people's heartbeat. 


