BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article] </F>
  [Text] Ministerial talks will be held in Marrakech, 
Morocco, for four days beginning 12 April to sign the final 
agreement document that was hammered out last December at the 
Uruguay Round (the multilateral trade negotiations of GATT]. 
The ministerial talks are expected to adopt a declaration 
calling for the implementation of an accord on the World Trade 
Organization (WTO) in January 1995, earlier than July 1995 
called for in the document. The United States and other nations, 
however, have proposed that the issue of protecting workers in 
developing countries be taken up for discussion at the 
ministerial talks, but the coordination of views among the 
participating nations on the proposal is facing rough sailing 
because of backlash to the proposal from developing countries. 
Hence, how to grapple with the North-South issue is surfacing 
as a focal point of the ministerial talks. 
  In a bid to end child and forced labor which is pervasive in 
developing countries, the United States and France have proposed 
that WTO map out a set of unified rules to protect workers in 
those countries. The two nations have also demanded that a 
document to be adopted by the ministerial talks incorporate a 
work schedule to study the compatibility of the protection of 
workers and trade. They have made the proposal out of their deep 
concern about an export offensive from developing countries in 
Asia and other regions that are supported economically by 
low-wage workers. Some industrialized nations have asserted 
that the export of low-priced goods from developing countries 
where labor conditions are poor should be restricted as dumping. 
  Developing countries have reacted against their assertions, 
saying, "They are pursuing protectionism under the pretext of 
protecting our workers." In his recent meeting with Hiroshi 
Kumagai, minister of international trade and industry, French 
Foreign Minister Juppe asked for Japan's cooperation, but Mr. 
Kumagai took a cautious attitude, saying, "Consideration should 
be given to the concerns of Asian nations." Environmental 
protection has been referred to as a major item on the agenda of 
the next round of multilateral trade negotiations and a few 
industrialized nations plan to demand that exports from 
developing countries where the costs of protecting environment 
are low be restricted as "environmental dumping." Developing 
countries are reacting against such a move by some 
industrialized nations. Both industrialized nations and 
developing countries will inevitably confront at the ministerial 
talks. 
  The declaration to be adopted by the ministerial talks is 
expected to call for the implementation of the accord on WTO in 
January 1995, but signatories to the accord need to do the work 
of amending their respective domestic laws. There is a view 
that given political agendas in the Untied States and European 
nations, it is unclear whether the accord would take effect in 
January 1995. 

