Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Raja Mansur: "Tehran Prepares for </F>
Saddam-Rafsanjani Summit; Iranian Intelligence Raids Baqir 
al-Hakim's Offices and Arrests His Group] 
  [Text] Will Iraqi-Iranian normalization be realized, and 
the promised Hashemi-Rafsanjani--Saddam Husayn summit take 
place? Apart from the good will and serious intentions of both 
sides, there are intensive secret and public meetings going on 
in the normalization negotiations, which recently led to 
practical steps against Iraq's Shiite opposition, which had 
sought refuge in Tehran. These have included raids on the 
offices of Baqir al-Hakim and the arrest of his group, which has 
begun to seek another country to which to flee. 
  Before realizing even partial progress in the Iranian-Iraqi 
talks to normalize relations between Tehran and Baghdad, Iranian 
authorities embarked on a series of international measures to 
get ahead of the outcome of the negotiations being conducted in 
Baghdad by Iran's Deputy Foreign Minister for International 
Affairs, Mohammad Jawad Zarif. It was clear that Tehran's aim 
was to show its good intentions, and to express its readiness to 
reach an agreement pleasing to the Iraqi capital. 
  Perhaps the most prominent of these measures, and the most 
significant, was the Tehran government's establishment of 
investigative tribunals supervised by 'Ali Mohammadi, the 
official responsible for the Iraqi committee in Khamene'i's 
office, to limit the activities of the Supreme Assembly of the 
Islamic Revolution of Iraq [SAIRI], led by Ayatollah Muhammad 
Baqir al-Hakim. 
  These tribunals attended diligently to the tasks Khamene'i 
himself assigned to them, in al-Hakim's presence, who went to 
confront the investigationa and left depressed and worried about 
the future because tribunal officials insisted upon a a 
wide-ranging investigation of the funds al-Hakim and his 
supporters had received from the Iranian Government. 
  Despite the fact that Muhammad Baqir al-Hakim opposed the 
investigative tribunal, and his group refused to give out the 
information demanded of them, Mohammadi went to the Ministry of 
Intelligence (security), which in the previous week had engaged 
in two raids on al-Hakim's Tehran and Qom offices. The raids 
took place simultaneously at all the offices, and the Ministry 
arrested numerous leaders of al-Hakim's group on charges of 
financial corruption and forging government documents. 
  In the first raid, mounted by the security forces on 
al-Hakim's offices, Iranian officials met no significant 
resistance on the part of al-Hakim's supporters, who were 
relying on al-Hakim's closeness to Ayatollah Khamene'i, whose 
had supported him in the past when Iranian security agencies and 
other agencies responsible for the Iraqi opposition tried to 
limit al-Hakim's influence. But the supporters of the head of 
the Supreme Assembly of the Islamic Revolution of Iraq, who with 
his entourage has established an empire not unlike the "empire" 
of PLO leader Yasir 'Arafat, did show opposition to the second 
raid, which resulted in the arrest of the director of the 
recruiting office in Qom, Sayyid Ibrahim Lajvardi and a number 
of al-Hakim's other followers and confidants. 
  High-ranking and well-informed diplomatic sources have 
confirmed to AL-WATAN AL-'ARABI that al-Hakim suffered a severe 
shock, because what the Ministry of Intelligence did was part of 
a startling context that indicated the coming of normalized 
Iranian-Iraqi relations. This was after word circulated in 
Tehran of the forthcoming visit of Foreign Minister 'Ali Akbar 
Velayati to Baghdad, and Velayati's meeting, prior to these 
events, with his Iraqi counterpart, Muhammad Sa'id al-Sahhaf, in 
New York, and their agreement on the exchange of visits of the 
two countries' officials. 
  What could "Abu-Sadiq" [al-Hakim] do but go, as he usually 
does in these circumstances, to the leader, Khamene'i, who had 
always stood by him in the blackest times, and supported him at 
the expense of his opponents, who had begun to speak openly of 
secret deals that had taken place, or were taking place, between 
al-Hakim and Western and American intelligence agencies? 
  The first time, Khamene'i promised al-Hakim to look into the 
matter and take the necessary steps; that there would be no 
repeat of Intelligence's raid; the documents that were seized 
would be returned. But after intelligence operations against the 
offices, and the arrest of a number of his supporters, Khamene'i 
told al-Hakim, that the Ministry knew what it was doing, and 
that "it knew its duty best." 
  The ayatollah left the other ayatollah's office 
disappointed, 
expecting increased pressure on him and on his Supreme Assembly, 
which now represented only his entourage, groups of penitent 
prisoners, and the remnants of Iraqi intelligence, who had 
declared their repentance to al-Hakim, who had assigned them to 
the organs of the assembly and the units of the Badr 9 military 
corps. 
<H5>  Saddam-Rafsanjani Summit </H5>
  The diplomatic sources say they are sure that the raids on 
al-Hakim's offices and the halt to its financial budget long 
months ago are part of the ongoing normalization process in 
Iranian-Iraqi relations, and the meetings of the two countries' 
officials. These had been conducted in total secrecy on the 
joint border before the announcement of the recent 
Velayati--al-Sahhaf meeting in New York on the sidelines of the 
current General Assembly session of the United Nations. 
  Diplomatic circles in the Iranian capital believe--and they 
are joined in this by factions of the Iraqi opposition in 
Damascus and London, and even in Tehran--that the Iranian 
Government is determined to normalize relations with Baghdad. It 
is awaiting the results of the negotiating process between Zarif 
and Iraqi officials over 5,000 to 8,000 Iranian prisoners, which 
Tehran says Iraq denies holding, before sending Foreign Minister 
Velayati to prepare for a controversial summit between President 
Hashemi-Rafsanjani and Iraqi President Saddam Husayn. 
  A few weeks ago, Iran's Supreme Council on National Security 
held a meeting to study the likelihood that relations between 
Tehran and Baghdad would be normalized. In this meeting, 
Rafsanjani said that "the alliance with Iraq benefits Iran in 
improving its Gulf relations, as well as with the West, and 
perhaps the United States." 
  Iran's Supreme Council on National Security studied an 
"encouraging" report submitted by its secretary general, Hasan 
Rohani, based on information from inside Iraq confirming that 
Iraqi President Saddam Husayn is personally supervising the 
renovation of the Shiite holy places in al-Najaf and Karbala', 
which had been devastated in the March 1991 uprising. 
  Rohani said that Iraq appeared serious in mending President 
Saddan Husayn's relations with the Shiites, and that Saddam had 
personally advised the governor of al-Najaf, Hasan Rida, to look 
after the holy places and prepare them for the visits of Iranian 
Shiites, which will resume very soon, if Zarif's negotiations, 
and then Velayati's in the Iraqi capital, succeed. The Supreme 
Council on National Security viewed the renovation of the 
al-Kufah mosque, and the seminaries in al-Najaf, and the 
well-known library of Ayatollah [Muhsin] al-Hakim, as a step 
proving Iraq's readiness to receive Iranian pilgrims. 
  Hasan Rohani's report welcomed any step toward improving 
bilateral relations on Baghdad's part, and the council made a 
unanimous decision to support a public summit between the 
presidents of Iran and Iraq, which it was said had been proposed 
by Iraqi Foreign Minister Muhammad Sa'id al-Sahhaf in New York. 
<H5>  Secret Meetings </H5>
  It is worth mentioning that this is not the first time the 
foreign ministers of the two countries have met. Velayati and 
al-Sahhaf met in Karachi, Pakistan, when they both attended the 
emergency ministerial meeting of the countries of the Islamic 
Conference Organization, on Bosnia. They agreed at the time to 
continue meeting. Informed diplomatic sources confirmed that 
Velayati met with al-Sahhaf three times in the border region 
between the two countries, and that al-Sahhaf went to the city 
of Qasr Shirin last month and held a meeting nearly seven hours 
long with his Iranian counterpart. Their talks focused on ways 
of normalizing relations without a fuss affecting the two 
countries, which are trying to break the international isolation 
imposed on Iraq, and which may be imposed on Iran because of its 
position on the Israeli-Palestinian peace accord. 
  But political sources in Nicosia seeing, in the evolution of 
events between Baghdad and Tehran, open borders on both sides, 
oil trade, and smuggling, including drug smuggling, express 
their doubts about the two countries' intentions in this 
anticipated opening. Particularly as Iraq is awaiting 
impatiently the lifting of economic sanctions, it does not want 
new problems from a strategic rapprochement with Iran. These 
sources believe that these moves mean Iraq is wooing the West 
and the United States, using the approach to Iran as a lever for 
lifting the economic sanctions, and returning it gradually to 
the international community. 
  Iran is working both sides of the street, doing anything to 
get one of its possibilities accomplished. Thus it would accept 
normalized relations with Iraq, not caring whether it angers or 
pleases the West and the United States; as long as it is wet, 
why should it fear the rain, as they say--especially when its 
options are limited. They say that Iran is more serious about 
playing the Iraqi normalization card to infuriate the Arab Gulf 
states, especially Kuwait, which supports the Emirates in its 
struggle for the three islands. 
  Why Kuwait? 
  Political sources confirm that Velayati did not want to make 
public his recent meeting with al-Sahhaf in New York, even 
seeking cover for it in the UN building, if Kuwaiti Foreign 
Minister Sabah al-Ahmad had not made a speech at the 
international forum, speaking candidly about Kuwait's position 
in support of the UAE [United Arab Emirates] in demanding the 
three islands, Tunb al-Sughra, Tunb al-Kubra, and Abu-Musa. 
  The sources quoted one of those accompanying Velayati to New 
York as saying it was the Iranian Foreign Minister who requested 
the meeting with al-Sahhaf just one day after Sabah al-Ahmad's 
speech at the international organization. The sources went 
further, saying its information confirmed that the Iranian 
Government was behind the leaking of reports of secret meetings 
between Iranian and Iraq's meetings at the border, and that it 
had spread the news of the open commercial and economic route 
between Iran and Iraq, especially for oil, linking Iraq 
commercially and economically to the republics of Central Asia. 
  Tehran is doing all this because it does not want to put all 
its eggs in one basket that might be broken. The sources added 
that the subject of normalizing Iranian-Iraqi relations was 
broached by Omani Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Yusuf 
Bin-'Alawi. They said that Bin-'Alawi had participated, as had 
his Qatari counterpart Hamad Bin-Jasim Al-Thani, who gave his 
blessing to Velayati's announcement of his meeting with 
al-Sahhaf in New York. He also gave his blessing to the meeting 
with UAE Foreign Minister Rashid Bin-'Abdallah al-Nuaymi on 
continuing direct bilateral talks to solve the crisis over the 
islands. The same sources said that Qatari Energy Minister 
'Abdallah al-'Attiyah, who visited Tehran last week, was 
informed of the details of the Iranian-Iraqi talks and the 
course they were taking, which would end or be ended with Iraq's 
return to the oil market if trade sanctions against it were to 
be lifted. 
<H5>  What Alternative to the Shiite Opposition? </H5>
  So, what is left? 
  Iraqi opposition sources in the British capital said that 
the 
Shiite opposition based in Iran is very worried about the 
future, and has hastened to arrange two extended visits. Two 
senior leaders were sent to some Arab countries to search for a 
new, alternative foothold, in case Tehran and Baghdad might 
reach an agreement that would mean the fall of their 
turbans--and heads. 
  The sources say that Damascus offered to play host to 
al-Hakim, but he appeared hesitant to accept the Syrian 
invitation at this particular time, after having accepted it 
seven months ago, when there had been talk of imminent 
Iranian-Iraqi normalization. The reason for al-Hakim's 
hesitation, and that of the opposition leaders with him, was 
their secret promise to the U.S. Administration to support the 
Arab-Israeli peace agreement. The leader of the [Executive 
Council of the] Iraqi National Congress, Ahmad al-Shalabi, 
conveyed this promise via al-Hakim himself. This was before the 
surprise Gaza-Jericho First agreement. Al-Hakim, like Syria and 
numerous regional and international parties, thought the peace 
negotiations would drag on until after the Iraqi problem was 
solved with the fall of Saddam Husayn and his party, and the 
coming of the opposition, which had agreed, in Irbil (Salah 
al-Din), on an agenda worked out by American officials. 
  After the Gaza-Jericho agreement, however, and the silence 
of 
the Shiite Iraqi opposition over manifesting a public position, 
al-Hakim's variables changed. Estimates in the field changed 
when the harvest came in. People close to al-Hakim said that he 
feared asking Damascus to make public a position based on one of 
two options, the better of which was still bitter to him and his 
thesis, which does not differ very much from 'Arafat's and that 
of the PLO: to rely on the West, particularly the United States. 
  If the Syrian-track negotiations make progress and result in 
Syria's signing a peace accord with Israel, it will be up to 
al-Hakim, if he is in Damascus, to support the accord. He does 
not want to do that before his own plan comes to fruition, with 
him holding power instead of Saddam Husayn. But if the 
negotiations on the Syrian track stumble, or drag on too long 
for the United States, then channels of communiction between 
al-Hakim and the U.S. Administration will require him to declare 
a position on the Gaza-Jericho accord. If he condemns it, he 
will burn the bridges to Washington that al-Shalabi has built 
for him over the years; if he supports it, he will have gotten 
into his first predicament. 
  And so, these days al-Hakim is studying the options open to 
him while Tehran works on its relations with Baghdad, and 
earnestly studies the proposals of hard-liners, since Iraq's 
invasion of Kuwait, of the strategic alliance with the 
government of President Saddam Husayn. It is keeping all its 
options--and maneuvers--open. 

