BFN 

<F P=106> [Government work report delivered by Wu Liji, chairman of </F>
the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Regional Government, at the second 
session of the eighth regional people's congress on 20 April] 
  [Text] Fellow deputies: On behalf of the autonomous 
regional people's government, I now give a government work 
report to this session for its discussion and for opinions from 
members of the autonomous regional committee of the Chinese 
People's Political Consultative Conference [CPPCC] and other 
persons attending as observers. 
<H5>  Review of 1993 Work </H5>
  Under the leadership of the party Central Committee, the 
State Council, and the autonomous regional party committee, the 
autonomous regional people's government, in 1993, relied on and 
led the people of various nationalities across the region to 
comprehensively implement the guidelines of the 14th party 
congress, the first session of the eighth National People's 
Congress [NPC], and the sixth (enlarged) plenary session of the 
fifth autonomous regional party committee; to conscientiously 
carry out the series of major policy decisions of the central 
authorities on strengthening and improving macroeconomic 
regulation and control; to deepen reform; to open wider to the 
outside world; to work hard in unison; to overcome numerous 
difficulties; and to maintain the good trend of faster 
development in the economy of the region. Our GNP totaled 45.52 
billion yuan, up 10.6 percent from the preceding year in terms 
of comparable standards. Of this, the added value of the primary 
industry grew by 5 percent, that of the secondary industry 16.4 
percent, and that of the tertiary industry 9.7 percent. Local 
revenue totaled 5.61 billion yuan, up 43.6 percent. Judging 
from the overall situation, the major economic targets defined 
at the first session of the eighth regional people's congress 
were attained or nearly attained. Science and technology, 
education, culture, and other social undertakings made new 
headway. An excellent situation characterized by economic 
development, political stability, unity among nationalities, and 
social progress emerged region wide. 
  A. The position of agriculture and animal husbandry as the 
foundation was strengthened, and new development was achieved in 
the economies in rural and pastoral areas. Governments at all 
levels further strengthened leadership over rural and pastoral 
work and adopted a package of policy measures to support 
agricultural and animal husbandry production and protect the 
interests of peasants and herdsmen, thus effectively promoting 
the economic development in rural and pastoral areas. New 
achievements were won in building farmland and grassland 
focusing on water conservation facilities. The autonomous 
regional government attached importance to reducing the burdens 
on peasants and herdsmen and canceled 21 burdens in addition to 
the irrational burdens canceled by the state in explicit orders. 
Thanks to the improvement in the capacity for comprehensive 
agricultural and animal husbandry production and for preventing 
and combating disasters, bumper harvests were won for the 
seventh year in a row in grain production and ninth year in a 
row in animal husbandry despite the serious natural disasters in 
some localities. The region's grain output totaled 11.08 billion 
kg, an all-time record; and per capita grain share neared 500 
kg, ranking third in the country. Livestock numbered 55.777 
million in the animal husbandry fiscal year, also an all-time 
record. More trees were planted than planned to reach 390,000 
hectares, up 5.2 percent. The production of agriculture and 
animal husbandry was restructured, marking a new step in 
developing high-yield, good-quality, and high- efficient 
agriculture and animal husbandry. 
  An unprecedentedly good situation emerged in the development 
of township enterprises, which created 20.3 billion yuan in 
output value in 1993. In terms of the output value of township 
enterprises, 53 banners and counties (cities, districts) in the 
region reached 100 million yuan, an increase of 25; and 39 towns 
and townships and seven villages exceeded 100 million yuan. 
Township enterprises became a new force in Inner Mongolia's 
economic development. 
  B. We overcame numerous difficulties to increase industrial 
production and transportation gradually. Despite the strained 
funds, electricity, and means of transportation in Inner 
Mongolia's industrial production and transportation last year, 
governments at all levels strengthened the regulation, control, 
coordination, and guidance to economic operation and urged 
enterprises to deepen reform and strengthen management, 
resulting in the gradual improvement in the growth rate and 
efficiency of industrial production and transportation and the 
fulfillment of most major targets defined early last year. 
Industrial output value totaled 50.5 billion yuan in terms of 
current prices, up 12.8 percent; the sales value of the 
industrial enterprises at and above the township level totaled 
42.79 billion yuan, and the marketing rate of their products was 
95.8 percent; and the overall index of economic efficiency 
reached 75.3, up 8.5 percentage points from 1992. 
  A big 
increase was made in the output of major industrial products, 
energy resources, and raw materials products in particular. 
Output of raw coal was 51.474 billion tonnes, an increase of 
7.1 percent; power, 23.48 billion kw hours, an increase of 6.1 
percent; steel, 3.449 million tonnes, an increase of 12.1 
percent; cement, 3.572 million tonnes, an increase of 12 
percent; plate glass, 3.411 million heavy boxes, an increase of 
108.5 percent; and sulphuric acid, 82,000 tonnes, an increase of 
13.1 percent. Communication and transportation also developed 
somewhat. Rotation volume of goods transported by railways was 
54.65 billion tonnes, an increase of 6.1 percent; the rotation 
volume of passengers carried by highways was 4.34 billion 
persons per kilometer, an increase of 24.3 percent; and the 
rotation volume of passengers carried by civil airplanes was 450 
million persons per kilometer, an increase of 9.3 percent. 
Postal, telecommunications, and communications service 
developed rapidly. The total business volume of postal and 
telecommunications departments was 470 million yuan, an increase 
of 45.4 percent. Production of construction trade developed at 
a high speed. The added value realized by construction trade 
was 4.48 billion yuan, an increase of 35.5 percent. 
  Thanks to reform, reorganization, grafting, and renovation, 
new changes took place in the structures of the ownership 
system, organization, and product of enterprises on the 
industrial and communications front, and some enterprises and 
enterprise groups began to march toward the world markets. 
  C. Investment structure was readjusted and construction of 
basic industries and basic facilities developed on a priority 
basis. In 1993, the total investment in fixed assets was 21.06 
billion yuan, an increase of 41.1 percent, the largest sum in 
history. The autonomous regional government conscientiously 
implemented the central authorities' measures on macroeconomic 
control, arranged construction projects in order of importance 
and urgency, ensured the construction of key projects, and 
curbed the construction of non-key projects, thus strengthening 
the construction of key projects and ensuring the construction 
of some key projects concerning basic industries and basic 
facilities, such as energy resources, raw materials, 
transportation, and communications projects. The newly added 
installed capacity of power facilities was 616,000 kw. The 
newly added coal dressing capacity was 1.2 million tonnes. 
Construction of 10 highways, with the Hohhot-Baotou Expressway 
as the major one, started simultaneously. The tracking for 
Jining-Tongliao Railway will be completed by the first half of 
1994. Investment in the region's postal and telecommunications 
fixed assets doubled and redoubled. All of the cities at or 
above the banner and county levels automated their local 
telephone exchanges. The completion of a large number of 
backbone projects added new momentum to the economic development 
of the region. 
  D. With the establishment of the socialist market economic 
system as the objective, new headway was made in various reform 
items. New headway was made in building the socialized 
comprehensive service system in rural and pastoral areas. 
Enterprise reform was deepened continuously, greater autonomy 
was granted to enterprises, more than 95 percent of enterprises 
carried out reform of labor, employment, and distribution 
systems, and 136 enterprises experimented with the shareholding 
system. More and more small and medium-sized enterprises were 
leased, sold, and merged to others or carried out the 
shareholding cooperative system, and the vitality of these 
enterprises was strengthened. Sixty percent of state-owned 
commercial enterprises instituted the system of "being owned by 
the state but operated by the people." In some localities, 80 
percent of such enterprises carried out this system. 
  A big step was made in building the market system, and the 
role of market regulation was expanded. In the region, the 
number of country fair trade markets reached 1,511, an increase 
of 17.6 percent over the previous year. In 1993, the 
transaction volume of the country fair trade in urban and rural 
areas amounted to 4.55 billion yuan, an increase of 47.5 
percent. The number of individually run industrial and 
commercial shops reached 300,000, and these shops paid 420 
million yuan in taxes to the state. New progress was made in 
developing the markets for means of production and for key 
production factors. There were 213 markets for means of 
production throughout the region, with their total transaction 
volume reaching 1.65 billion yuan; and there were 110 markets 
for key production factors, with their business volume reaching 
300 million yuan. 
  The pace of the reforms of the social security system and 
the 
urban housing system was accelerated. A total of 5,922 
enterprises in the region carried out the old-age pension 
insurance system, and 2.857 million staff and workers joined 
this insurance system. A total of 7,471 state-owned enterprises 
joined the worker unemployment insurance system. 
Non-state-owned enterprises of various categories were also 
experimenting with the old-age pension insurance program and the 
medical insurance program. By the end of 1993, a total of 11.78 
million square meters of public houses in urban areas were sold, 
gaining 490 million yuan. 
  The pace to reform the administrative management system and 
organizations with an emphasis in the change of government 
functions was accelerated and the strength in this aspect was 
expanded. In line with the demand of letting banners and 
counties take the lead and combining the efforts of the higher 
and the lower levels, we achieved a certain success in changing 
functions, simplifying administration, delegating powers, 
streamlining staff, strictly managing the size of organs, and 
controlling the blind increase in the functionaries of 
administrative organs and establishments. 
  E. Domestic and foreign trade increased constantly and new 
strides were made in introducing investment from abroad and 
establishing lateral ties at home. The total volume of imports 
and exports during the year reached $1.2 billion, up 28.5 
percent over the previous year. The building of ports was 
strengthened and the port functions improved. Big progress was 
made in border trade, and the volume of barter trade totalled 
$770 million, up 67.2 percent, accounting for 64 percent of the 
total volume of foreign import and export trade of the whole 
region. New achievements were made in inviting business and 
introducing funds. We organized a trade fair for inviting 
business and introducing funds and for economic and trade talks 
in Hong Kong and held a foreign economic and trade fair in 
Manzhouli. During the year, we reached an agreement on 
introducing $360 million in foreign capital, up 120 percent; and 
registered 408 new foreign-funded enterprises of three types, 
exceeding the total sum of the previous years. As of the end of 
last year, our region had invested in 83 enterprises outside the 
territory. Labor service workers, 8,829 in all, were sent out 
during the year, an increase of 2,543 people over the previous 
year. We further strengthened cooperation and coordination with 
fraternal regions and the state's relevant departments and 
committees, introduced 680 million yuan of funds during the 
year, and completed 1,147 economic cooperative items and 462 
technological cooperative projects. The achievements in 
introducing funds from abroad and establishing ties at home 
instilled new vitality into our region's economic development. 
  There were abundant commodities on the urban and rural 
markets and the purchasing and marketing were brisk, giving rise 
to a prosperous scene. The total retail sales of commodities in 
society during the year reached 21.97 billion yuan, up 17.5 
percent over the previous year. Of this, the retail sales of 
consumer goods increased by 19.6 percent. The retail prices of 
commodities during the year rose by 12.5 percent, which was 
slightly lower than the national average. 
  F. Remarkable results were made in rectifying the financial 
order, and new achievements were made in financial and taxation 
work. In line with the specific demand of the central 
authorities on strengthening macroeconomic regulation and 
control, the financial departments "made a few simple rules to 
be observed by all concerned," and cleared up and recovered 1.25 
billion yuan in funds on random collection of funds and 
interlending loans. We tried by all possible means to absorb 
savings deposits. The year-end savings deposits of banks 
totalled 30.89 billion yuan, up 17.5 percent; and all sorts of 
loans totalled 49.2 billion yuan, up 24.5 percent, thus 
alleviating the contradiction in the shortage of funds at 
varying degrees. The financial and taxation departments at all 
levels strived to increase revenue and reduce expenditure, 
conducted general inspection of financial and taxation work, and 
cleared up and checked the problems of arbitrarily taking 
responsible for the collection of indirect taxes and 
overstepping the authority in the reduction and exemption of 
taxes. Noticeable results were made in the collection and 
management of taxes, and in the management of extrabudgetary 
funds. We collected 5.12 billion yuan in industrial and 
commercial taxes, an increase of 1.76 billion yuan, or 52.6 
percent, over the previous year. 
  G. Science and education became increasingly close to the 
economy and social undertakings further developed. Governments 
at all levels continued to place the strategy of "invigorating 
the region through science and education" high on their agenda 
and further broaden the field of making science, technology and 
education serve the economy. New achievements were made in 
popularizing scientific and technological findings, tackling 
scientific and technological problems, and implementing the 
"spark" and "torch" plans and basic studies, and 140 major 
scientific and technological items were awarded by the region. 
The pace of invigorating agriculture and animal husbandry 
through science and technology was accelerated, and about 35 
percent of the increased portion of the agricultural and animal 
husbandry output was resulted from scientific and technological 
progress. New progress was made in the introduction of 
technology, equipment replacement and technical updating, and 
the development of new products and technology in industrial and 
mining enterprises, and the output value rate of new products 
reached 25 percent. 
  Education was continuously consolidated and developed when 
quality was stressed. Education for minority nationalities was 
further strengthened. Compulsory education was steadily 
popularized. The higher educational structure was readjusted. 
Multi-layered and varied vocational and technical educational 
networks preliminarily took shape. The region generally started 
to carry out the high-standard plan for wiping out illiteracy. 
Technical training was given to nearly 20,000 peasants and 
herdsmen. The in-service training for urban staff members and 
workers was carried out in a step-by-step manner. 
  New headway was made in culture, education, public health, 
family planning, radio and television, press, and publication. 
In line with the construction of the spiritual and material 
civilizations, a group of outstanding literary and artistic 
programs and works were created and performed. New headway was 
made in building the cultural networks at four different levels 
and implementing the "rainbow culture plan." Our region won 10 
golden medals and broke two national records at the seventh 
national sports meet and also made outstanding achievements at 
such international great events as Beijing International 
Marathon, the world cup shooting event, and the world football 
championship for middle school girl students. The construction 
of the "three public health projects" in the rural and pastoral 
grass roots was strengthened. New headway was made in 
preventing and curing such endemic and infectious diseases as 
iodine-lacking diseases, fluorine poisoning, and arsenic 
poisoning. Population increase was effectively controlled. In 
1993, the region's population natural growth rate was 11.65 per 
thousand. The "five-year plan for developing radio 
undertakings" was being implemented. Radio and television 
program transmission and reception networks basically took shape 
in densely populated areas. New achievements were made in civil 
administration, religions, Mongolian language and characters, 
geology and minerals, urban and rural construction, 
environmental protection, land management, meteorological 
service, and shock and disaster absorption. 
  H: Society was stable, nationalities were united, and the 
people's livelihood was continuously improved. The governments 
at various levels persisted in the principle of "taking a 
two-hand approach and being sure that both hands are tough" and 
further strengthened the ideological and political work. 
Activities of commending those with contributions to promoting 
national unity and progress were extensively launched. The 
new-typed socialist nationality relations characterized by 
national equality, mutual assistance, unity, and cooperation 
were consolidated and developed. 
  The construction of the socialist democracy and legal system 
was further strengthened. The regional people's government 
conscientiously implemented the resolutions adopted by the 
regional people's congress and its standing committee, 
consciously accepted supervision, narrowed the relations with 
the regional CPPCC committee and democratic parties, and paid 
attention to soliciting opinions from all fronts in making major 
policy decisions. In the past year, the regional government 
submitted eight local rules and regulations to the regional 
people's congress standing committee for examinations and 
discussions, formulated seven regulations, and handled 674 
motions set forth by the deputies and the CPPCC members. By 
deeply implementing the "Second Five-Year Plan" for conducting 
the education on popularizing the general knowledge of laws, the 
broad masses of cadres and people further enhanced the sense of 
legal system. The overall improvement of social order was 
further intensified. Some dynamic management systems, such as 
the policeman system, were set up in a step-by-step manner. 
Achievements were made in strictly dealing blows to various 
criminal and economic criminal activities. The PLA units 
stationed in Inner Mongolia and the armed police forces made new 
contributions to safeguarding the border of the motherland, 
safeguarding social stability, supporting the economic 
construction, rushing to deal with emergency, and providing 
relief to the disaster-hit people. The unity between the army 
and the government and between the army and the people was 
further strengthened. 
  Appropriate achievements were made in opposing corruption. 
The leading cadres at or above the county and section levels 
conducted self-investigations and self-corrections. Of 212 
major and appalling cases, most were investigated and concluded 
in the order of importance and urgency. The unhealthy trends 
within trades were corrected to a certain extent. The region as 
well as leagues and cities canceled 455 items on wanton 
collection of charges. The unhealthy trends, such as going out 
of the country and the territory for trips with public funds, 
administrative organs and law enforcement departments engaging 
in business and running enterprises, and vying with one another 
to purchase imported sedan cars, were brought under control. 
  The people's living standards improved in 1993. The 
average per capita net income of peasants and herdsmen reached 
829 yuan, an increase of 110 yuan over the previous year. Of 
this, the average per capita net income of herdsmen was 1,164 
yuan, an increase of 13.9 percent, and that of peasants, 778 
yuan, an increase of 15.7 percent. If the rise in the commodity 
prices was factored in, the increase was 3 percent and 3.8 
percent respectively. The average wages of workers across the 
region reached 2,772 yuan, an increase of 19.6 percent. The 
average per capita income for living expenses of urban residents 
was 1,712 yuan, up 27.3 percent, showing an actual increase of 
11 percent after price factors were deducted. New achievements 
were made in the work of supporting the poor areas and providing 
them relief. 
  Fellow deputies, we should attribute our achievements made 
during the past year to the efforts of the people of various 
nationalities across the region to emancipate their thinking, 
advance in a pioneering spirit, and struggle in unity. On 
behalf of the regional people's government, let me extend 
heartfelt thanks to workers working on all fronts across the 
region, peasants, herdsmen, intellectuals, soldiers of the 
People's Liberation Army [PLA], public security cadres and 
policemen, and officers and men of the armed police force, 
various democratic party and nonparty patriotic personages, and 
all friends at home and abroad who have supported our region's 
modernization drive. 
  Reviewing the work of 1993, we recognized that the region's 
economic and social development situation was gratifying. 
However, there were some problems which should not be 
neglected. First, owing to the uneven economic development in 
various localities, many banners and counties had a weak 
industrial foundation and lacked avenues of increasing financial 
resources. Beside many factors of increasing expenditures, some 
localities had the problem of default in the payments for 
workers. Second, the pace to change the operational mechanism 
of enterprises was not rapid, the ability to adapt ourselves to 
market competition was not strong, and a considerable number of 
enterprises had low economic returns and suffered serious 
losses. Third, the difficulties in the shortage of power and 
funds had not been noticeably alleviated. Fourth, owing to the 
fairly big rise in the prices of the means of production, the 
increase in the actual income of peasants and herdsmen was 
affected. Fifth, the problems of formalism and bureaucracy still 
existed at varying degrees in government organs. Some cadres 
still lag far behind in emancipating the mind and renewing 
concepts. Corrupt phenomena still exist among a small number of 
functionaries. Regarding the aforementioned problems, we will 
continue to adopt positive measures to realistically solve them. 
<H5>  The Major Tasks of 1994 </H5>
  Nineteen ninety-four is an important year in which our 
region 
will continue to maintain a good trend in economic and social 
development and a crucial year for implementing all major reform 
measures issued by the central authorities and for establishing 
the socialist market economic new structure. We should take 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics and the party's basic line as the 
guidance, make overall plans in line with the 20-character 
principle proposed by the Party Central Committee on "seizing 
the opportunity, deepening reform, expanding opening up, 
promoting development, and maintaining stability," 
comprehensively implement the guidelines of the third plenary 
session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, the second session of 
the eighth NPC, and the eighth enlarged plenary session of the 
fifth regional party committee, accelerate the pace of 
establishing the socialist market economic structure, actively 
readjust economic structure, strive to raise economic 
efficiency, continue to maintain a sustained, rapid, and sound 
national economic development, accelerate national unity, 
guarantee stability in the border areas, promote comprehensive 
social progress, and strive to attain the two expected fighting 
objectives. 
  To fulfill the various tasks for this year, we must make 
active efforts to understand and conscientiously handle well the 
relationship between reform, development, and stability. 
Economic development is the center of all work, reform is the 
motivation to promote development, and social stability is the 
prerequisite for economic development and the smooth progress of 
reform. Genuine stability depends on development, and 
development should be accelerated by adding impetus to reform. 
Not only should we carry out reform step by step in a 
coordinated manner, but also we should refrain from being 
overcautious and miss the opportunity. We are faced with an 
important historical opportunity for reform and development. 
Inner Mongolia's economic construction and social undertakings 
will develop in a faster and still better way as long as we 
clearly understand the situation, emancipate our minds, seek 
truth from facts, work hard, fully develop our advantages, have 
a good command of the state's reform policies, discover and 
address the new conditions and new issues emerging on our way of 
advancement, and enable reform, development, and stability to 
coordinate and promote one another. 
  A. We should achieve sustained, rapid, and healthy economic 
development. 
  Inner Mongolia's major targets of economic development for 
1994 are to strive for a 10 percent increase or more in GNP, 
which, translated, means a 5 percent increase in the added value 
of primary industry, a 14 percent increase in that of secondary 
industry, and an 11 percent increase or more in that of tertiary 
industry; and, dividing according to the new financial and tax 
systems, to make local revenue 3.17 billion yuan, up 14.1 
percent in terms of comparable standards. 
  a. We should develop the economies in an all-round manner in 
rural and pastoral areas with an aim to develop high-yield, 
good-quality, and high-efficiency agriculture and animal 
husbandry. Agriculture and animal husbandry, rural and pastoral 
areas, and peasants and herdsmen are always the basic issues on 
economic and social development. A success in agricultural and 
animal husbandry as well as in rural and pastoral work will play 
a decisive role in implementing the basic work principles 
defined by the central authorities for this year and in handling 
well the relationship between reform, development, and 
stability. We reaped bumper harvests in grain and animal 
husbandry production in the past few years successively, but our 
capital construction and overall disaster-control capacity are 
still at a low level, and the comparable efficiency of 
agricultural and animal husbandry production is rather poor. We 
must firmly put agriculture and animal husbandry above 
everything else and ensure the production of grain, edible oil, 
meat, sugar, and vegetables. This year, Inner Mongolia's grain 
output should be stabilized at over 10 billion kg, the number of 
livestock in the animal husbandry fiscal year should reach 56.5 
million head or more, afforested areas should exceed 330,000 
hectares, and township enterprises' output value should be 28 
billion yuan or more. 
  Investment in agriculture and animal husbandry should be 
increased at various levels, in various fields, and through 
various channels, and funds in support of agriculture should be 
used and managed well. We should continue to intensify capital 
construction for farmland and grassland, with the focus on water 
conservation facilities, pay attention to building marketable 
grain and marketable animal production bases and 
disaster-control bases for animal husbandry, and do a good job 
in building shelterbelts in north, northeast, and northwest 
China, reforesting plain areas, and improving deserts. We 
should harness large rivers in a planned manner. This year is 
the last year for Inner Mongolia's second- phase comprehensive 
agricultural development. We should accomplish the development 
tasks in good quality and quantity and, at the same time, strive 
for state's planning for the third-phase comprehensive 
agricultural development. We should step up efforts to work out 
another overall plan for "Hetao" project and actively organize 
forces to implement it step by step. 
  Aiming at developing high-yield, good-quality, and 
high-efficient agriculture and animal husbandry, we should first 
stabilize the areas sown to grain crops, stabilize their output, 
and stabilize their stock and then further adjust the production 
structure of rural and pastoral areas and the structures of 
farming and livestock breeding, greatly promote combination of 
agriculture and animal husbandry, and actively develop 
export-oriented and foreign exchange-earning agriculture and 
animal husbandry to improve the overall economic efficiency of 
agriculture, animal husbandry, and sideline production. 
  We should comprehensively implement the strategy of 
invigorating agriculture and animal husbandry through science 
and education and actively promote the practice of integrating 
agriculture (animal husbandry) with science and education. 
Continued efforts should be made to implement the "bumper 
harvest plan" and popularize science and technology that are 
applicable to agriculture and animal husbandry. We should fully 
mobilize the enthusiasm of the broad masses of technical workers 
in the agricultural and animal husbandry sectors and accelerate 
the conversion of agricultural and animal husbandry scientific 
achievements into practical productive forces. 
  Governments at all levels should uphold the principle of 
"promoting various ownerships and systems, making rational 
layout, laying stress on a proper degree of centralization, and 
developing tracts of land," proceed from the reality of all 
localities, adopt effective measures, firmly grasp township 
enterprises, and develop and expand the economy of banners and 
counties. We should encourage and guide township enterprises to 
promote the shareholding cooperative system and develop flexible 
mechanisms for township enterprises; encourage and guide them to 
cooperate with large and medium-sized enterprises, scientific 
research units, and institutions of higher learning, adopt high 
and new technology, and actively develop products with a high 
starting point, high added value, and a high ratio of products 
in the market; and encourage and guide them transform themselves 
by grafting with foreign-funded enterprises and enable their 
products to enter the international market. 
  It is necessary to conduct region-wide emulations on 
creating 
"townships and towns whose township enterprises have an output 
value of 100 million yuan, villages whose township enterprises 
have an output value of 10 million yuan, and enterprises whose 
output value reach 5 million yuan," and promote township 
enterprises to raise operational scale and management level. 
  We should resolutely implement central and regional policies 
and stipulations on reducing the burdens of peasants and 
herdsmen and check the unwarranted pooling of funds and 
arbitrary collection of donations, fees, and fines. Continued 
efforts should be made to adopt methods to support the poor 
areas develop production and use science and technology, to 
support the counterparts, to exchange cadres, and to accelerate 
the pace of helping poverty-stricken areas, particularly old 
revolutionary bases, minority areas, and border areas shake off 
poverty and become rich. 
  b. We should regard raising economic efficiency as the 
central task and promote a sustained, rapid and sound 
development in industrial and communications production. This 
year, the added value of industry of the whole region should 
reach 13.15 billion yuan, (based on the constant prices of 
1990), up 13 percent over last year. To grasp industrial 
production well, we must particularly stress the enhancement of 
economic returns, and exert strenuous efforts to serve the 
market, optimize the structure, and strengthen management. The 
comprehensive index of economic efficiency of industrial 
enterprises at and above the township level exercising 
independent accounting should rise by more than 6 percentage 
point. 
  To develop industrial production, we should try by all 
possible means to invigorate large and medium-sized enterprises 
and give full play to the overall economic advantages of large 
and medium-sized cities. It is necessary to continuously grasp 
the production of basic industries and pillar industries, such 
as coal, electricity, metallurgy, petrochemical industry, and 
building materials. Meanwhile, we should also actively attend to 
the transformation and improvement of light industrial 
enterprises with the advantages of agricultural and animal 
husbandry resources of our region, such as the woolen textile, 
leather, carpet, foodstuff, sugar, and medicines enterprises, 
and grasp new industries, including the rare-earth and 
electronics industries. The readjustment of product mix should 
be guided by the market, and the updating and upgrading of 
products should be accelerated. This year, we should develop 
1,100 new products, with an emphasis in cultivating a batch of 
products which have competitive ability on the domestic and 
foreign markets. 
  It is necessary to expand strength in developing enterprise 
technology and transformation and march towards the goal of 
rationalizing the technical installation, adopting advanced 
methods and technology, and producing high-grade new products. 
Under the plan, 4.6 million yuan will be arranged for 
technological transformation in the whole region and society, 
2.8 billion yuan of which will be diverted to state-owned units. 
We should concentrate the use of funds on some important 
projects, give consideration to general projects, pay attention 
to efficiency, and concentrate efforts on helping a batch of key 
enterprises carry out technological transformation projects and 
items that require a short construction period but yield quick 
returns and high efficiency within a short period of time. 
Further efforts should be made to introduce technology and 
actively encourage the use of foreign capital to transform old 
enterprises through such forms as developing joint ventures and 
grafting them with other enterprises. 
  We should continue to intensify the management of the basic 
work and guide enterprises to turn their eyes inward and to work 
hard to enhance their internal strength. We should deeply 
launch the activities of increasing revenues and reducing 
expenditures and of increasing production and practicing 
economy, strive to reduce production cost, upgrade the quality 
of products, increase the varieties of products, intensify 
marketing work, and positively pioneer markets. We should 
reduce the amount of goods kept in stock to promote sales, 
achieve coordination between production and marketing, reduce 
the amount of finished products kept in stock, and try every 
possible means to enliven capital. It is necessary to 
realistically ensure the safety in production, positively remove 
hidden perils, and reduce the occurrences of accidents. We 
should grasp the setup of the enterprise leading bodies and the 
enterprise staff and worker contingent; and cultivate a 
contingent of entrepreneurs who know economics, are good at 
management, and have the spirit of forging ahead as well as a 
contingent of good-quality staff members and workers with the 
ability to tackle difficult problems. 
  We should pay firm attention to helping enterprises halt 
deficits and increase profits, set up a system of each level 
assuming responsibility for fulfilling its assigned targets, 
give different instructions to different enterprises, and make 
conscientious efforts to make real achievements. We should 
strive to reduce the number of money-losing state-owned 
industrial enterprises by two to three percentage points by the 
end of this year and reduce the amount of deficits by more than 
5 percent. We should strengthen the management and coordination 
of industrial and communications production and operation, 
positively help enterprises solve transportation and capital 
problems cropping up in the course of production and 
circulation, and promote the sound development of industrial 
production. 
  c. We should maintain a reasonable scale of investment with 
the focus on basic industries and infrastructural facilities. 
This year, our region arranged 20.25 billion yuan of investment 
in fixed assets. According to the principle of "ensuring key 
projects, continued projects, and winding-up projects," we 
should concentrate energy on the development of such basic 
industries as agriculture, animal husbandry, and coal, 
electricity, metallurgical, petrochemical, building material, 
wool spinning, and forest industries as well as the construction 
of railway, highway, and postal and telecommunications 
infrastructural facilities; pay particular attention to 
continuing and winding up the ongoing projects; and strive to 
have these projects start operation and see real results as 
early as possible. We should positively strive to have the 
state make more investment in the region's key projects and 
particularly gain the policy-lending credits from the 
development banks. Simultaneously, we should adopt various 
forms, such as issuing stocks and bonds and bringing in foreign 
capital, to collect funds for key projects. We should 
strengthen geological prospecting work and better serve the 
economic development. We should pay attention to reasonably 
developing and protecting natural resources so as to safeguard 
the ecological balance. 
  d. We should take giving free rein to the development of the 
nonstate sectors of the economy as a favorable opportunity to 
positively cultivate new economic growth points. Nonstate 
sectors of the economy are key component parts of the national 
economy, as well as one of the key sources to increase tax 
revenues. At the time of grasping the state sector of the 
economy, particularly state-owned large and medium-sized 
enterprises, we must emancipate the mind, give free rein, and 
vigorously develop such nonstate sectors of the economy as 
collective, individual, private, and three types of 
foreign-funded ones. The proportions of various ownerships are 
allowed to be different in different localities and different 
trades. There should be no restrictions on proportions, scale, 
and management forms. It is necessary to break the bounds of 
different ownerships and to attain the requirements for state 
ownership and nongovernment management and for nongovernment 
ownership and nongovernment management. Nonstate-owned 
enterprises and individuals are allowed to lease and purchase 
state-owned small and medium-sized enterprises. Nonstate-owned 
enterprises and state- owned enterprises are encouraged for 
joint management in the forms of buying shares and offering 
technologies and equipment. Nonstate- owned enterprises' legal 
management rights and interests should be protected according to 
laws. Simultaneously, we should strengthen management and 
supervision and guide nonstate-owned enterprise managers to 
observe management laws and pay taxes according to regulations. 
  e. We should make a breakthrough in introducing foreign 
capital and advanced technologies and equipment on a large scale 
and developing large-scale cooperation and further expand the 
scale of opening to the outside world and developing lateral 
cooperation. This year, our region should make bigger strides in 
expanding the scale of exports, inviting merchants, and 
introducing foreign capital. The import and export trade volume 
should strive to reach $1.4 billion, an increase of 16.7 
percent. We should fully use our region's favorable conditions 
of opening the border areas to the outside world to further 
develop border trade and to widen and deepen the economic and 
technological cooperation with the Russian Federation and the 
Mongolian state. 
  We should exert strenuous efforts to grasp 
spot exchange trade, try by all possible means to increase 
foreign exchange through export, implement the strategy of 
occupying the market by producing quality products and 
developing various kinds of markets, develop production bases 
that can create foreign exchange through export, competitive 
products that can earn much foreign exchange, and large amount 
of key products, actively develop international markets, 
strengthen management over foreign- funded projects, enhance the 
rate of honoring contracts, the rate of putting foreign capital 
in place, and the rate of initiating new projects, strenuously 
develop tourist industry, and increase foreign exchange. 
  Further efforts should be made to strengthen lateral 
economic 
cooperation with fraternal province, cities, and regions, 
unceasingly expand economic cooperation with the northeast 
economic zone, economic zone Around Bohai Sea, Huanghe economic 
coordination zone, and other coastal provinces, cities, and 
regions, strengthen relations with Beijing Municipality and 
Hebei Province to support the counterparts, and on the basis of 
our region's advantages of having "highways, coal, electricity, 
and outlets," induce fraternal provinces, cities, and regions to 
make investments in our region, run plants, develop natural 
resources, and export products by way of our region. We should 
encourage enterprises inside the region to join the 
trans-provincial and trans-regional large enterprise groups, 
encourage enterprises outside the region to graft with 
enterprises inside the region or to develop joint ventures, do a 
good job in running the two experimental zones in Hulun Buir 
League and Wuhai city and the economic and technological 
development zones approved by the state and the region, and give 
play to their exemplary and influential role in opening up to 
the outside world. It is necessary to strengthen the work of 
setting up government organs in other localities and render good 
service while introducing technology from abroad and developing 
lateral ties at home. 
  f. We should give priority to increasing revenue and 
reducing 
expenditures and strengthen financial, taxation, and banking 
work. Governments at all levels should try by all possible means 
to cultivate financial resources and increase revenue. It is 
necessary to strengthen collection and management of tax 
revenue, strictly enforce the "tax collection and management 
method," deal strict blows to law-breaking acts of tax evasion 
and resistance, and promptly collect all the taxes which should 
be collected in full. Efforts should be made to strictly control 
expenditures. The total financial expenses must not exceed the 
budget. In line with the principle of paying attention first to 
food and second to development, making unified planning with due 
consideration for all concerned, guaranteeing the priorities, 
and curtailing general ones, we should guarantee that the wages 
of workers, particularly the teachers, retired cadres, and 
public security, procuratorial, and judicial personnel, will be 
issued on time, and guarantee the normal operation of party and 
government organs as well as institutions and units and the 
normal development of social undertakings. Continued efforts 
should be made to promote the glorious tradition of plain living 
and hard work, stop all sorts of extravagance and waste, pay 
special attention to strictly controlling the building of office 
buildings, auditoriums, and hotels, and actively curtail 
expenditure on the people, cars, and meetings. We should 
continue to control institutional purchases and strictly forbid 
the use of funds for tour abroad. We should combine the use of 
revenues inside or outside the budget and do a good job in 
managing and using funds not covered by the budget. It is 
necessary to strengthen auditing work. All localities, 
departments, and units must strictly implement the unified 
stipulations of the region, and allow no arbitrary increase in 
subsidies under any reason. 
  Financial departments should actively attract savings 
deposits from society, actively strive for state support, 
extensively absorb domestic and foreign funds, and try by all 
possible means to alleviate the shortage of funds. We should 
guarantee the priorities and give simultaneous consideration to 
general ones. It is necessary to optimize the credit structure, 
accelerate the circulation of funds, and enhance the results of 
using funds. Insurance business should be actively developed and 
its role should be given fuller play in economic construction 
and social life. 
  g. We should further invigorate the circulation of 
commodities on the basis of cultivating markets. This year, 
while making continued efforts to develop the consumer goods 
markets, we should give priority to cultivating and developing 
the wholesale markets for the means of production and the 
markets of the essential means of production, including the 
labor, personnel, banking, real estate, technology, information, 
and the property right trading markets. 
  We should greatly 
develop regional trade markets; build in the areas where 
northeast, north, and northwest China meet and in communications 
hubs a number of wholesale markets for staple farm and animal 
products and means of production, which link urban areas with 
rural areas, production units with marketing units, and Inner 
Mongolia with other provinces and which can exert greater 
influence; and gradually establish a number of distribution 
centers with Inner Mongolia's characteristics for grain, leather 
goods, woolen textiles, meat, medicinal herbs, timber, coal, 
iron and steel, building materials, and chemicals. We should 
continue to develop the role of commercial departments and 
supply and marketing departments as the major channels for the 
purchases and marketing of grain, edible oil, farm and animal 
products, and means of production. We should eliminate the 
barriers between different regions and different departments and 
the monopoly of trades and establish a new pattern of 
large-scale market, large- scale economic relations and trade, 
and large-scale circulation. While opening markets, we should 
manage markets well according to law and resolutely crack down 
on the production and sales of fake and inferior commodities to 
protect the legal rights and interests of consumers. As 
commodity prices constitute an issue concerning social stability 
and the smooth progress of reform in various fields, we should 
conscientiously do a good job in supervising and controlling 
prices. The state demands that this year's retail price rise be 
kept within 10 percent. To achieve this control target, tasks 
remain arduous. Governments at all levels must attach great 
importance to it. They should mobilize forces from entire 
society and adopt comprehensive measures to strengthen the 
supervision and control over the prices of people's basic daily 
necessities and basic service charges and strictly prevent the 
prices of important means of production from increasing. In 
addition to the price adjustments made by the state, Inner 
Mongolia will not make new price adjustments this year. We 
should establish and improve necessary reserve system and risk 
fund system for the important commodities that concern national 
economy and people's livelihood and ensure their supplies to 
stabilize the market. 
  h. We should continue to improve living standard on the 
premise of economic development. It is an important duty for 
governments at all levels to develop the economy and 
continuously improve people's material and cultural life. On 
the basis that the economies in rural and pastoral areas are 
developed in an all-round manner, we should increase the per 
capita net income of peasants and herdsmen by 100 yuan again 
this year. On the premise that economic efficiency is improved, 
we should also improve the income of enterprise staff and 
workers. The new wage system will be applied to the staff and 
workers of administrative units and institutions in line with 
the arrangements of the state and the region. Holding the 
responsibilities assigned them and taking all factors into 
consideration, governments at all levels should ensure 
accomplishment of this work. As many major reform measures will 
be carried out this year and many new conditions and new issues 
will arise, we should firmly embrace the mass viewpoint and show 
concern for people's life. We should make it a system for city 
mayors to hold the responsibility for the "vegetable basket" 
project to ensure the production and supplies of major nonstaple 
food in urban areas. We should make good arrangements for the 
life of the people of poverty-stricken areas and the staff and 
workers of difficult enterprises, especially those of the 
enterprises that have suspended production totally or partly or 
have gone bankrupt. We should do a good job in civil affairs, 
the special care to disabled servicemen and family members of 
revolutionary martyrs and servicemen, and various social welfare. 
  B. We should concentrate efforts to tackle difficulties in 
reform. 
  This year is a crucial year for promoting the package reform 
and making breakthroughs in key areas. The state has formulated 
and implemented a series of major reform measures for financial 
and tax, banking, planning, investment, and foreign trade 
systems as well as state-owned enterprises, making the reform 
unprecedented in range, quality, and difficulty. We should have 
a full understanding of the importance, urgency, and arduousness 
of this year's reform, meticulously organize its implementation, 
and achieve success in tackling difficulties. 
  a. We should establish and improve the socialized service 
system and deepen the reform in rural and pastoral areas. On the 
basis that the household-based output-related contract 
responsibility system and the dual management system combining 
unified operation with independent operation are further 
stabilized and improved, we should improve the efficiency of 
scale of agricultural and animal husbandry production, gradually 
expand the collective economy, and establish as soon as possible 
an economic operation mechanism and management system in rural 
and pastoral areas that meet the needs of the socialist market 
economy. Regarding the establishment of the socialized 
multi-purpose service system as the major target, we should 
greatly develop the economy characterized by the combination of 
farming, livestock breeding, and processing and the integrated 
management of foreign trade, industry, and agriculture (animal 
husbandry) and link the independent operation of thousands of 
households to the integrated large-scale market. Grass-roots 
multi-purpose service organizations should strive to improve 
service and gradually turn themselves into economic entities, 
which organize production and business and lead peasants and 
herdsmen to prosperity. We should conscientiously strengthen 
the grass-roots political power in rural and pastoral areas. 
  b. Enterprises should speed up transformation of the 
operating mechanism and do a good job in the reform of the 
property right system. The focuses of enterprise reform are 1) 
to invigorate large and medium-sized state-owned enterprises and 
2) to transform small, poor, and loss-making enterprises. We 
should continue to enforce the "enterprise law" and the 
"regulations on transforming the operating mechanism of the 
industrial enterprises owned by the whole people," continue to 
deepen the reform of the labor, personnel, and distribution 
systems of enterprises, and establish an effective incentive 
mechanism within enterprises to invigorate them. We should do a 
good job in making an inventory and check of the stockpiles and 
capital of enterprises and assessing their property and actively 
probe the various forms of management of state-owned property. 
Enterprise reform must be proceeded from reality, different 
guidance should be given to different enterprises, and reform 
should be conducted step by step, but the key is to improve 
economic efficiency. In compliance with the requirement for 
establishing a modern enterprise system, large and medium-sized 
enterprises should organize limited liability companies or 
limited liability stock companies in an active and orderly 
manner. Seventy large and medium-sized enterprises with good 
leading bodies, good mechanisms, and good efficiency (including 
state pilot enterprises) will be selected throughout the region 
to experiment with the modern enterprise system, and reform of 
the property right system should be conducted across the board 
in small enterprises. We should concentrate efforts on 
transforming a number of enterprises in line with the 
shareholding cooperation system, transplanting foreign capital 
to a number of enterprises, expanding a number of enterprise 
groups, transforming a number of enterprises into ones 
instituting several systems simultaneously, and adjusting a 
number of enterprises by contracting, leasing, and selling them 
out or merging them with others. 
  c. We should conscientiously conduct the reform of the 
financial and tax, banking, planning, investment, and foreign 
trade systems to suit the needs of the market economy. In 
reforming the financial and tax systems, we should rationally 
divide work and financial powers between the region and various 
leagues and cities, not only taking the interests of various 
localities into consideration to boost their enthusiasm for 
economic development but also centralizing financial resources 
on the region to enhance its financial regulating and control 
capacity. We should accomplish the tax reform tasks in an 
orderly manner and achieve success in establishing central and 
local tax organizations. In the reform of the banking system, 
we should handle well the relationship between policy-lending 
business and commercial-lending business and attach particular 
importance to policy-lending business. While putting total 
amount of assets under state control, we should carry out 
management of the liabilities and risks of assets and apply the 
market mechanism more to the management of banks. We should 
actively develop the monetary organizations other than banks and 
various money markets in minority areas to expand the channels 
for money lending. The focus of the reform of the planning 
system is to develop the macroeconomic, strategic, and policy 
functions of plans, study and map out medium- and long-term 
plans for economic and social development and local industrial 
policies, and strengthen the tracking, analysis, supervision, 
inspection, balance, and coordination of economic operation. In 
the reform of the investment system, we should strengthen the 
scientific appraisal and policy making on important projects, 
clarify the major investors, standardize investment activities, 
and establish the responsibility system for investment risks and 
the system for intermediary organizations to supervise and 
manage projects. Reform of the foreign trade system should be 
focused on transforming the operating mechanism of enterprises, 
establishing as soon as possible an economic operation mechanism 
for foreign trade that conforms to international practice and 
regulations, and promote foreign trade enterprises' endeavors to 
engage in manufacturing as well as trade, form groups with other 
enterprises, and become international corporations. 
  d. We should accelerate the pace of organizational reform 
and actually change the functions of the government. In line 
with the principles of changing functions, rationalizing 
relations, reducing the number of staff, streamlining 
administrative procedures, and improving efficiency, the 
government organizational reform should be aimed at 
strengthening macroeconomic controlling and law enforcement 
supervisory departments, intensifying social management 
functional departments, and reducing specialized economic 
management organs. This year, the region's organizational 
reform should be carried out in an all-round way. In close 
combination with the building of the socialist comprehensive 
service system in rural and pastoral areas, the organizational 
reform of banners, counties, townships, towns, and sumus should 
be aimed at streamlining the superstructure, strengthening the 
grass-roots units, and mobilizing cadres as well as scientific 
and technological personnel to go to various kinds of service 
organizations to fully display their wisdom and intelligence. 
Efforts should be made to complete the organizational reform of 
the organs directly under the regional authorities and the 
reform of the organizations at the league and city levels by the 
end of this year. Governments at all levels should adopt 
effective measures to strictly control administrative 
establishment and guarantee the quality of working personnel. At 
the same time, a part of government cadres should be allowed to 
go to grass-roots areas to do business or run enterprises in 
order to make good preparations for carrying out the public 
servant system. 
  In changing the functions of government, we should 
persistently separate government administration from enterprise 
management, delegate the production management power to 
enterprises, and transfer the market regulation function to the 
markets. The government should conscientiously conduct 
macroeconomic control, comprehensive coordination, and social 
management, and should establish a strict, scientific, 
efficient, and orderly mechanism of administration. The 
government should establish and perfect the macroeconomic 
control system, make a clear distinction between the functions 
and duties of governments at all levels, successfully combine 
immediate interest with long-term interest and combine partial 
interest with overall interest, achieve a balance between total 
supply and total demand, and pay attention to comprehensive 
coordination in order to truly decontrol and enliven the 
microeconomy and successfully control the macroeconomy. 
  e. We should accelerate the establishment of social security 
system and press forward the reform in all fields. Since reform 
is a complicated systems engineering, we need the coordinated 
actions of all fields. This year, an even bigger step should be 
taken in the subsidiary reform. We should firmly grasp the 
building of social security system and accelerate the 
establishment of multi- level social security system. We should 
expand the coverage of workers' old-age pension insurance 
system, gradually realize the overall planning by the regional 
authorities, and conscientiously carry out the "methods on 
unemployment insurance for staff and workers," formulated by the 
region. The region's program on medical treatment system should 
be set forth by the end of this year. The urban housing system 
reform should be pressed forward continuously according to the 
pertinent policies of the state. 
  C. We should energetically develop various social 
undertakings. 
  In the course of grasping economic construction, governments 
at all levels should conscientiously grasp scientific, 
technological, educational, cultural, and other social 
undertakings in order to make economic construction and social 
undertakings develop in coordination. 
  a. We should accelerate the process of merging science and 
technology to the economy. This year, we should make a 
breakthrough in the fields of deepening the reform of scientific 
and technological system, vigorously translating scientific and 
technological research results into productive forces, and 
improving investment returns. In line with the principles of 
"stabilizing a point, and decontrolling a vast area," we should 
accelerate the organizational structure readjustment of 
scientific research institutes, and encourage even more 
scientific and technological personnel to engage in 
technological development, production management, and scientific 
and technological service. Development- oriented and 
service-oriented scientific research institutes should be guided 
to enter the markets, to integrate themselves with enterprises 
in diverse forms, or to initiate science- and 
technology-oriented enterprises. Encouragement should be given 
to develop nongovernmental scientific and technological 
entities. Technology markets should be cultivated positively, 
and scientific and technological rules and regulations should be 
established further with a view to protecting the property right 
of knowledge. At the same time, we should emphatically support 
the research of the basic scientific and technologies items 
promising bright prospects and provide technological reserve for 
the region's economic development in order to maintain the 
momentum of scientific and technological development. 
  The 
development and application of science and technology should be 
focused on implementation of the "spark," "torch," and "bumper 
harvest" plans, and emphasis should be placed on the development 
of high-yield, good-quality, and high- efficient agriculture and 
animal husbandry and on tackling the key scientific and 
technological difficulties in the technical transformation of 
enterprises. We should further adjust the investment pattern 
and establish and improve the system of multi- channel and 
multi-layered social investment in science and technology. 
Scientific and technical funds must be used in key areas, and 
attention should be given to efficiency. Those who use the 
funds should pay them back so that the funds can be used over 
and over again. 
  b. We should actively develop education. Governments at all 
levels should consider education a strategic priority and 
continue to implement the "outlines for China's educational 
reform and development." We should further deepen the reform of 
the education system, optimize the education structure, and 
improve education quality and the efficiency of running schools. 
Schools should conscientiously implement the principle of 
comprehensive moral, intellectual, and physical development and 
train personnel of various specialties urgently needed in the 
socialist market economy. While ensuring state investment in 
education, we should raise education funds from various 
channels, advocate various measures for running schools, and 
change the wanton collection of fees for compulsory education 
and the state's monopoly of higher education. We should collect 
extra education funds fully and use them well in line with the 
regulations of the State Council document no. 2 of 1994. We 
should regard it as a strategic goal to make the nine-year 
compulsory education universal in most areas and eliminate 
illiteracy among young and middle-aged people, pay close 
attention to it, and achieve success in it. We should be 
determined to change the tendency of lop-sided pursuit of higher 
rate of attendance of higher-level schools and turn the 
education for the purpose taking examinations into high-quality 
education. We should mobilize forces from the entire society to 
make the "hope project" successful and adopt measures to prevent 
primary and middle school dropouts. We should further improve 
secondary specialized schools and vocational and technical 
schools and conduct on-the-job training for staff members and 
workers and technical training for peasants and herdsmen. 
Schools of higher learning should accelerate their reform to 
further break with the closed way of running school. Based on 
Inner Mongolia's actual conditions in economic and social 
development and the requirement for establishing the socialist 
market economy system, we should actively adjust the layout and 
disciplines of schools and advocate cooperation in running 
schools. We should support Neimenggu University's entry into the 
"211" project. We should intensify the education of minority 
nationalities and accelerate the training and improvement of 
scientific and technical personnel, economic personnel, and 
cadres of minority nationalities. We should conscientiously 
implement the "teachers law," strive to raise the quality of 
teachers, safeguard their legal rights and interests, and 
improve their material benefits. We should make active efforts 
to train and use personnel, establish a social environment for 
respecting knowledge and cherishing talents, and stabilize and 
attract personnel. 
  c. We should make socialist culture more flourish. In 
cultural work, we should continue the orientation of "serving 
socialism and serving the people" and the principle of "letting 
a hundred flowers blossom and a hundred schools of thought 
contend," put social benefit above everything else, and strive 
for unity between social benefit and economic efficiency. 
Literary and art works should advocate the main theme of this 
era and be diversified. We should lead and organize the large 
number of literary and art workers to plunge into the thick of 
reform, opening up, and economic construction, acquire a better 
understanding of the pulse of this era, and create the 
outstanding works that reflect the characteristics of our 
nationalities and region and are loved by the masses to satisfy 
the ever growing spiritual and cultural needs of the people of 
various nationalities. We should actively promote the 
restructuring of art performing groups. We should further 
develop the fine tradition of serving grass-roots levels 
displayed by the Inner Mongolia revolutionary cultural troupe. 
We should continue carrying out the "rainbow cultural plan" and 
facilitate the construction of the border cultural long 
corridor. We should step up construction of the final-phase 
work of the satellite uplink station, ground stations, and relay 
stations to expand our radio and television coverage. We should 
adhere to the principle of "making culture flourish and 
eliminating pornography simultaneously," conscientiously 
strengthen the management and supervision of cultural markets, 
and let healthy and progressive cultural activities prevail in 
urban and rural cultural fronts. We should strengthen the 
protection and use of cultural relics and resolutely crack down 
on the criminal activities to resell and damage cultural relics. 
  d. We should conscientiously carry out public health and 
sports work. Continued efforts should be made to conduct the 
experiment of reforming the medical insurance system in selected 
units in cities and towns and develop the security system with 
cooperative health care as the main substance in rural and 
pastoral areas. It is necessary to place the emphasis of health 
work in the rural and pastoral areas, grasp the building of 
health care networks in banners and counties, in sumu and 
townships, and in gacha and villages, and conscientiously 
implement measures for preventing epidemic disease and 
infectious disease that may cause great harms to the masses of 
people. We should actively conduct patriotic public health 
campaign and improve the environment and sanitation of cities, 
towns as well as the rural and pastoral areas. All medical 
units should focus their work on raising service quality, deepen 
internal reform, rectify medical order, and improve professional 
ethics and work style of medical workers. Active efforts should 
be made to explore a new way for developing sports undertakings 
during the new period, make sports a social undertaking, and do 
a good job in conducting the experiment of linking sports 
undertakings with enterprises in some selected units. We should 
extensively conduct mass sports undertakings in an effort to 
improve people's physique. In sports work, we should train 
athletes in an effort to produce professionals and achievements 
and make preparations for attending the "eighth national sports 
meet." 
  e. We should realistically grasp family planning well. It is 
necessary to conscientiously implement the work principle of 
"grasping family planning work firmly and well and paying 
attention to both," further enhance the consciousness on 
population and the per capita sense, implement the system of 
making party and government top leaders personally grasp and 
assume full responsibility for managing family planning work and 
attaining a certain target, implement the method of "negating 
one's work achievements when he violates the family planning 
plan," and ensure that the natural population growth rate will 
be controlled within 13.3 per thousand. Conscientiously efforts 
should be made to ensure healthy births and good upbringing so 
as to enhance the population quality. We should place the 
emphasis of family planning work on the rural areas and 
transients, guarantee that the family planning working funds 
will be in place, and do a good job in installing family 
planning personnel in the grass roots. 
  f. We should attend to environment protection and urban 
construction and management. It is necessary to uphold the 
principle of simultaneously planning, implementing, and 
developing the economy, urban and rural areas, and environmental 
protection work, conscientiously attend to the work of improving 
the existing pollution sources, and actively popularize new 
technology to comprehensive use the "three industrial wastes." 
We should strengthen urban construction planning work, attend 
to the building of infrastructure facilities, strengthen city 
management, and provide a good environment for a coordinated 
economic and social development. 
  D. We should further strengthen socialist democracy and the 
legal system. 
  Socialist democracy and the legal system is an important 
aspect in building socialism with Chinese characteristics and an 
important guarantee for deepening reform, promoting development, 
and safeguarding social stability. Governments at all levels 
should pay full attention to it and grasp it with earnest 
efforts. 
  a. We should continue to strengthen socialist democracy. 
Governments at all levels should maintain close ties with the 
masses, give full play to democracy, consciously accept legal 
and work supervision from the people's congresses and their 
standing committees of the corresponding level, and give further 
play to the role of political consultation, democratic 
supervision, and political participation and discussion of the 
CPPCC, various democratic parties, and nonparty patriotic 
personages. Conscientious efforts should be made to handle the 
suggestions of deputies and motions raised by the CPPCC members. 
We should give full play to the role of the trade unions, 
Communist Youth Leagues, the women's federations, and other mass 
organizations as a bridge and a link. It is necessary to 
realistically strengthen the work of handling people's letters 
and visits, experience and observe the conditions of the people, 
and conscientiously adopt the suggestions of the masses for 
rationalization. We should further establish and improve the 
system of democratic policymaking and supervision, extensively 
listen to opinions and suggestions from all sectors while making 
important measures, and make the policymaking more scientific, 
democratic and institutionalized. We should actively strengthen 
democracy in the grass roots, give full play to the role of 
workers congresses, neighborhood committees, and villagers 
committees, and guarantee that the grass-roots people can fully 
exercise their democratic rights. 
  b. We should attach great importance on the building of 
legal systems. Developing the socialist market economy requires 
us to have to master the practice of applying legal measures to 
managing economic activities and social affairs and to enhance 
the governmental work of legal systems. In line with the 
legislative plan formulated by the autonomous regional people's 
congress standing committee, we should vigorously draw up the 
draft plan for local regulations and rules concerned and 
formulate in a timely manner the administrative regulations of 
governments according to the demands of economic and social 
development. Efforts should be made to conduct the 
administrative work strictly according to the law and to enhance 
the supervision over law enforcement. We should also resolutely 
correct the problems of not abiding by the law, not strictly 
enforcing the law, not checking the violation cases, not 
implementing the order, and not carrying out prohibitions so as 
to safeguard the sanctity of the law. Efforts should be made to 
enhance the building of contingent of personnel in charge of 
enforcing the law, to upgrade the level of law enforcement work, 
to continuously deepen the "25" education on legal 
popularization, and to establish or develop the institutions of 
legal services so as to strengthen the concept of all citizens 
in legal systems. 
  c. We should vigorously grasp the social comprehensive 
management. Successfully grasping the comprehensive management 
of public security, making all-out efforts to safeguard the 
stability and social peace of the autonomous region, and 
providing a fine social environment for reform and development 
represent an unshirkable duty undertaken by governments at all 
levels and particularly by the political and legal departments. 
We should continuously and deeply wage the struggle of "dealing 
strict blows at crimes" and deal strict blows in line with the 
law at various criminal activities that are endangering the 
safety of the people's life and property and the modernizations. 
Efforts should be made to wage the struggle against the social 
evil phenomena, including the elimination of "six vices". The 
comprehensive management of public security is a systematic 
project. Therefore, various departments should closely 
coordinate with one another, make concerted efforts in the 
management, and establish or improve the network in which the 
masses are joining in the management and crime control. We 
should adopt a correct attitude toward and earnestly handle the 
contradictions among the people cropping up under the new 
situation as well as be good at mediating the disputes and 
relieving the contradictions so as to deal with the unstable 
factors that are adversely affecting the society in the 
embryonic stage. Governments at all levels should enhance their 
leadership over the management, implement the contracting 
system, enforce the "veto with one vote" system in the 
comprehensive management of public security, and realistically 
assume the political responsibility of "maintaining the social 
peace " of their own. 
  d. We should earnestly do a good job in the nationalities' 
affairs and the religious work. Enhancing the nationalities' 
unity and maintaining the border peace and the motherland's 
unification are areas in which the common desire and fundamental 
interests of the people of various nationalities lie. We should 
carry forward the fine tradition fostered by the cadres and 
masses of various nationalities with regard to mutual trust, 
study, assistance, respect, and existence so as to further 
consolidate and develop the socialist nationalities' 
relationship of equality, mutual assistance, unity, and 
cooperation. Efforts should be made to earnestly enforce the 
party's policy on nationalities' affairs, to deeply implement 
the "regional national autonomy law", and to vigorously grasp 
the fundamental issue of developing the economy so as to achieve 
common prosperity, unity, and progress among various 
nationalities. We should continuously enhance the work of 
Mongolian language and writing, earnestly implement the party's 
policy on religious affairs, and respect the freedom of believer 
and nonbeliever. We should not only protect the legal 
activities of religions but also enhance the management over 
religious affairs in line with the law. Currently, we should 
particularly guard against the hostile forces both at home and 
abroad, which are engaging in splitting activities by making use 
of the problems of national and religious affairs. 
  e. We should strive to do a good job in national defense. 
Guaranteeing a long period of order and stability in the border 
areas is our political responsibility. It is necessary to 
unswervingly conduct education on national defense and enhance 
the concept of national defense and the sense of people's air 
defense of all the people. We should actively support PLA 
building, strengthen management in the border areas, extensively 
conduct "double-support" activities, and further consolidate and 
develop unity between the army and the government and between 
the army and the people. The army and the local people should 
maintain close coordination and jointly attend to militia and 
reserve duty work as well as the settlement of servicemen who 
have retired or been transferred to civilian jobs. 
  f. We should deeply launch anticorruption struggle. 
Governments at all levels should fully understand the 
importance and urgency of anticorruption struggle, enhance the 
sense of misery, and unswervingly continue this struggle in an 
in-depth, sustained, and more effective manner. Cadres at all 
levels, leading cadres in particular, should perform their 
official duties honestly, do their administrative work 
diligently for the sake of the people, serve the people 
wholeheartedly, and serve as examples in fighting corruption and 
promoting honesty. It is necessary to conscientiously solve 
problems which the masses have strong complaints, step up 
efforts to investigate and handle major and appalling cases on 
corruption, bribe-taking, and serious malfeasance, and strictly 
punish corrupt elements. We should continue to check and 
rectify unhealthy trends in various trades, establish an 
effective supervision mechanism and a mechanism of restraints, 
give full play to the role of legal supervision, administrative 
supervision, mass supervision, and media supervision, and 
prevent and check the corrupt phenomena with systems. 
  Fellow deputies: 
  In the whole process of reform, opening up, and 
modernization 
drive, we must persistently uphold the principle of "taking a 
two- handed approach in work and be tough with both," strengthen 
socialist spiritual civilization, enhance the scientific and 
educational level as well as the ideological and moral level of 
the whole nation, and strive to cultivate well-educated and 
self- disciplined socialist people of a new type with lofty 
ideals and moral integrity. It is necessary to conscientiously 
study Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with 
Chinese characteristics and further enhance our awareness in 
implementing the party's basic line. We should strengthen 
philosophy and social sciences research work with 
Marxism-Leninism and Mao Zedong Thought as a guidance, 
unswervingly conduct education on patriotism, collectivism, and 
socialism, and cultivate the moral habit of working hard, making 
progress with a matter-of-fact attitude, being ready to take up 
the cudgels for a just cause, and working honestly. We should 
display the superiority of ideological and political work, 
enhance spirit, advance in a pioneering spirit, and guide the 
people of various nationalities to actively plunge into the 
powerful current of the region's reform, opening up, and 
socialist modernization drive. 
  Building the socialist market economic structure is an 
unprecedented great cause. The mission vested by history is 
glorious but arduous. We must unify thinking, grasp the overall 
situation, work with one heart and one mind, and do all we can 
to forge ahead. We are firmly convinced that under the correct 
leadership of the Party Central Committee, the State Council, 
and the regional party committee, and through the strenuous 
efforts of the people of various nationalities across the 
region, we will surely accomplish all tasks of this year and win 
new victories in reform, opening up, and the modernization drive. 

