CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with National Bank Vice President Merab Kakulia </F>
by Armaz Saneblidze, Donetsk-Tbilisi: "Economic Passions. A 
Triptych for Two Ministers and a Vice President"; date not given] 
  [Text] We began our interview with National Bank Vice 
President Merab Kakulia by talking about an ordinary detail of 
the hullabaloo, so to speak, over the 50,000-ruble 
banknotes. 
<H5>  Even a Priest Will Steal When Hungry </H5>
  [Saneblidze] What is the reality behind it? Is it a form of 
making money with money? 
  [Kakulia] Let me say that the hullabaloo over the 
50,000-ruble banknotes is purely speculative. They are the most 
"mobile banknotes" in Russia, freely accepted by banking 
establishments. The officials of Russia's Central Bank wouldn't 
even dream of taking those notes out of circulation. True, 
counterfeit 50,000-ruble notes have been printed and have been 
found in Russia and other republics where the ruble more or less 
circulates, but that shouldn't have caused such a hullabaloo, 
because it's easy to determine whether a banknote is fake or 
not, for it has many protective mechanisms. For example, just 
look at it in the light; if you see watermarks you can be sure 
it's genuine. The finish on a fake bill is so bad that it takes 
little scrutiny to tell the difference. 
  People won't accept a 50,000-ruble note in Georgia and will 
exchange it only if you let them keep a few thousand as a 
commission, so to speak. Making money with money goes on. 
  We ought to be combatting this in the media, explaining to 
people that a 50,000-ruble note is a fully valid medium of 
payment, that it is in no danger. But because our mass 
consciousness suffers from so much malaise, for various reasons, 
it will be hard to carry out reassurance work like that. We do 
have some experience, however. Remember when the exchange 
offices wouldn't accept dollar bills issued in the 1970s and 
1980s? The absurd notion of the "superdollar"--issued in 
1990--spread. The ridiculous claim was that people in America 
don't like to put those bills in their pocket because they 
contain so much metal; muggers using a special device can easily 
detect that kind of capital, and its owner really is in danger 
of losing it. 
  When this problem surfaced in Georgia, I asked my colleague 
in the U.S. Federal Reserve System (although I was certain it 
was was all made up, an official reply would be useful), and his 
reply was prompt and categorical: all banknotes issued since 
1928 are legal tender. 
  We published this reply and explanation and, believe it or 
not, the problem was partly solved. Probably the same thing 
should be done about the 50,000-ruble notes. 
  [Saneblidze] But there is still a state agency that is 
supposed to regulate currency circulation. It has been slow to 
react to this falsehood, which some organizer must surely be 
behind. Why? 
  [Kakulia] That agency is the National Bank, but keep in mind 
also that for us the 50,000-ruble note is foreign currency, and 
the National Bank doesn't have the means to influence its 
circulation. At best we can talk to Russia's Central Bank and, 
by an exchange transaction, have the bills exchanged for smaller 
denominations. 
  [Saneblidze] Let me put it another way. Some people think 
that the transactions which private exchange offices are 
providing should be taken over by the state. 
  [Kakulia] I don't share that idea. Until the parliament made 
changes to existing legislation and allowed legal and physical 
persons to open currency exchange offices, only authorized banks 
had that right, including state banks. You'll recall that most 
banks were not interested in buying and selling currency; they 
were involved in more "lucrative" business such as refinancing 
credit resources obtained from the National Bank. Banks which 
did engage in currency transactions only bought it, and at low 
rates too. A black market developed in which the currency 
purchase rate that formed was significantly higher than the one 
set by the banks and greatly exceeded the purchase rate. In 
order to correct the currency market it became necessary to set 
up an extensive network of exchange offices. We can say now that 
the currency black market in its traditional sense is no more. 
The buying and selling of currency goes on primarily in the 
exchange offices. But a great many of them can't meet standards, 
although that too is being dealt with in the course of 
reinforcing state order. 
  Still, the exchange offices' role would be greater if the 
coupon really did function as the sole legal tender in Georgia. 
  [Saneblidze] That was my next question--parallel currencies 
and the fate of the coupon. 
  [Kakulia] Let's look this way at the idea of two currencies 
with parallel circulation in our country. There is a generally 
acknowledged law of money circulation--a strong currency will 
drive out a weak one. This is happening before our eyes: the 
ruble (to say nothing of the dollar) is driving out the coupon. 
In every case, then, officially allowing parallel circulation 
will step up the pace of coupon avoidance. Meanwhile, most of 
Georgia's citizens receive their pay in coupons. You can imagine 
what will happen: our people's earnings will lose any economic 
meaning and lead to a social explosion. 
  As for the coupon's fate: is there a way to assure its 
status 
as the sole legal tender? Look, here we are in Ukraine, which is 
also having a hard time. Even the local karbovanets [Ukrainian 
ruble] is not much firmer than our coupon. There was a time when 
our coupon's exchange rate was more solid than that of the 
Ukrainian currency, and yet the karbovanets is still the sole 
legal tender. In all this big country you can hardly find a 
store that does its trade with rubles or dollars. If you have 
foreign currency, say rubles, in your hand, you have to change 
it at an exchange office. I repeat, the karbovanets's exchange 
rate is falling fast, yet currency regulations are not being 
broken--because that carries an appropriate penalty that is 
enforceable by law, and people have a national 
self-consciousness that the karbovanets is a symbol of. 
  I think that with the proper state approach, we can make the 
coupon the sole legal tender in Georgia as well. I'm encouraged 
to think so by the fact the coupon's status in the outlying 
areas is not as shaky as it is in Tbilisi. We have to take 
prompt steps to save the coupon. 
  First of all, we have to institute a legal mechanism of 
liability for violating currency regulations in Georgia. Despite 
repeated demands by the National Bank, we haven't been able to 
get changes made in the laws to impose stiffer penalties for 
engaging in retail trading and services with foreign currency. 
As it is, the control agencies are virtually powerless against 
currency violators. We need to institute harsh penalties and 
fines. 
  Don't get me wrong: I don't think administrative methods are 
the only way to expand the coupon's circulation area. We have to 
try to achieve domestic convertibility of the coupon, for the 
Russian ruble at least, so we can import the resources we need 
so badly and get our factories going again. 
  [Saneblidze] But how do we do that? 
  [Kakulia] We can do it. Remember the Russian troop 
contingent 
in Transcaucasia and the Military Field Bank that serves it? 
That bank can legally bring billions of Russian rubles into 
Georgia. Why not conclude an intergovernmental agreement with 
Russia stipulating that money allocated to Russian servicemen on 
our territory be exchanged for coupons at the ruble's current 
exchange rate? That way the banking system can build a certain 
ruble reserve, which will enable to National Bank to set a more 
or less stable rate for the ruble. 
  Again, domestic convertibility of the coupon could be 
greatly 
fostered by the billions of rubles which legal persons in 
Georgia have hidden in the former Soviet republics. A leading 
role in this illegal activity is played by enterprises in the 
state sector which export their goods to neighboring countries 
and then keep their earnings there. They are, to be sure, 
solving some of their own problems that way, but they aren't 
thinking about how Georgia is to pay for its natural gas, 
electricity, raw materials and supplies! It would be very easy 
to toughen up export controls. We need to improve our licensing 
and customs mechanisms. The banking system is already able, by 
means of corresponding accounts, to obtain the funds it has 
coming to it from foreign and neighboring countries. 
  [Saneblidze] What about the 32-percent tax? 
  [Kakulia] Every country has hard-currency reserves forming 
the basis for stabilizing its monetary system and developing its 
economy. They are formed from hard currency earnings held by the 
country's residents. Thirty-two percent of these earnings are to 
be sold to the state, of which 22 percent goes into the republic 
and local currency funds and 10 percent goes to the National 
Bank to stabilize monetary circulation and the exchange rate. 
It's not actually a tax, because in exchange for the 32 percent 
of earnings, enterprises and organizations receive the coupon 
equivalent at the market exchange rate. 
  [Saneblidze] If Georgia joins the ruble zone, will it 
perhaps 
solve a lot of these problems? 
  [Kakulia] Yes, but do we know what the ruble zone is? The 
Russian side hasn't even figured out yet how to incorporate the 
Belarusian monetary system--and Belarus has much better 
macro-economic indicators than Georgia, or any other former 
Soviet republic except the Baltics. Any talk of the ruble zone 
will require detailed information regarding what conditions the 
ruble-issuing country--Russia--will set. The seven conditions I 
found out about in the press are not very sound, to say the 
least. 
  [Saneblidze] To sum up, what is most needed today? 
  [Kakulia] It's hard to put it in a nutshell, but--we have to 
save the coupon. We can only do it if we can achieve the 
domestic convertibility of foreign currency. This will require 
getting Georgia's export earnings into Georgia's banking system. 
We also need to severely restrict credit emissions and thus 
create the conditions forming a real exchange rate for the 
coupon. Slowing down the coupon's slide will create conditions 
to improve the overall macro-economic situation. 
<H8>  * * * </H8>
  So these are the thoughts of a banking professional. 
Nothing can be done with one stroke, apparently, and being hasty 
is like the floundering of a man in quicksand--the harder you 
struggle, the deeper you sink into the muck. 
  But as you can see, there is hope, and, thank God, it 
is serious hope, not a twisted rope. 
  Meanwhile, sad to say, even a priest will steal when 
hungry. 

