BFN 

<F P=106> [By Bruce Gilley] </F>
  [Text] China's State Statistical Bureau (SSB) was hit by 
the Friday 13th computer virus on Friday, with the result its 
entire national accounts network was shut down. Key economic 
figures due to be released this week, including the sensitive 
urban inflation figure for April, will be delayed for up to a 
week as a result, according to SSB sources. 
  The bureau's anti-virus team worked through the weekend 
trying to repair the damage, hoping to reboot the bureau's 
American-made Compaq computers by today. But problems were 
encountered and the system was still down last night. 
  Computer viruses are malicious instructions inserted in 
computer programs which cause aberrant behaviour and sometimes 
permanent loss of data. "In the past they always could get rid 
of the virus in a few days. But this one is much more 
complicated," an SSB source said. 
  Because China has not yet established a national statistics 
computer network, the shut-down was not expected to affect the 
normal reporting of provincial figures to the bureau. However, 
data processing has been delayed in Beijing. The SSB has 
suffered regular attacks from computer viruses in the past year, 
according to the source. Most of them appear on Friday, which 
has come to be known within the bureau as "Black Friday". 
  The Ministry of Public Security said last month that about 
70 
to 80 per cent of the nation's computers were infected by 
viruses. A computer virus destroyed parts of the second volume 
of Deng Xiaoping's biography, currently being written by his 
daughter, Deng Rong, it was reported last week. The ministry 
said some viruses had infected "scientific research and higher 
learning institutes", but made no mention of government 
departments. But the official said there were "hundreds" of 
viruses affecting central government computer systems. 
  According to Compaq Computer's main account manager in 
Beijing, Raymond Yam, the SSB and other government users in the 
capital -- which include the State Taxation Administration, the 
Ministry of Finance and the Great Hall of the People -- normally 
deal with the viruses themselves. "The Chinese users are very 
experienced in handling viruses, even more than ourselves," he 
said. 
  Yam said viruses have spread in China recently because of 
widespread use of pirated software, which can quickly infect an 
entire network once used on a single computer. Copying data 
using diskettes can also introduce a virus, he added. 
  Compaq, which sold 80,000 personal computers in China last 
year, claims to hold about a quarter of the state enterprise and 
government department computer market in the country. China has 
a total of about half a million computer systems. The State 
Council issued new regulations in March to control computer 
systems and combat viruses, including an approval system for 
companies making anti-virus products. 
  Two Beijing companies-China Huaneng Group and Beijing Rising 
Computer Company -- were among the first to receive Public 
Security Bureau approval and are believed to have captured a 
large share of the government market in the capital. "There are 
many small companies now in Beijing specialising in helping 
government departments fight viruses," Yam said. "It has become 
a booming business." 

