Language: <F P=105> Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpts] Chinese Premier Li Peng and four vice premiers, 
namely, Zhu Rongji, Li Langing, Qian Qichen, and Zou Jiahua, met 
with domestic and foreign reporters who had been covering the 
National People's Congress meeting and the Chinese People's 
Political Consultative Conference meeting yesterday [22 March] 
at the Great People's Hall in Beijing. At the meeting Premier 
Li Peng expressed gratitude to the reporters for their news 
coverage of the meetings and answered some questions raised by 
them. [passage omitted] 
  Referring to relations between China and the United States 
Premier Li Peng said that China attaches importance to Sino-U.S 
relations and is ready to improve the relations and that it has 
been making efforts for this end and will continue to make 
efforts in the future, too. However, he stressed that China is a 
sovereign state and that, accordingly, it will not hold 
negotiations on principled matters. 
  Referring to U.S. Secretary of State Cristopher's recent 
visit to China Premier Li Peng said that Cristopher's visit was 
successful and that China hopes he will attain greater success. 
He also said that the two sides reached an agreement on some 
specific matters and promoted mutual understanding. [passage 
omitted] 
  Referring to the nuclear issue of Korea, Premier Li Peng, 
saying that China has always insisted on resolving the nuclear 
inspection issue of Korea through negotiations, said that using 
a method of applying pressure would make the situation on the 
Korean peninsula more complicated and tense and would be 
unfavorable for the peace and stability of this region. 
  Premier Li Peng said that North Korea's acceptance of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency's inspection proved that the 
two sides can gradually reach agreement through negotiations. 
He said that if the issue on the nuclear inspection of North 
Korea is referred to a discussion at the UN Security Council, 
China will adhere to its consistent position of reasonably 
resolving the issue through dialogue and negotiations, not 
through applying pressure. [passage omitted] 

