BFN 

  [Text] It is likely that objective criteria, which are a 
focal point at issue in the Japanese-U.S. economic framework 
talks, will continue to have the characteristic of "numerical 
targets." The framework talks have been resumed on the 
condition that objective criteria will not become numerical 
targets. However, a government source said: "There is an 
interpretational gap between Japan and the United States over 
the numerical targets, but they 'started acting before obtaining 
full consensus' and resumed talks without completely closing the 
gap." The United States believes that unlike the case of 
"quantities of imported goods," a pledge to increase in the 
future "the number of dealers who sell foreign products," for 
example, will not be regarded as a numerical target. This U.S. 
view differs from Japan's official explanation that it will "set 
no future goals." But because Japan has already made 
compromises by setting goals designed to allow more foreign 
companies to make inroads into the Japanese market in each 
sector and to increase sales of foreign products, it is expected 
that Japan will eventually meet the United States halfway 
regarding the objective criteria as well. 
  At the framework talks, agreement was reached to introduce 
objective criteria to measure the openness of Japan's markets. 
However, opinions of the United States, which calls for the 
incorporation of future goals into objective criteria, and 
Japan, which wants to use these criteria only as a means to 
evaluate the openness of its markets in the past, were divided. 
The talks have been suspended since February. 
  Prior to resuming the talks, the two nations exchanged on 23 
May a statement of agreement, which was not made public. As for 
objective criteria to measure the openness of Japan's markets, 
both nations only confirmed the following principles: 1) 
Objective criteria will not become numerical targets; 2) Several 
yardsticks, including quantitative and qualitative standards, 
will be set; and 3) The openness of Japan's markets will be 
evaluated comprehensively not by a single standard but rather by 
several standards. A detailed definition of numerical targets 
is not mentioned in this agreement at all. 
  A Japanese negotiator said that the U.S. Government is 
interpreting the numerical targets as future goals regarding the 
quantities of imported foreign goods and foreign companies' 
market share in Japan. For instance, the United States believes 
that the goal of "increasing imports of foreign automobiles by a 
certain percentage before a certain fiscal year" is a numerical 
target and that it has no intention to ask Japan to make such a 
pledge. In this regard, both countries share the same view. 
  According to the same source, however, the United States 
also 
believes that pledges will not be considered to be numerical 
targets as long as they set quantitative criteria for the 
improvement of Japan's domestic environment for increasing the 
share of foreign products. A public commitment to "increase the 
number of foreign car dealers by a certain percentage before a 
certain fiscal year" will not be considered to be a numerical 
target. During his speech, U.S. Trade Representative (USTR) 
Micky Kantor expressed a similar opinion. 
  Some government officials point out that Japan agreed to set 
rules to evaluate market liberalization by applying several 
standards on the basis of the presumption that an indicator 
similar to numerical targets would be incorporated into 
objective criteria. They expect that comprehensive evaluations 
by applying several standards will have the effect of preventing 
the United States from imposing sanctions on Japan even if Japan 
fails to reach part of the target figures. 

