BFN 

  [Text] Toyota, Nissan, and other automobile manufacturers 
have begun requesting that Nippon Steel and other major steel 
companies develop low-cost surface-treated sheet steel. 
Surface-treated sheet steel is one of the highest grades of 
sheet steel used in the exterior sheets of automobiles. With 
demand shifting to low-cost automobiles and the revived 
competitiveness of the American Big Three and other car 
companies, however, Japan's automakers are revising their 
high-class orientation even in sheet steel in a combined effort 
to lower prices. Nippon Steel and other steel companies, 
although responding by developing new sheet steel, are asking 
the automakers to put off adopting it for as long as possible. 
  Exterior sheets in automobiles are surface-treated steel 
sheets whose surfaces are galvanized to rustproof them. The 
galvanization process is different at Toyota, Nissan, and each 
of the other carmakers. Toyota uses a two-layer galvanization 
process, with a layer of electroplating added to top-quality 
hot-dipped galvanized sheet steel. Toyota has been probing to 
see if the steelmakers can make some of the two-layer galvanized 
sheet steel a single layer. The company is planning to adopt the 
low-cost sheet steel in five to six years. 
  Nissan uses an electrogalvanizing process. Aiming to enhance 
the beautiful appearance of the painted exterior sheets, 
steelmakers have been placing slight irregularities on the 
surface. For that reason, the yield rate for the sheet steel is 
said to suffer. Nissan has begun to request of the steelmakers a 
high-productivity, low-cost way to produce steel sheet, even if 
there is some deterioration in external appearance. 
  The rustproofing of today's sheet steel is said to last over 
10 years. During the bubble economy period, the automakers all 
aimed for high-quality sheet steel; the steel companies 
established new production lines to meet the demand. However, 
with the fall in domestic automobile production, the operating 
rate for the surface- treated sheet steel galvanizing equipment 
has been stagnating. Nippon Steel has been postponing putting 
into operation its newest galvanizing facilities, built at the 
cost of 25 billion yen at its Nagoya steelworks. 
  The steel companies are saying, "We will cooperate with your 
requests to develop low-cost surface-treated sheet steel to 
lower manufacturing costs. But we would like you to wait in 
adopting the new sheet steel until the depreciation on the 
present facilities is over." However, the steel companies could 
lose their foremost industrial customers if they do not 
cooperate with Japan's carmakers in reducing costs. The steel 
companies will apparently have to quicken their responses by 
restructuring. 

