Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Hideki Somemiya, researcher, Nomura Research </F>
Institute: "Time Will Come for Attrition of Rating Agencies; 
Search for Enhancement of Quality of Rating Systems as 
Investment Data"] 
  [Text] When viewing ratings of Japanese corporations, 
it is noted that ratings assigned by U.S. rating agencies are 
considerably more rigid than those assigned by Japanese rating 
agencies. This is probably attributable to wide differences 
between Japanese and U.S. ratings agencies in the way they view 
various industries and in their perceptions about credit 
standing. Debenture ratings in Japan are gaining recognition 
primarily in the area of corporate bond markets, but in the 
future as investors increase their interest in ratings, they 
will probably opt for rating agencies that can stand the test of 
reliability. Rating agencies will probably be required to 
enhance the quality of ratings in terms of investment data. 
<H3>  Rating Systems Expand Primarily in Connection With New 
Issues Market </H3>
  Debenture rating systems are rapidly gaining recognition in 
Japan. Only 14 years have passed since the Japan Bond Research 
Institute was established as our nation's first rating agency in 
1979, but corporations with published ratings now total more 
than 800. That number represents one-third of the firms whose 
stock is traded on the stock exchanges. 
  A major factor contributing to the widespread use of rating 
systems over such a short period was the incorporation of 
ratings in standards for issuance of corporate debentures. 
Unlike the United States where almost one century has passed 
since the birth of rating systems, issuance of corporate 
debentures in Japan was rigidly regulated until the 1970's by 
measures such as the requirement for collateral and controls 
exercised by the Bond Raising Adjustment Council. 
  As issuance of corporate debentures was decontrolled in the 
1980's, standards for issue of debentures were relaxed from 
numerical standards which emphasized the size of net assets to 
standards which required the acquisition of ratings above a 
specified level. And, in 1990, quality rating standards of 
domestic corporate debentures were consolidated into one rating 
system. Stock exchange-listed corporations of our nation which 
in the 1980's shifted from primary procurement of capital from 
indirect financing to direct financing sharply increased their 
interest in rating systems based on standards for rating 
debentures. 
  On the other hand, the actual situation was one in which 
little awareness existed of the aspect wherein the primary role 
of rating systems is to provide investment data. In the past, 
investor concern was not directed at credit risk, because very 
few ordinary corporate debentures where credit ratings are 
important had been issued, thus precluding the formation of 
active markets and very few corporate debenture defaults ever 
occurred. 
  In recent years, new issues of ordinary corporate debentures 
have finally increased and expectations have heightened for the 
formation of markets for corporate debentures. On the other 
hand, the economic recession and the issue of nonperforming 
assets have inspired growing sensitivity to corporate credit 
ratings. In actual situations, differences in market interest 
rates of interest-bearing bank debentures traded by various 
long-term credit banks have occurred and there have been cases 
where firms with low ratings have had difficulty in issuing 
commercial paper. On the other hand, there have been cases where 
institutional investors have attempted to use rating systems. As 
the role played by rating systems in the form of credit data 
increases in stature, they will probably face a stronger 
challenge in terms of ratings reliability. 
  In the United States, ratings were issued as information to 
be used by investors, but they gained increased confidence of 
investors owing to the fact that many debentures with low 
ratings underwent default during the Great Depression. Wider use 
of rating systems among investors without the impact of an 
"incident" like the Great Depression will probably require 
improvements in the operation of the infrastructure represented 
by the corporate stock markets and enhancement in the quality of 
ratings as credit data. Unless the methods used by the rating 
agencies in assigning ratings to corporations are clarified to 
include a debate on "just what do we mean when we speak of the 
credit strength of our nation's corporations," we cannot win the 
confidence of investors in rating systems. 
  We would like to ask rating agencies to provide clearly 
defined explanations of rating codes assigned as a result of 
evaluations as well as why the ratings were assigned. 
<H5>  Wide Differences Between Japanese and U.S. Ratings </H5>
  Currently, there are a total of nine rating agencies that 
can 
be used under the debenture qualification standards of our 
nation, but agencies whose performance records are widely known 
encompass five firms including two of U.S. origin known as 
Moody's (MDY) and Standard and Poor's (S&amp;P) and three of 
Japanese origin known as Japan Bond Research Institute (JBRI), 
Nippon Investment Service (NIS), and Japan Credit Research (JCR). 
  Each of these agencies uses the same rating codes and each 
of 
the codes should represent the same rating for any given firm 
regardless of which agency assigned the rating. However, when 
viewing the published ratings, ratings assigned to any given 
firm can vary widely depending on the rating agency in question. 
The widest variation in ratings assigned exist between those 
assigned by Japanese rating agencies and U.S. rating agencies. 



  Table 1. Firms Whose Ratings Assigned by Japanese and U.S. Rating Agencies Vary 
Two or More Grades as of End July 1993 

Manufacturing Firms 

Code    Firm Name        JBRI        NIS    JCR     MDY      S&amp;P     Difference 

2501    Sapporo          A-          A      A-      Ba1              2 
        Breweries 

3101    Toyobo           A-                 A       Ba1              2 

3401    Teijin           AA                         Baa3             2 

3402    Toray            AA+         AA+            Baa1             2 

3404    Mitsubishi                   A-     A-      Baa1             2 
        Rayon 

4005    Sumitomo         A+                 AA-     Baa1             2 
        Chemical Co. 
        Ltd. 

4061    Denki Kagaku                 A-     BBB+    Ba3              2 
        Kogyo K.K. 

5108    Bridgestone      AA-                A+      Baa1             2 

5401    Nippon Steel     AA+         AAA            A3               2 
        Corporation 

5403    Kawasaki Steel   AA                 AA      Baa1F    2 
        Corporation 

5404    NKK              AA-         AA             Baa2             2 

5405    Sumitomo Metal   AA          AA             Baa2             2 
        Industries, 
        Ltd. 

5406    Kobe Steel,      AA-         AA-    AA      Baa3             2 
        Ltd. 

5407    Nisshin Steel                AA-            Baa2             2 
        Co., Ltd. 

6367    Daikin Kogyo     A+          AA-            Baa3             2 
        Co., Ltd. 

6702    Fujitsu, Ltd.    AA+         AAA            A2               2 

6764    Sanyo Electric   A           AA-            Baa1             2 
        Co., Ltd. 

Nonmanufacturing Industry 

1861    Kumagai-gumi     A-                         B1               3 

1802    Obayashi-gumi    AA                 AA      Baa1             2 

1806    Fujita           A                          Ba3              2 
        Corporation 

1837    Hazama-gumi,     Deferred    BBB            B2               2 
        Ltd. 

1860    Toda Corp.       A+          A+             Ba1              2 

1928    Sekisui Prefab   AA          AA             Baa1             2 
        Homes, Ltd. 

8016    Onward                              AA-     Baa2             2 
        Kashiyama 

8020    Kanematsu        A-                 A-      Ba1              2 

8078    Hanwa Co.,                          A-      Ba2              2 
        Ltd. 

8324    Daishi Bank,                        AA-     Baa1             2 
        Ltd. 

8379    Bank of                      AA-            Baa2             2 
        Hiroshima, 
        Ltd. 

8401    Mitsui Real                         AA-     Baa2     BBB+    2 
        Estate 
        Development 
        Co., Ltd. 

8404    The Yasuda                          AA-     Baa2     BBB     2 
        Trust &amp; 
        Banking Co., 
        Ltd. 

8407    The Toyo Trust                      AA-     Baa1             2 
        and Banking 
        Co., Ltd. 

8801    Mitsui Real      AAA         AAA            A2               2 
        Estate 
        Development 
        Co., Ltd. 

8830    Sumitomo                     AA-            Baa2             2 
        Realty &amp; 
        Development 
        Co., Ltd. 

9101    Nippon Yusen     AA-         AA             Baa2             2 
        K.K. 

9104    Mitsui O.S.K.    A-                 A-      Ba1              2 
        Lines, Ltd. 

Notes: 1. The table reflects a comparison of the highest ratings assigned in 
those cases where multiple ratings were assigned by either Japanese or U.S. 
rating agencies. 2. Rating Agency Names: JBRI (Japan Bond Research Institute); 
NIS (Nippon Investment Service); JCR (Japan Credit Research); MDY (Moody's); and 
S&amp;P (Standard and Poor's) 

Source: Data for this and other tables in this article were extracted from the 
Corporate Finance Research Report published by the Nomura Research Center. 




Table 2. Trends in Variations in Rating by Industry as of End July 1993 

Industry                Industries        Industries        Percentage of 
                        covered by        rated two or      industries 
                        Japan-U.S.        more grades       rated two or 
                        agencies          lower by U.S.     more grades 
                                          agencies          lower 

Steel                   6                 6                 100.0 

Housing-real estate     5                 3                 60.0 

Textile                 7                 4                 57.1 

Construction            9                 5                 55.6 

Transportation          5                 2                 40.0 

Trading company         8                 2                 25.0 

Banking                 32                5                 15.6 

Chemical                13                2                 15.4 

Electrical equipment    13                2                 15.4 

Precision instruments   6                 0                 0.0 


Transportation          6                 0                 0.0 
equipment 

Securities-other        13                0                 0.0 
financial 

Electrical-Gas          12                0                 0.0 

Other                   19                4                 21.1 

Total                   154               35                22.7 


  This divergence in ratings became the center of attention 
when Moody's began to aggressively publish so-called 
"unsolicited ratings" in 1992 without being requested by the 
debenture-issuing corporations. Ratings of Japanese firms 
published by Moody's as of January 1992 numbered 75, but doubled 
to 166 by September 1993. 
  Inclusion of ratings which were substantially lower than 
those issued by Japanese rating agencies became a matter of 
controversy. As of the end of July 1993, 20 Japanese 
corporations had been rated by Moody's as Ba or unqualified for 
investment, but 11 of those firms were rated A by Japanese 
rating agencies. There were also three Japanese corporations 
that had been rated B, which means that there is a 35-percent 
possibility of default within 10 years according to statistical 
research conducted by Moody's. Moody's overall average rating 
for Japanese corporations is A3, compared to an overall average 
rating assigned to the same Japanese corporations by Japanese 
ratings agencies of AA-, reflecting an overall difference of one 
grade. When viewed from the detailed perspective of notches 
expressed in plus or minus signs, there is a substantial 
divergence of three notches. The issuance of unsolicited ratings 
in such a manner resulted in more than just a minimal 
antagonistic reaction from the applicable debenture-issuing 
corporations. The situation created the term "Moody's shock." 
  As indicated in Table 1, 35 (23 percent) of the 154 Japanese 
corporations rated by Japanese and U.S. rating agencies as of 
the end of July 1993 were rated lower by the U.S.-based rating 
agency by two or more grades. Table 2 reflects the industry 
ratings of the 35 corporations, while the graph [not 
translated] reflects the average industry ratings assigned by 
JBRI and Moody's. 
  Ratings assigned by U.S. rating agencies are not 
substantially lower in all cases, ratings are substantially 
lower in some cases and moderately lower in other cases. 
  More firms are rated lower by two or more grades by U.S. 
rating agencies among manufacturing firms such as steel and 
textiles, while fewer firms are rated as such in the 
transportation equipment industries such as automotive and 
electrical equipment and precision instruments. As an example, 
JBRI ratings for transportation equipment and steel are in the 
same AA range, while Moody rates transportation equipment at an 
average of A1 in contrast to an average rate of Baa2 for steel, 
reflecting a substantial divergence. 
  Japanese rating agencies still assign high ratings to former 
basic industries of our nation, but U.S. rating agencies seem to 
assign considerably lower ratings. 
  On the other hand, substantial rating differentials are 
noted 
in the housing, real estate, and construction categories of the 
nonmanufacturing industries. Not only are these industries of a 
category that does not exist as extensively overseas as they do 
in Japan, but substantial differences in ratings between 
Japanese and U.S. rating agencies are probably attributable to 
differences in the treatment of balance sheets reflecting 
falling land values. 
  In industries such as electric power and gas and finance, 
where risks are minimized through regulation, divergences in 
ratings are relatively small and only a few firms are rated 
lower by two or more grades by U.S. rating agencies. In the 
banking industry, controversy was stirred by the alleged 
unsolicited low ratings by Moody's, but of 32 banks sampled, 
only five (16 percent) including trust and banking firms were 
assigned ratings which were two or more grades lower than those 
assigned by Japanese rating agencies. Banks on average were 
rated A1 by Moody's and AA by JBRI, reflecting a relatively 
small differential between Japanese and U.S. ratings. Finally, 
in the transportation area, marine transportation rating 
differentials were substantial, while differences in ratings for 
the electric rail industry were minor. 
  Japanese and U.S. rating differentials average one grade 
overall, but the divergences are relatively more substantial in 
the lower rated areas. Eight firms are rated exactly the same by 
both Moody's and JBRI and six of those firms are rated AAA. 
Other firms where Japanese-U.S. rating differentials are 
minimal, i.e., where U.S. rating agency ratings are high, are 
characterized by favorable equity-debt ratios and minimal 
concern for asset conditions. 
<H5>  Why Do Differentials Exist? </H5>
  In assigning ratings, Japanese rating agencies seem to place 
emphasis on relative comparisons among Japanese corporations, 
while U.S. rating firms seem to emphasize comparisons on an 
international level. 
  To begin with, Japanese rating agencies do not rate overseas 
firms. In the case of U.S. rating agencies, if they have already 
rated firms in a given industry in Europe and the United States 
and can rate Japanese firms based on a comparison of such 
existing ratings. It could be said that Japan-U.S. ratings vary 
widely in those cases where a firm may be competitive in Japan, 
but to a lesser degree on an international basis. 
  Additionally, a point particularly appraised highly by 
Japanese rating agencies is said to be the credit potential 
peculiar to the Japanese corporate climate which is difficult to 
reflect in any financial index. In the case of a historically 
well-established major corporation in our nation, there is 
little risk of the firm falling victim to a management crisis 
even if it is marginally profitable and has an unfavorable 
financial structure. Such firms enjoy a credit standing peculiar 
to major Japanese firms which is difficult to explain on a 
logical basis, but is based on factors such as supporting roles 
played by affiliated companies and main banks and commitments 
made by government authorities. It appears that perceptions of 
such credit standings vary widely between Japanese and U.S. 
rating agencies. 
  On the other hand, financial and public service industries 
covered by explicit regulations are aggressively rated higher by 
U.S. rating agencies. 
  Then, there is the possibility that conservative ratings are 
issued in those cases of unsolicited ratings because of the lack 
of adequate data on which to base appraisals. It is especially 
questionable whether valid ratings can be made based solely on 
externally available information in the case of banks and 
nonbanks. 
<H3>  Divergences in Ratings Among Japanese Rating Agencies Is 
Minimal </H3>
  Divergences in ratings among the three Japanese rating 
agencies is small compared to those between Japanese and U.S. 
rating agencies, as reflected in Table 3. Regardless of which 
comparison is viewed, 60 percent of the firms assigned multiple 
ratings reflect ratings which are essentially the same with less 
than one notch of variance. Further, 90 percent of the firms are 
limited to variances which fall within a notch. 



  Table 3. Divergences in Ratings Among Japanese Rating Agencies 

JBRI Versus NIS 

             JBRI High Rating        Same         NIS High Rating     Total 
                                     Rating 

2 or More    1 Notch    1 Notch      2 or More 
Notches                              Notches 

No. of       2          19           113          48        6         188 
firms (end 
of July 
1993) 

Percent      1.1        10.1         60.1         25.5      3.2       100.0 

No. of       0          10           97           57        6         170 
firms (end 
of July 
1992) 

Percent      0.0        5.9          57.1         33.5      3.5       100.0 

JBRI Versus JCR 

             JBRI High Rating        Same         JCR High Rating     Total 
                                     Rating 

2 or More    1 Notch    2 or More 
Notches                 Notches 

No. of       0          7            75           75        26        8 
firms (end 
of July 
1993) 

Percent      0.0        6.0          64.7         22.4      6.9       100.0 

No. of       1          9            58           30        6         104 
firms (end 
of July 
1992) 

Percent      1.0        8.7          55.8         28.8      5.8       100.0 

NIS Versus JCR 

             NIS High Rating         Same         JCR High Rating     Total 
                                     Rating 

2 or More    1 Notch    1 Notch      2 or More 
Notches                              Notches 

No. of       1          16           57           18        4         96 
firms (end 
of July 
1993) 

Percent      1.0        16.7         59.4         18.8      4.2       100.0 

No. of       2          5            46           14        2         69 
firms (end 
of July 
1992) 

Percent      2.9        7.2          66.7         20.3      2.9       100.0 


  However, a look at firms whose assigned ratings vary shows 
that of the three rating agencies, there is a trend whereby JBRI 
ratings are the lowest and JCR ratings are the highest. In other 
words, as of the end of July 1993, JBRI rated 54 firms lower 
than NIS and 21 higher than NIS, while rating 34 firms lower 
than JCR and higher than JCR in the case of seven firms. In 
comparisons between NIS and JCR, NIS rated 22 firms lower and 17 
firms higher, indicating a trend whereby NIS assigned somewhat 
lower ratings. 
  A comparison of ratings by the three Japanese rating 
agencies 
shows that differentials between JBRI and the other two agencies 
have diminished and that between NIS and JCR, it should be noted 
that more firms are being assigned lower ratings by JCR. 
<H5>  Eventual Reduction in Differentials </H5>
  Ratings reflect the opinions of independent rating agencies 
and variances are unavoidable because they are based ultimately 
on subjective judgments. However, from the standpoint of 
investors, lenient appraisals are risky and overly rigid ratings 
could result in missed opportunities. 
  It is imperative that current differentials in ratings by 
rating agencies will become the topic of debate as use of such 
data by investors progresses. As activity in stock markets 
intensify, trading by investors based on evaluations of reliable 
rating agencies will take place and such evaluations will be 
reflected in market prices. Even for firms issuing debentures, 
there will be no value in being rated by rating agencies not 
used by investors, leading to diminishing rating differentials 
among rating agencies and the attrition of rating agencies that 
fail to gain the credibility of investors. 
  Further, debate is taking place which aims at the future 
discontinuation of qualification standards for the issuance of 
debentures. If circumstances are such that investors are unable 
to check the reliability of stocks in the market place, there is 
the risk that issuing firms will not hesitate to work with 
rating agencies that issue high ratings merely for the sake of 
satisfying qualification standards. However, if qualification 
standards are discontinued, the market will become the 
qualifying judge for stocks and only ratings winning the trust 
of investors will prevail. 
  Since revenues of Japanese rating agencies are currently 
dependent on rating fees collected from corporations issuing 
debentures, the objective of agencies was to increase the number 
of firms soliciting ratings and stabilizing the revenue base. 
However, now as investors focus on the rating differentials 
among the agencies, agencies must now compete with each other on 
the basis of quality of ratings as investment data. 


