BFN 

<F P=106> [Annual petroleum report read by General Director Francisco </F>
Rojas during an event marking the 56th anniversary of oil 
expropriation at the Mexican Petroleum headquarters in Mexico 
City; date not given; from the "At Midday" newscast -- recorded] 
  [Excerpt] Mr. President, a little more than five years ago 
you took office. Today, Mexico is a country that owns its future 
more. It follows specific paths, it is better organized, more 
sur of itself and its enormous potencial for advancement. You 
have undertaken your duties with patriotism and are fulfilling 
the responsibilities given to you by the people. 
  As in past years, in 1993, Mexican Petroleum [Pemex] worked 
following the main guidelines of your policy, the defense of 
oil. All actions taken follow these main guidelines. This 
explains the efforts made to make Pemex efficient and make it 
highly competitive. An in-depth administration reorganization 
was conducted. The four Pemex subsidiaries are working normally. 
Pemex reported a reduction in its debt by $68 million. In other 
words, the total plan for investment was carried out with our 
own resources. 
  For a third consecutive year, the production level for total 
liquid hydrocarbons surpassed the record reached in 1982. The 
total production for 1993 reached 3.131 million barrels per day, 
of which 1.794 million barrels were assigned for domestic 
consumption and 1.337 million barrels for exports. In the past 
three years, an increase in the reserves of hydrocarbons allowed 
restoring three-quarters of the production extracted during that 
period, thus reversing a long-standing trend. 
  The creation of Pemex-Gas and Basic Petrochemicals 
[Petroquimica Basica] was a prelude to the significance the use 
of clean fuels and basic raw material will have in processing 
petrochemicals in Mexico and worldwide. The production of 
natural gas reached 3.576 billion [figure as heard] cubic feet a 
day while that of liquefied gas reached 103,000 barrels a day. 
  Environmental protection, industrial safety, and energy 
savings have been placed at the forefront of Pemex's program. 
Several preventive and active programs have been encouraged in 
close cooperation with the Social Development Secretariat and 
the Metropolitan Commission for the Prevention and Control of 
Environmental Pollution to the Valley of Mexico. During the last 
fiscal period, more than 215 installation safety inspections 
were carried out by insurance companies and specialized 
corporations, as well as more than 1,000 environmental impact 
studies. Following strict budgetary constraints, Pemex has been 
able to improve its financial position, meet its production and 
marketing objectives, and implement internal restructuring. In 
addition, it has promoted a new institutional culture through 
the adoption of modern operational practices in a state owned 
enterprise. 
  At the end of this administration, Pemex will have 
transferred to the Treasury $106 billion over a six year period. 
Pemex's assets totals $50 billion and the value of proven 
reserves, valued at $13 per barrel is approximately equal to 
$850 billion. In addition, Mexican sovereignty over subterranean 
resources and revenues from crude oil exploration assures energy 
security as well as an instrument to realize structural changes 
in the Mexican economy. The question we should now ask is if we 
Mexicans are willing to transfer ownership, management, or use 
of this patrimony to private interests? PEMEX workers have 
expressed solidarity with the companies' institutional 
objectives, and cooperated in moving forward toward goals of 
modernization. 
  The workers union has been intransigent in defending its 
collective contract, but it has preferred the collective 
interest over outdated demands for economic concessions and 
political power. Now, one year after the law was promulgated, we 
can feel satisfaction to report that Pemex's new organization 
system has been implemented and is working; the four subsidiary 
companies are operating normally; and the benefits of the 
reforms are beginning to capitalize. 
  Noteworthy is the fact that efficiency has reduced operation 
costs by 39 percent during 1981-93, 29 percent for the current 
six-year period. Yearly savings for 1994 represent 60 percent of 
the investment plan. Not only has the oil community put an end 
to the waste of the past, but it has also organized the true 
defense of the nations's institutional interests for the future. 
[passage omitted] 

