Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Bucharest ROMPRES, 17/3/1994 -- The allegations of 
spying for France spelled out by a best-selling Romanian daily 
against Lieutenant-General Marin Pancea, secretary of Romania's 
Supreme Defense Council, provoked boisterous commentaries by the 
press and a categorical dismissal by the presidency. 
  The daily EVENIMENTUL ZILEI headlined its front page on 
Monday [14 March]: "A reason to worry Romania's president: 
Lieutenant-General Marin Pancea, secretary of the Supreme 
Defense Council, is spying for the French secrete services." It 
elaborated: "The French had access to secrete information from 
the Supreme Defense Council delivered by General Pancea through 
a Romanian-born French citizen, Tudor Anescu, known by Romanian 
counter-intelligence as a two-way spy manipulated by the French 
counter-intelligence... On Monday, March 7, President Iliescu 
approved the retirement of General Marin Pancea and, during the 
same day, the director of the Romanian Intelligence Service 
(SRI), Virgil Magureanu, sacked the head of the 
counter-intelligence division, Major-General Gheorghe 
Diaconescu. Nevertheless, there is a connection between the two 
events of special relevance." 
  The daily ADEVARUL called for comments on telephone from the 
French Department for Territory Surveillance. An official whose 
identity was not made available to the Romanian daily replied: 
"I do not know what are you talking about but, in any case, 
with regard to what you are telling me about, we can neither 
confirm nor deny such an information." 
  General Pancea, cited by the daily CURIERUL NATIONAL, 
stated: 
"It is not that I only think but I am actually sure that all 
these information are fabricated and imagined by someone wishing 
to make a thriller out of it. It is not necessarily the daily 
which published this information, but I would rather say some 
interested groupings... They are altogether aberrations, 
informations imagined by someone not reliable, only to avoid 
calling that person insane... I believe there are some groupings 
or forces interested in weakening certain structures of the 
Romanian state, the Supreme Defense Council being one of them. 
They tend to strike not where the `effect' occurred but higher, 
on the presidency." 
  In a fax released to ROMPRES on Wednesday, Presidency 
Spokesman Traian Chebeleu stated: "The fact is that the 
accusations with espionage against General Pancea are pure 
fabrications and fiction. Links of the most aberrant kind are 
groundlessly imagined with some leading structures within the 
SRI. Romania's president cannot have the obligation to answer 
to such irresponsible fables, but rather the ones launching them 
should sustain their allegation with evidences and not through 
groundless affirmations." 
  The presidential decree concerning the release of the 
secretary of the Supreme Defense Council Lieutenant-General 
Marin Pancea from his office and his retirement from active duty 
has been signed and delivered to the official gazette for 
publication, the presidency spokesman said. "The signing of 
this decree has nothing to do with the recent days' allegations 
by the press. General Pancea's retirement had been considered 
long time ago," reads the presidency spokesman's statement. 

