Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Gabriela Coutino and Jaime Aviles] </F>
  [Excerpts] San Cristobal de las Casas, 9 Mar -- [passage 
omitted] San Cristobal's 50 Catholic churches were symbolically 
closed down early today with Civic Front pamphlets from the 
authentic coletos [natives of San Cristobal de las Casas, 
Chiapas]. 
  Moreover, according to the local Attorney General's Office, 
10 Indians, who are members of the Christ's Renewal Evangelical 
Church in Las Margaritas Municipality, were beaten up and 
arrested "reportedly for religious reasons." 
  In Ocosingo -- where approximately 20 journalists were 
detained by federal Army members en route to the San Miguel 
ejido where they were going to try to interview Marcos 
[preceding word published in italics] -- local cattlemen met all 
day long to discuss the sale of their land, and they threatened 
to seize the Santo Domingo Convent, which is under Father Pablo 
Irribarren's authority. [passage omitted] 
Churches Closed 
  "Catholic brethren: This church and all the churches in the 
city will remain closed, starting today, until Bishop Samuel 
Ruiz leaves the city, Chiapas, and Mexico. He is responsible for 
the squatters' conflict and the war in the region.... Pray with 
your family at home because God knows you are with Him and God 
is everywhere. Coleto Civic Front Against Destabilizers." 
  This is the message that was used today to paper 50 Catholic 
churches in San Cristobal. Many of the churches are controlled 
by neighborhood groups according to a tradition which dates back 
to the 1940's. Most of the parishes, however, worked normally 
throughout the day, except for La Merced and San Francisco, 
where the priests did not have the keys to the outer doors. 
  Witnesses said municipal employees were seen last night near 
the churches, where they left the Civic Front's messages. The 
messages were photocopies of a legal size page printed on an 
offset machine. Local journalists said the work might have been 
carried out at the weekly LA NOTICIA's printing shop because it 
has supported the movement against the bishop. 
  Furthermore, a message from the "authentic coletos," the San 
Cristobal Civic Defense Group, whose existence was unknown until 
yesterday, was distributed by hand today. It is an open letter 
to President Salinas de Gortari, Governor Javier Lopez Moreno, 
and Mayor Jorge Mario Lescieur Talavera with new measures to 
pressure Bishop Samuel Ruiz Garcia. "Our children will not 
attend school because of safety and public health reasons, even 
if this grieves us very much, as long as the squatters are not 
evicted from urban areas in the municipal capital. We would 
rather see our children alive than being used as human shields 
by the invaders who came from various geographic regions to 
provoke us." 
  The document, signed by lumber businessman Ricardo Diaz 
Martinez, who became rich by exploiting the Lacandona jungle 
forests, warns that the decision "is mainly aimed at recovering 
the native's dignity, given the constant aggression of 
subversive groups that, logically, are led by Bishop Samuel 
Ruiz." 
  Meanwhile, Governor Lopez Moreno urged all the local groups 
in Tenejapa, his home town, to "declare a truce and prevent 
violations of the law and the disruption of public peace in the 
region." He said: "The fact that a native of Tenejapa was 
appointed state governor" proves things are changing in Chiapas. 
In his opinion, this proves "the poor also have the right to 
achieve power in Mexico." 

