OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
<F P=103> 94UM0153C </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ZARUBEZHNOYE VOYENNOYE OBOZRENIYE </F>
 Language: <F P=105>Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lt Col Ye. Nikolayev] </F>
  [Text] The current military-political policy of the 
Republic of Poland is being formed in conditions of a radically 
changing situation in Central and Eastern Europe, associated 
primarily with the dissolution of the Warsaw Treaty Organization 
and the reorientation of the former allies of the socialist 
community on the West. In addition, the military policy is being 
influenced significantly by the social, political and economic 
reforms being carried out in the country, the weakening of ties 
with the republics of the former USSR, and the withdrawal of 
Russian troops from its territory. The Polish government's 
activities are directed at accelerating the process of 
integration into the European military-political and economic 
structures, and also at establishing bilateral, mutually 
beneficial cooperation with the leading countries of the West. 
In doing so, one of the main goals was for Poland to join NATO 
as a full or associate member. 
  The Polish government considers the inviolability of the 
state borders, the lack of territorial claims on neighboring 
countries, the refusal to recognize any state as an enemy, and 
non-use of force in resolving international disputes to be the 
basic principles set forth as the basis of the military doctrine 
adopted in late 1992. It is also believed that the national 
armed forces must possess sufficient might, in the event of 
wide-scale aggression, to restrain the enemy's advance deep into 
the territory and, by inflicting maximum losses on him, gain 
time to settle disputes by political means. In the opinion of 
Polish command authorities, it is impossible to ensure 
guaranteed protection of national interests by its own forces 
alone, which is how it justifies the desire to integrate into 
NATO structures. 
  The new military doctrine is based on tenets of the national 
security concept (given the name "perimeter defense"), calling 
for an even disposition of troops in the state's border areas 
and a readiness to repel armed aggression from any direction. To 
implement the doctrine, it is planned to create on the basis of 
the Polish Army small, well-equipped and well-trained armed 
forces capable of ensuring reliable protection of the national 
interests. 
  According to the constitution, the country's president is 
the 
supreme commander in chief of the Armed Forces of the Republic 
of Poland. The Defense Committee is the consultative body under 
the president during peacetime. It can be made up of members of 
the government, the chief of the General Staff, and 
representatives of the houses of parliament. 
  The minister of national defense (a civilian) exercises 
overall direction of the armed forces and shaping of military 
policy. The chief of the General Staff is responsible for the 
daily activities of the Polish Army, support, and combat 
training. 
  The strategic level of command and control of the armed 
forces is made up of the central bodies of the Ministry of 
National Defense and the General Staff; the operational level is 
the headquarters of the armed services; and the 
operational-tactical level is the headquarters of the four 
military districts (Maritime, Silesian, Warsaw, and Cracow, 
formed based on the southern part of the Warsaw Military 
District. During wartime they are to be reorganized into 
headquarters of four mechanized corps), an air corps and air 
defense corps, warship and coastal defense flotillas, and Naval 
Aviation command (Figure 1). 


<FIG ID=JPRS-UFM-001L-8A>           Figure 1. Organizational Structure of </FIG>



  According to data from foreign military sources, the overall 
numerical strength of Poland's armed forces exceeds 296,000. It 
includes the Ground Forces, Air Force and Air Defense Forces, 
Navy, and during wartime the Border Guards and formations of the 
Civilian Militia (subordinate to the Ministry of Internal 
Affairs), numbering about 20,000 and 18,000, respectively, and 
also the Regional Defense Forces being newly formed. 
  The force composition of the Ground Forces (more 
than 194,000) has 11 mechanized divisions with varied manning 
levels, 13 brigades (three missile, three artillery, one 
assault, one coastal defense, one mountain infantry, and four 
engineer), and also logistic and technical support facilities. 
  The military districts have the following force composition: 
Maritime District--three mechanized divisions, one coastal 
defense brigade, one missile brigade, one artillery brigade, and 
one engineer brigade; Silesian District--four mechanized 
divisions, two missile brigades, two artillery brigades, two 
engineer brigades, one mountain infantry brigade, and two 
antitank artillery regiments; Warsaw District--two mechanized 
divisions, one artillery brigade, one engineer brigade, and 
logistic and technical support facilities; Cracow District--two 
mechanized divisions (in the stage of formation), one assault 
brigade, and one mountain infantry regiment. 
  The Ground Forces' have more than 2800 battle tanks (T-72, 
T-55), 2846 infantry vehicles [BMP's] and armored personnel 
carriers [BTR's], 1500 field artillery pieces (Gvozdika, Dana, 
Figure 2 [not reproduced]), 550 M-120 mortars, 260 multiple 
rocket launchers (BM-21, RM-70), 65 Skud and Tochka missile 
launchers, more than 400 antitank guided missile launchers 
(Fagot, Malyutka, and others), and 700 antitank artillery 
pieces. In field air defenses there are up to 260 surface-to-air 
missile [SAM] launchers and more than 900 antiaircraft artillery 
pieces. The mechanized divisions in the Ground Forces have a 
typical structure. At peacetime strength each division has 
4,500-5,500 people, and at wartime strength more than 11,000. A 
division includes three mechanized regiments, one artillery 
regiment, one antiaircraft artillery regiment, one antitank 
artillery battalion, and logistic subunits. There are 186 tanks, 
205 BMP's and BTR's, and 126 field artillery pieces, mortars, 
and multiple rocket launchers. 
  The Air Force and Air Defense Forces (83,000 
people) have four combat aviation regiments, two military 
transport regiments, three helicopter regiments (all combined 
into an air corps), and also eight air defense regiments in 
three air defense corps. 
  Armament includes: 508 combat aircraft (245 MiG-21's, 104 
Su-22's, 37 MiG-23's, Figure 3 [not reproduced], 30 MiG-17's, 28 
Su-20's, 12 MiG-29's, and others) and also 30 Mi-24 combat 
helicopters and 154 auxiliary helicopters (130 Mi-2's, 21 
Mi-8's, and 3 Mi-17's). The Air Defense Forces also have more 
than 250 SAM launchers. 
  The force composition of the Navy (19,000 people) 
includes a flotilla of attack ships and two coastal defense 
flotillas, a fighter aviation regiment, and a special naval 
aviation regiment. 
  Armament includes: Three submarines, one destroyer, one 
frigate, four corvettes (Figure 4 [not reproduced]), eight 
guided-missile boats, eight patrol boats, 24 minesweepers, and 
so forth. Naval aviation has 38 MiG-21 fighters, 15 Mi-14 
antisubmarine warfare helicopters, and others. 
  In accordance with the military organizational development 
program, it is planned to reduce armed forces personnel strength 
to 230,000-250,000 people and complete by the mid-1990's a 
reorganization of formations (large units) and central command 
and control bodies, converting them to a new structure in 
accordance with the model adopted in NATO countries. The 
percentage of career servicemen is to be 50-60 percent. It is 
planned to reduce the number of weapons and military equipment 
to the levels established by the Conventional Armed Forces in 
Europe [CFE] Treaty. By the end of the 1990's, it is planned to 
have no more than 1730 battle tanks, 2150 BMP's and BTR's, 1610 
field artillery pieces, mortars, and multiple rocket launchers, 
460 combat aircraft, and 130 attack helicopters left in the 
inventory of the Polish Army. 
  It is envisioned that the Ground Forces will have 10 
mechanized divisions, three infantry brigades, two assault 
brigades, two mountain infantry brigades, and one coastal 
defense brigade. Of all the large units, only three mechanized 
divisions and two assault brigades will be manned at less than 
65 percent of wartime strength. 
  In connection with the forthcoming reduction of the armed 
forces, it is planned to create "rapid deployment forces" 
consisting of one to two assault brigades and two regiments of 
combat and transport helicopters to repel any sudden aggression 
or to participate in settling local armed conflicts. If 
necessary, these forces are to be reassigned from the Ground 
Forces and the Air Force to the disposition of the chief of the 
General Staff. The possibility of using them as a part of UN 
peacekeeping military contingents is not ruled out. It is also 
planned to form regional defense forces to reinforce Poland's 
defense system on axes not protected by regular forces and to 
guard important installations. They will be armed basically with 
light small arms. Peacetime cadre-strength regional defense 
brigades and regiments will be deployed up to wartime strength 
during mobilization. 
  Manpower acquisition for the armed forces is 
accomplished based on the Law on National Defense passed in an 
updated form in September 1991. The draft age is 19 years. A 
single term of service of 18 months has been established for all 
servicemen. A call-up is conducted twice a year. 
  Personnel of the Polish Army are represented by 
compulsory-service and cadre servicemen. In early 1993, more 
than 80,000 cadre servicemen were serving in the armed forces; 
however, there is a large manpower shortage (officer positions 
are manned at an 85 percent level, and noncommissioned officer 
positions at a 67 percent level). In the opinion of command 
authorities, the problem of maintaining the Army's combat 
effectiveness with a considerable reduction in its numerical 
personnel strength can be resolved by recruiting servicemen on a 
contract basis. However, the process of professionalization of 
the Army (to a level of 50-60 percent) will extend to the end of 
the 1990's. These servicemen will fill positions associated with 
operating weapons and military equipment. 
  Western experts estimate that Poland's trained reserve of 
the 
armed forces exceeds 435,000 people, including 352,000 for the 
Ground Forces, more than 65,000 for the Air Force and Air 
Defense Forces, and about 18,000 for the Navy. 
  Thus, the planned reorganization of the armed forces and 
their rearming with the latest models of weapons and military 
equipment of both western and domestic production pursues the 
goal of creating a small, well-armed and well-trained Army. It 
is believed that replacing obsolete Soviet-made weapons and 
military equipment with models compatible with those in service 
in western countries will considerably help speed up Poland's 
integration into the military-political structures of NATO. 

