BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed commentary] </F>
  [Text] Democratic Party boss Tony Leon is heading for 
Parliament determined to find out why the election turned into 
such a "shambles." We would wish him well but do not believe he 
will get far while he has to contend with political parties 
determined that the election shall be declared free and fair, 
and with the dissembling of Independent Electoral Commission 
[IEC] head Judge Johann Kriegler. 
  The delays in counting have cast doubt over the election and 
everything flowing from it. That is hardly surprising as the 
delays are due to the chaos at Nasrec [exhibition center] and 
the political horse trading over what many believe to have been 
massive electoral fraud in Natal. IEC members were sworn to 
secrecy not just for the duration of the electoral process but 
for ever. Commissioner Kriegler took that as licence to hide the 
full truth of the political deals he has helped cut with major 
parties from the millions of voters whose commitment and hope 
gave the election its value. 
  In the process, Kriegler has called into question his own 
judgment as well as his ability to remain calm under pressure. 
He has also not only seriously damaged his own credibility but 
also that of any declaration on freeness and fairness by the 
IEC. Of course the election will be endorsed by the 
international community, because the alternative cannot be 
contemplated. But we will soon have the farcical situation of 
an incompetently run IEC pronouncing on its own management of 
the election. 
  Newspapers, meanwhile, are being fed a steady stream of 
semi-official statements apparently designed to consolidate 
different parties' positions. They come from as high as 
President de Klerk's office to as low as grassroots party 
branches. The leaks accompany obvious political deal making, 
particularly between the ANC and National Party. It is not 
difficult to suspect that the parties themselves are trying to 
hammer out agreements on vote and power sharing that will keep 
their supporters happy and that will help steer the country away 
from the turmoil that would accompany a declaration that the 
election had not been free and fair. 
  But while Kriegler prevaricates, voters are likely to become 
increasingly sceptical. President-designate Nelson Mandela 
offeed Cabinet posts to parties whose share of the vote was 
below the threshold. It was a statesmanlike move by a man 
committed to the reconciliation this country needs. But it has 
been tarnished by the electoral farce that has left sceptics 
wondering if his offer was necessary to buy the silence of 
parties who had been swamped. 
  Kriegler has to come completely clean, even if that exposes 
his own incompetence and that of the electoral machine he has 
headed. He cannot be allowed to go on treating his fellow South 
Africans as fools by hiding the truth behind inane 
philosophising on what the election was about. Elections 
worldwide have problem areas, but if they do not materially 
affect the outcome of the polls they are generally accepted. 
South Africans need to be told precisely what that means across 
this country. If the Natal vote was excessively flawed by 
fraud, some means must be found to hold the election in the 
province again. If there are doubts about the competency of the 
election in the PWV [Pretoria, Witwatersrand, Vereeniging], they 
must be discussed openly and the public told if political 
compromise has been necessary. 
  If we are to be given a Parliament whose composition is 
determined post-election by party horse trading, we need to be 
told. We, the people who endorsed South Africa's first universal 
franchise, understand that realpolitik may be necessary to 
obtain a broadly acceptable electoral result. But we are also 
entitled to open disclosure of the compromises the political 
bosses have felt necesary. South Africans can no longer be 
treated as children. 

