BFN 

  [Text] Since 1987, the experts of Environmental Management 
Corporation (EMC) have used the latest technologies to 
administer and operate various treatment plants including plants 
for industrial wastewater, hazardous wastes, urban waste 
incineration, and metropolitan landfill sites. 
  EMC has designed and supervised the construction and 
operation of water treatment plants at various locations 
throughout the country, and has provided technical assistance 
and loan programs to small and medium enterprises for the 
building of their environmental facilities. 
  Lately, the corporation has started constructing various 
kinds of facilities on behalf of the government and local 
agencies, and has raised funds for research and development of 
environmental technologies. 
  EMC will continue to serve the public and private sectors 
with much better and more efficient antipollution programs. The 
corporation is also going to expand its capacities and services 
as an institution of professional skills and commitment. 
  In a bid to preserve the environment through the operation 
of 
modern facilities and high technologies, EMC has operated and 
constructed facilities entrusted by the government, local 
agencies or private sectors: wastewater treatment plants, 
landfill sites, hazardous waste treatment plants, night soil 
treatment and urban waste incineration plants, and industrial 
liquid waste treatment plants. 
  The corporation has financed the construction of 
antipollution facilities for small and medium companies. It has 
provided technical assistance in the design, construction and 
operation of various environmental facilities, and educated the 
public on environmental preservation. 
<H5>  History of EMC </H5>
  May 21, 1983: Legislation forming the Environmental 
Antipollution Corporation is instated 
  Dec. 31, 1986: Enforcement Regulations are passed 
  March 23, 1987: The initial body of the present EMC is 
formed 
  Nov. 28, 1987: The corporation is renamed Environmental 
Management corporation 
  Oct. 15, 1993: Headquarters of EMC is rearranged for 
innovative management, with nine departments including the 
Metropolitan Landfill Site, 11 plants and 14 regional offices 
  In general, the effluent of the industrial complex is highly 
contaminated. EMC's plants were constructed to collect all the 
waste discharged from the industries in the complex and to treat 
them all together thereby saving the treatment cost, reducing 
the pollution of nearby river. Seven plants are under operation 
at each of the corresponding industrial complexes. The above 
plants are to be enlarged and the new ones constructed to make 
the rivers clean. 
  Whasong plant treats 60 tons a day of industrial waste 
generated in the metropolitan area, thereby contributing to 
clean air, water, and earth. 
  The plant is equipped with incinerators which treat 
polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) and organic phosphorus, in 
addition to the physical chemical treatment facilities which 
treat acid and base wastes and a sanitary landfill site for 
their solidification, landfill of the waste sludge containing 
heavy metals. 
  Onsan plant treats about 100 tons of hazardous waste daily 
generated in the Youngnam region thus going far toward the 
preservation of the regional environment. It is prepared with 
an incinerator treating waste oil and organic sludge, a 
physical/chemical treatment facility treating concentrated 
hazardous liquid waste, a solidification unit, and a landfill 
site. 
  The waste carried into the plant is weighed on the weighing 
bridge, laboratory-tested for analyzing the concentration of the 
ingredients, and is conveyed to the treatment processes. 
  Various waste oil, organic sludge, PBC or phosphorous 
compounds are heat-dissolved in the rotary kiln first, and 
re-incinerated in the secondary incinerator at the temperature 
of 1,200 degrees C. The exhaust gas generated during the 
incineration is treated through the detoxication tower and the 
electrostatic precipitator. 
  Waste acid and base are neutralized, processed by 
coagulation 
and sent to the sedimentation basin for the settling. Liquid is 
ion-exchanged finally and the dehydrated sludge cake is sent to 
the landfill site after solidification. 
  The sludge bearing heavy metals mixed with cement and 
chemicals is solidified and cured in a molding box for several 
days and sent to the landfill site finally. 
  The landfill site is sealed with a membrane to protect the 
secondary contamination of the underground water by leachate. 
The collected leachate in the collection well is treated in the 
chemical/physical treatment facility. 
  In particular, the EMC has been pushing ahead with a 
long-term project related to the operation and maintenance of 
the sanitary landfill site for metropolitan areas from September 
1989 through December 2014. 
  Landfill works will last for 25 years from February 1992 
through December 2015. The reclaimed coastal zone is located at 
Komdan-myon County, Yangchon-myon County and Inchon City. 
  The landfill site will be covering a total area of 6.3 
million pyongs or about 22 million sq. meters. Its landfill 
capacity will amount to 278 million tons. With the main 
facilities of two disposal plants (3,500 tons a day each), the 
landfill site will cover 20 cities or countries in Kyonggi 
Province. 
  The bid project will bring in expected effects: an actual 
solution for the wastes generated in the metropolitan area, 
protection of the environment by sanitary landfill and 
development of advanced waste treatment system. 
  Another reclamation project is under way, though its 
construction period ended as of November 1991. Landfill period 
will last through December 1992. 
  With a total landfill capacity of 47 million tons, the huge 
project worth 87 billion won specifies the 11,312-meter road 
construction, 10,690-meter embankment, three bridges, a leachate 
treatment plant, leachate collection facility, waste ingredients 
test stand, office building, weighing facilities, car washes, a 
maintenance camp for the landfill equipment and landscaping. 
  On behalf of the small industrial complexes in the rural 
area, EMC is engaged in the design, construction supervision and 
operation of waste treatment plants. 
  In a move to minimize the contamination by those small 
complexes established for the balanced development between 
cities and the country and the increase of new income sources 
for farmers and fishers, the EMC has designed, supervised the 
construction of, or operated small plants for the treatment of 
waste water from the complexes. 

