Language: <F P=105> Korean </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [By Kim Yu-chong] </F>
  [Text] We are living in a "Hobbesian World" with neither 
eternal comrade nor eternal enemy, and only having national 
interests. With the development of advanced communications, this 
has become a more complex, mutually dependent world, a world in 
which the competition for economic survival is more intense than 
ever before. 
  Under the leadership of the United States, world politics 
are 
being interspersed with conflict and strife. With Japan and 
Germany headed toward their apex, the world economy is evolving 
into regional blocs. The history of confusion and unrest is not 
rolling along; it is moving by leaps and bounds. 
  How are we acting at this point in time? How and where shall 
we find our interests? In the sense that we must act 
independently and autonomously in the international community, 
and are doing so, is the Republic of Korea, as a sovereign 
nation, acting autonomously and carrying out an independent 
policy? The Korean people began to be aware of the nuclear 
issue and policymakers began turning their eyes toward nuclear 
problems or nuclear policy, particularly nuclear policy toward 
North Korea, in 1989, when U.S. and French satellite photographs 
of DPRK nuclear facilities captured the attention of the world 
press. 
  Before then, we only went along with the U.S. NCND [neither 
confirm nor deny] policy (One part of its strategy to restrain 
the DPRK, this was the U.S. policy to neither confirm nor deny 
the existence of U.S. tactical nuclear weapons on the Korean 
peninsula.). We have believed the U.S. NCND policy guaranteed 
our greatest security interests and have just followed along 
with it. 
  Later, on 8 November 1991, President No Tae-u made his 
"Denuclearization Declaration," even renouncing nuclear 
enrichment and reprocessing. One month later, after proclaiming 
the "absence of nuclear weapons," he signed the DPRK's 
"Agreement on Reconciliation, Nonaggression and Cooperative 
Exchange Cooperation [Hwahae wa Pulgachim mich Kyoryu e kwanhan 
Hapuiso]," without any mention of the nuclear issue. 
  In this agreement, the government demonstrated an intention 
to pursue a DPRK policy dealing with the nuclear issue and other 
issues "in parallel." Running up against strong U.S. 
dissatisfaction with this, however, the government elucidated a 
"linkage" policy: "If the DPRK nuclear issue is not resolved, 
North-South economic cooperation is impossible." Afterward in 
September 1992, we came to support what could be called the 
U.S.' greatest outstanding issue, the extension of the NPT 
(Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty). 
  There are still two years left until the NPT-extention 
negotiations, and non-nuclear countries, using the NPT-extension 
negotiations as a opportunity, are looking for concessions. 
Despite this, we supported the U.S. desire for an indefinite 
extension, directly and indirectly. 
  The above is a general outline of the 6th Republic's nuclear 
policy. There are more than a few problems with it. First, 
although we can acknowledge that our government's ability to 
collect intelligence is clearly limited because it has no 
independent reconnaissance satellites, it did not come up with 
an appropriate response when the DPRK nuclear issue was first 
raised or when the DPRK admitted to possessing plutonium. 
  The DPRK nuclear issue was brought up a long time ago. Even 
when some experts warned of the possibility of a DPRK-style 
NCND, the government showed no movement on this whatsoever. It 
was only when the domestic media started making an uproar that 
it began to seek a solution to the problem. 
  Second, in its approach to the nuclear issue, the government 
was unable to secure our interests due to a lack of expert 
knowledge. 
  Our nuclear policies can be generally divided into two 
categories: "nuclear-possession policy" and "non-possession 
policy." Pursued by the five nuclear powers, the U.S., Russia, 
China, the United Kingdom and France, the nuclear-possession 
policy maximizes military, political, and diplomatic national 
interests by maintaining nuclear weapons. 
  Although it gives up nuclear weapons, surrendering to the 
pressure of the nuclear powers, the non-possession policy seeks 
to maximize national interests within given conditions by 
obtaining economic and diplomatic concessions while arguing 
against inequality. For various reasons, such as our alliance 
with the United States, we have had no choice but to adopt a 
non-possession policy. Are we, then, getting concessions? 
Unfortunately, we are not. 
  Our government proclaimed its renunciation of nuclear 
weapons 
and even elucidated that it would not maintain the enrichment 
and reprocessing facilities so necessary for the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy and for dealing with nuclear waste. The is no 
nation on earth like ours. This was the first time we 
surrendered our autonomous nuclear policy. As a minimum 
concession for giving up nuclear weapons, we should have at 
least obtained a U.S. effort to reduce trade pressures, such as 
pressure to open our markets. 
  Third, the fact that we accept as is the U.S. worldwide 
nuclear policy and its nuclear policy toward the Korean 
peninsula clearly shows our lack of an autonomous nuclear 
policy. We have overlooked the fact that nuclear politics arise 
in the world of the zero-sum game in which one side loses as 
much as the other side gains. Our lack of an autonomous nuclear 
policy becomes even clearer when we look back on U.S. 
interference in our nuclear development. 
  The ambitious nuclear-development program pursued by 
President Pak Chung-hi in the 1970s was frustrated by the U.S. 
(Of course, it can be said that he brought this on himself 
because he pursued it with openly military objectives). Since 
then, even the possession of enrichment and reprocessing 
facilities for peaceful uses has been suppressed. 
  In 1976, a plan to import a "nuclear-research reactor" from 
Canada came to nothing and a plan to import "mixed-nuclear-fuel 
technology" from Belgium was also discontinued because of U.S. 
pressure. 
  The U.S. has applied a first-supress-then-see style of 
pressure against even nuclear technology unrelated to nuclear 
bombs. Considering the elimination of the "seeds of misfortune" 
which may result from the development of nuclear weapons more 
important than the economic loss of a friendly nation, the U.S. 
nuclear-weapons-prevention policy is directly applied to our 
industrial policy. 
  The fourth blunder of the 6th Republic was to include the 
non-possession of enrichment and reprocessing facilities in its 
prohibition against nuclear weapons with its "Denuclearization 
Declaration." Let us say that it was a good thing to declare our 
abandonment of nuclear weapons. Considering the present 
international order keeping small countries from possessing 
nuclear weapons, it is true that an attempt to possess nuclear 
weapons would not be in our national interests. However, why 
did we declare that we would not maintain enrichment and 
reprocessing facilities? 
  The government did not have to include the renunciation of 
enrichment and reprocessing facilities in its Denuclearization 
Declaration, but it did. This declaration was only in the 
interests of the United States, which views the growth of our 
military and economic nuclear potential as contrary to its 
national interests (it has long classified the ROK as a nation 
having the potential to possess nuclear weapons), and 
surrounding nations. This is because enrichment and 
reprocessing are core technologies essential for the nuclear 
energy industry, although they are also needed in manufacturing 
nuclear bombs. Because of this, if a nation receives 
international inspections, then there is not the least legal 
problem with maintaining these facilities. 
  Thus, a legal basis capable of freezing the ROK's nuclear 
potential and closing the DPRK's nuclear facilities within the 
North-South Joint Denuclearization Declaration, which includes 
the abandonment of our enrichment and reprocessing facilities, 
is for the United States and surrounding nations a mechanism by 
which they can effortlessly achieve their aims. 
  Ultimately, our non-nuclear policy conforms well with the 
composition of superpower hegemony. Thus, the nuclear policy of 
the 6th Republic was totally ill-suited for securing our 
interests. This 6th Republic's nuclear-policy failure left the 
new government with pressing problems, that is, with nuclear 
tasks and dilemmas it must resolve. These are urgent issues the 
new government must confront and solve. The first dilemma is 
the possibility that the DPRK possesses nuclear weapons. Even 
though the DPRK has not openly proclaimed that it possesses 
nuclear weapons, the probability is growing that it will carry 
out its own style "uncertainty strategy." Signs of this are 
already appearing. 
  For this strategy to succeed, it must indirectly obscure its 
ability to possess nuclear weapons. The DPRK already boasts 
reprocessing capability. Even while aware that it is a violation 
of the Joint Denuclearization Declaration, it has admitted to 
possessing plutonium. Also, it has carried out approximately 70 
detonation tests and left signs of this. Even while showing 
signs that it is developing nuclear weapons, such as rumors it 
is smuggling plutonium, officially it still maintains that it 
has neither the ability nor the intention to develop such 
weapons. 
  To put it another way, contrary to our government's casting 
off of all such capability by its nuclear-free and 
joint-denuclearization declarations, the DPRK has tricked us 
with the joint declaration and has been successful enough in 
dragging out the nuclear issue to be a psychological burden to 
us. 
  Second, we still needs to decide on a posture concerning the 
possibility of sanctions by the international community against 
the DPRK. If the DPRK is deceptive in the inspections and 
continues its development of nuclear weapons, there is a 
possibility the situation could develop into a head-on collision 
with the nuclear hegemony of the United States. Various senior 
American political leaders have already hinted on several 
occasions of the possibility of military sanctions. 
  Also, the DPRK's continued refusal to accept inspections 
have 
caused the UN Security Council to begin a full-scale search for 
a solution to the problem. This will develop into a UN 
resolution for forced inspections. If even this is refused, 
military action may follow diplomatic and economic sanctions. 
Would this, then, solve the DPRK nuclear issue? 
  It is in no way a simple problem. The threat of war due to a 
DPRK retaliation against the ROK cannot be precluded. This could 
result in the entire Korean peninsula being polluted by nuclear 
radiation. North-South relations would enter their worst 
possible state and the dream of peaceful coexistence and 
unification we have so carefully cultivated would retreat far 
into the background. 
  There can be no change in our fundamental position desiring 
that the DPRK accept inspections. However, it is not in our 
national interests to go beyond what is needed. This is because 
the IAEA (International Atomic Energy Agency) is a mechanism of 
inequality protecting the superpower's nuclear monopoly. 
  Since the collapse of the East-West composition of the 
international order, nuclear southernization [Namgukhwa] 
(attempts by non-nuclear countries to obtain nuclear weapons) is 
increasing. At this time, the IAEA has restored its authority 
weakened by Iraq and is building a strong system outlawing 
nuclear weapons. There is no reason for us to step too far 
forward. 
  Since the nuclear issue will undoubtedly progress along with 
the larger current of "North-South Relations" (the relationship 
between the possessing "North" and the non-possessing "South"), 
being more concerned about what we can do at the level of the 
Korean peninsula, such as reopening North-South talks and 
negotiations on mutual inspections, would be more in our 
interests. 
  Third, an issue we will have to worry about in the future is 
nuclear-energy security. This is because the ROK nuclear-energy 
industry is estimated to have suffered considerable damage with 
the government's elucidation of its abandonment of enrichment 
and reprocessing facilities. Apart from simple economic 
considerations, the maintenance of enrichment and reprocessing 
facilities signifies much in relation to nuclear-energy security. 
  Fourth, the government of the 6th Republic adopted a linkage 
policy as its official position: "Without progress on the 
nuclear issue, we cannot proceed with the issue of North-South 
exchange." This is still accepted as valid. This linkage policy 
has behind it the at-first-glance convincing argument, "North 
Korea is stubbornly persisting in its nuclear development. How 
can we offer economic cooperation?" 
  The problem is that this argument is too uniform. Thus, we 
need to apply a flexible linkage policy. 
  First of all, uniform linkage cannot guarantee a DPRK 
abandonment of nuclear weapons. The first reason for this is 
that inspection is not a perfect means of hindering nuclear 
development. With IAEA inspections, which are hampered by many 
obstacles to inspecting sites other than reported facilities, 
and mutual inspections, which investigate only agreed-upon 
sites, we cannot be 100% sure of a DPRK abandonment of 
nuclear-weapons development. 
  When through exchange we establish a structure of 
interdependence between North and South Korea, destroying the 
military utility of nuclear weapons, we will have found a final 
solution to the nuclear problem. 
  Uniform linkage blocking exchange, therefore, promotes an 
immediate resolution of the nuclear issue, mutual inspections, 
but is actually an obstacle to reaching a final solution to the 
problem. We need to understand this fact. 
  What must be made clear at this point is that bringing up as 
a reason for linkage cordial diplomacy toward allies such as the 
United States and Japan betrays simplistic thinking unable to 
understand the realism of international politics. The reasoning 
that, because these allies maintain the position that they will 
not normalize relations with the DPRK without a resolution of 
the nuclear issue, we must admit that this is illogical. 
  Concerning the nuclear issue, the U.S. and other nuclear 
powers have exercised their influence to prevent all non-nuclear 
nations from gaining nuclear capability in order to maintain 
their nuclear monopoly. Of course, the reflective benefit gained 
by Japan from a denuclearized Korean peninsula is great. 
  We must keep in mind that, viewed from the perspective of 
the 
U.S. and Japan, both of which want a "non-capable" Korean 
peninsula, our linkage policy must seem to be us sacrificing our 
own long-term interests, standing at the forefront of the 
"neutralization of North and South Korea [Nambukhan Muryokhwa]" 
desired by surrounding nations. 
  Fifth is the dilemma created by Japan, emerging as an 
"asymptomatic nuclear nation [mujunghu haekguk]" (a nation 
possessing nuclear weapons that, while not exposing military 
aims, actually has military potential). Apart from its 42 
nuclear power plants presently under operation, Japan maintains 
the advanced nuclear facilities on an enormous scale: 15 
research reactors, two high-speed breeder reactors, two 
converter reactors, nine critical experiment devices, five 
reprocessing facilities, five enrichment facilities, nine 
nuclear-fuel processing facilities, and ten large-scale research 
complexes. In scale and quality, the facilities of North and 
South Korea cannot compare with this. 
  Japan has a plan to expand its existing enrichment 
capability 
to 3,000 tons by the year 2000. Using an advanced laser 
enrichment beam, they can enrich uranium by over 90 percent. 
Furthermore, having built the 210-ton-capacity Tokai factory, a 
large-scale reprocessing factory with a capacity of 800 tons per 
year is now under construction in Aomori and is scheduled to be 
completed by 1995. Japan is presently implementing a plan to 
stockpile large amounts of plutonium. Their reason for this is 
that it is needed for operating their high-speed breeder 
reactors and for their mixed-nuclear-fuel development. 
  Japan receives nuclear inspections and says that it uses its 
nuclear facilities and nuclear material for peaceful purposes. 
When its advanced nuclear technology is combined with existing 
means of transportation, the world's most advanced electronics, 
materials, electronics industry, aviation industry, and space 
industry, it could instantly create a formidable nuclear force. 
  While developing its peaceful nuclear-energy industry, Japan 
ultimately obtained the byproduct of this nuclear-weapons 
potential. Japan carried out brilliant nuclear diplomacy toward 
the United States by retaining enrichment and reprocessing 
facilitates in exchange for its 1967 announcement of its three 
non-nuclear principles. In comparison, one cannot help but think 
we have lost much. The nuclear policy of the 6th Republic did 
not reflect our national interests well and the problems faced 
at that time still remain dilemmas. This was because it lacked a 
deep understanding of the reality of the nuclear world, which 
moves according to the principles of hegemony and the zero-sum 
rule, and of the double value of nuclear power. For us to 
pursue an autonomous nuclear policy, therefore, we must 
understand the economic value of nuclear power used peacefully 
as well as the reality of the nuclear world. 
  One of the two values of nuclear power is the political and 
diplomatic tools, as well as the military tool, gained from 
possessing nuclear weapons. The other is the use of nuclear 
power to expand national interests economically and 
technologically. It has been a long time since the fierce, 
political battle over nuclear power as a means of bringing at 
once both national security and national wealth has become 
normal between actors on the international stage (nations and 
terrorist groups also). 
  This battle gave birth to the nuclear non-proliferation 
system. Its character is represented by "North-South Problems," 
"North-North Problems" and "South-South Problems." That caused 
by the fierce competition and jealously between nuclear nations 
is the North-North Problem. The lack of a security guarantee for 
non-nuclear nations, the distrust among non-nuclear nations, and 
so on, are called South-South Problems. 
  Looking at the North-South Problem of nuclear power in 
relation to the nuclear problems of the Korean peninsula, its 
essence is the inequality between nuclear and non-nuclear 
nations. For example, if we look at the pillar of the nuclear 
non-proliferation system, the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty 
(NPT), it has three nominal objectives. These are to prevent 
the lateral proliferation of nuclear weapons, to prevent the 
vertical proliferation of nuclear weapons, and to encourage the 
peaceful use of nuclear power. On closer inspection of the text, 
however, one can quickly see that it is an unequal treaty: it 
permits vertical proliferation, the continued development and 
deployment of nuclear weapons by established nuclear powers, 
while prohibiting lateral proliferation, the acquisition of 
nuclear weapons by non-nuclear powers resulting in their 
emergence as new, nuclear nations. 
  Compared to the time the treaty went into effect, the United 
States and Russia actually have come to possess more than three 
times the number of nuclear warheads. They have developed 
multi-warhead missiles, cruise missiles, and other fearsome new 
weapons. Compared to this, despite the treaty's call for the 
encouragement of the use of peaceful nuclear power by 
non-nuclear nations, this article has in fact been made a dead 
letter by the nuclear powers. 
  Although this is also due to the "dual nature of nuclear 
power," which results in increasing capability for its diversion 
to military uses as a peaceful nuclear industry develops, this 
is really because the Hobbesian instinct of the great powers to 
maintain a monopoly on power has dominated the nuclear order. 
This inequality is even more obvious in the regulations on 
nuclear inspections. They burden nuclear nations with no 
obligation whatsoever to accept nuclear inspections, but make it 
obligatory that non-nuclear member nations conclude a 
saftey-meassures agreement with the IAEA and open all their 
nuclear facilities to international inspection within 18 months. 
This unequal treaty became the textbook of today's nuclear 
world, with its 146 member nations, because of the reality of 
the power difference between the great powers and smaller 
nations. 
  Recently, however, the inequality of the treaty has become a 
point of contention in international, nuclear politics as 
developing nations have gradually begun voicing their opposition 
to it. A heated North-South debate is predicted between nuclear 
nations and non-nuclear nations demanding a price during the 
negotiations on extending the NPT. 
  It is difficult to set up a sound, autonomous nuclear policy 
without an understanding of the economic value of peaceful 
nuclear power. The problematic points of the 6th Republic's 
nuclear policy resulted from a lack of national-policy 
deliberation concerning this. The economic value of nuclear 
power is centrally related to enrichment and reprocessing 
facilities. 
  First of all, "enrichment" is the key to Koreanizing nuclear 
fuel. Of the nine nuclear reactors in use by the ROK, eight are 
light-water reactors using enriched uranium as fuel. As long as 
we have no enrichment facilities, we are doomed to import 
enriched uranium from foreign countries. 
  In the case of the ROK, the fuel fabrication process is now 
done domestically, but possessing no enrichment facilities, it 
is missing one important element for Koreanizing nuclear fuel. 
Because it is a central part of the fuel cycle, without the 
enrichment process we cannot achieve the Koreanization of the 
nuclear fuel cycle, nor can we achieve nuclear-energy security. 
  Possessing eight light-water reactors and having already 
established their economy, we must no longer put off securing 
enrichment facilities. This is even more the case given the 
energy-security nature of the problem. 
  Also, just as with enrichment facilities, as long as we have 
no "reprocessing" facilities, it will be impossible to make our 
nuclear-industry truly advanced. The gains brought by 
reprocessing are as follows. First, reprocessing produces 
several hundred varieties of isotope, including transuranium 
isotope (possible to produce only by reprocessing), used for a 
variety of purposes: medical, agricultural, industrial, 
measuring instruments, chemical compound synthesis, and so on. 
  Second, some uranium remains in the nuclear fuel after use. 
This is also a valuable resource. Third, through reprocessing, a 
valuable resource for nuclear energy, plutonium, is extracted 
from spent nuclear. 
  If the ROK only had reprocessing facilities, it could 
extract 
2.4 tons of plutonium every year from 240 tons of used nuclear 
fuel. Plutonium is used as fuel for high-speed breeder reactors. 
An almost magical nuclear reactor using plutonium as a fuel to 
create new plutonium, the high-speed breeder reactor makes 
possible an epoch-making recycling of resources, extending the 
use of uranium over 60 times. Lastly, reprocessing itself is an 
invaluable, peaceful technology for treating nuclear-energy 
byproducts: it divides and treats resources to be recycled from 
waste material to be disposed of. 
  Abandoning such precious enrichment and reprocessing 
facilities, the "8 November Denuclearization Declaration" was 
nothing more than a result of our obedience to the 
hegemony-seeking, non-proliferation policy of the nuclear 
powers, who seek to prevent both North and South Korea from 
possessing nuclear-weapons potential. Once we possess these 
facilities, we will have considerable political and diplomatic 
influence on the international stage. 
  No lengthy explanation is needed when we consider the gains 
made by the DPRK with one, not even completely built, 
reprocessing facility. At the same time, advanced nuclear energy 
signifies our influence as a people after reunification. As this 
cannot be achieved in a day, we must understand that we are 
wasting precious time. 
  What, then, would be an autonomous nuclear policy? What our 
nuclear policy must be and where we must go have already been 
revealed in the matters discussed above. To enumerate these a 
little more systematically, we must complete two supreme tasks. 
One is that we must wipe out the nuclear threat from our 
immediate enemy, the DPRK. The other is that we must set up a 
nuclear policy preparing for unification, taking into account 
the dual nature of the DPRK as our companion, who together with 
us must achieve unification in the future. 
  To establish and promote an autonomous nuclear policy, 
first, 
we must reverse our abandonment of enrichment and reprocessing 
facilities and secure these facilities as soon as possible. 
Second, we must actively nurture our nuclear-energy industry and 
make an issue of the U.S. discriminatory policy which denies us 
even the "basics" while permitting Japan enrichment and 
reprocessing, as well as allowing it to stockpile large 
quantities of plutonium. 
  Third, by raising our intelligence capability and gaining 
"eyes," we must cultivate a space industry so that we do not 
depend intelligence provided by foreign countries. 
  Fourth, we must clearly renounce military use of nuclear 
power and increase opening and self-inspections one step. We 
must limit to nuclear weapons our "undressing-together" nuclear 
policy toward DPRK and, to the extent that is legal, we must 
switchover to a "dressing-together" nuclear policy (while not 
permitting imbalance between North and South Korea). 
  Fifth, converting from an unconditional linkage policy to a 
selective one, we must search for a North-South dialog 
separating the nuclear and exchange issues. 
  Sixth is elevating our diplomatic image on the international 
stage by participating in Third-World nuclear diplomacy while 
improving the one-sided, Korean-American nuclear relationship, 
making it more of a partnership, 
  If we admit that we should establish and promote an 
autonomous nuclear policy, learning from the 6th Republic's 
nuclear policy, then there is still a chance for us. We must 
play our part in the diplomatic battle to take place in the NPT 
negotiations opening in 1995. 
  In our position, we must hurry the development of nuclear 
energy, if for no other reason than to minimize the dilemmas 
left to us by the nuclear policy of the 6th Republic, in the 
sense of maximizing the use of the dual nature of nuclear power 
and of approaching security and energy issues simultaneously. 
The year 1995, then, will truly be our best opportunity for 
securing the right to unlimited, equal use of nuclear power, by 
making the most of our negotiating ability. 
  As a plan for using this opportunity productively, we can 
first think of a staged approach. First of all, while supporting 
a limited, three-to-five year extension of the NPT, as a 
non-nulcear member, we need to align ourselves with the position 
advocated by the Third World. 
  In the second stage, through negotiations with the United 
States, we receive a guarantee of our right to legitimate, 
peaceful use of nuclear power. The ROK should consider 
supporting an indefinite or 25-year extension of the NPT in the 
third stage, under the condition that our right to the 
autonomous use of nuclear power is secured in the second stage. 
  The ROK must revise the inadequate Korean-American Nuclear 
Energy Agreement [Hanmi Wojaryok Hyopjong] and, while receiving 
inspections, improve its present status as an uninspected 
country unable to handle plutonium. It is obvious that as long 
as we guarantee transparency and comply with international 
inspections, there should be no restrictions on our research and 
development of civilian technology, such as enrichment and 
reprocessing. 
  The past's hasty expression of a "supportive position" 
toward 
the United States is now taboo. We must understand that the era 
has passed in which this form of nuclear diplomacy is justified 
under the name of "diplomatic reality." 
  Nuclear diplomacy must no longer be the exclusive property 
of 
one ministry. We must understand that the time has come when 
there is no problem with most nuclear diplomacy progressing in 
the open after receiving the official approval of the relevant 
organizations and public opinion. 
  In January of this year, we signed a chemical weapons 
treaty. 
In his September, 1992 speech before the UN, President Roh 
Tae-woo said that we would do this, so we had no choice. Of 
course, this signing was done without any mention of the large 
number of chemical weapons maintained by the DPRK. 
  We demanded no concessions of the United States either. The 
"diplomatic-realtiy" logic was once again emphasized: "It's okay 
to give sooner what we have to give eventually, anyway." Nuclear 
policy must not be repeated in this way. 
  It would be absurd for us to promise support for an 
indefinite extension of the NPT before the U.S. begins 
"underwater diplomacy" in earnest. 

