Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Gerard van Nifterik: ``The Problem Of </F>
'Biodegradability'. Materials And The Environment.''] 
  [Text] An increasing awareness of the environment has 
resulted in research being instigated into new and 
environmentally friendly materials, such as biodegradable 
plastics. Initially the creation of these biopolymers was held 
up by various different problems, but at the same time essential 
basic knowledge was being acquired and the 'biodegradable' 
phenomenon has recently been defined in a better way than ever 
before. In other words, biopolymers are well on the way to full 
development. 
  In the meantime, various `biodegradable' plastics have 
appeared on the market which have been evaluated too light, such 
as those mixtures which were often blends of polyethylene and 
modified starch. They were sold under the principle of 
environmental friendliness, but in fact they were worse than 
traditional plastics. Micro organisms only break down the starch 
component, while the polyethylene fragments are diffused 
directly into the environment. There they are digested by birds, 
which are often unable to survive such a diet. All of this has 
done perception of the environmental character of biological 
plastics no good at all. 
  ``It has been a very good learning experience,'' said Dr. 
Bert Tournois, divisional head of the Agrotechnological Research 
Center, ATO, in Wageningen. ``If a plastic is being marketed as 
biodegradable, then the polymer really does have to be 
biodegradable.'' According to Tournois, this means that it is 
highly necessary to be able to define biodegradability in one 
way or another. That, therefore, has been one of the subjects 
into which ATO has been carrying out research. 
<H5>  Biological Breakdown Test </H5>
  ATO-DLO [Agrotechnological Research Center-Division 
Agricultural Research] has been very involved over the last few 
years researching pure biopolymers, particularly in connection 
with modified starch. In the first instance, the relationship 
was examined between a specific modification to the starch 
molecule and the final quality of the plastic. This research is 
progressing well, and ATO now has at its disposal a form of 
structural properties sample card. The result is that by means 
of specifically aimed modifications in the structure of the 
starch polymers, the properties of the bioplastic can be chosen 
very precisely. This involves characteristics such as 
brittleness, strength, elasticity, water attraction and 
repelling features, and so on. According to Tournois, ``One of 
the most important properties in these new materials is, of 
course, their biodegradability, and this property had in fact 
not been properly defined until recently. A great deal of 
progress has been achieved in this field in recent years.'' 
  ATO has developed a number of tests in which the biological 
breakdown can be determined, a package which is not only 
applicable to bioplastics but is also of interest for a wide 
group of materials, ranging from paper and wood to adhesives, 
rubbers, and coatings. A biological breakdown test for solid 
components appears, in fact, to have been a gap in the market. 
Until recently there had been standardized methods for liquid 
waste matter, but not for solid materials. Above all, what 
exactly is `biodegradability'? 
  As Tournois explains, ``If something dissolves, it doesn't 
necessarily mean that it is also biodegradable. The easy 
tendency is to say that biopolymers have been biologically 
broken down when you can no longer see them. That is not the 
case. We feel that the biological breakdown needs to be 
described as a chemical change which is initiated by a 
biological activity.'' 
<H5>  Breakthrough </H5>
  ATO has therefore made an inventory of the tests which 
existed previously, and afterwards started considering what a 
standard test for bio-destruction should be like. In particular 
they have sought contact with standardization bodies such as the 
European CEN [European Committee for Standardization], and the 
Dutch Standardization Institute, NNI. These efforts have led to 
a number of standardization tests for four different features: 
anaerobic or aerobic, wet or dry. ATO has in the meantime made 
these tests commercially available, and according to Tournois 
there is great interest, not surprisingly. Following the 
problems that occurred with the first so-called `biodegradable' 
blends, it is now of vital importance that the term should be 
given real meaning. Using a standardized test, business, 
industry, and materials developers will be able to work out how 
their new product can be broken down by micro organisms, even 
under which circumstances and within what time scale. A 
breakthrough, Tournois feels. 
<H5>  Outstrip </H5>
  The perception of the relationships between structure and 
properties, and the development of a standardized biological 
breakdown test, have brought the introduction of more and 
improved bioplastics closer. That means, however, that research 
into polymers is still moving rapidly. In fact the biopolymer 
technicians are rapidly overtaking the petrochemical polymer 
technology. Whereas the conventional plastics industry can rely 
on more than 40 years' experience, the bioplastics industry is 
still at the crawling stage. However, the catching up is taking 
place very fast indeed, not in the least because much of the 
groundwork has already been covered by the petrochemical 
industry. Meanwhile, various bioplastics have been developed, 
such as [polyhydroxyalkanoaten] polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA's), 
of which polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) is the most well known. 
They are produced by micro organisms which store the polymers 
in the shape of little balls within the cell. By adapting the 
process and by choosing a specialized breeding ground, it 
appears to be possible to let bacteria produce certain PHA's 
more or less `on measure'. These so-called fermentation 
polymers are still very expensive, despite the fact that the 
price per kilo has dropped over the last few years from about 60 
Dutch guilders to around 10 guilders. 
  Another category covers polylactids or polylactic acids. 
Initially this advanced degradable plastic seemed to be far too 
expensive, and it was used primarily for medical applications, 
such as surgical stitching thread. It now seems possible to 
produce it at a much cheaper price, by withdrawing the lactic 
acid raw material not from sugar, but for instance to prepare it 
from potato waste or from whey. A further cost reduction 
appears possible as a result of increasing the production 
capacity. In the meantime there are a number of relatively 
large installations in operation in the United States and Japan 
(see POLYTECHNISCH WEEKBLAD Number 45, 1992). Such 
installations can now produce the polymers for approximately 5 
guilders per kilo. Protein plastics, such as gluten, can cost 
even less and the same applies to modified starch polymers, the 
price of which is expected to be not much more than that of 
polyethylene. 
<H5>  Biopolymer Center </H5>
  The biopolymer industry is at the starting line and the 
first 
products are already on the market, such as shampoo bottles made 
from PHB and French fries bags created from modified starch. On 
the research front, too, work is being done on biopolymers, for 
instance at the Universities of Twente, Leiden, Utrecht, 
Groningen, Eindhoven's Technical University, and naturally in 
the research institutes, not least at ATO-DLO in Wageningen. 
  Recently an official center for biopolymers was set up at 
ATO, where centralized research is being carried out into some 
eight or nine different biopolymer types. It is a relatively 
large and excellently equipped center, in which around 60 
researchers will be working. The new center is not intended to 
remain a purely national concern. According to ATO, the 
institute must achieve international status. 

