CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Simonov, NOVOSTI RUSSIAN PRESS AGENCY </F>
political observer, especially for LITERATURNAYA GAZETA: 
"Stiffening of the Spine: Russia in Search of Equal Partnership 
With the United States"] 
  [Text] Life is zigzag-like--including, international 
life. 
  We had just been touched to find, it seems, that we 
were "in the thick of a joint Russian-American revolution." And 
we have suddenly, at a rush, torn into another thicket--rows, 
suspicions, and rivalry which have simultaneously disturbed the 
seemingly unruffled harmony of Russia's relations with the 
United States. 
<H5>  Nerves, Nerves </H5>
  Espionage. Nixon, poor soul. Bosnia. This is just a 
telegraphic list of the sharp elbows which the two countries 
have suddenly dug into one another's sides, compelling the 
impressionable press to speak of "the most serious crisis of 
recent years," "return of the Cold War," and the "old bared 
teeth of the Russian bear." 
  Enough. It is a question of a bad state of nerves. The quite 
banal incidents pertain to a period when very serious 
complications of a domestic nature have arisen for the two 
presidents. 
  Once again betrayed by his inner circle and exposed by the 
procurator general, Yeltsin has been forced to seek ways of 
neutralizing the consequences of the amnesty. Wresting away the 
initiative, having thrown his authority and energy into 
realization of the idea of civil reconciliation, is seen to be 
one of them. A strong, well-considered move. The last thing the 
occupant of the Kremlin needs at this time is the elderly 
patriarch of American politics walking past him with a trembling 
hand proferred to his enemy. 
  Nerves crack. 
  Clinton is not in the best position. Three of his 
associates, 
including the defense secretary, have returned to private life. 
The Whitewater mire--the turbid affair of the Clintons' real 
estate in Arkansas, in which all kinds of malfeasance are being 
attributed to them--is yawning ever wider and dragging on. 
  Finally, the latest blow. Webster Hubbel, No. 3 in the 
Justice Department and the president's constant companion on the 
golf course, has resigned. He is accused of over billing as a 
lawyer at the Rose Law Firm in the 1980's. And Hillary Clinton 
ranked as Hubble's partner in this firm. Having one of the 
snuggest offices of the CIA occupied by a paid agent of the 
Soviets, excuse me, Russian democrats, was just about the last 
straw. Nerves give out also. 
  In addition, both presidents are being enveloped, as it 
were, 
by a spectral, in some respects Kafkaesque, picture of what is 
happening on the other side of the ocean. 
  Here is Yeltsin, reading a dispatch from the Russian Embassy 
in Washington. Knowing the sentiments of our ambassador, it may 
be assumed that the president is being warned about the passive, 
reactive, short-sighted policy of the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs in respect to the United States, which suffers, what is 
more, from infantile pro-Americanism. 
  Time for consultations with the minister of foreign affairs. 
The latter explains persuasively to the president that if 
infantile pro-Americanism does in fact show through anywhere, it 
is only in the incapacity of our embassy in Washington to 
establish professional, forceful diplomatic work. In addition, 
the boss of Smolenskaya Square believes, this ailment is 
suffered by our members of parliament, who have become regular 
visitors to the United States. Their pilgrimage should be halted. 
  Yeltsin is puzzled. Such scissors in the evaluations, 
beneath 
the blade of which the broader spectrum of Russian-American 
relations evidently falls, are of hardly any help to him. 
  Clinton is wandering in a similar information fog also. 
Voices from Congress, some of his advisers, and the news media 
are forcefully explaining to him that since the December 
elections Yeltsin has become a captive of the national-patriotic 
forces. With the departure of Gaydar and Fedorov not a single 
reformer remains in the government. Nor have their numbers 
increased in parliament. The reforms are dead. The tune in this 
unfortunate country is being called by the new demon of Russian 
politics--Zhirinovskiy. 
<H5>  Horse and Rider </H5>
  However odd, the leader of the LDPR [Liberal Democratic 
Party 
of Russia] is now growing in the American mass consciousness 
into something gigantic, almost other-worldly, like King Kong, 
who catches airplanes in his paws, seated atop a skyscraper. Of 
course, the frightening image of the politician is being 
inflated not by himself, but by other people. Let us try and 
understand this passage from THE NEW YORK POST: 
  "The amnesty and the subsequent release of the rebel leaders 
were a personal victory for Vladimir Zhirinovskiy (my 
emphasis--V.S.), who found opportunities for this in the new 
constitution, prepared the draft resolution, persuaded a 
substantial majority of the members of parliament to support it, 
and won the putschists' release...." 
  All was mixed and baked by him personally. The absolute 
arbiter of Russia's fate. It is hard to believe that the author 
of this piece was Jeane Kirkpatrick, former representative of 
the United States at the United Nations and professor at 
Georgetown University, so simplistically does she conceive of 
the battering-ram that broke through the gate of Lefortovo. Such 
panegyrics to the leader of the LDPR, which can be seen in 
American newspapers from time to time, are needed to prove the 
proposition that Zhirinovskiy's ideas have become Russia's 
official foreign policy. 
  Consequently, the Clinton administration should have done 
with its infatuation with Yeltsin and his reforming. 
Consequently, a cordon sanitaire around the enemy, which is 
coming round from its coma, needs to be created out of the 
former Soviet republics. And, of course, it is necessary to stop 
shaking loose from Congress money for Russian espionage and 
other imperialism which is a threat to the creditors themselves. 
  The driving forces of this campaign are the hard-line 
Republican opposition, the military-industrial complex, and 
sundry people profiting from enmity with Moscow. We, of course, 
are free to believe that this is a mildewed invention of the 
international affairs specialists of the times of Yuriy Zhukov. 
  We could also give ourselves over to the illusion, to which 
the U.S. Administration also has given itself over in recent 
years, that the fall of communism is sweeping away the main 
barrier between the two countries, removing in this way all the 
reasons for confrontation. What is there to divide the two 
democracies? Values common to all mankind have always and in all 
things been higher than national interests, which are losing 
their distinctiveness and becoming increasingly coincident. Is 
this not so? 
  Whence, it is true, Washington concluded that it is Russia 
which should act as the domestic servant of the national 
interests of the United States. Those vanquished in the Cold War 
should pay tribute to the victor. 
  Mixed in with this is the traditional American missionary 
disposition--the passion to serve up to the world its experience 
as the fruit of the highest wisdom, be it the Chicago monetarist 
school in economic affairs or high-handed leadership in all that 
concerns foreign policy. 
  Then the dominoes began to fall. The December elections. The 
departure of Gaydar and Fedorov. Yeltsin's report to the Federal 
Assembly, which emphasized a tougher foreign policy more 
oriented toward national interests. Our diplomatic breakthrough 
in Bosnia. Russia's irritating, vigorous efforts in the Near 
East.... 
  Had the U.S. Administration not measured Russia's reforms by 
Chicago yardsticks and had it not reveled in its patronage over 
the "rubble of the USSR," these changes would have come as no 
shock to it. And would not be taken by some Western politicians 
as the end of the world. Washington would then be paying closer 
heed to the opinion of its own people who have observed events 
up close. For example, Thomas Pickering, U.S. ambassador to 
Moscow. He maintains: 
  "Reforms in a country spanning 11 time zones are not 
dependent on the will of individuals. Crudely put, had there 
been no Gaydar or Fedorov, today's Russia would be attempting to 
take its leave of the legacy of the Soviet past, which is 
discrediting it, just as actively and in roughly the same spirit 
as now. This truth is applicable even to Boris Yeltsin, although 
he has already made an enormous contribution to this work and 
will, I hope, make no less important a contribution in the 
future." 
<H5>  Wedge in Another's Field </H5>
  In his speech at the Council for International Relations, 
from where this quotation was taken, Pickering overlooks one 
important factor. It was Washington's high-handed attitude 
toward Russia and its impudence and, as a result, the abasement 
of Russians' national pride which brought the ultra-nationalist 
scum to the surface of political life. If some people in the 
United States are today demonizing Zhirinovskiy, for truth's 
sake brief mention should be made somewhere in parentheses of 
their direct involvement in this phenomenon. 
  Whatever, it is finally clear that the failure of communism 
has not done away with the main contradiction between Russia and 
the United States--their natural rivalry over the possession of 
raw material, world markets, and security guarantees. And over 
the right to consider certain regions--I quote from Yeltsin's 
report to the Federal Assembly--"a sphere of the special 
responsibility and special mutual interests of Russia and its 
neighbors." 
  The territory of the former republics of the USSR, say. 
Washington's approach to this painful problem, meanwhile, is 
clearly illustrated by its attempts to substitute power 
maneuvers for partnership in a manifestly alien geopolitical 
field. 
  As we know, the CIS heads of state have now become frequent 
visitors to the United States, as formerly princes to the khans 
of the Golden Horde, with complaints about one another. There is 
a slight nuance, it is true: Our ancestors took tribute, their 
descendants seek alms. What is more, often in the most servile 
form. Taking advantage of this, the United States is stipulating 
a new role for itself in the post-Soviet space, clearly 
attempting to carve a wedge in the traditional relations. The 
latest example is the idea that surfaced at Clinton's meeting 
with Shevardnadze--deploying American troops as part of a UN 
force throughout Abkhazia.... What is most astounding--along the 
border with Russia also! 
  The U.S. secretary of state, meanwhile, delivers to the 
Russian president, who stated Moscow's readiness for 
peacekeeping operations on the territory of CIS, something akin 
to a rebuke. Warren Christopher is sternly insisting on the 
prior approval of international institutions of the CSCE type. 
And it is being made understood, what is more, that obtaining 
the consent of the United States itself would be the ideal 
option. 
  This is already archaic. Russia is today stiffening its 
spine, arising from the all-too-low bow before its partner. And 
hampering this process is not in the partner's interests. 
Slowly, under strain and with sudden nervous shifts Washington 
is beginning, it would seem, to understand this--or at least 
those who make foreign policy. Following the meeting in 
Vladivostok with Minister Kozyrev, that same Warren Christopher 
deemed it necessary to observe: "I told Andrey: perhaps I am 
senior, but only in terms of age. As for the rest, we are equal 
partners...." 
  Splendid, splendid! Tomorrow I would like to take the first 
sample of this equality. 

