BFN 

  [Excerpts] The Gansu Provincial CPC Committee has decided 
to transfer more than 10,000 provincial, prefectural, and county 
cadres to rural areas and to some enterprises that are 
encountering difficulties so as to help these areas and 
enterprises in their work. Yesterday afternoon [1 March], the 
provincial party committee and government held a mobilization 
meeting on transferring cadres to grass-roots units to help 
these units in their work. The meeting was presided over by 
Vice Governor Yang Huaixiao, member of the provincial party 
committee standing committee. Sun Ying, deputy secretary of the 
provincial party committee, made an important speech at the 
meeting in which she said: The main task of cadres transferred 
to grass-roots units is to help some areas with better 
conditions gradually achieve small-scale prosperity; to help 
some areas that basically have solved the problem of having 
sufficient food and clothing to move toward a relatively 
comfortable lifestyle; to help those comparatively poor and 
backward areas where conditions are hard to do a good job in 
work to support the impoverished, so they can escape poverty and 
become rich; and to help some enterprises that are encountering 
difficulties to turn from deficits to profits and enhance their 
economic results. In the meantime, in accordance with the 
demand of the central authorities and the State Council, we will 
carry out experimental reform work on a trial basis in selected 
enterprises with the aim of establishing a modern enterprise 
system so as to promote in an all-round manner sustained, rapid 
and healthy economic development in both urban and rural areas. 
[passage omitted] 
  In conclusion, Sun Ying stressed: Cadres who are transferred 
to grass-roots units to help with the work there must do their 
work in a down-to-earth manner. This must be regarded as a key 
point in their work. They must do some practical work that 
truly can benefit the local masses. In the meantime, owing to 
the fact that a large number of cadres from various fronts are 
involved and that time is pressing while our tasks are 
strenuous, various localities and units must truly strengthen 
leadership in accordance with the unified arrangements made by 
the provincial authorities, and must do a conscientious job in 
transferring cadres, and fulfill their tasks with quality and 
quantity guaranteed. 
  Provincial leaders who attended the meeting included: Yan 
Haiwang, Lu Kejian, (Sun Xiaozheng), (Shi Zhongyuan), (Luo Tao), 
(Liang Peizhen), and responsible comrades from departments, 
sections, commissions and bureaus directly under provincial 
authorities, as well as from people's organizations, 
universities and colleges, scientific research units, factories, 
mines, and enterprises, and from units of the central 
authorities based in Lanzhou. 

