Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Laurent Schwartz: ``A Computer Controlled by </F>
Thought''] 
  [Text] The brain orders, it obeys... Japanese 
researchers have been working in utmost secrecy on a machine 
controlled directly by brain waves. Disclosures of a discovery 
whose potential repercussions are incalculable. 
  Incredible... but true! One of the most powerful of the 
multinationals has embarked on a project that is crazy, crazy, 
crazy: Development of a system for controlling machines by 
thought. Let note be taken by those tempted to cry ``Hoax!'': 
This research, undertaken by Japan's Fujitsu group, is expected 
to yield, within 18 months, the ability of a computer to 
distinguish between a ``yes'' and a ``no,'' thought by an 
operator! The study is being conducted together with Hokkaido 
University's highly respected Institute for Electronic Science 
at Sapporo. The spitefully inclined might say that with some 165 
billion francs [Fr] of annual revenue, 162,000 employees, a 
worldwide number-two standing in electronics, and an annual 
investment budget of around Fr20 billion in research and 
development, one can afford to indulge in the loss of a few 
pennies, for the sake of prestige, in probing the frontiers of 
the imaginary. Except that, since April 1992, which marks the 
start of work on this project, the Japanese researchers have 
already achieved an amazing result: The recognition by a machine 
of the vowel-sound a thought by a human! 
  Should this research achieve its desired results, their 
repercussions on day-to-day living would be incalculable. 
Imagine a world in which humans would dialogue silently with and 
distantly from other humans.... The telephone would be relegated 
to the scrap heap of memories: Why bother to take it off the 
hook, dial a number, and talk? Black boxes installed in homes 
would transmit our wandering thoughts, via a network, in the 
form of written text or synthesized speech. You would merely 
have to think the access code of the person you want to contact. 
This would activate a screen or loudspeaker in that person's 
home or office to establish the contact. A boon for the 
intelligence services, which could thus secretly transmit 
information! Fujitsu's management envisions the ultimate 
man-machine interface: ``Today, we know how to control a 
wide-ranging gamut of household appliances by means of a 
computer. Control of the computer by thought could thus be of 
considerable aid to the severely handicapped. The speed at which 
data could be transmitted via such a system would be so high 
that it would outmode keyboards and other manual signaling 
devices,'' says Fujitsu's Research Department. Viewed from this 
angle, the prospect of issuing orders without lifting a finger, 
or opening one's mouth, can seem great indeed. Provided, 
however, that the process is not inverted by manufacturing... 
thought-reading machines! 
  The idea of developing a thought-controlled computer system 
took shape in August 1991. Two months earlier, Fujitsu's top 
management had made a highly unusual offer to its researchers: 
They could propose ultra-futuristic topics of research! Of 80 
themes received, three revolved around the translation of the 
brain's bioelectric activity into data that could be operated on 
by a computer. Tempted by the boldness of such a project, the 
management gave the researchers full freedom as to the research 
to be pursued, the cooperation to be enlisted, and even as to 
their working hours.... Tempted but prudent: The researchers 
were given exactly three years in which to obtain validating 
results. During those three years, there would be no special 
investment. At the conclusion of this period, one of two things: 
The researchers' experiments will either have yielded results, 
in which case a laboratory, indeed a building, would be built, 
specifically dedicated to the ``operation of computers by means 
of thought''; or will be spinning their wheels, in which case 
the researchers must show that they need more time to attain 
their objective, so as to be granted three more years. But in 
view of the results achieved on the recognition of a 
barely seven months following the start of work, it may be taken 
for granted as of now that the Japanese researchers can 
definitely count on six years of freedom of action. 
  Developing a thought-controlled system presupposes pursuit 
of 
two lines of research. First, a way must be found to somehow 
characterize human thought in material form. This represents a 
major challenge. Next, these thought-generated signals must be 
processed to translate them into an effective order that can be 
assimilated by an electronic device. This task is easier. The 
conversion of physical, electrical, or magnetic signals to 
numeric data is now commonplace. All computers possess such a 
converter. 
  Five researchers are currently working on the topic. Their 
first stage: Define in exact detail the type of ``interior 
language'' to be explored. ``Although there is still controversy 
on this point, a distinction is drawn between gratuitous thought 
and mental representation of the words that we are about to 
pronounce. It is on this second approach, in other words, a mode 
of thought that leads to an action, and specifically the 
activating of the muscles of the larynx and of the tongue, that 
we have worked,'' says Norio Fujimaki, apparently the sole 
Fujitsu researcher authorized to speak of the work being done. 
``Our objective is to characterize brain activity in terms of 
detailed, operative messages, hence in a language of action. We 
have given this language the name silent speech.'' A 
study conducted several months ago by two American 
neurobiologists of the University of Iowa appears to verify the 
existence of silent speech. They presented to 
patients with anatomically different cerebral lesions two series 
of diapositives, one showing objects, the other showing actions 
in the course of being performed. When the patients were asked 
to describe what they had seen, some patients committed errors 
on the names of the objects, others on the verbs representing 
the actions. Hence the idea that thought-language might follow 
different neuronal systems depending on whether objects or 
actions are evoked. 
  The topic of study having been determined, Norio Fujimaki 
spent several months at the University in Sapporo working 
alongside Professor Kuriki, an expert on electroencephalographic 
measurements. Fujitsu's researcher already had his plan in mind: 
Place a subject in two possible situations--one requiring that 
he produce silent speech, and the other corresponding 
to interior silence--and observe the subject's cerebral activity 
in each of the two cases for the purpose of comparison. ``For my 
first series of experiments, I chose the simplest of all 
electroencephalographic measurement techniques. By means of 
electrodes, the electrical currents produced by the neurons that 
enter into action can be measured within a fraction of a 
second.'' This is the method, entirely classic today, that has 
made it possible to draw the subtle distinction between a 
sleeping subject's paradoxical-sleep (dreams) and deep-sleep 
stages. ``I needed knowledgeable and perfectly disciplined 
subjects, able, on request, to think or not think!'' The 
instruction given to evoke silent speech--``think the 
vowel a''--was chosen because it is the first letter 
of the alphabet. Over a period of six months, eight subjects 
were tested in rotation, between 50 and 100 times each, in an 
absolutely silent room. Each subject was seated, as motionless 
as possible, facing a screen equipped with two intermittently 
operative light-emitting diodes, one red and one green. A point 
situated between the two diodes helped to fix the subject's 
gaze. ``Throughout each experiment, it was necessary to avoid 
any and all spontaneous movement, which would inevitably have 
been translated into an emission of parasitic cerebral electric 
waves. The gaze fixing point proved insufficient, and the 
subjects had to be fitted with a kind of yoke to immobilize 
their head. All swallowing or any other movement whatever of the 
throat muscles was categorically forbidden!'' As for the 
principle of the test, it was utterly simple. The guinea-pig, 
wearing a headdress consisting of a dozen or so electrodes, was 
asked to pronounce the vowel a mentally upon the 
display of a given color. To eliminate the effects of 
anticipation or habit, the significance of the colors was 
reversed several times and the time intervals between displays 
were produced at random. ``We performed some 600 
electroencephalographic measurements in all. Regardless of the 
mental response called for (think a or do not think 
a), a cerebral reaction was observed at the rear of 
the brain, in all cases, 0.3 second after the lighting of the 
diode. This reaction is altogether logical, in that this part of 
the brain encloses the center of vision. On the other hand, and 
this is the important thing, this wave was detected 0.42 second 
later in the frontal part, which lodges the centers of action, 
solely in the cases when the subject was asked to produce 
silent speech.'' In other words, each time the 
subject thought a, the Japanese researchers were able 
to detect an electric wave sweeping the cortex from back to 
front. And by statistical treatment of the 600 measurements 
taken, they were able to characterize the intensity of this 
wave. ``The large number of tests run enabled us to discard 
parasitic noises and to delimit a relatively powerful wave in 
the frontal region, whose negative potential ranged around an 
average value of -4.25 microvolts. Its duration varied between 
0.4 and 1.2 second, depending on the subjects. It appeared in 
the midst of a myriad of small positive and negative waves, of 
much shorter duration, which can be considered the cerebral 
waves responsible for vision.'' A wave resembling that of the 
thought a was also detected when Norio Fujimaki asked 
the subjects to actually pronounce the letter a. This 
is equivalent to saying that, from the standpoint of cerebral 
activity, there is practically no difference between thinking 
and pronouncing. Only the will--whose location no one has yet 
succeeded in pinpointing!-would appear to intervene to prevent 
us from proceeding from the thought to the action. Does one not 
sometimes go off to talk all alone when immersed in deep 
meditation, oblivious to the environment? 
  Norio Fujimaki would like to go further into the tracking of 
the brain's thought waves, with magnetoencephalography (MEG). 
This technique measures the modulations of the magnetic field of 
extremely low intensity emitted by the brain's activity. Its 
intensity is of the order of one millionth that of the earth's 
magnetic field! The method enables the pinpointing of neuronal 
reactions with a precision of two millimeters over a time lapse 
of less than a millisecond. For starters, the Japanese 
researcher would be able to track the displacement of the 
thought waves that run through our minds! Another advantage: The 
signals could be captured without necessitating direct contact 
with the head being probed. But this method is still 
experimental and very costly. In particular, it calls for 
magnetic sensors based on superconductors cooled by liquid 
helium.... 
  Spectacular though initial silent speech results 
may seem, numerous questions remain without a clear response for 
the moment, indeed without a response at all! For example: Were 
any letters other than a tested? And why not entire 
words? How can one be certain that the subjects thought 
a and not something else? ``Actually, other 
experiments were conducted, but I cannot yet divulge the 
results. They are discussed in an article that I am in the 
process of submitting to the magazine ELECTRO-ENCEPHALOGRAPHY. 
As regards verifying whether the subjects are actually thinking 
a, I recognize that a certain ambiguity exists on 
this point inasmuch as we have no way of checking the subjects' 
mental discipline,'' Norio Fujimaki acknowledges. He merely 
points out that the bioelectric responses of the subjects as a 
whole exhibit only very slight deviations of around 1 percent. 
Since the subjects did not consult with each other, it may 
reasonably be assumed that they all conformed to the same 
instruction. This said, the Japanese researcher recognizes that 
instead of thinking a he could just as well have 
asked them to concatenate ideas or to evoke a poem in their 
heart of hearts. This amounts to saying that the research 
conducted by Fujitsu, at least in this initial stage, was less 
aimed at recognition of waves representing the thought of a 
specific letter or word than at characterizing a broader mental 
activity, specifically, in this case, the evoking of an interior 
discourse. By being able to discern it in the midst of the 
background noise corresponding to suspended mental activity, 
Fujitsu would already have achieved an initial operable 
distinction of the ``idle''-``not idle'' type. Nothing would 
then prevent the codifying of this binary message, addressed to 
a machine, in terms of yes, no or of plus, 
minus. 
  It remains to be seen whether it will be possible some day, 
one way or another, to decode the content of the thoughts 
passing through our minds. It must be acknowledged that the 
majority of the scientists who have long been doing work on the 
brain view such a quest as utopian. According to them, it is 
highly improbable that each given mental representation 
corresponds to a unique physicochemical state of the brain. On 
this basis, it hardly seems possible to achieve an alphabet, 
whether it consist of electrical, magnetic, or chemical signals, 
by means of which the sense of a thought could be reconstructed. 
``This schema would be far too simplistic and static. 
Present-day imaging techniques, which enable us to grasp a 
little better what is occurring in the human brain as it 
performs its functions, reveal an extremely complex dynamic 
whose rules we are not anywhere near to discerning,'' says 
Bernard Mazoyer, head of the CEA's (Atomic Energy Commission's) 
Neurofunctional Imaging Group at Orsay. Nevertheless, studies 
realized to date on the functioning of the brain have already 
unveiled certain aspects of the mechanism of perception and of 
the nature of conscience. It has been shown, for example, that 
for a given mental operation several areas of the brain, 
including distant ones, are mobilized. By more refined 
observation, it has even been possible to show that all of the 
neurons concerned produce electrical discharges simultaneously 
and at the same frequency, throughout the duration of the 
stimulation. This manner of functioning would explain how we 
become instantly conscious of everything that surrounds us. 
Thus, as soon as we perceive an object, a bottle, for example, 
we immediately have an idea of its shape, its color, its feel, 
its weight, and its volume, even though we may be only seeing a 
part of it. As for knowing the manner in which distant groups of 
neurons communicate with each other in order to synchronize with 
each other... it is a mystery. In any case, it all occurs as if, 
in a fraction of a second, our brain reconstructs a puzzle in 
order to provide us all the information we need to describe or 
manipulate the object perceived. In a given case, it may be a 
matter of grasping the bottle correctly in order to pour out its 
contents for the purpose of drinking them. More intriguing is 
the observation made by neurologist Rodolfo Llinas of the 
University of New York. By means of a magnetoencephalograph--to 
date, he is one of the rare persons to possess one--this 
researcher scrutinized a subject's brain as he asked the subject 
to play mentally with cubes placed before him. The rule was 
simple: Imagine in space the displacement an isolated cube would 
have to undergo in order to fit in with other cubes. Astonished, 
the American professor found that the displacement of activity 
among the neurons described a rotation within the brain 
corresponding to that of the cube! 
  Another imaging technique, positron emission tomography 
[PET], has enabled other astonishing discoveries. In France, 
Bernard Mazoyer and his team use this method on the human brain. 
It is an indirect method of observing neuronal activity by 
measuring the augmentation of blood flows arriving at the cells 
in action. The team has thus been able to display the different 
forms of thought that may traverse the brain! The nerve centers 
mobilized within the brain differ depending on whether an image 
or a movement is represented. It further appears that when one 
thinks of a movement, the motor-neuron zones concerned by the 
movement are also activated. It was possible to observe this 
with respect to eye movement. In Great Britain, a team of 
neurobiologists observed the same phenomenon by asking a group 
of subjects to mentally associate ideas. The motor-neuron zone 
controlling the articulation of language was activated as if 
they were preparing to pronounce words. These recent 
observations thus corroborate Norio Fujimaki's idea according to 
which the boundary between thinking a word and pronouncing it is 
very thin. They should also provide support to Terry Hambrecht 
and William Heetderks. These two American scientists at the 
National Institute of Neurological Disorders at Bethesda, 
Maryland, see the day approaching when the degree of disability 
of the severely motor-handicapped can be reduced by means of 
brain implants. The idea, unlike that of Fujitsu's work, is not 
to base the approach on orders emitted by thought itself, but 
rather on signals captured at a lower stage: that of the motor 
neuron centers that command the muscles to execute this or that 
action. ``Inoperative muscles can be short-circuited by 
detouring the information directly to a robotic prosthesis,'' 
said the two Americans last September in OMNI magazine. In a 
way, the bionic human... 
<H5>  [Box p 18]: </H5>
<H5>  Attention! Danger! </H5>
  It has happened before, with the nuclear among others: Every 
discovery has a double cutting edge. So let us imagine that 
Fujitsu's machine has now been developed. To improve it, so that 
it will still better serve our purposes, the engineers will 
undoubtedly rack their brains to teach it to decipher notions of 
greater subtlety than ``plus, minus'' and ``yes, no.'' To begin 
with, the obedient machine could be transformed into an 
implacable interrogator of our most intimate thoughts. Into a 
judge of Truth, if, in the best of cases, this diabolical 
machine were in the hands of Justice. In the worst case, one 
dare not imagine its possible uses... The pilfering of our 
secret gardens. The violation of our psyche. An international 
ethics committee would undoubtedly be formed to circumscribe its 
use to noble ends. But circumventions are always possible, and 
Big Brother is not all that distant. For that matter, even 
before reaching the point of no return, Fujitsu's seemingly 
laudable invention raises several questions. What about human 
operators who, to run these third-generation machines, will have 
to clutter their minds with operational, codified thoughts? A 
way of getting humans to think like the machine. Some progress! 
<H5>  [Box p 21]: </H5>
<H5>  When Fiction Outdoes Reality </H5>
  In 1937, novelist Andre Maurois wrote ``La machine a 
lire les pensees'' [The Thought Reader]. 
  ``(...) A Doctor Max, by placing subjects in insulating, 
coffin-like enclosures, has been able to capture and amplify 
cerebral emissions (...), and I wonder if the image of the brain 
could be captured by some sort of apparatus... - In sum, you 
would like to film dreams?... - Exactly...'' 
  ``Capture and amplify cerebral emissions,'' ``coffin-like 
enclosures''... In describing this scene in 1937, in a 
science-fiction novel, ``La machine a lire les pensees,'' Andre 
Maurois revealed a true visionary mind. His description is the 
very likes of the principle of the magnetoencephalograph, a tool 
that serves today to record the brain's activity! 
  The author goes this principle one better, a few lines 
later, 
describing in detail what present-day imaging techniques have 
only now enabled us to discover: That the mental evocation of a 
word is accompanied by the activation of the motor neuron that 
controls the speaking of the word: 
  ``(...) Thinking man's interior language is a very defined 
physical phenomenon (...). It is translated by movements of the 
tongue and larynx... - Really? I would have thought that the 
subject had the illusion of pronouncing words, but remained 
silent. - You would have been wrong... To realize this, you 
need only observe yourself for an instant (...). Think of a 
sentence, any sentence... - It's done... - What is that 
sentence? - A verse by Racine (...): ``The day is no longer 
pure...'' - When you thought of that sentence, did you hear it? 
- Yes... I still hear it... - Where do you hear it? - Let me 
listen... I hear it in my mouth, and more exactly toward the top 
of my palate, at the base of my nose. - Think of a range of 
tones... Do you not notice that if you sing it mentally your 
organs take different positions depending on the notes? - Give 
me a moment... Yes, that is true... - Can you think of a tones 
that is too high for your voice? - I don't think so.... 
<H5>  [Box p 22]: </H5>
<H5>  `An Exceptionally Ambitious Project' </H5>
  The reaction of Marc Guilliaume, member of the France 
Telecom's Scientific Council, and professor of applied economics 
at Paris-Dauphine University. 
  The research on ``silent speech'' being pursued by the 
Fujitsu laboratories is exceptionally ambitious and merits our 
full attention in many respects. 
  The methodological and technical difficulties that must be 
surmounted are immense and give the project a science-fiction 
dimension. By permitting the researchers a high degree of 
freedom to explore such bold trails, the Japanese industrialists 
are showing that they can support basic research and long-term 
innovations. 
  This said, what is surprising is the striking contrast 
between the ambitious scope of this research and the modest 
scope of its applications, at least as they have been unveiled 
to date. The control (specifically, voice control) of computers, 
and-more generally, the man-machine interface, have greatly 
advanced over the past several years. 
  The real object of this research is another: It is aimed at 
improved recognition of certain human thought processes. 
Initially, the study of the waves emitted by the brain could 
yield medical and neurolinguistic applications. Just as research 
on data processing of speech opens the way to 
envisioning--beyond initial applications in the area of control 
of automatons--a full-fledged mastery of linguistic 
intelligence, and, for example, automated translation in real 
time. From a more general viewpoint, all research on the 
functioning of the brain can yield a more refined understanding 
of the thought processes, another ``model'' of the human 
intelligence. 
  Indeed, the Fujitsu project appears to extend, quite boldly, 
the recently postulated model of an artificial intelligence 
based on neuronal networks. The performance capabilities of 
conventional computers have become mind-boggling, as much for 
their power as for their speed. They are bringing profound 
changes to the conditioning of writing, reading, storage, and 
communication. They are based, however, on intellectual 
mechanisms to which we therefore cannot attribute the status of 
human or even animal intelligence. We know, for example, that 
the most sophisticated robots are still a long way from 
possessing the learning capabilities that are within the range 
of living organisms endowed with a modest number of neurons 
(machines calculate very well, but are incapable of executing 
the simplest of gestures...). On the other hand, by way of 
simulation, trial and error, and interactive learning, neuronal 
devices are beginning to attain notably better performance 
capabilities. The Fujitsu project evokes dreams of automatons 
equipped with sensors that would learn to simulate certain 
mental processes of the human brain. These SNR [Simulated 
Neuronal Network] automatons would hark back, paradoxically, to 
the historic old tradition of the analog automatons, those that, 
from Abbe Mical to Vaucanson and von Kempelen, simulated the 
human voice, gestures, and appearance. But here, the ultimate 
stage would be the simulation of human thought. 
  The prospectus of an analog intelligence, of a vengeance 
wreaked on today's computers by SNR automatons, is a very 
uncertain one, and in any case goes beyond the already very 
ambitious Fujitsu program. It sees this project as perhaps the 
first step toward the realization of dreams often explored by 
the science-fiction writers: The brain no longer able to ensure 
the inviolability of thought, of one's innermost being, thought 
is recorded and preserved, or restored to the brain that emitted 
it, or transferred to another brain. And thus, ultimately, by 
the end of time, the end of the separation between individual 
consciences, and access to a kind of immortality! 

