BFN 

<F P=106> [By Katherine Espina] </F>
  [Text] Prospects of finding oil and gas in Mindoro have 
brightened as oil and gas readings were recorded over the 
weekend, the Department of Energy (DOE) said yesterday. 
  Energy Undersecretary Rufino Bomasang said in the drilling 
bulletin released yesterday that Anderman Smith Philippines 
Inc., operator of the Cambayan well in onshore Mindoro, 
encountered gas readings of propane at various intervals while 
drilling. 
  Bomasang said the U.S.-based Anderman Smith has drilled the 
Cambayan-1 well to a depth of 6,285 feet. The operator will 
continue drilling this week. It is targeting to reach a depth 
of 8,000 feet. 
  Anderman Smith is slated to drill two wells in Mindoro 
within 
the year requiring some $2 million in investment. The second 
well will be drilled right after the first well. 
  Anderman Smith's partners in the exploration of the Cambayan 
area in Mindoro are the PNOC [Philippine National Oil Company] 
Exploration Corp., The Philodrill Corp., Basic Petroleum and 
Minerals Corp., Terra Grande Resources and Exploration Inc., 
Vulcan Industrial and Mining Corp., and Anglo-Philippines Oil 
and Mining Corp. 
  Still on oil exploration, Bomasang said the Australian oil 
firm Ampolex Ltd. spudded the Villaba-1 well in offshore Leyte 
last 1 May. Its drill ship, the "Ocean Clipper," has drilled to 
a depth of 1,723 feet. Ampolex is scheduled to drill to a depth 
of 6,234 feet. 
  At the same time, the French Government through Trans Energy 
has signed an agreement with the Energy Department of conduct a 
technical and feasibility study for the setting up of a 
liquefied natural gas (LNG) facility in Luzon. [sentence as 
published] 
  Bomasang said the project will not entail any cost on the 
part of the government. 
  Trans Energy according to Bomasang, will also provide a gas 
market profile for Luzon. He said that it was the French 
Government that broached the idea of undertaking such a 
feasibility study. 
  The French company has started a preliminary survey among 
economic planners, policy makers, and different agencies 
involved in power generation to assess the technical and 
economic feasibility of setting up an LNG tanker facility. 
  The DOE is planning to tap natural gas as a source of energy 
by the turn of the century especially with the ongoing 
exploration at the Camago-Malampaya field in northwest Palawan. 
  Shell Philippine Exploration and Occidental Petroleum are 
currently drilling a well at Camago-Malampaya to confirm 
reserves of some two to five trillion cubic feet of gas. 

