Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Silvio J. Mendiandua: "Cuba: In Search of </F>
Economic Efficiency"] 
  [Text] Havana, [no date as received] (PL) -- National 
economy, efficiency, and profits are the topics most discussed 
in Cuban life on the occasion of the opening chapter of the 
Workers Assemblies, unprecedented in other democracies, to 
search for solutions to the island's economic problems. 
  These meetings consist of implementing an analysis of the 
economy, at all the country's work centers of the respective 
enterprises to contribute ideas and initiatives to making them 
more productive and efficient. 
  At these meetings, convened by the Cuban Workers Federation 
(CTC) since January, the workers also discussed serious 
problems, such as excess money in circulation, equal to more 
than $11 billion, and the excessive amount of personnel at a 
number of enterprises, a problem which some sources estimate 
affects approximately 60 percent of the State-owned enterprises. 
  Deputies to the National Assembly (parliament) participate 
in 
the meetings, contribute information to the work centers, and 
receive the workers' proposals and initiatives, which they must 
take into consideration during debates at the upcoming 
extraordinary Assembly session, aimed at adopting measures that 
will guide the nation's economic future. 
  According to CTC sources, this process is called the Workers 
Parliament and will be carried out at approximately 80,000 work 
centers through 15 March. 
  The principles that serve as the basis for this measure, 
which has no precedent anywhere in the world according to 
official Cuban sources, are participative democracy and the 
enormous potential of the multiple intelligences involved. 
  The Cuban economy entered a period of harsh difficulties 
following the disappearance of the European socialist bloc and 
the disintegration of the Soviet Union, with whom Cuba had 
commercial relations that were very beneficial for the island. 
  The Soviet petroleum supply, amounting to almost all of the 
island's consumption, abruptly dropped from 13 million tons per 
year to less than 50 percent and the country had to restructure 
its foreign trade, which provided 85 percent of the raw 
materials to industry and agriculture. 
  At the end of 1992, another obstacle hampered Havana's 
economic plans. The Torricelli Law, ratified in October 1992, 
prohibited subsidiaries of U.S. enterprises' in third countries 
to trade with the island. 
  According to studies conducted by specialized U.S. agencies, 
trade with Cuba, which reached $500 million with these firms at 
one time, was left futureless and the trade embargo tightened. 
On 26 July 1993, Cuban authorities announced the adoption of a 
series of measures to reactivate the national economy and 
reinsert the country into the world economy. 
  The plan included new incentives for foreign investments to 
attract capital, markets, technology, and raw materials. 
Additional incentives were granted for visits and the remittance 
of funds by Cubans living abroad. 
  As for the structural aspect of the economy, important 
decisions were made, such as the creation of the basic 
cooperative production units, which decentralized the national 
agriculture sector, and the self-employed workers law, which 
encouraged the production of certain goods which the state 
cannot provide. 
  The new offensive is aimed at improving the financial 
situation in 1994, eliminate excess personnel, increase work 
productivity, and seek new production incentives. 
  Participants in the majority of the work meetings held this 
week have proposed increasing the price of nonessential 
articles, such as rum and cigarettes, charging admission to 
sports and cultural events, and eliminating subsidies to 
unprofitable enterprises. 
  According to local media, the participants also spoke about 
the need to establish greater control mechanisms to prevent the 
illegal diversion of state property assets. 
  Other agreements deal with the labor unions' request to 
participate in future processes to account for personnel. They 
also requested the measures be adopted in a gradual manner. 

