Language: <F P=105> Urdu </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Farah Rafi: "Drug Smuggling Must Be Stopped"] </F>
  [Text] Humans have used narcotics prepared from leaves, 
grains, and flowers from natural plants for centuries. The 
practice of preparing and selling on a commercial scale started 
with the advent of the capitalist system. The investors get so 
involved in their desire for making profits that they do not 
even think that their trade is like poison to human health. 
  The capitalist system started during the British era. They 
formed the East India Company for trade which took over Bihar 
and Bengal in 1757 and gradually controlled the whole of India. 
It started cultivation of poppy used for making opium. The 
British sold opium to the Chinese people and they became 
addicted to it. Their goal was to get the Chinese addicted to 
opium and then get silver in exchange. They continued to sell 
opium to the Chinese for this purpose and became rich by getting 
silver in exchange. They used to post attractive posters to sell 
opium and to increase the desire to purchase this fatal poison. 
Slowly the number of drug addicts in China increased. The 
Chinese, seeing this situation, rebelled against the British. 
This is known as the Opium War. 
  A similar situation was created in America. The Christians 
under pressure did impose restrictions on making, selling, and 
drinking liquor. However, it caused the start of smuggling and 
many persons got involved in it. This work could not be done 
without the help of the government. The investors involved in 
this trade made the officials and agents partners in it and 
smuggling by ships and airplanes began to prosper. This trade 
has expanded even to Pakistan now. We have been reading in the 
newspapers that when the Afghans came to Pakistan because of the 
Soviet-Afghanistan war, they brought opium and heroin with them. 
They sowed poppy in the northern part of Sarhad and began to 
obtain opium from it. Not only this, they began to make heroin 
from opium later. This was used in our country and has grown to 
a dangerous proportion now. The truth is opposed to it. The 
people in Sarhad and Peshawar had not permitted the Afghans to 
cross the border. How could they let them grow poppy? It was the 
locals who had started cultivating poppy there and gradually the 
drug trade began to expand. Strong voices were raised against 
this trade under every government. Seminars were held and 
rallies taken out. The persons who were arrested for being 
involved in this trade were not Afghan refugees. Similarly, when 
"Operation cleanup" was carried out in Sohrab Goth in Karachi, 
the people who were arrested there were not related to Afghan 
refugees. Therefore, it is unfair to say that Afghan refugees 
brought drugs to Pakistan. The drug trade was carried out on a 
small scale in Pakistan in the past, however, the hunger of 
these traders was not satisfied and they started to smuggle 
drugs abroad. In this context, high officials cooperate with 
them and they also became rich because billions of dollars are 
involved in heroin smuggling. The smuggling business created the 
"drug mafia." 
  Drugs from Pakistan are smuggled to the United States, Saudi 
Arabia, and several other countries. The United States has been 
putting pressure on Pakistan since the end of the Afghan war to 
stop drug smuggling. The Saudi leaders are also demanding the 
same thing. In our own country, seminars, meeting, rallies, and 
special anti-drug days are being observed. However, all this is 
useless. 
  If we look around ourselves, we will see people with sheets 
wrapped around their heads using drugs at bus stops, parks, and 
streets in large numbers. Around schools and colleges various 
edibles will have opium or heroin mixed in them. No one is there 
to catch the culprits. At times, there are news reports of 
arrests of addicts and drug dealers, however, the whole business 
starts all over again just like the old adage, "the 
story-tellers write about China." The drug addicts are admitted 
into hospitals and control their habit to an extent, but when 
they leave the hospital, various people catch them and make them 
addicts again. 
  The government must stop heroin production and it is 
necessary to stop growing poppy. The farmers who grow poppy 
should be encouraged to grow grains and fruits to increase our 
agricultural production. In addition, drug smugglers should be 
levied with heavy fines and given exemplary punishments. They 
should not be let go just by paying fines so that they start 
their business again and they get used to the habit of "paying 
the bribe and buying freedom." 

