BFN 

<F P=106> [By Laura Beck and agencies] </F>
  [Text] Tiananmen Square "black hand" Wang Juntao left 
China yesterday after being released from jail to gain medical 
treatment abroad for severe hepatitis. Mr Wang's mother, Ge 
Yumei, said by phone that her son -- sentenced in 1991 to 13 
years' jail, in the heaviest sentence given to 1989 
pro-democracy activists -- was put on an early morning flight. 
Officials had arrived unexpectedly at her house at about 7 am 
and driven her to the airport, where she briefly met her son, 
she said, adding that she was unclear who had arranged or who 
had paid for the trip. Hong Kong legislator Lau Chin-shek said 
Mr Wang was last night on a flight bound for New York, where his 
wife Hou Xiaotian has been studying since last year. XINHUA NEWS 
AGENCY quoted a justice ministry spokesman as saying Mr Wang was 
released on bail "on account of the conditions of his illness". 
  A spokesman for the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of the 
Patriotic Democratic Movement in China, Lee Cheuk-yan, last 
night said: "We welcome such a move, but we are disappointed 
that he is a chip in MFN (most-favoured-nation) renewal. Just 
one move to benefit one dissident does not mean the human rights 
situation has changed in China," he said. Legislator Cheung 
Man-kwong said: "The main reason for Wang's release is because 
of MFN. We are sorry the Chinese government will use our people 
to get MFN." Mr Lau said: "I think Wang's release is for 
economic reasons. Because there is no freedom of speech in 
China, people voicing their opinions will continue to be 
arrested." 
  However, fellow dissidents welcomed Mr Wang's release, 
saying 
it appeared in part to be aimed at improving ties with 
Washington ahead of the decision which must be made by 3 June on 
the renewal of China's MFN trade status -- which United States 
President Bill Clinton has linked to human rights improvements. 
"This is the result of (U.S. Secretary of State) Warren 
Christopher's visit to China," Shanghai dissident Bao Ge said, 
noting that Mr Wang's case was highlighted on a list handed to 
the Chinese authorities by the US delegation in March. 
  But the decision to release Mr Wang at a time when the 
authorities are launching a concerted crackdown on dissidents 
also suggests the condition of his liver disease, contracted in 
jail before his trial, is now critical. The authorities had 
previously ignored lobbying by Ms Hou for her husband's release 
for treatment, and dismissed her claims that his illness was 
life-threatening. She left China in September. Mr Wang had 
been in a military hospital since June but Ms Hou said in 
October that the effectiveness of his treatment had been minimal 
because strict limits imposed on his freedom of movement 
continued to take a serious toll on his health. Ms Hou said she 
had been struck by his sharp deterioration and emaciation at 
their last meeting in September. 
  Mr Wang and fellow dissident Chen Ziming were labelled "the 
blackest of the black hands" behind the Tiananmen Square 
democracy movement and each was sentenced to 13 years for 
"counterrevolutionary propaganda and incitement". Both men had 
run a reformist think-tank associated with Zhao Ziyang, the 
former protegee of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping, who was 
ousted as communist party general secretary after the 
pro-democracy protests were violently crushed by the army. 
  Mr Cheung a member of the United Democrats and the Hong Kong 
Alliance, said they were concerned that the Chinese government 
had "kicked" Mr Wang out and would stop him returning, as 
happened with labour activist Han Dongfang. Mr Han, who spent 
22 months in jail for his role in the 1989 protests, has been 
stranded in Hong Kong since August, when he made his first 
attempt to go home after being sent abroad a year earlier for 
treatment for his tuberculosis contracted in prison. 
  Mr Wang's mother said: "I'm happy for him to go abroad to 
cure his illness, but I'm unhappy because I don't know when I'll 
see him again." 

