Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "'Ndrangheta Informant Warns of </F>
Explosives"] 
  [Text] Reggio Calabria, 6 Jan (ANSA) -- Police in the 
Calabrian capital were searching for 350 kg of explosives that a 
'Ndrangheta [Calabrian Mafia-style organization] informant had 
warned them were going to be used in an attack on a Reggio 
magistrate. 
  That search was concentrated today in an area near the 
Ionian 
coast about 30 km from the capital, investigators said. 
  A likely target of the reported plan was Giuseppe Verzera, 
assistant district prosecutor of Reggio, who has conducted some 
of the most important inquiries into organized crime in that 
region. 
  Police said they had obtained the information from several 
members of 'Ndrangheta gangs who had decided to cooperate with 
the authorities, including one informant who only recently began 
to talk to police. 
  This source told investigators that the explosive (of the 
same type used in deadly car bombs that blew up in Florence, 
Milan and Rome last spring and summer) was in the hands of the 
Calabrian crime organization as well as how they intended to 
employ it. 
  In a search last July, carabinieri found 50 kg of explosives 
hidden in a field near Montebello Ionico, an area considered to 
be under the control of the Iamonte clan. That crime group was 
recently badly hit in a major dragnet on December 6, under the 
coordination of Verzera. 
  The growing role of the 'Ndrangheta in national organized 
crime circuits, both alone and in cooperation with the Sicilian 
mafia was underlined in a report on crime filed by the Anti 
Mafia Investigating Directorate (DIA) to parliament yesterday. 
  The national anti-crime police unit said that the Calabrian 
'Ndrangheta has been expanding rapidly since 1991, when Sicilian 
Cosa Nostra representatives intervened among warring Calabrian 
rings to negotiate a `pax mafiosa' that led to a steep decline 
in inter-clan murders and a much improved capacity for illicit 
business. 
  (DIA cited the 20 percent in Calabria's gangland killings in 
1992, with inter-gang deaths continuing to fall this year.) 
  Investigators linked the 'Ndrangheta's spread to the tight 
network of secret masonic lodges in the region of Calabria, 
first brought to the attention of law enforcement officials by 
the Palmi public prosecutor's office, then under the direction 
of Judge Agostino Cordova. One third of all southern Freemasons 
live in Calabria, investigators estimate, and they are stepping 
up their inquiries into the links between criminal activity and 
the secret and semi-secret lodges. 
  In the province of Reggio Calabria alone, some 3,500 persons 
have been identified as 'Ndrangheta members, while the whole 
region numbers 155 clans and at least 5,500 working for 
organized crime. Catanzaro and Cosenza were cited as other major 
crime centers. 
  'Ndrangheta activities include extortion (with 368 related 
cases of arson in 1992), usury, kidnapping and drug traffic. The 
DIA report cites the spread of Calabrian crime activities to 
Northern Italy as well as abroad to Canada, the U.S. and 
Australia. 
  In the past six months, 890 detentions or arrests have been 
ordered, including 524 regarding the 'Ndrangheta, as compared to 
269 orders regarding the Sicilian mafia, 62 involving the Sacra 
Corona Unita [United Holy Crown -- Pugliese Mafia-style 
organization] of Puglia and 35 involving the Camorra. 

