BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Dr. 'Abd-al-Karim al-Iryani, Yemeni minister </F>
of planning and development, by Muhammad al-Aswad of Cairo Voice 
of the Arabs radio in Sanaa; date not given--recorded] 
  [Text] [Al-Aswad] In the name of God, the merciful, the 
compassionate. Brother Arabs, I greet you from Sanaa, the 
capital of sisterly the Republic of Yemen, at the beginning of 
this interview with Dr. 'Abd-al-Karim al-Iryani, minister of 
planning and development in sisterly Yemen. His Excellency Dr. 
'Abd-al-Karim al- Iryani, you are welcome on the airwaves of 
Voice of the Arabs. 
  [Al-Iryani] Thank you very much. You are welcome to Sanaa. 
  [Al-Aswad] Dr. 'Abd-al-Karim al-Iryani, we begin this 
interview by analyzing the Yemeni political position on the 
secessionist move announced by 'Ali Salim al-Bid in Aden? 
  [Al-Iryani] The Yemeni political position has been expressed 
by the brother chairman of the Presidential Council, who 
stressed that any dealing or sympathy with this secessionist 
move will mean antagonizing 12 or 14 million Yemenis. Also, I 
believe that any dealing with this move will mean a definite 
desire to continue this war. We have heard continuous calls for 
halting this war. Now, any dealing with this move will 
contravene any call for halting the war, for this will mean a 
definite and strong desire to make this war go on. 
  [Al-Aswad] Dr. 'Abd-al-Karim al-Iryani, many efforts were 
made to contain the crisis before it exploded on the military 
level. Among these efforts are the efforts of Egypt and 
President Mubarak. Could you brief us on the yet undisclosed 
secrets of these efforts? 
  [Al-Iryani] In fact, among the most important secrets of 
these efforts is what I have said to my brother and colleague, 
'Amr Musa, in Cairo last April. I clearly said to him: Unless 
the teeth of the military on both sides are removed, you cannot 
prevent the war. Our colleagues in Aden refuse to withdraw the 
forces from the former so-called boundaries in accordance with 
Paragraph 4 of Part 1 of the pledge and accord document. If 
they insist on their refusal, I stress to you, brother 'Amr, 
that this will mean they want war. I would like to stress that 
they resorted to war when they came under intolerable pressure 
to withdraw from the former so-called boundaries. I said this 
at the last session of the Council of Ministers I attended in 
April, two weeks before the war. I declared that 
procrastinating the withdrawal of these troops will lead to war. 
I clearly told my brothers and colleagues in the Socialist 
Party inside the conferences room of the Council of Ministers 
that the absence of the defense minister from that session in 
particular was a war decision. I entreated them not to allow 
matters to fall in the hands of those who seek war. 
Regrettably, the appeal fell on deaf ears. Since that day, I 
have not entered the Council of Ministers' conferences room to 
attend a meeting in the presence of my colleagues in the 
Socialist Party. 
  [Al-Aswad] Now that what was feared has taken place, that 
the 
war has broken out, and that the secession has been declared, do 
you envisage a possibility for returning to dialogue and 
resolving the current political crisis in Yemen as a whole 
through dialogue, even by beginning to implement the positive 
aspects of the pledge and accord document? 
  [Al-Iryani] First, let me tell you that secession was a 
positive step as much as it was a negative one. 
  [Al-Aswad] What does this mean? 
  [Al-Iryani] First, it means that 'Ali al-Bid has announced a 
name for a state that has no origin. You know that among the 
basic foundations of a state are land, people, and authority. 
It is an authority similar to the royalists in the 1960s. It 
still has a radio station and [words indistinct] a television, 
but it is an authority of [word indistinct] royalists. 
Congratulations to the greedy ones. Second, he relieved us of 
an intense embarrassment in front of some of our colleagues who 
used to blame us for not giving al-Bid sufficient time. He has 
revealed his true intentions with which he started the crisis. 
  The third point is that he gave the brothers in limited 
areas, particularly Aden, which are under the control of the 
party a chance to say yes to unity and no to secession. 
  The fourth point is that it allowed us to [words 
indistinct]. 
We were fighting for some two weeks, or close to three weeks; 
the armies were fighting in the name of unity. This [words 
indistinct], but today fighting is between the unionist and the 
separatist. This will bring war closer to an end, but on 
condition that no state commits the mistake of recognition. 
  [Al-Aswad] Dr. 'Abd-al-Karim, Yemeni minister of development 
and planning, do you frankly expect international recognition of 
the entity that 'Ali Salim al-Bid is seeking to establish on 
part of the Yemeni territory in the southern and eastern 
governorates? 
  [Al-Iryani] Frankly, I do not expect any recognition by any 
state, unless a fraternal Arab state commits that crime. But if 
Nicaragua recognizes it, congratulations to them then. 
  [Al-Aswad] Dr. 'Abd-al-Karim al-Iryani, minister of 
development and planning in fraternal Yemen, one last question: 
London BBC radio says there is a division at the top of the 
power echelon in Sanaa and that you are one of those who differ 
with the presidency in opinion. 
  [Al-Iryani] In fact, London Radio these days reminds me of 
the Near East Radio that transmitted from Cyprus during the Suez 
War. Many listeners may recall how the Near East Radio acted 
during the Suez War. Very regrettably, London Radio is today an 
exact copy. I gave an interview to the English-language Service 
of the London Radio two nights ago. I was asked: You intend to 
enter Aden by force and dropped every political option. I 
interrupted him and said: This is untrue. We are ready to hold 
dialogue and reach agreement with the unionists in the Socialist 
Party. The unionist in the Socialist Party knows what we mean. 
Of course, he distorted my words and said this is evidence of a 
division within the party. But this decision was made by the 
first session of the Joint Meeting on the first day of 'Id 
al-Adha [21 May], that all of us who have connections to the 
foreign media should announce the opening of dialogue with the 
unionists in the Socialist Party. The unionists should announce 
their rejection of [words indistinct]. Therefore, and in answer 
to your question, the door of dialogue is open to whoever says 
no to secession. He who says no to secession in the Socialist 
Party, will be welcome. The door of dialogue is open and 
everything can be discussed under the canopy of one Yemeni 
state, one Yemeni legitimacy, and one Yemeni Army. 
  [Al-Aswad] Dr. 'Abd-al-Karim al-Iryani, you have criticized 
the Egyptian declaration. Why? 
  [Al-Iryani] I still have some criticism because talk was on 
northern and southern Yemen. It could be forgivable to use 
northern and southern forces, but to say North Yemen and South 
Yemen is, in my opinion, prohibited. I would also like to say 
that the all world media are saying fighting between the North 
and South. Let me tell you that certain units whose cadre is 
considered to be wholly southern were the spearhead in Mukayris, 
Shabwah, and al-Dali' because they were fighting in familiar 
terrain. The forces whose cadre is northern are less familiar. 
The spearhead on the main battle fronts consisted of forces 
mainly from the southern and eastern governorates. I regret to 
announce that the commander of the Artillery Brigade from Abyan, 
who spearheaded the advance toward Shabwah, was martyred three 
(?days) ago. 
  [Al-Aswad] Brother Arabs, at the end of this interview with 
Dr. 'Abd-Karim al-Iryani, minister of planning and development 
in fraternal Yemen, in his house in Sanaa, we thank you. We 
also thank him and welcome him always on the airwaves of Voice 
of the Arabs. Thank you Dr. 'Abd-al-Karim. 
  [Al-Iryani] Thank you very much and I welcome you once 
again. 
  [Al-Aswad] Thank you dear listeners. This is Muhammad 
al-Aswad from Sanaa. 

