Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "EU Budget: Members Split Over Delors </F>
II Package"; as released by Brussels Euroscope EIS Database] 
  [Text] European Union [EU] countries were reported on March 
8 to be at loggerheads over the budgetary adjustments tied in 
with the Edinburgh Summit agreement on how to fund EU activities 
over the 1993-99 period ("Delors II" package of financial 
measures) and the disagreements were particularly acrimonious 
over the adjustments to farm spending. France wants an 
agreement to be wrought before Union membership for Austria, 
Sweden, Finland and Norway as this would provide French farmers 
with guarantees about funding for the agricultural sector. 
There was still some hope of clearing this matter of all 
obstacles before the end of the March 8 Council of Foreign 
Ministers in Brussels, for Ministers were debating the subject 
afresh just as European Report was going to press at the end of 
the afternoon. 
  The most prickly problem is to do with the money available 
for the Common Agricultural Policy [CAP], as this is a highly 
controversial subject for France and southern Member States. 
Ministers are at odds on three major questions left unanswered 
by the political decision-making at Edinburgh in December 
1992: 

  -  The main thing is to fix the voting rules - unanimity 
or qualified majority voting - to change the farm speeding 
ceiling - (the agricultural guideline) if there is not enough 
money in the pot to cover all the needs. This problem is likely 
to arise come enlargement day, for the guideline which is 
calculated on the basis of the EU GNP will then increase. 
Sticklers for budgetary rectitude, the UK and the Netherlands 
are calling for unanimous voting, whereas France and the 
southerners want qualified majority decision-making. 
  -  Another 
vexatious issue is to do with the procedures for using the 
monetary reserve provided to offset any increased CAP costs as a 
result of monetary fluctuations. 
  -  Lastly, Italy is seeking 
financial guarantees that extra costs tied in with running 
market organisations for Mediterranean produce will be 
chargeable to the farm budget. 
  Less prickly subjects are the review of the Union budget 
funding system (own resources). The main problem here is a 
German one, for this country is facing a wave of protests from 
its citizens who feel that the Germany contribution to the EU 
Budget is far too high. Germany is calling for more transparency 
in the application of costs and tougher controls over the 
formula for allocating expenditure. Bonn upholds the idea of 
creating an EU Budget supervisory body, but this has foundered 
on the misgivings of several delegations that point out that the 
job is already being done by the Court of Auditors. 
  Less confrontational is the issue of budgetary balances. 
Several countries want money left unspent in the Budget to be 
carried forward two years instead of one. The review of the EU 
Budget funding system proposes that as from January 1, 1995 the 
VAT [value-added tax] base should be reduced from 55 to 50 
percent of GNP and the VAT call-up rate should be cut from 1.4 
to 1 percent for Spain, Greece, Portugal and Ireland. These 
changes will on the other hand taper off between 1995 and 1999 
in the case of the other Union countries. Italy dislikes the 
review decided upon by the European Council, for it means an 
significant increase in the country's Budget contribution. 

