Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Sarajevo Radio Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Network in Serbo-Croatian at 0900 GMT on 2 March carries in its 
regular 9-minute newscast the following reports on the fighting 
in the republic. 
  Maglaj correspondent Hajrudin Sermic reports that "the 
bloody 
Maglaj drama continues today. Since the early morning hours the 
chetnik weapons from all sides are targeting buildings, 
residential areas, civilians. This is hell in the Maglaj 
concentration camp in which Mladic's bloodthirsty criminals are 
killing innocent civilians. In less than one hour, and up until 
the time of filing this report over 300 tank, howitzer, and 
mortar shells have landed on the town. Systematic fire from 
four tanks, two howitzers, and dozens of guns is being directed 
at the northern, new part of Maglaj that was build just before 
the war. Pragas, antiaircraft machine guns, and snipers are 
also being used against the town." Sermic wonders why the UN 
Protection Forces [UNPROFOR] has made no attempt to enter the 
town and convey to the world the truth about the unheard-of 
suffering of the civilian population. 
  From Bihac Mirza Sadikovic reports that "the Serbian 
aggressors overnight continued their bestial shelling of Bihac 
and neighboring areas. [Words indistinct], Brekovici, Srbljani 
and all the other places situated on the right bank of the Una 
River. The Bihac industrial zone and the outskirts of the Cazin 
Commune continue to be the target of howitzers, tanks, and 
mortars. They have only one objective -- to destroy everything. 
Moreover, the chetniks continue to systematically shell the 
defense positions on Grabez and the Grmusko-Srbljanksi plateau. 
A great number of defenders have been killed overnight. It is 
obvious that this a preparation for fresh attempts at infantry 
breakthroughs." 
  Reporting from the Bosna Operative Group Press Center in 
Zavidovici, correspondent Viktor Boban says that "in the past 24 
hours, the Serbian aggressor has intensified his activity on the 
Zavidovici free territory. Indiscriminate fire from hill guns 
and antiaircraft guns, supported by 82-mm and 120-mm mortars, 
resulted in over 100 shells landing on the villages in the 
Krivaja River valley, while a 122-mm howitzer shell landed on 
Zavidovici. Antiaircraft weapons from Blizna and [name 
indistinct] pounded the villages near Ruzic and Dolna. In the 
late afternoon hours [1 Mar] overflights of chetnik helicopters 
were registered. The flights continued overnight on the Mt. 
Ozren-Zavidovici route. A veritable motorcade of enemy 
motorized vehicles from Mt. Ozren toward the Maglaj and 
Zavidovici fronts went on until the morning hours. We wonder 
whether this means that the heavy weaponry from Sarajevo is 
being transported to these areas. This morning, Dubravica was 
marked by intense antiaircraft and infantry arms' fire." 
  Zvornik correspondent Nijaz Banjanovic reports that "the 
aggressor's strong artillery attack at the entire Zvornik free 
territory went on all night. Using tanks and mortars of all 
caliber, they pounded residential areas and civilian targets in 
Zaseok, Nezuk, Kobilici, and Vitinica which resulted in immense 
material damage. Ten tank shells, fired from Kitovnice, landed 
on Zaseok overnight, while the chetniks fired another 10 shells 
this morning. Luckily, there were no casualties. The chetniks 
are targeting almost all of our positions with antiaircraft 
weaponry and snipers. The defense lines are stable." 

