BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Roberto Petrini: "Right Critical: Governor Must </F>
Not Interfere"] 
  [Excerpt] Rome -- Berlusconi's team, having been criticized 
by the Bank of Italy, issued an irritated reply, and proceeded 
to accelerate the launch of its program for the first 100 days. 
Pensions, inflation, fiscal pressure: The three warnings that 
Bank of Italy Governor Antonio Fazio issued to the majority 
yesterday were received with embarrassment by the government 
circles closest to Prime Minister Berlusconi. The response from 
Forza Italia, entrusted to lower house floor leader Raffaele 
Della Valle, was a sharp one: "I express reservations," he said 
a few hours after the Bank of Italy meeting, "concerning the 
parts of the `Final Considerations' that relate directly to 
Parliament's and the government's sphere of responsibility. I 
am referring in particular to the references to such important 
sectoral policies as those on welfare and public works." AN's 
[National Alliance] Under Secretary for Industry Francesco 
Pontone was firm: "The Bank of Italy must not believe that it 
can influence the government by telling it what it should or 
should not do." The following sharp comment came from 
Institutional Reforms Minister Francesco Speroni: "A pointless 
list of obvious things." Minister for Relations with Parliament 
Giuliano Ferrara was surprised too, especially by Fazio's 
warning about the danger of inflation if it is decided to 
stimulate recovery by favoring only consumption. "The 
government," he said, "will do its utmost to disprove that 
economic recovery also implies a resumption of inflation." 
  The task of keeping alive the diplomatic interplay between 
the government and the Bank of Italy fell to Giancarlo 
Pagliarini, the League's budget minister. "I never said that 
the system of capitalizing pensions should be introduced 
overnight," the budget minister said defensively, replying to 
Fazio's attacks on the abolition of the mechanism that currently 
supports the pension system. "I am simply saying that we should 
set ourselves the aim of moving on from a system of distribution 
to a system of capitalization. For that matter Fazio himself," 
he added, "talks in terms of a 'broad distribution' of a 
benefits system based on capitalization. So he accepts that we 
should move in that direction." 
  What about fiscal pressure, which Fazio considers lower than 
in other countries? "Fiscal pressure is too high in Italy," 
Pagliarini said. "It can hardly be compared with other 
countries; be that as it may, we have no intention of creating a 
greedy revenue system." It was the same story with the proposal 
to grant tax relief to industry, which Fazio seemed to want to 
curb when he recalled the extent of existing tax relief for 
industry. "I agree with the thousand per thousand," he added. 
"I too drew up a large number of bills during the previous 
legislative period to cut down tax benefits to enterprises. A 
rational plan must be drawn up and benefits must be granted only 
if new jobs are created." [passage omitted] 

