Language: <F P=105> Italian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Umberto Torelli: "A Robot is even Working in </F>
the Greenhouse"] 
  [Text] We are used to robot butlers, and to robots that do 
dangerous jobs underground, as well as those inside stores where 
explosives are kept. A robotic manipulator that is just as able 
to perform operations as the surgeon and uses remote control 
techniques has also been experimented. This time robotics is 
being applied to agriculture. The robot "farmer" project 
started at the Agrobot consortium, a pool of university centers 
and companies working in the sector engaged in the CNR [Italian 
National Research Council] finalized robotics project. 
  The body of the system, which is designed to work in the 
greenhouse for the time being, is made up of a strong 
caterpillar vehicle that can move about, and also serve as a bed 
on which the produce that has been harvested can be carried. An 
anthromorphic arm, which can translate and rotate operating with 
six grades of restraint between ground level and 1.5 meters 
above ground level, is fixed onto the upper base. 
  The manipulation system is made up of three fingers and lies 
at the end of the arm. It is entrusted with the job of 
delicately grasping the produce that is to be picked and this is 
not simple. The articulated phalanges of each finger are able to 
assess the consistency of the object being handled with extreme 
precision, just like the human hand, and evaluate the force that 
should be applied to take hold of it. 
  Finally there is the vision system. It is as sophisticated 
as ever and uses a pair of stereo color television cameras. 
These artificial eyes are given the delicate task of evaluating 
the size of the obstacles that are met and this information is 
used to give the correct navigational instructions. But this is 
not all. The robot can pinpoint the position of the fruits or 
vegetables with millimetric precision and evaluate the 
tonalities of their color. 
  In this way it manages to identify flowers for hormone 
treatment, select the position of fruits to be treated, and 
above all select the harvest with precision on the basis of the 
grade of color and the consistency of the pulp. Naturally, it 
is easy to program the robot so that it picks the fruit that has 
the weight and form required, then places it in boxes, in rows, 
with the stalks facing in the same direction. 
  "At present greenhouse produce is harvested all at once, 
often picking produce in different stages of maturation," says 
Giulio Sandini of the University of Genoa DIST (Department of 
Information Science). 
  "With the advent of robotics all the produce is separately 
picked, assuring the correct grade of maturity. We must also 
consider the reduction made in the quantity of chemicals used. 
Now, when parasites are present, it is necessary to spray the 
whole area, in the future the robot system will be able to 
locate the individual plants that are affected and treat them 
separately." 

