Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yegor Yakovlev, under the "Breakfast on the </F>
Grass" rubric: "Barbed Wire for Ourselves"] 
  [Text] What do I think about the words that sounded from 
the podium of the night rally in the Kremlin? "Russia, stop and 
think! You have lost your mind." I do not know about you, but I 
was deeply insulted by this statement. And although it came from 
a person who sometimes is considered nearly a forefather of our 
democracy, in my opinion he is no better than Zhirinovskiy. One 
set out to order Russia to lie down by his boot. The other also 
addresses her in the familiar form, and at the same time gives 
her a kick in the butt when she does something different than he 
would have wanted her to. 
  How wise were my people, who refused this time to give their 
support to those who, having found themselves in power, wanted 
to stay there in the manner of business as usual. The people 
have not forgotten unfulfilled promises. They have not forgiven 
mutual devouring. They did not hear from those in power in 
Russia how they intend to pull it out of the pit that they 
themselves had dug. In short, the people did not believe the 
electoral bloc where political cheats, the talentless, and the 
greedy freely mingled among unquestionably decent and respected 
people. 
  But why then, why have these wise people of mine have given 
their support to Zhirinovskiy? Well, because they have been 
very, very much treated like a doormat over the past two years. 
Now those who have been ardently arguing lately in favor of 
political expediency and the moral necessity of choosing between 
the lesser of two evils can congratulate themselves. This is the 
result. Evil in power is always more prominent than evil in 
opposition. 
  We had fun painting, and then cried when the count came in. 
The wave of fear of Zhirinovskiy's victory is rising higher and 
higher, hypnotizing and paralyzing. The democrats already are 
preparing to stock up on barbed wire for themselves. The 
newspapers, instead of congratulations on the New Year, 
congratulate us on a new monster. Everybody sees fascism walking 
across Russia behind every corner. 
  Come on! Calm down! Breathe through the nose. One has to be 
a 
good sport both in winning and in losing. 
  Yes, Zhirinovskiy's program is pro-fascist. There is no 
doubt 
about it. But neither is there any doubt that this program of 
imperial aspirations, propped by the palisade of shameless 
promises, cannot possibly be implemented in our time. 
  Of course, Zhirinovskiy's election triumph does not evoke 
anything other than sadness and painful contemplation. But are 
you so certain that the victory of Russia's Choice would have 
brought you what we have been deprived of for quite a while--a 
feeling of deep satisfaction? An absolute predominance of this 
bloc in the parliament would have meant that the executive 
branch, which now has freed itself from any checks and balances, 
would retain this indecent posture of free-for-all. Who will 
argue with it when a minister becomes a lawmaker, and a lawmaker 
a minister? 
  Many tears have also been shed on the subject of a split in 
democratic forces. It seems to me, though, that it would have 
been much worse had they come to the elections in a single 
formation. The latter would mean that all democrats, big and 
small, ignore the realities of life. Which has convinced us 
quite graphically that in the environment of festering crisis, 
only opposition forces can count on popular support. Had the 
democrats dared to take a more oppositionist stance, had they 
judged the events more critically, they would have gathered more 
votes. But had they all merged in one pro-government bloc, they 
would not have collected even those they have now. 
  So who needs to fan up these fears, this unstoppable funeral 
toll? I think it is not just the naive ones. 
  Some think that the more fear they pump into the public 
atmosphere, the sooner they will get back--no, not the votes, 
they have already gone to Zhirinovskiy--at least the benevolence 
of those who had rejected them at the elections. Others, having 
reached a sense of comfort when the executive branch prevailed 
everywhere and in everything, want to prolong this pleasure. 
That is why they are calling us to the barricades, seeing the 
latter as the most convenient place. Our foreign friends are 
also pumping up the fears. Of course, they absolutely need to: 
Otherwise, how can they explain their unquestioning support for 
everything that has been happening in Russia lately? 
  And what has been happening went precisely in accordance 
with 
the scenario that originated with the president and was 
supported by the ruling elite. Disbanding the parliament; 
elections that resembled roach races; and blindfolded approval 
of the Constitution. Except that the result turned out 
differently. Since all of this went according to a scenario, its 
authors and executors now have to make an effort to find 
interaction with those they have brought into the legislature. 
  Some people think that everything in life is prepaid. I 
think 
differently: One has to pay for everything. They assured us: We 
will violate the Constitution ever so slightly, disband the 
parliament somewhat, shoot at it a little bit, and then 
everything will be fine. It does not happen this way! You have 
to pay. It would not be too bad if only those who violated the 
Constitution and disbanded the parliament had to pick up the 
tab. Alas, most often it is all of us who have to pay. 

