BFN 

<F P=106> [Announcer-read report over video; from the "Xinjiang News" </F>
program] 
  [Text] The regional radio and TV department and regional 
personnel department held an award ceremony on the afternoon of 
9 May to commend the Hotan TV Station and 23 other stations as 
advanced collectives, and (Padanmu Maimaiti) and 81 other 
comrades as advanced workers of the regional radio and TV 
department. 
  Regional party and government leaders Janabil, (Wufuer 
Abudula), Feng Dazhen, and (Sha Mi) congratulated the commended 
collectives and individuals, and presented them with 
certificates and awards. 
  Xinjiang has scored notable achievements in developing radio 
and TV undertakings in recent years. At present, there are 23 
radio stations of all kinds and 38 radio transmitting stations 
throughout the region, beaming to 70 percent of the population. 
The TV undertaking, which made a late start, has developed 
rapidly. There are 26 TV stations and 348 TV relay stations, 
covering 72 percent of the population. The region has approved, 
according to the law, the establishment of five cable TV 
stations by administrative institutions, six cable TV stations 
by enterprises, and 440 cable TV posts of various kinds for over 
1 million subscribers. 
  The advanced collectives and individuals commended yesterday 
afternoon had for many years worked hard and selflessly on the 
regional radio and TV front. They had strictly observed 
discipline, adhered to high moral standards, and made important 
contributions to publicizing the party's line, principles, and 
policies, developing radio and TV undertakings, and promoting 
socialist economic construction. 
  At the meeting, the relevant regional leaders also presented 
certificates to Ili Kazak Autonomous Prefecture, [words 
indistinct], the Akus Prefectural Radio and TV Bureau, 8106 
Medium- Wave Relay Station, and Changji Prefecture's Fukang 
Radio and TV Bureau, which had been commended as the national 
radio and TV department's advanced collectives; and to (Xiao 
Renbao) and nine other national advanced individuals. [video 
shows shots of a conference room with about 100 people, and 
leaders passing out awards and trophies to recipients] 

