Article   Type:BFN 

  [Editorial Report] Guatemala City Radio-Television 
Guatemala in Spanish at 0400 GMT on 26 January broadcasts a one 
hour interview with Guatemalan President Ramiro de Leon Carpio 
by Dionisio Gutierrez as part of the regularly scheduled "Free 
Encounter" program. The discussion centers on 30 January 
constitutional referendum and begins with Gutierrez recapping 
President de Leon's previous efforts to get lawmakers and 
Supreme Court justices, who were accused of corruption, to 
resign. Gutierrez asks if constitutional reform, "which the 
people will vote on this Sunday, was the only alternative left?". 
  The president replies: "Yes, I think so within the framework 
of democracy and circumstances that have prevailed since I took 
office." He adds that the Guatemalan people have called for the 
resignation and purge of the judicial and legislative branches, 
and other alternatives to achieving this were exhausted when the 
members of these branches refused to resign, and later, when the 
Constitutionality Court suspended the referendum to allow the 
people to express their views on the issue. 
  He said: "Although the ruling was unbelievable, I had to 
abide by it. Given this situation and the political crisis that 
was brewing, the only thing left was to use a third alternative, 
which was always democratic." De Leon noted that on 30 January, 
the people will have the opportunity to vote on constitutional 
reforms so they can "say yes, the deputies should go and a new 
congress should be elected; yes, the justices should leave and 
we should have a new Supreme Court of Justice, or no, let things 
remain unchanged with the same people." 
  He also notes the people are leery of the constitutional 
reforms because Congress drafted and approved them, but "in 
politics, what counts are the results." Gutierrez adds that the 
fact that some deputies, mistrusted by the people, are 
supporting the reforms compounds the people's feeling of 
weariness. Regardless of this situation, according to De Leon, 
the democratic system will be strengthened by the reforms. 
  In response to a question regarding the political cost De 
Leon had to pay for what is referred to as "holy wheeling and 
dealing" ("santa componenda") with Congress, De Leon states he 
studied it and "was always aware of the political cost" it 
entailed, but made the decision anyway because it brought a 
degree of political stability, which was lacking "at that time" 
to the democratic system. 
  Gutierrez points out to De Leon that he chose the hardest 
and 
most loyal path because he could have called a referendum within 
a week of taking office, and he asks "why did you choose the 
most difficult course?" The president acknowledges this may be 
the most difficult course, "but if we reach the end or goal, it 
will be the most satisfying "because the Guatemalan people are 
indicating they are beginning to love and defend their 
democratic system. He notes the third option may lead to the 
results the people wanted. "If the people wanted a purge, they 
can have it by voting yes on 30 January. If the people want the 
deputies to go, they will achieve that by voting yes on the 
referendum." 
  Referring to this point, Gutierrez says this may set a 
precedent for changing the Constitution in a peaceful manner. De 
Leon feels this "may be something historic and worth noting. 
This is the first time a Constitution will be amended in 
Guatemala without a coup d'etat, to be perfectly honest, or 
without the need to use force or break established order. This 
will be the first time the constitutional mandate of two state 
branches is being broken without the use of force or ending 
institutional order." 
  As for the question of who is paying for the "yes vote" 
campaign, the president refers to the work young volunteers are 
doing and adds: "What I can assure you is that the government is 
not paying for it." He goes on to deny money from the 
confidential fund is being used in the campaign because that 
fund "no longer exists." The constitutional amendments, he says, 
will eliminate confidential expenses, thereby "ensuring, from a 
constitutional standpoint, there will not be confidential funds, 
which have allowed so much corruption to exist, not just in the 
Presidency but in all the state agencies." 
  Gutierrez asks De Leon, "What will happen if voter 
abstentionism is high in the upcoming referendum?" De Leon says 
that many things can contribute to voter abstentionism "here and 
anywhere in the world. It is unusual for any country to have a 
voter turnout rate of more than 50 percent." Voter turnout may 
not be high on Sunday because a referendum is something new in 
the country, and although regrettable, it "would not change 
things," De Leon states. He then adds, "If the yes vote won by a 
slim margin, the amendments would enter into effect." To be 
sure, he hopes a large number of people will vote and make the 
event into a "civic holiday," as there will not be losers, since 
all Guatemalan people will be the "winners." 
  When asked to consider the possibility of a "no" vote 
victory, De Leon comments that this is most unlikely, but 
"should it happen, I would have to make decisions based on 
strategies, which I will not mention here because they would no 
longer be strategies. They would be public knowledge. It would 
be regrettable, more than regrettable because it would create a 
situation of unforeseen consequences. The people would not stand 
by idly. Even very small extremist radical groups would try to 
profit from this situation." He also notes that groups like the 
Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity (URNG) would be 
"delighted" by this outcome because they are hoping "there will 
be social turmoil," and a crisis will ensue. In any crisis, the 
president has to be ready for certain decisions and strategies 
to be implemented, he affirms. 
  Gutierrez asks him to explain what aspects of the 
constitutional amendments he does not like. "I dare say," the 
president replies, "all the amendments are positive." Continuing 
on the same vein, Gutierrez asks the president to list five 
major advantages of the amendments. Besides the fact "the 
deputies will have to go, which is what the people want, and the 
people will elect a new congress, that the chief justices will 
have to go, and there will be a new Supreme Court of Justice, 
the first thing is that the confidential fund will no longer 
exist. This is a major step against corruption," according to De 
Leon. 
  Second, power abuse will be prevented because Congress will 
no longer be in charge of trying deputies accused of wrongdoing. 
Another government branch will handle these cases. 
  Third, the budget will be public for the first time, thanks 
to the amendments. De Leon says, "This means honesty and better 
control over public spending." 
  According to De Leon, the fourth advantage is that they 
strengthen and provide real autonomy to the Comptroller's 
General Office. "This means controlling public spending, so that 
officials from the president on down do not -- simply put -- 
steal, enrich themselves illegally, or steal the Guatemalan 
people's money. 
  Fifth, the Attorney General's Office is strengthened to 
prosecute illegal actions and prevent political impunity. 
Besides these five advantages, De Leon talks about another 
amendment that prevents the Bank of Guatemala from making loans 
to the government. Although he vows never to act recklessly in 
issuing money without backing, "we must guarantee, that in the 
future, governments will not do as past governments have done." 
  In De Leon's opinion, other advantages are that 
municipalities will receive 10 percent of the national budget, 
which is to be spent on programs to help the most needy; the 
mandate of the president and deputies is reduced to four years; 
there will no longer be alternate deputies; and the Supreme 
Court will be depoliticized. 
  The host tells De Leon he has read the amendments and he 
finds it odd that opposition to them is so strong. Some people 
in the country have said there has been little time to study 
them and would have wanted them to cover more areas. Gutierrez 
states that if approved, the Constitution will be much better 
than it was. De Leon acknowledges the people have not been told 
this is "merely a first step, the beginning, in restructuring 
and modernizing the state," something that is achieved by 
purging and restructuring the state branches, and, most of all, 
by setting a precedent. The new deputies will take office with 
fewer privileges and they will be aware the people are watching 
them, he states. 
  When asked if the deputies will be compensated for the 
months 
left in their term if the "yes" vote wins? De Leon flatly 
replies: "God forbid!" Gutierrez then asks De Leon when will 
Deputy Rodil and his team leave. De Leon replies that based on 
these amendments, deputies and their alternates will leave their 
seats 60 days following the referendum or on 31 March. Elections 
are to be held 120 days later. "In August, we could have a new 
Congress and Supreme Court," De Leon indicates. 
  On the topic of voter abstentionism, De Leon asks the people 
to ponder the matter because the "destiny of Guatemala lies in 
the hand of the yes or no vote. He thinks that "to urge people 
not to vote is irresponsible." He adds that the URNG is asking 
the people to vote no "because they would gain if we had chaos 
or a crisis." 

