BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Riccardo Franco Levi: "The First Test"] </F>
  [Text] The stock market has sounded the alarm with a 
4-percent drop in a single day, but the government, via the 
treasury minister, has responded only in part. In an official 
statement released during the evening, Minister Lamberto Dini 
for the first time undertook to launch "a corrective maneuver 
that will impinge on the current year's deficit and, to an even 
greater extent, on trends for 1995," and announced that the hole 
which the recent Constitutional Court verdict had dug in the 
INPS [National Institute for Social Insurance] accounts would be 
addressed separately and covered "with specific revenue-raising 
measures." However, he did so only after referring to the 
"boosting measures undertaken by the government" and without 
quoting any specific figures at all for the salvage operations, 
although by now there is little doubt that this year's 
"supplemental budget" will have to bring in about 5,000 billion 
lire, whereas the real operation, scheduled for 1995, will have 
to achieve about 40-45,000 billion lire (INPS excluded). 
  Crowned with their double election victory, Silvio 
Berlusconi 
and his ministers had taken the wheel on a boat that was sailing 
with the wind and carrying a cargo that, though heavy, gave the 
impression that it was well distributed and made fast in the 
hold. Indeed, the recovery, which was export-led, was running on 
an even keel, while the public debt represented less of a 
threat, thanks mainly to the lower inflation rate, which had 
reduced interest costs. 
  Then the boat suddenly began to list, it encountered head 
winds, and the cargo began to shift. The lire, state bonds, and 
the stock market endured repeated buffeting, and interest rates 
raised their ugly head again, adding to the public debt. In 
spite of all this, the boat suffered hardly any damage and 
continued on much the same course. True, there was the terrible 
INPS accident, but, apart from the fact that it had been 
inherited from the past, taken on their own, the 30,000 billion 
lire involved hardly justified the sudden squall. 
  Indeed, there was more to it than that: There was 
uncertainty as to the new crew's navigational skills and, to an 
even greater extent, its intentions. Basically, it was a matter 
of confidence and credibility, and as the sore point was the 
balance of payments, the officer who has had the weightiest 
responsibilities thrust upon him has been the treasury minister. 
  And Lamberto Dini has begun to do his bit, albeit with 
something approaching timidity. It is true that it will be up 
to the government collectively to set the pace of recovery. 
Nevertheless, in view of the commitment that the "revenue 
minister," in other words the finance minister, has already made 
to keep the burden of taxation at its current level, it will be 
up to him, the "spending," to take on the most difficult job, 
that of curbing spending and ensuring that targets are met. He 
should, therefore, have put out a strong, specific message 
regarding the public debt, even if it means forcing his hand, so 
as to enable the Community to release the third portion of the 
European loan immediately, to reassure the markets, and to 
trigger a beneficial cycle of recovery, investment, and growth. 
  Although the financial markets are not given to patient 
waiting, the Treasury Ministry still has time. Lamberto Dini 
enjoys the requisite personal prestige. What is more, no one is 
better than he is at creating a climate of confidence and 
calming fears of a further rise in inflation, and nothing can 
help him more than a Bank of Italy rendered fully credible by 
its independence. The Bank's director general is due to be 
appointed in a few days. The wisest decision that Dini can make 
will be to allow Governor Fazio complete freedom of choice. 

