BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Slovak President Michal Kovac by Karol Wolf; </F>
place and date not given: "Patient Politician Michal Kovac"] 
  [Excerpts] [Wolf] Prior to becoming president, you held 
the post of the chairman of the last Federal Assembly and you 
took part in practically all important talks between the 
Movement for a Democratic Slovakia [HZDS] and the Civic 
Democratic Party as an HZDS representative. Which of the Czech 
politicians with whom you worked do you remember most fondly? 
And with which one would you not want to work again? 
  [Kovac] I will avoid the second part of the question but I 
must say that there are many Czech politicians whom I respected 
and still do today. They are particularly the ones who, in 
addition to professional qualities, had the ability of human 
rapport with the political partner, even an adversary, and could 
offer trust for trust and sincerity for sincerity. I must say 
that I knew many of the present Czech politicians personally at 
the time of normalization. They are Messrs Kocarnik, Dyba, 
Strasky, but also Mr. Klaus. These human contacts certainly 
helped us at the time when understanding and patience were 
needed. [passage omitted] 
  [Wolf] You have certainly spent a substantial part of your 
political career in the HZDS and in cooperation with the former 
Slovak Prime Minister Meciar. When did you two first meet and 
how do you remember it? 
  [Kovac] We first met in the first Slovak post-November 
Government, which I joined a little earlier. We were all 
waiting for an interior minister, and Mr. Meciar was appointed 
to the post. I liked him as interior minister, and my then 
colleagues felt the same way. Apparently, he made a good 
impression also on the Public Against Violence Movement 
coordination center, for they nominated him for the prime 
ministerial post after the first free elections in 1990. When 
Vladimir Meciar became prime minister, I admired his work 
enthusiasm and his ability to grasp the essence of an issue. I 
remember that he led the government session at a tremendous 
speed, and not all of us could keep up with him. Nevertheless, 
his negative features had also already been demonstrated at that 
time. He acted unfairly, for instance, more than once towards 
First Deputy Prime Minister Carnogursky, and later, when he 
learned that some colleagues like another deputy prime minister, 
Kucerak, demonstrated their independence, he was quick-tempered 
and often arrogant in his reaction. I often had the feeling 
that Mr. Meciar is lacking more tolerance. At the time, 
however, it was easily explained by the tremendous stress and 
the large quantity of work that overwhelmed us all. It was a 
tremendous feeling of responsibility, and I did not perceive the 
negative features of Mr. Meciar -- and they were not just the 
ones I listed, others appeared later -- as something that could 
be potentially dangerous. 
  [Wolf] Have you also met with Vladimir Meciar privately? 
  [Kovac] I do not know him well as a person. There were not 
enough opportunities for friendly meetings and discussions. 
After all, these posts mean that one constantly thinks only 
about the work, and does not have the time to get to know even 
the fellow workers with whom he is in daily contact. 
Nonetheless, I remember that I made several attempts at a 
friendly relationship, because I believe that even for a cabinet 
team it is good to know one another. I learned, however, that 
Mr. Meciar feels differently. He avoided sitting down over a 
glass of beer or wine and discussing something that could not be 
directly linked to politics. He never accepted an offer, for 
instance, to spend a holiday with families of his colleagues. 
He was probably happiest with his family, and did not like 
company. I respected this. With other fellow cabinet members, 
however, I enjoyed closer contacts that carried over in our 
families, and have in most instances survived until now. 
  [Wolf] Just before Meciar's cabinet was recalled, Slovak 
Parliament Deputy Chairman Cernak said that people in Slovakia 
are scared to use the telephone and speak aloud in enclosed 
rooms. Were you scared, too? 
  [Kovac] Several deputies and members of the former cabinet 
shared with me their suspicions of being watched and of having 
their telephones bugged. Although I could not verify it, I 
considered it unnatural that constitutional officials should 
fear wiretapping. Later I learned that it was possible even in 
my case, but I did not follow through to find out who, 
wherefrom, and what. To answer your question, however, no, I 
was not scared. 
  [Wolf] Can you imagine the duo Meciar-prime minister and 
Kovac-president to work again in Slovakia? 
  [Kovac] Theoretically, everything is possible. As far as I 
know, however, it is unimaginable according to Mr. Meciar. He, 
himself, declared several times that if he accepted the 
commission to form the new government from my hands, he would 
immediately ask for my resignation. There have even been 
reports that a referendum should decide on my post. I am ready 
to accept the decision of my fellow citizens but insist that 
these rules must also be respected by others. So, I could 
imagine even such a situation as to which you referred but I 
have a feeling that Mr. Meciar cannot imagine it. 

