BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Time Has Come To Admit Vietnam Into ASEAN"] </F>
  [Text] The honor guard at Hanoi's international airport has 
probably never been so busy. Since Washington lifted its 
three-decade-old economic embargo on Vietnam in February, the 
formerly shunned communist bastion has been besieged by 
diplomatic visitors. 
  Leading the rush, have been the heads of the Association of 
South East Asian Nations (ASEAN), all eager to look at 
investment prospects and assess Hanoi's ambitions to join their 
privileged group. Within the space of a little over a month, 
Vietnam has hosted visits from the secretary general of ASEAN 
and the leaders of Singapore, Thailand, and the Philippines. 
  Communist Party chief Du Muoi was a guest of Malaysia last 
week, and President Le Duc Anh is due to visit Indonesia in late 
April. The visits coincide with a diplomatic offensive on the 
part of Vietnam, which is trying to widen ties with ASEAN and 
pave the way for its own entry into the group. 
  The official exchanges mark the second major diplomatic 
offensive Vietnam has launched following the break up of the 
Soviet bloc. Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet visited all six ASEAN 
members between October 1991 and July 1992 as Vietnam searched 
for new economic partners. At the time, most observers 
predicted that it would be at least five years before Vietnam 
would be admitted. But in a reflection of the sweeping 
political changes that are occurring across the region, 
Singapore Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong announced in Hanoi that 
he thought Vietnam may be formally discussed in 18 months. 
Philippine President Fidel Ramos was even more optimistic, 
calling for the immediate acceptance of Vietnam. 
  Political differences between communist Vietnam and the six 
capitalist ASEAN members have been swept aside with Hanoi's 
market reforms and the signing of the Cambodia peace agreement 
in 1991. 
  Goh said Vietnam's communist ideology was no obstacle to 
membership of the bloc, founded when most of its members were 
aligned against Hanoi during the Vietnam War. 
  "It (Vietnam's communism) should not be an obstacle," he 
said. "It depends on whether it can contribute to ASEAN." 
  Vietnam contends that its political system is not going to 
change anytime soon and that the important thing is stability 
for economic development, a line that fits in nicely with the 
way most ASEAN governments feel about the "soft autocratic" 
style of democracy they practice. 
  Other ASEAN officials have argued that the speed at which 
Vietnam is integrated will depend on the pace of its economic 
development and market reforms While Vietnam is about 30 to 40 
years behind Singapore and possibly some 20 years behind in 
development compared to the Philippines or Indonesia, the wide 
disparity within ASEAN itself would suggest that this is not an 
obstacle. 
  However, ASEAN officials have said that before membership 
can 
be granted, Hanoi must prove its ability to contribute to the 
group's technical projects and resolve administrative and 
financial obstacles. These include the need to boost English 
language skills and accounting practices. 
  Once again it seems ASEAN's ability to zero in on petty 
bureaucratic priorities when faced with the opportunity of 
taking bold action will only reinforce its reputation as a 
hide-bound forum for endless talk and little achievement. 
  Hanoi is upgrading its technical capabilities to accelerate 
its admission but ASEAN continues to talk of admitting Vietnam 
only at an "appropriate time" when it is sure it can make a 
contribution to the regional group. 
  In one frequently cited area, education, it is going to be 
years if not decades before Vietnam can contribute but in 
possibly the most important area -- security -- Vietnam is ready 
to make a valuable contribution now. 
  As Philippines President Fidel Ramos, Hanoi's only strong 
supporter in the regional grouping noted, Vietnam's 
"incorporation into ASEAN is an imperative of Southeast Asian 
peace, security and prosperity." 
  "Over the next generation, Vietnam is certain to become one 
of Southeast Asia's most important states and a major force in 
the balance of power," Ramos said during his recent visit to 
Hanoi. 
  Of particular interest to Ramos and the Philippines is the 
dispute Spratly Islands. ASEAN has been reluctant to take an 
assertive stand on the atolls which are claimed in part by four 
of its members, as well as Vietnam, Taiwan and China and have 
long been regarded as the most likely source of conflict in the 
region. 
  In 1992, Vietnam acceded to the Bali Treaty in which the 
original ASEAN members pledged to settle their disputes 
peacefully. China refuses to sign the treaty and its use of 
force against Vietnam to settle claims in the South China Sea is 
becoming increasingly troubling. 
  ASEAN was born out of fear of the spread of communism and 
conflict from Vietnam. Whether it is a member of ASEAN or not, 
Vietnam remains crucial to continued peace and prosperity in the 
region. 
  By admitting Vietnam, ASEAN will be better placed to work 
toward a solution of the Spratly Islands issue and also prosper 
if the South China Sea can in the words of Ramos, "be 
transformed from waters of contention to an area of cooperation." 
  As ASEAN admits itself, Vietnam's membership is no longer a 
matter of policy or principle but merely procedure and time -- 
an that time has come. 

