Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Chang Kang (1603 2123): "Shenzhen Leading Body Faces </F>
Purges"] 
  [Text]"Collective Application for Transfer" Was 
Obstructed 
  A series of natural and manmade calamities, including the 
big 
blast at the Qingshuihe warehouse, the serious floods caused by 
the draining of the reservoir, and the conflagration at the 
Kuiyong factory, exposed Shenzhen's protracted hidden crises. 
Some observant and conscientious people are aware of a gradual 
decrease in the number of people coming to Shenzhen from other 
provinces and cities to "see the world" and to "emulate the 
spirit of the special economic zone." Information then 
circulated abroad that a reshuffle, and a major reshuffle at 
that, of Shenzhen's leading bodies was imminent and that some 
people would be held responsible for those accidents.... 
  But the Shenzhen authorities solemnly "refuted the rumor," 
saying one or two media units in Hong Kong "concocted the rumor 
on purpose." 
  The fact, however, is that in early November last year, over 
30 members of the top-level leading bodies of the city party 
committee and government asked to be transferred back to their 
original provinces or original departments. If their requests 
were approved, that would certainly result in a big change. But 
the "collective application for transfer" was turned down by the 
higher authorities. On 5 November, the Guangdong Provincial CPC 
Committee issued to the city party committee and government a 
document which stipulated that cadres serving in the city party 
committee and government at the section level and above shall 
not be transferred for the present stage and that any necessary 
cadre transfer must be discussed by the city party committee and 
be reported to the provincial party committee's organization 
department for examination and for the record. 
  Was there any causality between the request for transfer and 
the order to "stop transferring cadres for the time being?" 
<H5>  Chen Yun and Peng Zhen Were "Furious" and Gave Instructions </H5>
  An informed cadre in Shenzhen leaked word that things were 
getting hard for local leading cadres because the disasters had 
resulted in many "after effects." In their recent, restricted 
finding report, the Central Discipline Inspection Commission and 
the Guangdong Provincial Discipline Inspection Commission gave a 
detailed account of the private property of Shenzhen's cadres at 
the sub-section level and above, which is not commensurate with 
their official income. This attracted the attention of the CPC 
hierarchy and party elders. Chen Yun, Peng Zhen, Jiang Zemin, 
Qiao Shi, and Li Peng thus gave instructions on the matter. 
  The restricted finding report, which was completed on 18 
December 1993, mainly disclosed: The average monthly salary, 
including the subsidy and bonus, of cadres of the city party 
committee and government stands at between 600 and 850 yuan; 86 
percent of cadres at the sub-section level and above have worked 
in Shenzhen for three years or more and own residential units 
measuring 75 square meters and above. These dwellings average 
more than 400,000 yuan at the going market price and most of 
these residential units are the owners' second dwelling places 
or are let out by their family members. Approximately 80 
percent of cadres serving in the city's industrial and 
commercial management offices, tax bureaus, and public security 
organs and their family members have bank deposits, and 40 
percent of cadres and their family members are share holders. 
  The cadres were so "rich" that they made CPC elder Chen Yun 
furious. Chen then made the following comment: "It is hard to 
imagine that party and government cadres would take advantage of 
reform to make money illegally. How could they ignore party 
discipline and state laws?" 
  Peng Zhen, who had been responsible for the party's 
procuratorial and judicial work, directed his instructions 
against "criminal offenses": "Some achievements in reform and 
opening up shall not be used to cover up the corruption and 
criminal offenses committed by some party and government cadres. 
Investigations show many cadres in Shenzhen practice graft, 
take bribes, and levy blackmail on others. We should no longer 
take a laissez-faire attitude toward such soul-stirring 
offenses." 
<H5>  Jiang Zemin, Qiao Shi, and Li Peng Gave Separate Instructions </H5>
  The party's General Secretary Jiang Zemin also gave the 
following instructions: "The leading bodies of the Shenzhen 
City CPC Committee and government are seriously corrupt. This 
problem has not been earnestly dealt with in the last seven to 
eight years, so it has produced a great undesirable impact. The 
party's general secretary, secretaries, and party-member cadres 
are equal before party discipline and national laws. It is high 
time for us to thoroughly settle the problem." 
  Qiao Shi, who is responsible for procuratorial and judicial 
work, said in his instructions: "Those leading party and 
government cadres who commit all kinds of outrages under the 
sign board or by taking advantage of reform and opening up must 
be dealt with according to party discipline and national law. 
No such harmful persons should be allowed to go scot-free. If 
we did not act this way, that would mean we brush aside the 
voice of the masses, generally acknowledged principles, and the 
state laws." 
  State Council Premier Li Peng's instructions read: "It is 
necessary to resolutely and relentlessly crack down on corrupt 
elements within the party by legal means. In the meantime, 
informants should be protected and given necessary awards." 
  The CPC leaders' instructions certainly applied heavy 
pressure on those involved. At the meeting of the provincial 
party committee standing committee held in late December last 
year, Secretary Xie Fei stressed: The grave impact of the 
problem concerning the corruption committed by the leading 
bodies of the Shenzhen City CPC Committee and government has 
gone beyond Shenzhen and national boundaries. The image of 
reform and opening up would be tarnished if the problem were not 
exposed and solved. 
<H5>  Five Opinions Advanced by the CPC Secretariat </H5>
  But before the problem was really "brought out into the 
open," the CPC Central Committee Secretariat had advanced five 
tentative opinions on addressing the problem of the leading 
bodies of the Shenzhen City CPC Committee and government upon 
the beginning of 1994. They are: 
  1. The leading bodies of the city party committee and 
government must, under the specific leadership of the provincial 
party committee, continue to keep effective tabs on the present 
tasks and reorganize themselves. 
  2. The leading bodies of the existing city party committee 
and government and of the two preceding party committees are 
undoubtedly questionable and some members have seriously 
violated the law and discipline. 
  3. The central authorities hope cadres who commit offenses, 
big and small, will consciously report their cases to the 
departments concerned so that they will be treated with leniency. 
  4. The central authorities require that leading party and 
government cadres at all levels in Shenzhen examine and correct 
their mistakes by themselves. Harsh measures must be taken 
against those who commit offenses while examining their past 
offenses, who deliberately flout the law, and those who violate 
the law while enforcing the law. And, 
  5. The central authorities have decided to send work teams 
to cooperate with the provincial party committee in carrying out 
an anticorruption campaign in Shenzhen party and government 
departments. 
  The departments concerned in Guangdong, which could not 
afford to shrug off the opinions, immediately organized cadres 
to dig Shenzhen's "corruption up by the roots." This time the 
leadership really "squared accounts after the autumn harvest," 
laying bare some of the Shenzhen authorities' "family scandals" 
hushed up since 1987. 
<H3>  Guangdong Provincial Discipline Inspection Commission Dug 
the Corruption "Up by the Roots" </H3>
  Following is the fact-finding report sent to the Central 
Discipline Inspection Commission by the Guangdong Provincial 
Discipline Inspection Commission in early January and some 
materials made public by the provincial party committee and 
government. 
  1. Since 1987, 35 to 45 percent of Shenzhen's annual 
expenditures were spent on "social intercourse," "bonuses," and 
"subsidies." The figure was as high as 58 and 56 percent in 
1988 and 1992 respectively. 
  2. From 1987 to October 1993, the provincial party 
committee, the provincial discipline inspection commission, and 
the provincial corruption investigation and crime hunting center 
received 2,500 letters against 470 cadres at subsection level 
and above of the city party committee and government and over 90 
departments, commissions, offices, bureaus, and sections under 
the city party committee and government, from people in 23 
provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities across the 
land. 
  3. The staff of the Shenzhen corruption investigation and 
crime hunting center reported to departments concerned under the 
provincial party committee 230 cases involving violations of the 
law and discipline by Shenzhen's leading party and government 
cadres. 
  4. Initial statistics compiled by Shenzhen's banks and 
credit departments reveals since 1987 Shenzhen's bad debts have 
reached 22 percent of the total debts and 90 percent of the bad 
debts totaling 18.5 billion yuan were underwritten by the 
city-level departments or relevant leading cadres. 
  5. Shenzhen's state enterprises evaded 80 percent of taxes, 
foreign-funded enterprises evaded 75 percent, and individuals 95 
percent. According to an initial estimation, the economic 
losses from tax evasion from 1987 to 1992 hit 36 billion yuan. 
  6. The purpose of an average of 16 percent of the funds for 
Shenzhen's urban capital construction in 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 
1991, and 1992 was unknown and the cost of 39 percent of the 
projects was higher than the estimated figure. 
<H3>  A Former Director of XINHUA Hong Kong Branch Was Involved in 
Shenzhen's Corruption </H3>
  It appears that, under pressure from the central 
authorities, 
Shenzhen will launch an anticorruption campaign soon. It is 
still unknown whether "there is much said but little done" in 
the campaign as there was before, but it is certain that the 
campaign will come to an end hastily because, under the CPC's 
existing system, the "whole body is affected if one hair is 
pulled." According to the information provided by the Central 
Discipline Inspection Commission in early January, various 
ministries and central committees have received a total of 1,300 
letters and telephone calls (including those from Chinese 
residing in Hong Kong, Macao, Taiwan, and overseas and from 
foreign businessmen) about corruption and violations of 
discipline and laws in Shenzhen's party and government 
departments involving ministerial-level cadres, NPC vice 
chairmen (or chairman), CPPCC (the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference) vice chairmen (or chairman), and former 
directors (or director) of XINHUA Hong Kong branch. 

