CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Milos Sklenka: "According to Dlouhy, </F>
Liberalization of World Trade Will Increase the Czech GDP by 1-2 
Percent Per Year"] 
  [Text] Today, the Czech Republic will sign the final 
accords of the Uruguay Round and an agreement regarding the WTO 
[World Trade Organization]; our government is rejecting the 
so-called social clause to the GATT agreement; the Czech 
minister engages in bilateral negotiations regarding the 
expansion of trade. 
  Yesterday, in a conversation involving Czech journalists at 
Marrakesh, Vladimir Dlouhy, Czech minister of industry and 
commerce, said: "The Czech Government sees the GATT agreement as 
a fundamental contribution to our economy and to our future 
economic growth, because expansion of the Czech economy will be 
dependent upon export to a considerable extent. For the Czech 
Republic [CR], which has comparative advantages from the 
standpoint of exports that cannot be ignored, the conclusions 
stemming from the Uruguay Round, which facilitate access to 
markets, will, among other things, restrict the opportunities of 
developing nations to attack us for dumping and to impose 
quantitative and other technical commercial obstacles on our 
exporters." 
  In his opinion, the advantages stemming from the worldwide 
liberalization of trade and which are contained in the Final Act 
of the Uruguay GATT Round, which the minister will sign for the 
CR today in this Moroccan town, will annually provide a 
supplement for our economic growth on the level of 1 to 2 
percent of the gross domestic product. 
  In his speech before participants from 125 countries at the 
GATT ministerial conference, which will bring to an end more 
than seven years of negotiations involved in the Uruguay Round 
at Marrakesh after four days of discussion and which deals with 
the liberalization of international commercial exchange, the 
minister expressed the CR's interest in becoming a full-fledged 
member of the newly established WTO, as of 1 January next year. 
  He further rejected the so-called social clause, which is an 
inseparable component of the WTO agreement. He explained that 
the introduction of minimum work standards in developing 
countries having cheap exports would exert an unfavorable 
influence, not only on their competitiveness in the world 
market, but can have a negative effect on employment even in the 
importing countries. 
  "Wages in less-developed countries will remain low as long 
as 
those countries remain poor and as long as there are surpluses 
of available manpower," he stressed. According to Dlouhy, the 
social clause could even restrict the investments made by 
supranational corporations in these regions of the world, 
because it is precisely the low wage costs that attract them to 
those areas. 
  In responding to a question by HOSPODARSKE NOVINY as to why 
the CR, which wishes to join the ranks of the developed 
countries as rapidly as possible, is resisting their proposal to 
connect commerce with the rights of free association of citizens 
in trade unions, the guaranteeing of collective bargaining, and 
the prevention of the exploitation of child labor, the minister 
responded that "the CR is opposed to having the new 
international institution become a place of discussion regarding 
social and labor rights of citizens." He stressed that, for this 
purpose, there are other forums which exist, such as, for 
example, the International Labor Organization (ILO). 
  As far as ecological protection issues are concerned, which 
also became part of the document, particularly at the request of 
the United States and France, Dlouhy noted that even those 
issues should not be discussed within the multilateral 
commercial organization, in the opinion of the Czech Government. 
  Yesterday, Minister Dlouhy also held a number of bilateral 
conversations in Marrakesh. He signed a new commercial agreement 
with Muorad Cherif, Moroccan minister of foreign trade and 
investment. The document, which replaces an old agreement dating 
back to the 1980's, adapts mutual trade between the Czech 
Republic and Morocco to conditions of the market economy and 
fully reflects the standards of GATT. 
  He negotiated regarding the possibilities for eliminating 
antidumping measures aimed at the importation of Czech electric 
motors with C. Kesman, Argentine deputy minister of foreign 
affairs. V. Dlouhy also met for discussions with C. Amorim, 
Brazilian minister of foreign affairs, Panitchpakdi, Italian 
deputy prime minister [as published], and S.B. Joedono, 
Indonesian minister of trade. At the request of the Latvian 
side, he also held discussions with O. Pavlovskis, Latvian 
minister of state for foreign trade. It is expected that today 
the Czech minister will hold discussions with Peter Magvas, 
Slovak minister of economics. 

