BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement by the Council of the Movement for National </F>
Progress "On the Situation in the National Defense System"] 
  [Text] It has been already more than half a year that the 
national defense system of the Republic of Lithuania has been 
destroyed methodically. This process was begun and is being 
vigorously continued by the Seimas [parliament] National 
Security Committee. Some responsibility for these actions and 
their effects also falls on the Lithuanian Democratic Labor 
Party [LDDP] and its faction in the Seimas, because their 
members, constituting the core of the National Security 
Committee, determine its destructive activities. One must state 
that the blatant press campaign discrediting the national 
defense system was begun by this committee which is continuing 
to incite it. Newspapers carry misleading statistics about the 
situation in various areas of the national defense system, the 
rate of accidents and deaths in the Army, without comparing them 
with analogous figures in the interior system. We do not intend 
to belittle the accomplishments of the National Security 
Committee in disclosing the current disorder in the defense 
system -- instances of occasional abuse of one's powers, 
nonstatutory relations, poor nutrition, substandard living and 
sanitary conditions, mismanagement, financial violations, and 
chaos on the border. We believe, however, that the prevalent 
style in this committee is that of supervision and criticism, 
while its members imagine that they know everything about the 
national defense system. One must state that their criticism is 
not benevolent, and there are no constructive proposals on how 
to improve the current situation. Members of the National 
Security Committee have forgotten that their primary duty is to 
immediately impose order in the legal basis of the national 
defense system. Thus far, the Seimas has adopted neither a 
national security concept nor laws regulating young men's 
conscription to the active national defense service or a 
military statute, while the National Security Committee has 
shown no hurry to speed up their adoption. The fact that the 
National Defense Ministry budget was reduced on the initiative 
of this committee was particularly negative. It is extremely 
dangerous that the cut in finances for the national defense 
system and its ruthless criticism cause tension and 
dissatisfaction in the Army. Those who want to sustain tensions 
in the Army by trying to use it for the implementation of their 
political interests, take perfect advantage of these moods. It 
is not accidental that they are interested in the illegal 
activities of separate officers of the Volunteer National 
Defense Service [SKAT] and justify them by all means. We 
believe that direct responsibility for the delay in effective 
SKAT reform in preventing any chances for abuse rests with the 
National Security Committee. It is highly surprising that the 
committee hinders the national defense minister in every 
possible way, who seeks to preserve our Army's authority, 
concord, and peace, as well as the prestige of Lithuania's 
national defense system among Western states. 
  The Council of the Movement for National Progress 
categorically speaks out against the destruction of the national 
defense prestige, of the moral authority in the Army and the 
volunteer service, and the factual removal of Lithuania's 
defense system. We claim that all of this is currently being 
done by the Seimas National Security Committee. We appeal to 
the LDDP leadership and urge it to prevent this situation with 
practical deeds rather than declarations. We also appeal to the 
LDDP faction in the Seimas that it review the activities of its 
members who belong to the National Security Committee. We 
appeal to the leadership of the Lithuanian Seimas and its 
deputies requesting them to reform the National Security 
Committee and replace its leaders. We also appeal to A. 
Brazauskas, president of the Republic of Lithuania, so that he 
devote more attention to the national defense system, 
particularly to officers, begin supervising the Lithuanian Army, 
and prevent its thoughtless and dangerous destruction by his 
authority. The destruction of the national defense system that 
has not been fully formed can seriously harm the restoration of 
Lithuania's independence and its joining the ranks of democratic 
states. 

