BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with ANC chief Nelson Mandela by Willi Germund on </F>
28 April; place not given: "We Will Need One, Two, or Perhaps 
Five Years..."] 
  [Text] [Germund] What will be your first decisions as 
president? Do you intend to change the role of the president 
and separate the office from everyday politics? 
  [Mandela] It is hard to list all the changes that we are 
planning to make. We have developed a reconstruction and 
development plan covering a broad sphere in our country's public 
life, including also the president's office and other government 
structures. I will be an executive, managing president and work 
in the framework of a government of national unity. We do not 
want this government to be an empty shell. If we include 
political parties in the government of national unity that get 
more than 5 percent of the votes, they must feel that they are a 
complete, equal part of the decision-making process. 
  [Germund] What type of changes will there be? 
  [Mandela] I do not want to give details at this point, 
because we must be very careful, even if we win an overwhelming 
election victory. We must not create concerns that with our 
majority, we intend to force the minority to accept our policy. 
Any changes must be decided in collective responsibility, 
meaning by agreement of all parties involved. 
  [Germund] That sounds like a formula to paralyze the 
government. If you want to consult the other parties 
comprehensively on any government measure, how are you going to 
make them join in, above all in view of your followers' demands? 
  [Mandela] Can you really ask such a question seriously? We 
have 26 political parties in the country. Thanks to our correct 
policy and strategy, we have been able to keep these parties 
together, and we have made fantastic progress. The new 
transition Constitution has shortcomings because all demands of 
all parties had to be considered. However, we have it, and this 
is our success. We have also achieved agreement with all 
political parties to hold these upcoming elections, without 
making use of our majority. Of course, our followers have the 
right to demand the same opportunities and rights that the 
Whites in South Africa or the people in our neighbor countries 
have. But it will take one, two, or perhaps even five years 
before we can tackle the basic requirements and offer 
employment, jobs, housing, and sanitation. That will take time, 
because we must mobilize the means for this purpose. But once 
the election results have been announced we will start tackling 
these problems. 
  [Germund] Do you believe that the symbols of the old regime 
must be changed? Will a clear cut with the past be necessary? 
  [Mandela] The problem is how to meet the demands of the 
majority, without scaring or intimidating the minorities in this 
country. Despite our conflict in the past -- the Whites have 
skills and means that we do not have. They are of crucial 
importance for our national reconciliation and the development 
of a nation. That is why we are telling the Whites: South 
Africa is your country. The program to change the symbols must 
therefore be started very patiently and seriously, with the 
participation of all parties, as we have done since 1990. 
  [Germund] Do you want to change the name of South Africa 
into 
Azania? 
  [Mandela] I think that is a bit far-fetched. Throughout its 
history, the country was never called Azania. The Arabs at one 
time called a region further north like that. I personally 
cannot warm myself to this idea. I do not think there is a need 
to change the name of South Africa. 
  [Germund] You have basically agreed to a general amnesty for 
members of the security forces. Will there nevertheless be a 
truth commission to clarify the past, and in what way will the 
past be dealt with? 
  [Mandela] The truth commission will not open any type of 
Nuremberg tribunal. South Africa's armed forces, police, 
intelligence services, and administration will play an 
important, if not a crucial, role in this change. Anyone 
demonizing them will render a disservice to South Africa. They 
are of fundamental importance for stability in our 
transformation process. The people who committed crimes in the 
struggle against apartheid have been amnestied. It is therefore 
only fair for the people who committed crimes in the defense of 
apartheid to be amnestied as well. Regarding crimes that were 
committed between October 1990 and December 1993, we think the 
new parliament should decide. We will not amnesty people who 
have committed murders since December. 
  [Germund] Does the public not have a right to know what 
happened? 
  [Mandela] I do not think we should expose people. What 
happened belongs to the past. We must heal the wounds of the 
past. 
  [Germund] So there will be no truth commission? 
  [Mandela] There will be a commission, but the name is not 
important. It is supposed to collect data. 
  [Germund] Does this mean that the police and armed forces 
generals will remain in office? 
  [Mandela] Look, the principle is the same with a general as 
with an ordinary soldier. It applied to our people and will 
also apply to others. 
  [Germund] Are you personally inclined to grant amnesty? 
  [Mandela] I have always said in the election campaign that 
it 
is no use attacking the people of other parties in a way that 
new wounds are created. After all, we want to cooperate in a 
government of national unity. I advocate amnesty. Of course, 
there are the victims' families and relatives, they are very 
bitter. But I personally say, let the past rest. 
  [Germund] What will you be doing with ultrarightists? You 
criticized President Frederik W. de Klerk in the past for 
dealing with them too gently. 
  [Mandela] The National Party at one time represented the 
same 
positions that the ultrarightists hold today. The most 
important weapons are dialogue and criticism, not force. This 
worked prior to the elections when we persuaded General Constand 
Viljoen to take part in the elections and leave the Conservative 
Party. I talked with almost everyone during the past months. I 
talked with every police general. I talked with the whole armed 
forces staff three months ago. I was successful. My most 
important weapon with everyone is dialogue. 
  [Germund] What guarantees can you give that your government 
will act against corruption and will call people personally to 
account? After all, until recently, the ANC had corrupt chiefs 
of government from the Homelands in its own list of candidates. 
  [Mandela] Well, first of all, corruption in the Homelands is 
a mirror of corruption under the governing National Party. We 
know the people were corrupt, but we also know the environs in 
which they worked. However, we will not act in an isolated way. 
We will purge the government. We installed a "Public 
Protector" who will be in charge of publicity and transparency. 
We also installed a commission to investigate human rights 
violations that our organization committed abroad. 
  [Germund] But nothing happened to the responsible people who 
were mentioned in the report. 
  [Mandela] We have the truth commission, which will look at 
the relevant records. However, we must not deal with such 
issues in an isolated manner. We must view all this in the 
political context that is determined by the necessity of 
national unity. We are going to act accordingly. 

