BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "The Reconciliation of `Hardheads'"] </F>
  [Text] The departure of the members of the Serbian 
Volunteer Guard from the Erdut Military Training Center is not 
going to be a cause of yet another Serbian quarrel. Milan 
Martic, president of the republic of Serbian Krajina, and Zeljko 
Raznatovic Arkan, commander of the "Tigers" [the Serbian 
Volunteer Guard], are adamant about that. 
  The Center changed owners last Friday and the ceremony was 
attended by both Martic and Raznatovic, who thereby implemented 
the agreement reached earlier. The Erdut Training Center will 
in future serve for the training of special units of the army of 
the Srpska republic. 
  "Arkan's soldiers have not been expelled. Dust has been 
raised about that in public completely unnecessarily. There is 
simply no need for their presence in Erdut," Milan Martic claims 
categorically. "The Serbian Volunteer Guard contributed to the 
liberation of some parts of Krajina and, if the need arises, we 
are going to count on their help in the future as well." 
  Zeljko Raznatovic Arkan, hitherto commander of the Erdut 
Military Training Center, said something similar: "We have also 
assessed that, after three years, there is no longer any need 
for us to be concentrated in Erdut. We have left the Training 
Center in perfect condition, well furnished and equipped," 
Raznatovic says. "My 240 soldiers are now dispersed in three 
directions: Those who were born in the Srpska republic and the 
republic of Serbian Krajina have placed themselves under the 
command of the local armies, and some of them have removed their 
uniforms." 
  Touching upon the earlier disagreements with Martic, 
Raznatovic says that they were not upon a personal, but a 
strategic basis. What is involved, he says, is the different 
views (his and Martic's) of the Maslenica events last year. 
  "Martic and I are hardheads, but, being real Serbs, we 
forgot 
our disagreement and buried the hatchet. After all, it suits 
me, as the chairman of the Serbian Unity Party, to be reconciled 
with every honorable Serb," Raznatovic concludes. 

