Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Havana, 11 Feb (PL) -- Today, Cuban businessmen 
stressed the need to reinforce commercial information, both to 
and from the island, because it is a decisive factor in knowing 
what business possibilities exist. 
  The Cuban Chamber of Commerce members studied their 1994 
projections at the annual general assembly meeting held at the 
Havana Convention Center today. 
  The members, which include firms from all sectors of the 
national economy, are involved in exporting their products and 
expanding the island's trade horizon within the framework of 
new, commercial laws which allows and promotes the participation 
of foreign firms in the country's economic activities. 
  A report, which was distributed at the general assembly, 
noted that the need to provide more information has prompted the 
creation and implementation of a business support service, which 
gives advice on issues related to business organization, 
legislation, and techniques in other countries. 
  A member of a firm, who requested that his name not be 
revealed, told PRENSA LATINA that the commercial activities in 
1993 yielded positive financial results. He also emphasized the 
growing number of requests to operate joint companies by many 
foreign firms from all over the world. 
  The report highlighted the importance of strengthening ties 
with Caribbean countries, keeping in mind the ties established 
by Havana with the capital cities of those countries. 
  In this sense, Milda Picos Rivers, director of the 
Cubaexport 
firm, stated there are more exchanges between the five eastern 
provinces of Cuba with Caribbean countries. 
  Picos reported that this firm promotes exports to Trinidad 
and Tobago, Guadalupe, Martinique, and other neighboring 
islands, of, among other products, citrus, fish and seafood, 
mineral water, construction material, and salt. 
  In this framework, there is also noteworthy interest in the 
tourist industry in which Santiago de Cuba, the third largest 
city in the country, will host at least three important events 
next summer: Carifiesta, Expocaribe, and the sixth Cuban Nurses 
Congress. 
  The assembly of associate members was headed by Chamber of 
Commerce President Carlos Martinez Salsamendi, and was attended 
by high-level Cuban foreign commerce and finance officials. 

