Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Moving on From Esprit and Race"] </F>
  [Text] ESPRIT [European Strategic Program for Research and 
Development in Information Technologies], the first major EC 
R&amp;D 
programme and the pattern for most of the others that followed, 
is dead. RACE [Research and Development in Advanced 
Communications Technologies in Europe], too, has become past 
history. But as with John Brown, their souls go marching on in 
the shape of the current programme on "Telematic Systems of 
General Interest", or STIG, as it is often referred to in 
Brussels, after the initials of its title in French. 
  According to the Commission, by contrast with ESPRIT and 
RACE, STIG is mainly an application oriented programme. It has 
seven sub-programmes which bring together: 
  -- Users from areas of major economic and social importance; 
  -- System and service providers from the information 
technology and telecommunications sectors. 
  The Seven sub-programmes, with their budgets in mecu 
[million 
European Currency Units] are (April 1993): Administrations 
(41.64); Transport Services (125.42); Health Care (97.8); 
Flexible and Distance Learning (DELTA); Libraries (22.69); 
Linguistic Research and Engineering (22.69); and Rural Areas 
(14.11). 
<H5>  Background </H5>
  Modern economies are moving towards the information age. In 
future, industrial efficiency and the delivery and quality of 
services will increasingly depend on information and 
communication technologies. Over the next decade, most 
information is expected to take the same form as computer data. 
The cost of this process is almost certain to drop sharply. 
  Very large gains in productivity will be made if a common 
European infrastructure can be provided for the research, 
industrial, service and user organisations involved in these 
areas. A prerequisite for the necessary large scale investment 
is an investigation into applications that would benefit from 
existing and emerging technologies. 
<H5>  Objectives </H5>
  The objectives of STIG are to promote cooperation between 
industry and service providers and to define a response to the 
needs of users and the developing market. Work on 
interoperability and standards will aim to remove a major 
barrier to free competition. 
<H5>  Some Achievements so Far </H5>
  STIG has drawn over 1,000 participants into its projects, 
concerted actions, and "accompanying measures". 
  Although the individual actions under STIG began by growing 
autonomously from their different contexts, they have gradually 
developed similar approaches in addressing RTD [Community 
Research and Technological Development] topics: 
  -- Identification of end-user requirements. 
  -- Determination of the technology and system engineering 
implications of these requirements. 
  -- Assessment of the techno-economic impact of the 
application. 
  -- The development of common functional specifications. 
  -- Piloting and validation of advanced telematics services 
irrespective of geographic location. 
  -- Identification of appropriate targets for standardisation 
in order to accelerate the implementation of telematics 
applications Europe wide. 
  -- Diffusion of results and know-how, and transfer of 
technology Europe wide. 
  -- Promotion of awareness of the impact of, and the 
opportunities for, these telematics applications. 
<H5>  Some Key Results </H5>
  The Health Care programme has created a common platform in 
its fragmented sector for researchers, health care providers and 
users, improving, through collaboration, the prospects for more 
effective competition. 
  Issues addressed include acute, chronic and specialised 
care, 
care in the home, and remote or sparsely populated areas. The 
programme has led to the establishment by CEN [European 
Standards Committee] of a technical committee for medical 
informatics. A laboratory reporting system has been set up to 
serve general practitioners. A tele-service is being set up 
which will enable donors and recipients of human bone marrow to 
be matched on a Europe wide basis. 
  The transport programme is paving the way for the 
development 
of the Europe wide availability of services and the 
interoperability of in-vehicle equipment, involving 
standardisation and regulatory action at European level. 
Research is being conducted on common equipment and credit 
arrangements to permit non-stop electronic toll collection and 
payment for parking and public transport throughout Europe. 
R&amp;D 
on safety includes anti-collision systems and vehicle and driver 
monitoring equipment. 
  The Flexible and Distance Learning programme is developing a 
standard work station for learners and tutors and a distributed 
network to join and interlink users at a distance. An 
experimental European training network has been set up to enable 
broadcasts by satellite of live TV training sessions with a 
low-cost video- conference to interconnect students with tutors, 
and a low-cost specialised satellite service is being researched 
to link Europe's Open Universities. 
<H5>  Telematics in the Fourth Framework Programme and Beyond </H5>
  Future EC Telematics research, the Commission has stated, 
will aim to: 
  -- Promote generic and seamlessly integrated information 
systems, providing swift, accurate, reliable and user friendly 
access to the full body of relevant information; 
  -- Increase the competitiveness of European system suppliers 
and service providers in the international market place by 
developing trans-European telematics solutions to specific 
applications based on the integration of distributed, networked, 
heterogeneous hardware and software platforms; 
  -- Shorten implementation time frames to maximise the 
financial returns to suppliers, by encouraging the development 
of only those systems which are clearly needed, and where 
telematics solutions are cost effective; 
  -- Promote best practice and open standards; 
  -- Build on previous telematics activities in Europe, while 
monitoring international developments to ensure that appropriate 
opportunities for European RTD are not missed; 
  -- Raise awareness of the economic benefits of telematics 
systems where specific users' needs have been identified by 
analysing the likely cost effectiveness of RTD in the particular 
application, and assist in the adoption of telematics 
technologies in new areas of application. 
  (The above is taken from the introductory section of the 
current annual report on DELTA, obtained without charge from: 
CEC, DGXIII/C/2 DELTA, 200 rue de la Loi, Brussels B-1049. 
Fax: Brussels 296-2392.) 

