BFN 

  [Text] Washington, April 26 (XINHUA) -- U.S. Secretary of 
Defense William Perry today urged his Russian counterpart Pavel 
Grachev to keep the joint U.S.-Russian military exercises 
planned for July. 
  In a telephone conversation originally intended to focus on 
Bosnia, Perry "urged Minister Grachev to push within his 
government to keep the exercise going forward," Pentagon 
spokeswoman Kathleen Delaski said. 
  Delaski refused to characterize Grachev's response other 
than 
to say that the minister accepted Perry's concern and said he 
would take it to his government. 
  The week-long joint exercises, scheduled for July in the 
Ural 
Mountains with 250 troops from each country, was agreed upon by 
Grachev and Perry's predecessor Les Aspin, when Washington and 
Moscow were enjoying their diplomatic honeymoon. 
  Ties between the two countries soured recently following the 
Aldrich Ames spy case and differences over Bosnia and in other 
front. 
  No longer branding it as warm partners, secretary of 
defense, 
before a trip to the former Soviet Union, characterized 
U.S.-Russian relationship as a "pragmatic partnership." 
  Earlier today, Vyacheslav Kostikov, Russian President Boris 
Yeltsin's spokesman, said Yeltsin instructed the defense 
department to consult with Washington on the matter. 
  The move came after Russian parliamentarians from the State 
Duma, the lower house, called the exercise an American plot to 
invade Russia. 
  Yeltsin "regards with understanding the doubts expressed in 
the Duma about the expediency of the joint Russian-U.S. staff 
and field exercise," Kostikov said. 
  At the Pentagon, Delaski said the Russian move came as a 
surprise in the U.S. although "our experts on this issue may 
have had an inkling." 
  In response to the Russian objection to exercises in the 
Urals, Delaski said conducting the games elsewhere or on U.S. 
ground was "certainly a possibility." 
  "Originally, we talked about the possibility of doing them 
in 
the U.S. or in Russia or even in neutral territory somewhere in 
Europe," she said. "So that remains a possibility." 

