CSO 

  [Text] The Ministry of Posts and 
Telecommunications-sponsored "Research Council for Broadcast 
Digitization," a private research council of the Broadcast 
Administration Bureau director and chaired by Academic 
Information Center Director Hiroshi Inose, completed its final 
report on 27 April. Aside from specifying the standardization of 
broadcasting formats, which will be the first stage for shifting 
to next-generation broadcasting, by 1996, the report is 
characterized by the proposal to establish a "frequency band 
licensing system" which utilizes the special features of digital 
systems. Controversy surrounding the proposed review of 
high-vision systems will serve to stimulate a resumption of 
debate concerning next-generation broadcasting systems which had 
reached a stalemate. 
  In contrast to analog broadcasting which can transmit voice 
and images only, digital broadcasting can accurately transmit 
large volumes of data and software. As an example, broadcasting 
over multiple channels and installing two-way capabilities will 
enable services such as in-home medical care, home shopping, and 
broadcasting of games. 
  In connection with such digitization of broadcasting, the 
report introduces the status in Europe and the United States 
where work is in progress relative to systems standardization. 
The report provides the assessment that the goal of the United 
States and European nations is to work for the smooth 
implementation of the international standards for digital 
satellite broadcasting being promoted by the International 
Telecommunications Union (ITU), a subordinate agency of the 
United Nations, with a target date of 1996. The report stresses 
the need to accelerate work on the standardization of systems in 
Japan where movements are taking place to prepare for the 
implementation of digital broadcasting via communications 
satellites. 
  Further, the report criticizes the disadvantages of the 
current licensing system which discriminates between radio and 
television broadcasting. The report concludes that if digital 
systems are adopted, there will be a need to use a system of 
licensing based on frequency bands, to enable flexibility and 
versatility in offering services such as for television 
broadcasting, video and data transmission and telephone 
communication. 

