Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Gan Lin (3927 7207): "Renewing Hainan's </F>
Strength: From Policy to Institutions"] 
  [Text]Most Extensive Preferential Policies No 
Guarantee of Status As Largest Special Economic Zone 
  Hainan, the newest province in the country, is associated 
with the title "China's largest special economic zone [SEZ]" by 
virtue of the fact that it offered the most extensive 
preferential policies back when the province was founded. 
  No doubt Hainan's preferential policies were the most 
attractive in the entire country, including the 15 percent low 
tax policy, foreign exchange retention, and the policy that 
allows personnel, funds, and goods to enter and leave China 
freely. All that had simply been unthinkable on the mainland. 
The policies set off a round of "Hainan fever": "100,000 
qualified personnel crossed the strait and companies from all 
over congregated in Qiongzhou." 
  Successive Hainan leaders have worked hard in the past few 
years "implementing the policies and laying the foundation." 
Since 1992, however, especially after Deng Xiaoping toured the 
south, the Chinese economy has been on a fast track. Cities 
along Chang Jiang have been opened up, so have those along the 
border. Many of the preferential policies that Hainan was once 
so proud of can now be found elsewhere. The policy edge of 
Hainan over other places is eroding by the day. 
  Hainan is faced with a grim fact; no longer is it enough for 
it to rely on the "most generous preferential policies" to 
retain its position as the "largest SEZ." 
<H5>  From Policy Advantage to Institutional Advantage </H5>
  Under these circumstances, an advantage that Hainan has 
always had but was not sufficiently noted in the past now looks 
enormously attractive, namely its institutions. 
  When Hainan was founded as a province, the central 
government 
made it clear that it wanted Hainan to take the lead in 
implementing the "small government, large society" model. 
Accordingly, Hainan went in for bold reform when it put together 
its machinery of government. Altogether 26 departments and 
bureaus were set up under the government protection system, 
administrative affairs and social service system, economic 
supervision and regulatory system, and consulting system. That 
was a reduction of 20 administrative organs from the 
administrative setup in the Hainan administrative region. The 
number of personnel also fell by 200. Compared to the province 
of Ningxia in the interior, which has more or less the same area 
as Hainan, the latter has 90 fewer administrative organs and 31 
percent fewer workers. At the same time, market regulation is 
allowed to play the key role in Hainan's economy and no 
artificial restrictions are placed on the ratio of the various 
economic components. Fair competition is encouraged. For 
instance, all enterprises, whether state, collective, private, 
or wholly or partially foreign-owned, pay income taxes at the 
rate of 15 percent. 
  By rolling back government regulation and control, the 
implementation of the "small government and large society" model 
has freed ample room for the creation and development of 
enterprises, the cells of the economy. Already 30,800 companies 
had been created by the first half of 1990. Before it became a 
province, there was just one private enterprise in Hainan. By 
the first half of 1990, the number had increased to 1800. 
Statistics from the departments involved show that Hainan has 
more companies on a per capita basis than any other province in 
China. Given the emphasis on market regulation, the development 
of a host of markets for capital goods has been most rapid. A 
labor market and a skilled personnel market have taken shape. 
Almost 100 percent of the total labor demand is now met through 
market regulation. The lending and borrowing of short-term funds 
is no longer the only game on the funds market; instead it has 
been developing into a comprehensive market where bonds, notes, 
and foreign exchange regulation exist in balance. The state 
bank, foreign-funded banks, urban credit unions, as well as 
non-bank financial institutions have developed in a big way. 
Haikou is now one of the cities in the country with the highest 
bank concentration. In January 1990, Hainan led the nation in 
slashing the supply of low-priced grain by 20 percent. This one 
piece of reform alone enabled Hainan to reduce the supply of 
low-priced grain by 60 million kilograms a year and save 66.8 
million yuan in government subsidies. Subsequently, Hainan 
became the first in the nation to totally abolish low-priced 
grain, thereby severing the linkage between permanent registered 
residency and grain and oil. Nowadays most capital goods and all 
articles of daily use in Hainan are market-regulated. According 
to a Western observer, the prices in Hainan are regulated by the 
market to a greater extent than those in Brazil, a free market 
economy. 
  This system has invigorated the development of Hainan like 
never before. According to statistics from the departments 
involved, in the three years since Hainan became a province, 
more was invested in capital construction than in the entire 
40-year period following 1949. About 70 percent of these 
investments came from the various enterprises in society and 
have played a notable role in improving Hainan's investment 
climate. The new system has also helped Hainan tide over the 
difficult period with some success. As the nation entered a 
period of economic retrenchment and grain, steel, and coal 
became scarce, Hainan managed to fare quite well by putting to 
use its multiple channels as a large society with small 
government, its diverse sources of funds, and its strong 
adaptability. By creating ample room for the unhindered growth 
of enterprises and individuals, Hainan has made possible the 
emergence of a number of outstanding enterprises and capable 
individuals, including large-scale shareholding companies with 
hundreds of millions of yuan in capital. One example is the 
Hainan New Energy Co. Ltd. Starting out with just 500,000 yuan 
in capital, it has been developing by leaps and bounds, buying 
up state shares and social shares and becoming the first private 
shareholding enterprise in China to reorganize itself through 
share standardization. 
  The magical hand of the market has also guided the leaders 
of 
Hainan to make wise policies. Soon after it became a province, 
Hainan did consider emulating the Zhu Jiang delta and achieving 
economic take-off by going all out to attract foreign capital 
and develop the three kinds of enterprises either wholly or 
partially foreign-funded. Of the four major sectors, tourism 
came in last, after industry, trade, and agriculture. What was 
unexpected was the upsurge in social investment in tourism, 
despite minimal government inputs in that sector, in response to 
the fact that Hainan boasts the most beautiful tropical seascape 
in the nation and is largely free from pollution. The payoffs 
took everybody by surprise. By April last year, that is, four 
years after Hainan achieved provincial status, 4.5 million 
tourists, both Chinese and foreign, had visited the province, 
including 774,000 from overseas, generating $140 million in 
foreign exchange. In both the amount of foreign exchange 
generated and the growth rate, tourism outperformed the three 
kinds of enterprises either wholly or partially foreign-funded. 
  While still in the experimental stage, the new market 
economy, bursting with life, further opened the eyes of the 
decision-making echelon in Hainan to the possibility of and need 
for renewing its strength. After the 14th CPC National Congress 
unequivocally set the goal of establishing a new market economy, 
in particular, they realized that now is the time to make Hainan 
live up to its name as China's largest SEZ. 
<H5>  Reforms in Hainan: Tough Choices But Revenue-Boosters </H5>
  Hainan has successively unveiled nine pieces of reform since 
the beginning of this year. As these are all major reforms, 
their introduction was immediately greeted immediately with 
strong reactions at home and abroad. 
  1. In project registration, a direct registration system has 
replaced the traditional project examination-and-approval 
system. Under China's traditional industrial and commercial 
registration system, a project must first obtain permission 
before it could proceed with registration. In advanced 
countries, in contrast, it is just the opposite. You must first 
register the company as a legal person and then apply to have 
the project approved. The most essential characteristic of the 
new enterprise registration system is that it adopts the direct 
registration system commonly in use in the world to facilitate 
enterprise formation as much as possible: 1) 24 kinds of 
enterprises, including financial and insurance institutions, 
must still go through the examination-and-approval process in 
accordance with the appropriate state regulations. All other 
enterprises, however, can directly register with the industry 
and commerce administrative bureau, bypassing the department in 
charge. 2) The paperwork involved has been cut drastically. 
Nowadays two sets of documents are required, instead of the 
traditional nine. It used to take several months to go through 
the process. Today it takes just seven days. 3) State 
enterprises, collective enterprises, private enterprises, and 
foreign-funded enterprises are put on a level playing field and 
treated similarly. In effect Hainan has become the place in 
China where enterprise registration is at its simplest. 
  2. Enterprises within the budget have been abolished. No 
longer are enterprises that are mismanaged and have been losing 
money for a long period of time being subsidized. They are 
allowed to go bankrupt or be merged or acquired as the case may 
be. 
  3. Land is allowed to change hands through open bidding and 
auction. To begin with, Hainan did a good job in land value 
assessment and came up with proper base prices so that different 
kinds of land parcels are priced differently and industrial land 
remains low-cost. The next step is to replace the renting system 
with a bidding and auction system. 
  4. Export quotas are allocated through bidding. 
  5. Factory directors and managers are recruited openly. 
  6. Hainan has abolished the tax levy system, first trying it 
out in Haikou. The special tax commissioner system, in effect 
for decades, was abolished in favor of modern computerized 
collection. A tax court was also set up to handle cases of tax 
cheating and tax evasion in accordance with the law. 
  7. The shareholding system has come to the infrastructural 
sector. The myth that only the state can take on infrastructural 
projects because of the size of the investment required and the 
long turnover period has been exploded. Society is given a free 
hand to raise funds to develop the infrastructure. 
  8. State enterprises are encouraged to adopt the 
shareholding 
system. State-enterprise legal persons are encouraged to own a 
piece of one another by buying one another's shares. This is one 
way to stimulate the flow of capital among such enterprises. 
  9. Planning work is no longer "cage" management but track 
management. Provided something is in the right direction and is 
in line with the industrial policy, people should be given a 
free hand to do it. 
<H5>  Building the Market-Economy "Iron Triangle" </H5>
  The reforms mentioned abov are major revenue-boosters, as 
demonstrated by a wealth of data: 
  The drive now under way to reduce the money supply and 
tighten credit has slowed development in some areas, including 
the coastal region. Yet the momentum in Hainan to import from 
abroad and develop cooperative ties with the interior has not 
abated. During the months of April and May, just as Hainan 
introduced a new enterprise registration system, over 5,000 
enterprises were registered in the province with combined 
registered funds amounting to 20 billion yuan. If all 
enterprises come up with 25 percent of their funds within one 
month as required under the regulations, there will be an 
infusion of at least 5 billion yuan into Hainan. Between January 
and August, the province approved over 2,000 foreign-funded 
enterprises with a total contractual investment of $4 billion, 
up 160 percent and 200 percent, respectively, over the same 
period last year. 
  On 15 May, the Haikou municipal government put a total of 40 
acres of land in the financial and commercial district along the 
waterfront on the block. Dozens of companies took part in the 
open bidding. In the end there were two successful bidders, who 
paid 4.9 million yuan and 6.8 million yuan per acre 
respectively, enriching the municipal coffers by 243 million 
yuan. There is an interesting contrast here. In the past five 
years the city sold 20,000 acres of land but netted just 997 
million yuan from the transactions. 
  Between January and July this year, the province of Hainan 
collected over 1.5 billion yuan in revenue, more than doubling 
that for the corresponding period in 1992. During the same 
January to July period, the city of Haikou collected 840 million 
yuan in revenue, a gain of 118 percent over the same period a 
year ago. 
  It should be pointed out that revenue-boosting reform 
measures were not something that came about overnight. 
Consideration had been given to them and the appropriate 
documents prepared soon after the province was created. The 
proposal of allocating export quotas by bidding, for example, 
was put forward back in April 1988 and the necessary regulations 
were issued in August of the same year. It was made much of in 
the official documents of the first provincial party congress 
held in September. 
  The actual implementation has been much more difficult. One 
reason is the emphasis a few years ago on Hainan's policy 
advantage and the neglect of institutional advantage. Another 
crucial factor is that these reforms have been resisted by 
forces inside the government, by vested interests that have 
profited handsomely from illegitimate competition. Broadly 
speaking, the experiment to set up a new market economy in 
Hainan in the past few years can be divided into two stages. 
Before this year, Hainan concentrated on nurturing a variety of 
markets for capital goods and worked hard to make the market the 
principal regulator of economic operations. At the same time, it 
hammered out the basic framework of a "small government and 
large society" model. Since the beginning of this year, the 
province has graduated from the kind of reform that is concerned 
mainly with quantitative indicators--small government, large 
society--to a concerted effort to transform government functions 
and build up the capacity of society for self-rule and 
development. The implementation of the enterprise registration 
system, for example, is an indication of the effort to remove 
government from administrative affairs it should not and cannot 
handle and truly return enterprises to the people. Introducing 
the shareholding system to infrastructural build-up and 
encouraging state enterprises to adopt the shareholding system 
are precisely the very things that would create an even more 
favorable climate for the all-out drive by society to develop 
the economy. Meanwhile, a major effort has been under way to 
create a level playing field for enterprises in all economies. 
There is absolutely no doubt that abolishing enterprises within 
the budget effectively weans state enterprises from the 
privilege of depending on the state and putting them on a level 
playing field with enterprises from other economies. As for the 
use of public bidding in the allocation of export quotas and the 
transfer of land, it closes the "door of convenience" for 
"special people" who only know how to pull strings instead of 
using their own skills. 
  In reality Hainan's revenue-boosting reforms are very tough 
reforms. They constitute a high-level decisive battle in the 
campaign to create a new market economy. Look closely at 
countries around the world with a successful market economy and 
you can readily discover that the market economy never exists in 
isolation. Most of us realize that economic operations depend on 
market regulation. That aside, there are two other things which 
are absolutely indispensable. One, small government and large 
society. Two, fair competition among all economies. These two 
things constitute the "iron triangle" of a market economy. 
Remove any one of them and the other two will not be able to 
really survive. 
  After waging the tough battle, Hainan has basically created 
an iron triangle for its market economy. When it comes to the 
creation of a new market economy, Hainan no doubt has placed 
itself at the forefront of the nation. Meanwhile, the largest 
SEZ, which used to pride itself on its "most extensive 
preferential policies," has sought to replace its old advantage 
with its institutional strength. The message to the world is in 
China the era of using preferential policies to affirm the 
extent of China's openness is over. Today, the race to come up 
with the most preferential treatment is giving way to a contest 
to see whose reform is better. Whoever does the best job in 
putting together a new market economy is driving the fastest 
train. 

