Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special article" by James Tien Pei-chun (3944 0554 0193), </F>
legislative councillor and member of the Liberal Party: "There 
Should Be No Discrimination Regarding the Most-Favored-Nation 
Trade Statute"] 
  [Text] In a few months, the United States will make the 
decision on the issue of extending China's most-favored nation 
(MFN) trade status. I would like to point out that the factors 
for considering whether nor not the United States should extend 
China's MFN trade status unconditionally at present are 
different from those before 1992. The combination of the two 
factors that Bill Clinton of the Democratic Party has become 
U.S. President and the overall situation of the U.S. Congress is 
controlled by the Democratic Party will become a key factor for 
us in assessing whether or not the United States will extend the 
MFN trade status unconditionally because Bill Clinton will not 
revoke a resolution adopted by his own party in the Congress. 
<H5>  MFN Trade Status Is Not a Kind of Preferential Treatment </H5>
  As a matter of fact, extending China's MFN trade status is 
basically a trade affair between China and the United States. 
However, the United States has changed it into a political tool. 
The so-called MFN status is only a bilateral trade arrangement 
on the basis of equality and mutual benefit which does not 
involve discrimination and is not a special preferential 
treatment. On the contrary, not granting MFN trade status is a 
kind of discrimination directed against a nation. 
  In 1992, the United States had trade relations with a total 
of more than 170 countries, and it needs to extend the MFN 
status each year to only three countries: Bulgaria, the former 
Soviet Union, and China. 
  This phenomenon fully demonstrates that, in fact, the United 
States has not regarded China as an equal trade partner and is 
attempting to make China compromise or submit on other non-trade 
issues by threatening to discriminate against China on its trade 
status. 
  It is to be regretted that this discriminative act in 
handling the trade relationship with China has deceived the 
majority of the residents so that they think the United States 
will give preferential treatment in trade to China as long as 
China improves the human rights situation. To date, some people 
still are mistakenly following the U.S. line and have brought 
the human rights issue into the discussion on the MFN status, 
thus blurring the heart of the entire issue. 
  Their criticism of human rights in China shows only that 
they 
have scanty knowledge about human rights and think that 
political rights are the sum total of human rights. As a matter 
of fact, human rights also include civil rights. For example, 
the Chinese people can choose their jobs freely and are not 
restricted in traveling from province to province, and so on. 
Are these human rights? 
<H5>  Do Not Mix Trade With Human Rights </H5>
  That I have flatly refused to link human rights in China 
with 
the MFN status does not mean that I am satisfied with the human 
rights situation in China at present. As a matter of fact, I 
too think that there is ample room for improvement regarding 
human rights in China. I also hope that human rights in China 
can be escalated. However, the experience of Western countries 
has also told us that it has taken 40 to 50 years of constant 
development before their human rights reached today's level. 
This development was not completed overnight, like magic. 
  The experience of Western countries also tells us that they 
too first developed their economy to motivate the escalation of 
the level of the people's living standard, and then the progress 
of the entire society, including human rights and political 
rights. China's achievements in economic development, gradual 
opening up in the field of information, and gradual realization 
of universal education among the people, and other factors at 
present have laid a foundation for further development of human 
rights in China. 
  At present, in Guangdong Province alone, there are more than 
10 million laborers who have come from Hunan and Hubei. Among 
them, more than 4 million are employed by more than 10,000 
plants set up with the investment of Hong Kong businessmen. 
They have remitted their earnings to their hometowns. This 
undoubtedly is conducive to improving the living standards of 
more people there. In their spare time after work in the 
plants, these laborers have more opportunities to come into 
contact with foreign information. In their correspondence with 
their friends and relatives in the rural areas, they also can 
help them acquire more information. 
  People who hope to promote the improvement of human rights 
in 
China by means of the MFN status should understand that human 
rights in China already are developing steadily and that trying 
to help the shoots grow by pulling them up will not work. On 
the contrary, China's loss of MFN trade status will deal a heavy 
blow to the economic development in south China, and employment 
opportunities will be reduced. This will only further degrade 
the quality of life for more people and damage the foundation 
for the development of human rights. 
  Let us take a look at the former Soviet Union, a country 
that 
started reform at about the same time as China. It has taken 
the road of developing politics first, while China has regarded 
economic development as the leading factor. To date, we can see 
that some progress has been made in the political rights of the 
Russian people, but they still have to join long lines to buy 
bread and other daily necessities. Comparatively speaking, 
people in China can buy various kinds of food at will and they 
have clothing of various colors to choose and buy. The people 
are universally earning more and can even afford to make tours 
of other localities. I would like to ask: What kind of living 
do they expect to have as ordinary citizens? 
  That the United States has used human rights as a condition 
for giving MFN status does not mean that such an act is correct, 
and it is not necessary for everyone to following such an idea 
blindly. In fact, the political rights of the American people 
are more progressive than those of the Chinese people, but their 
civil rights are lagging behind in some ways. For example, even 
to date, some small towns in the United States still practice 
apartheid, prohibit the entry of black people, and even 
persecute and murder black people who move into such towns. 
<H5>  Give China Permanent MFN Status </H5>
  Although the demand for the United States to extend China's 
MFN trade status is a routine and important official matter, 
there is, in fact, a thorough solution to it, which is that the 
United States can grant China permanent MFN trade status on an 
equal and mutually beneficial trade basis. 
  We have urged the United States to extend China's MFN 
status. 
We have made this most basic appeal because we are faced with 
the reality that the United States gives the MFN status on a 
yearly basis, but such an arrangement has not proceeded from an 
equal and mutually beneficial basis and is only a pretext for 
making use of a trade issue to pin down another country to 
attain its hidden purpose. 
  What we should strive for in the future is a permanent MFN 
trade status granted by the United States to China. We should 
let the residents of Hong Kong, the American people, and even 
the whole world understand that granting permanent MFN trade 
status to China is not a favor bestowed by the United States on 
China, but is only a bilateral, equal, and non-discriminative 
trade arrangement with China. If the United States is willing 
to delete its political purpose from the trade issue, I see no 
reason why the United States should not grant China permanent 
MFN trade status. 

