Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Mexico City, D.F., 22 December (SUN)--The Office of 
the Attorney General of the Republic [PGR] held a judge and a 
magistrate responsible for the release, three years ago, of the 
presumed drug trafficker, Amado Carrillo Fuentes. It claimed 
that he was freed even though the Federal Public Prosecutor's 
Office had sufficient evidence to charge him with crimes against 
health, and those of collecting and carrying firearms without a 
license. 
  In an official communique, the PGR explained that, during 
1990, it "never approved the release of Amado Carrillo; but, on 
the contrary, constantly objected to the judicial decisions that 
benefited him." 
  The magistrate cited in the document is Gilberto Chavez 
Pliego, of the third unified court of the first circuit; and the 
judge was the head of the 10th district court of criminal 
proceedings. 
  The document reveals that the PGR is currently intensifying 
its investigations to reinforce the indictment against the 
presumed drug trafficker. It was executed on 20 November, when 
the public prosecutor's office requested an arrest warrant for 
him, based on the crimes of collecting arms, storing cartridges 
and explosive ammunition, and criminal association. 
  The PGR states that, in August 1989, Carrillo Fuentes was 
captured with three other persons in Guadalajara and taken to 
Mexico City. He was presumed guilty of crimes against health, 
providing funds for the purchase of drugs, collecting weapons, 
and carrying a firearm without a license, as specified in 
preliminary investigation 3755-D-89. 
<H5>  Removing Drugs From Mexico </H5>
  He was held for trial on 27 August 1989 in the 10th district 
court of criminal proceedings. The trial was initiated for his 
presumed authorization of a fleet of air taxis for removing 
drugs from Mexico. Three days later, an order was issued for his 
formal imprisonment. 
  The department indicates that he appealed to the third 
unified court of the first circuit, as recorded in docket 
418-89-III-E. 
  On 9 April 1990, Magistrate Gilberto Chavez Pliego ordered 
his release "for lack of evidence supporting an indictment, 
benefiting all those accused of crimes against health and 
criminal association." 
  The PGR notes that, consequently, on 10 April 1990, Carrillo 
Fuentes petitioned the judge for his provisional release, which 
was granted with bail of 10 million old pesos. 
  On 12 June of that year, the Federal Public Prosecutor's 
Office reported its accusatory findings regarding his presumed 
guilt of the crime of arms collection. 
  Nevertheless, the same judge issued a verdict of acquittal 
in 
favor of the presumed drug trafficker, considering him "not 
liable." Therefore, he ordered the latter's absolute release. 
  After an appeal from the Federal Public Prosecutor's Office, 
the same unified court decided that the verdict was in favor of 
Amado Carrillo. Hence: "The Office of the Attorney General of 
the Republic never released Amado Carrillo, and the 
investigation is currently being intensified," as the communique 
states in conclusion. 

