BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 25 (XINHUA) -- A top manager of the 
General Motors [GM] Automotive Components Group (ACG) said here 
today that the Government of the United States should renew 
China's most favored nation status (MFN) in June to keep 
bilateral trade on the normal track. 
  The business of U.S. enterprises in China would not be 
affected as well, said Rudi von Meister, director of China 
operations of the GM ACG in his interview with XINHUA. 
  The group will spare no effort to help China receive MFN 
status, he said, adding that a Washington-based deputy president 
of the group had kept frequent contacts with U.S. Congressmen 
and government officials, in support of China's continued 
enjoyment of MFN status. 
  If trade conflicts arose between the two countries, it would 
be possible for those U.S. companies who had invested in China 
to lose this large market with great potential, the director 
said. 
  However, von Meister was confident about prospects of 
resolving the problem, saying that China would once again get 
MFN status, and the group would expand its China business. 
  "In order to show our determination to expand investment 
here, we have brought products from all seven departments of the 
group, as well as that of our joint venture with China, to show 
in the China '94 international engine exhibition," Meister said. 
  The exhibition, whose full name is the First International 
Exhibition on Internal Combustion Engine Technology and 
Equipment, opened here today. About 70 foreign and 240 Chinese 
companies are displaying their products. 
  The GM-China joint venture--Beijing Wan Yuan-GM Automotive 
Electronic Controls Ltd, established at the end of last year, 
manufactures advanced electronic fuel injection systems for use 
in locally produced automobiles. 
  In addition, the group also cooperates with six other 
Chinese 
companies by transferring technology and training technicians 
for them. 
  To increase its presence here, Meister said, the group has 
made an overall investment plan in China. 
  According to the plan, GM ACG would establish three 
manufacturing bases in northeast China, in coastal areas of the 
southeast, and in southwest China's Sichuan Province. 
  All seven departments of the group would establish joint 
ventures with China to help the country develop the 
export-oriented automotive components industry. 
  The director disclosed that over 30 cooperative projects 
were 
under discussion between the two sides, and agreement on several 
of them would be reached within the year. 

