Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tehran, Feb. 23, IRNA -- The Islamic Republic of 
Iran has volunteered to contribute to the United Nations 
peacekeeping troops in Bosnia-Herzegovina but the response by 
the U.N. implies unexplainable wariness, said an Iranian Foreign 
Ministry spokesman here Tuesday. 
  The spokesman, Mahmoud Mohammadi, told IRNA that Iranian 
Foreign Minister 'Ali Akbar Velayati had informed the U.N. 
Secretary General Butrus Butrus-Ghali of Iran's preparedness to 
do so and was awaiting the U.N. response to mobilize troops to 
Bosnia-Herzegovina under the supervision of the United Nations. 
  He said Iran's proposal had been previously upheld by the 
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) and by the last 
assembly of the foreign ministers of the nonaligned countries in 
Jakarta earlier this month. 
  Asked to comment on NATO's ultimatum to Serbian forces, he 
said NATO had not demanded the Serbs to end their siege of 
Sarajevo but simply to distance their artillery pieces from the 
besieged Muslim city. As far as NATO is concerned, he added, 
the ultimatum was solely a propaganda device for face-saving and 
for breaking NATO's long silence and not as a genuine warning to 
the Serbs. 
  Commenting on the current negotiations in Tehran between 
Iranian officials and members of an Iraqi delegation who are 
here since last Thursday, he said that the main topic in their 
agenda is that of the prisoners of war, adding that a joint 
committee of officials of the two countries were proceeding with 
the task. 
  The second most important item in the talks with the Iraqis, 
he said, is that of the fate of a number of Iraqi warplanes that 
were allowed to land in Iran immediately before the outbreak of 
the war of the allied powers with Iraq for its invasion of 
Kuwait in 1990. 
  He said the Chinese Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of 
Foregin Affairs Qian Qichen is to arrive in Tehran for a 
three-day official visit Friday 4 march. 
  The Chinese minister's talks with the Iranian officials, the 
spokesman noted, would focus primarily on bilateral relations, 
mutual cooperation at international organizations, and also 
cooperation in Central Asia. 

