Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Irbil, Iraq, Jan 5 (AFP)--The trial opened here 
Wednesday [5 January] of a Turkish guide accused of murdering 
three BBC freelancers in Kurdish-controlled northern Iraq, an 
AFP correspondent reported. 
  Hashim Jirki is accused of killing Charles Maxwell, Nick 
della Casa and his wife Rossana as he took them across the 
Turkish-Iraq border during the Kurdish uprising in northern Iraq 
in March 1991. 
  The bodies of the two men were found close to the border six 
months later, but the woman has never been found. 
  Kurdish police arrested Jirki in spring of last year, and he 
allegedly confessed to the killings, saying the three had not 
given him enough money. 
  He has spent 10 months in prison in Irbil, where the 
breakaway Kurdish parliament is based. 
  Kurdish police said it had taken until now to complete their 
investigations, and they had been in contact with their Turkish 
counterparts. 
  Trial judge 'Iz-al-Din told AFP that the verdict will be 
given on Saturday. 
  The three British journalists had planned to slip across the 
mountainous border to report on the Kurdish uprising against 
President Saddam Husayn following the Gulf war. 
  They left the Turkish border town of Yuksekova and were 
never 
seen again. 
  The mystery remained for more than a year, despite efforts 
by 
the BBC and Rossana della Casa's mother, who visited the region 
several times and is a member of a delegation accompanying 
Britain's Lord Archer on a current trip here. 
  It was suspected by other journalists and also by Kurdish 
authorities that the three had either been killed by the Turkish 
or Iraqi military. 
  However, Jirki surrendered to the Kurdish police and 
confessed last year. 
  Lord Archer, better known as the author Jeffrey Archer, 
addressed the Kurdish parliament on Wednesday and delivered a 
message from Prime Minister John Major. 
  Major expressed his satisfaction "to be able to pass those 
greetings through the elected representatives of the people of 
Iraq." 
  He said his meeting last March with leaders of the 
opposition 
Iraqi National Congress "strengthened my hope that this 
democratic model will one day be followed by other parts of Iraq 
if that is the wish of the Iraqi people." 
  He also confirmed that British aircraft will remain at least 
another six months in Turkey to protect northern Iraq. 
  Lord Archer arrived here on Tuesday for a five-day visit. 

