BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Eduardo Barcelona] </F>
  [Text] Brigadier Eugenio Miari, auditor general of the 
Armed Forces, has asked the chiefs of staff and the Foreign 
Ministry to send him all background material on the violations 
committed by the British against Argentine soldiers during the 
Malvinas War. The request is the auditor's first firm 
demonstration after having received the report of the Defense 
Committee on the crimes committed during the conflict. 
  The chiefs of staff must answer as soon as possible, but the 
Foreign Ministry has not acknowledged Miari's authority to 
submit the data, and has asked the Defense Ministry to confirm 
the authenticity of the military auditor. Defense Ministry 
spokespersons made it clear that the Foreign Ministry's reply 
must be understood within the context of the interminable 
internal discord that has separated the ministries for a very 
long time. 
  Institutional Affairs Under Secretary Roberto Ahumada sent a 
note expressing his support for Miari, which was received by 
Foreign Policy Under Secretary Rogelio Pfierter. 
  The first thing that the Foreign Ministry officials said in 
public was that they had no knowledge of the report, something 
that happens to be true. But the political view of the people 
at the Defense Ministry was that the diplomats "are very 
sensitive, and air the disagreements in the newspapers." 
  Reliable sources at the Auditor General's Office said that 
"Miari wants to know how the Foreign Ministry granted Scotland 
Yard permission to come and investigate the alleged Malvinas war 
crimes." 
  Miari, a Malvinas War veteran, is also investigating 
something that could cause real harm to the British: accusing 
them of perfidy. This is considered a crime according to the 
Geneva Convention. 
  According to the sources, the British exhorted the 
Argentines 
to surrender, with the promise that if they did so they would be 
looked after properly. This message was heard in the islands 
over British radios from the time the Task Force disembarked in 
San Carlos Bay. The Defense Committee's report outlines the 
killing of the Argentine soldiers at the hands of the British. 
  For Miari, this is an act of perfidy. It is the same as 
using a white flag as a tactic for distracting the attention of 
the enemy. The Auditor's Office is convinced that if it can 
prove the allegations, the international charges would be as 
serious as an accusation of homicide. "In a future war no one 
would believe the British, and they could suffer more casualties 
than they otherwise think they might," the military sources said. 

