Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] Sofia, January 17 (BTA) -- We ascertained that 
both Bulgaria and Sweden have a positive attitude to NATO's 
Partnership For Peace (PFP) initiative. We decided to 
informother of our actions under the said initiative, Mr. Anders 
Bjorck, defense minister of the Kingdom of Sweden, who is on a 
formal visit to Bulgaria at the head of a military delegation, 
said today after a meeting with his Bulgarian opposite number 
Valentin Aleksandrov. Mr. Bjorck added the sides also debated 
the situation in Europe, including Russia, and other matters of 
bilateral concern. We agreed to keep in touch on a number of 
issues of common interest and more specifically in the military 
sphere, between the two Defense Ministry, the Swedish defense 
minister added. 
  The sides also debated the UN-sponsored peace initiatives. 
Over 60 thousand Swedish officers and soldiers have taken part 
in them, Mr. Bjorck specified. I extended an invitation to Mr. 
Aleksandrov on a group of Bulgarian military to be trained in 
courses by military instructors who took part in UN missions, 
conducted in a special school near Stockholm, Mr. Bjorck added. 
  As concerns the PFP, we have no political differences, 
Minister Valentin Aleksandrov said after his meeting with the 
Swedish defense minister. The differences concern technologies 
and standardization, he added. "We were a neutral state," the 
Bulgarian defense minister quoted his Swedish counterpart. This 
statement makes me think that our decision to join the PFP is 
useful for Bulgaria, Mr. Aleksandrov said. 
  Mr. Bjorck is visiting Bulgaria on Sweden's "very insistent" 
initiative, the Bulgarian defense minister underscored. Our 
cooperation may encompass peace-keeping operations and the 
training of related contingents. Sweden helped us with 
expertise in the training of a Bulgarian infantry batallion to 
operate within UNTAC, the minister recalled. The invitation to 
dispatch a team of Bulgarian officers to the specialized school 
near Stockholm is very important. Working groups are to 
consider possible defense industry joint ventures, he indicated. 
The Swedish Army is being thoroughly re-armed. I think we can 
be of use in the field of electrical engineering and possibly in 
anti-tank defense, Mr. Aleksandrov said. In his view, 
territorial defence cooperation is likewise possible. 
  Mr. Anders Bjorck is the first Swedish defense minister to 
have visited Bulgaria. He has already been in this country as 
President of the Council of Europe and in his words, he has had 
very good personal contacts, including with President Zhelev. 
Mr. Bjorck told reporters he would use his meetings to get an 
idea of how the Bulgarian Armed Forces were developing and 
whether a military reform was under way. 
  Later today, the Swedish military delegation was received by 
Foreign Minister Stanislav Daskalov. In the course of the talks 
the sides exchanged views on bilateral relations, Daskalov told 
BTA. The sides noted with satisfaction the increased activity on 
both sides to promote cooperation in all spheres, including the 
military, said the Bulgarian foreign minister. We shared views 
on general issues of European integration and the two countries' 
integration into European structures, said Daskalov. They 
discussed developments in former Yugoslavia, the guests were 
briefed on the losses sustained by Bulgaria as a result of the 
Yugoembargo, the minister said. 
  Bulgarian President Zhelyu Zhelev this afternoon received 
Mr. 
Bjorck. The two discussed the situation in Europe, including 
Russia, expressing hope the Partnership for Peace initiative 
would develop into a system and structure of security which 
would guarantee the security of countries such as Bulgaria and 
Sweden. [passage omitted] 

