Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Talks may be under way in Lusaka, but the situation 
is one of war in northern Angola. Felix Miranda, the Voice of 
the Resistance of the Black Cockerel [Vorgan] correspondent in 
that part of the country, the People's Armed Forces for the 
Liberation of Angola, FAPLA, General Staff continues to involve 
regular forces in its offensive against National Union for the 
Total Independence of Angola [UNITA]. 
  Last weekend, the Popular Movement for the Liberation of 
Angola-Labor Party [MPLA-PT] used its self-propelled artillery 
to shell an area northeast of Ucua, in Bengo Province, and the 
area of (Quicabo), north of Caxito. Those clashes were quite 
intense, killing more than 30 civilians, wounding dozens of 
people, and destroying homes. 
  Meanwhile, Americo Chivala, the Vorgan correspondent in 
Cabinda, has reported the presence of Cuban soldiers in the area 
of N'gange. Those soldiers are ready to come into action via the 
sea and to provide support to forces deployed on land. Our 
correspondent reports that those Cuban forces are artillery and 
military engineering experts. 
  It is worth noting that the Armed Forces for the Liberation 
of Angola [FALA] Northern Command last week inspected all units 
entrenched in Uige, Zaire, and Bengo Provinces. The FALA 
Northern Command promised people in those areas that its forces 
would do everything in their power to defend the lives and 
interests of the people. 
  It has also been reported that clashes have taken place in 
Huila Province. Vorgan correspondent Silva Aleluia reports that 
the MPLA-PT air force continues to carry out air raids against 
UNITA-controlled areas. Meanwhile, the FAPLA forces left the 
city of Lubango on 21 January in the direction of Cacula and are 
now waiting for reinforcements. Silva Aleluia also reports that 
the number of people killed as a result of shelling on 20 
January has now risen to 14. More than 20 people were seriously 
wounded. As in northern Angola, the FALA Huila Province Command 
has already taken the necessary passive and active measures to 
defend the people. 

