BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" report: "Fresh Arrests Among Jordanian Afghans"] </F>
  [Excerpt] The Jordanian security authorities are continuing 
their campaign of arrests against the ranks of the Jordanian 
Afghans. The campaign is starting to face strong resistance by 
some of the elements of these groups, who are using firearms. 
This unprecedented phenomenon signals an increase in the 
violence of these groups. 
  We have learned that the latest arrests have been 
concentrated in al-Rusayfah and al-Zarqa' towns and the 'Awjan 
area for the past two weeks. Officers and men, assisted by 
personnel from the special police force, carried out arrests and 
apprehended a great number of people from these groups, which 
are believed to have a connection with attempts to plague Jordan 
with terrorism. 
  According to a knowledgeable source, the campaign did not 
end 
peacefully. One of the suspects fired at a security officer, 
wounding him in the leg. 
  The latest arrests are apparently part of a series of 
measures to fight the establishment of terrorist organizations 
in the Kingdom financed from abroad. Jordan is taking rather 
harsh measures to contain the terrorist groups that have been 
formed recently. 
  AL-BILAD has recently noted a number of attempts on the 
world 
level, instigated by Israel, as well as other attempts sponsored 
by Arab businessmen, to brand Jordan with terrorism and 
implicate Amman in a never ending cycle of terror. 
  We begin in Denmark where big question marks are raised in 
connection with a fire at a residence of a Jordanian citizen who 
was a member of the Muslim Brotherhood and currently resides in 
Denmark. According to well-informed sources, the Danish police 
arrested three Egyptians following the fire and investigated the 
possibility that the suspects are connected to the bombing of 
the World Trade Center [WTC]. Two of the arrested men were 
political refugees and the third holds Danish citizenship as 
well as Egyptian citizenship and currently resides in Denmark. 
  The three were accused of buying chemicals used to 
manufacture explosives similar to those used in the WTC bombing. 
The name of the Jordanian citizens, whose house was set on 
fire, has not been released. The Danish authorities' arrest of 
the three Egyptians is construed as having a link with the fire. 
[see 7 January Terrorism Report for initial arrest report] 
However, the incident created the impression, encouraged by the 
United States and Israel, that certain Jordanian nationals are 
involved in terrorism. 
  It goes without saying that for U.S. public opinion, the 
most 
sensitive act of terrorism is the bombing of the WTC in February 
of last year. According to Arab sources, active Israeli 
security bodies in Europe are now trying to invent false 
connections between Jordanians residing in Europe and Egyptians 
suspected of belonging to the al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah led by 
Shaykh 'Umar 'Abd-al-Rahman, currently detained in the United 
States. 
  Therefore, Jordan must prepare to confront a media war that 
is expected to be launched against it from Washington and 
European capitals on terrorism stories similar to the one we 
just related. 
  This war is not isolated from fears by certain Arab sources 
that the [Israeli intelligence service] Mosad is perhaps 
carrying out assassination attempts against Hamas members in 
Jordan. The aim is to create confusion in Jordan and disturb 
the security of the country and create a new climate of 
terrorist acts. 
  In short, Israel is endeavoring to drown Jordan in the 
maelstrom of terrorism and extremism in two ways: the first is 
by giving international public opinion the impression that the 
Jordanians have some sort of connection with acts of terrorism 
in Europe and the United States; and second, by threatening to 
carry out terrorist acts in Jordan itself and disturb the stable 
security conditions in the country. 
  Meanwhile, secret attempts by Arabs have also been revealed 
aimed at drowning Jordan in acts of terrorism by financing 
groups returning from Afghanistan. 
  As has already been mentioned, the first Arab involved in 
financing terror in Jordan was the Saudi businessman Usamah 
Bin-Ladin. Jordanian security investigations have already 
revealed that one of the leaders of the Jordanian Afghans, 
Zakariya Muhammad Dawud, traveled to Sanaa and met with Yemeni 
figures representing the financier, Bin-Ladin, who helped him 
join training camps. 
  Bin-Ladin finances large training camps of Arab Afghans, 
including quite a large number of Jordanians, in Sanaa with the 
aim of exporting terror to Jordan. 
  Jordan is exerting immense efforts to apprehend a Saudi 
merchant and arms smuggler by the name of Nasir Mashhur 
al-Ruwayli. Al- Ruwayli is considered one of the most dangerous 
drug traffickers and gun smugglers across Arab borders. He uses 
drug smuggling in striking arms deals and smuggling these arms 
to Arab states. 
  It is feared that this smuggler was involved in supplying 
weapons to extremist groups to carry out terrorist acts. 
Members of these groups in Jordan were arrested recently. 
  According to Arab sources, this smuggler is now charged with 
smuggling drugs and arms in many Arab states including Yemen, 
Algeria, and Egypt. [passage omitted] 

