Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Philippe Gallard: "A Khaki Airbus"] </F>
  [Text] The beasts of burden of French aviation are worn 
out. The humble stars of current events, the 82 Transall and 
Hercules C130 aircraft of the military transport fleet see 
service in all armed interventions and all humanitarian 
operations. These aircraft, 30 or more years old, will have to 
be replaced just after the year 2000. This retirement date is 
scheduled even sooner in Great Britain and is similarly close in 
Germany (co-producer of the Transall), Spain, and Italy. Their 
replacement by a European "future large aircraft" (FLA) has 
become a burning, even explosive issue since eight chiefs of 
staff for the Army and Air Force met in Paris on 20 December at 
a meeting chaired by French General Lanata. 
  This meeting uncovered three weighty issues: The creation of 
a military subsidiary of Airbus Industrie; the possible 
invention of a new mode of financing in response to the American 
GATT challenge; and the development of a new type of engine by 
[French national aircraft engine manufacturer] SNECMA in 
association with European partners. The role of party-pooper 
was played by the American company Lockheed with its offer of a 
share in the production of the updated Hercules C130-J. The 
Americans have courted British manufacturers with subcontracting 
offers worth more than 10 billion French francs [Fr]. 
  All this crazed commotion has one aim: to reduce the 
estimated cost of the FLA by one-third from its initial Fr35 
billion for 200 aircraft. Public paymasters gagged when this 
price was announced, and began to eye offers from America 
(Lockheed) and the Ukraine (Antonov) that were proposing new 
versions of old models. French military officials, however, 
considered any deal with the Ukraine to be too risky. As for 
the Hercules C130-J, they found its cargo bay too narrow. "We 
need an aircraft with a fuselage diameter of four meters --like 
the large Airbuses and the FLA project -- so that we can carry 
large helicopters or anti-aircraft missile batteries without the 
need to ask the Americans if they would be kind enough to lend 
us planes bigger than the Hercules," General Lanata insisted. 
It appears that he convinced his colleagues that it would be 
better to cut down the FLA estimate rather than make do with the 
diameter of the American aircraft. 
  The first novelty was that, instead of the usual step of 
creating a new, tailor-made industrial consortium, the partners 
want to adopt the mold and procedures of Airbus Industrie. The 
idea is to create a military subsidiary where the four majority 
Airbus partners would be joined at least by the Italian company 
Alenia, if not by a Belgian, Portuguese, or Turkish 
manufacturer, since these are the other partners and future 
customers of the FLA project. The advantages of this are 
two-fold: Participants would profit from the efficiency of the 
methods used in civil aviation; and a gateway would be created 
for channeling public subsidies from the military to the 
civilian branch. Since the military is not subject to the 
requirements of GATT, this subsidiary could, without fear of 
reprisals, receive uncapped refundable loans if the 
participating are unable to fund the aircraft's development. 
After all, Boeing is currently hoping to receive an order for 
80 Boeing 747's for military transport, which at the present 
rate of production represents more than three years' work for 
the jumbo assembly line. 
  Second, the generals will content themselves with a simpler 
aircraft, with less ambitious equipment for the mass-produced 
aircraft, and quite different engines. The forces want both an 
airliner capable of flying long distances at high speeds, which 
had led to the decision of a four-engined model, and an assault 
plane capable of landing on an clay runway or a plowed field, 
which requires turboprop engines. This second solution is 10 
percent less expensive. Meeting this week in Rome, 
manufacturers from eight countries know that the choice of 
engine will be crucial. Opposition between Rolls Royce and 
SNECMA 10 years ago blew apart the European fighter plane 
project. Now it looks like a showdown between the young 
Anglo-German partnership of Rolls Royce and BMW and the new 
French-German pairing of SNECMA and MTU [Engines and Turbines 
United]. Both groups have at least a "core" that can be used as 
the basis for a high-speed turboprop engine capable of reaching 
speeds of 800 kph. Aircraft manufacturers and European chiefs 
of staff are keeping their fingers crossed that history does not 
repeat itself. 

