Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report from Muhammad Sadiq in Washington and unattributed </F>
AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT report from Cairo: "Washington: Israel 
Fabricated Clinton's Statement on Jerusalem"] 
  [Text] The U.S. Administration yesterday denied the 
statement attributed to President Bill Clinton that he 
considered Jerusalem to be the unified capital of Israel. A 
U.S. State Department official has told AL-SHARQ AL-AWSAT that 
"President Clinton's position on the issue of Jerusalem is the 
same as that of former presidents, and it is firm and has not 
changed." 
  He pointed out that the allegations made in this connection 
were "wrong, fabricated, and inaccurate." He emphatically drew 
attention to what President Clinton said at his press conference 
the day before yesterday that "the question of Jerusalem is up 
to the parties to decide, and the Declaration of Principles says 
that a decision on that will be made in the final stage, and 
that is what we think should be done." 
  The official said that "the report was a fabrication by the 
Israeli media." He said he hoped that "the media would be 
accurate and truthful in their reporting." 
  The U.S. official also denied similar statements attributed 
to Vice President Albert Gore. 
  The issue was raised after President Clinton's meeting last 
week with Steven Crossman, chairman of the American-Israeli 
Political Action Committee [AIPAC], the most influential Jewish 
organization in the United States, but U.S. official sources 
have stated that the issue of Jerusalem is not a matter for 
speculation and that the position on it is clear and has already 
been stated. 
  Timothy Wirth, U.S. State Department adviser on population, 
environment, and terrorism, stressed yesterday that the U.S. 
position on Jerusalem is firm and that the U.S. Embassy cannot 
be moved from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem because the question of the 
capital is one of the issues to be resolved in the 
Palestinian-Israeli negotiations. He referrred to President 
Clinton's statement at his joint press conference with Rabin on 
the U.S. firm position on Jerusalem. He stressed that the CNN 
report claiming Clinton stated that Jerusalem was Israel's 
capital was untrue. 
  Egyptian President Husni Mubarak yesterday received the U.S. 
State Department's adviser on population, environment, and 
terrorism in the president's office at Heliopolis. 
  In the first Egyptian reaction, Egyptian Foreign Minister 
'Amr Musa said that he saw Clinton's statement as a political 
and tactical one. He added that if the statement meant a new 
U.S. policy on Jerusalem, then Egypt would be in total 
disagreement with that policy. He said that the U.S. Embassy in 
Israel is still in Tel Aviv and has not been moved to Jerusalem 
yet. 
  Musa added: Jerusalem is a part of the occupied Arab 
territory and we reject any Israeli measures Judaizing it or 
making it Israel's eternal capital. 

