BFN 

<F P=106> [By Louis Ng] </F>
  [Text] Local delegates of the National People's Congress 
will sign a letter to their chairman Qiao Shi urging that 
Chinese authorities give a detailed account of the verdict 
against Hong Kong journalist Xi Yang. The letter drafted by 
Cheng Yiu-tong, Ng Hongman and Peter Wong Mankong, is 
circulating among other local delegates and is expected to be on 
its way to Mr Qiao early this week. The letter asks the 
congress' executive committee to press Beijing Municipal 
People's Intermediate Court to reveal the full text of the 
verdict that brought Xi a 12-year jail sentence. It also urges 
for a fair hearing of Xi's appeal in full accordance with 
Chinese law. 
  Mr Wong warned that the emotional public reaction may harm 
Xi's appeal. He also appealed to reporters and legislators not 
to resort to the British Government for help, saying this would 
complicate the issue. 
  A law lecturer yesterday pointed out that China had violated 
its own statutes when it refused to publish specific offences 
for which Xi, 38, had been convicted. Lecturer of the City 
Polytechnic of Hong Kong Priscilla Leung said Chinese law 
stipulated that these details had to be announced at the time of 
sentencing. The court, however, had released only a brief 
statement saying that Xi was to serve 12 years in jail, with a 
loss of political rights, for "spying and stealing state 
secrets". 
  Ms Leung said only very serious circumstances would attract 
a 
severe penalty of more than 10 years. She called for a clearer 
definition of the term "state secret" to put the severity of 
this offence in perspective and to protect the journalistic 
profession. She added that there was no specific law to protect 
journalists under existing Chinese jurisdiction. 
  Journalist colleagues at Xi's newspaper, MING PAO, and 
student representatives continued to protest outside the Happy 
Valley headquarters of XINHUA (the New China News Agency) 
yesterday. More than 200 representatives of the Hong Kong 
Federation of Students called for a fair and open trial and 
respect for press freedom. MING PAO colleagues ended their 
three-day hunger strike at 10 pm. Other staff distributed 30,000 
copies of a 15-page colour special on Xi. 

