Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by staff reporter Gao Lu (7559 6424): "Call for </F>
Reform of Ownership, Property Rights -- Brief Account of 
Seventh, Eighth Symposiums at `Forum on China's Market Economy'"] 
  [Text] Following China's deepening involvement in the 
reform of its economic system, especially since its decision to 
put into practice the socialist market economy, the question of 
property rights has gradually become a hot topic for theoretical 
circles to explore. On 24 September and 13 October the seventh 
and eighth symposiums of the "Forum on China's Market Economy" 
were respectively held. The subject discussed was the question 
of ownership and property rights in a market economy. The 
specialists and scholars at the symposiums gave their views and 
put forth many noteworthy viewpoints. 
  1. The Question of Ownership Should Become the Focal Point 
of 
Study and Reform 
  The subject discussed at the seventh symposium was the 
question of ownership in a market economy. It was unanimously 
held at the symposium tht, after it was decided that China would 
put into practice the socialist market economy, the study of the 
question of ownership should become the focal point of study in 
the circle of economists; ownership reform could have to go 
through a very long and difficult process, but the pace of 
reform must be accelerated. Centering on the question of 
ownership, the specialists and scholars in their discussions put 
forward the following viewpoints: 
  A) The "social ownership" advocated by Marx is directly 
integrated in individual ownership. The state ownership now 
existing on the national territory of China is not the social 
ownership talked about by Marx. State ownership is only a form 
of public ownership, and is also a fairly primitive form, not 
like the high-level form it was thought to be by people in the 
past. Some scholars believed that various forms of the worker 
individual ownership system should be made the basic form of the 
socialist ownership system. 
  B) Only by setting up a rational ownership structure can we, 
within the scope of society, fully integrate the worker and the 
means of production and create a more practical productive 
force. Therefore, the existing irrational ownership structure, 
which does not suit the market economy, needs to be reformed. 
  C) In the current reform in state-owned enterprises of 
separating government and enterprise, noteworthy phenomena have 
appeared. The first phenomenon is the "reversed signboard 
company," i.e., the original administrative and management 
organization changes its sign and becomes a group company. This 
is a case of going backward in the name of reform. The second 
phenomenon is "shotgun marriages" in which some small- and 
medium-sized enterprises are pinched together, causing them to 
lose their proper right to act on their own initiative. The 
third phenomenon is, on the pretext of effecting macroeconomic 
regulation and control, the methods of the command economy 
system have restrengthened administrative control. The 
appearance of these phenomena and trends show that the form of 
ownership currently in practice in the state-owned enterprises 
also must be reformed. 
  2. Thoughts on Ownership Reform 
  A) Some scholars said that, in the reform of state 
ownership, 
not only must the government and the enterprise be separated, 
but also the government and capital must be separated, changing 
sector management to trade association management. The 
government has begun to conduct experiments in this aspect at 
selected points, i.e., respectively changing the Ministry of 
Light Industry and the Ministry of Textile Industry to the China 
Light Industry Association and the China Textiles Association. 
These experimental points, which show the direction to go, 
should be popularized. 
  B) Encourage mutual competition between various kinds of 
ownership,and promote the development of various kinds of 
economic reforms and management forms. The new forms of 
ownerhsip proposed by those at the symposium were "state-owned, 
people-managed," "publicly owned, privately managed," "mixed 
economy," "share system," "share cooperative system," "social 
ownership," and "people-managed economy." Of these forms the one 
everybody was most interested and the one that was fairly fully 
analyzed was the "share cooperative system." 
  C) The share cooperative system should be developed 
vigorously. At the ownership level it is a mixed ownership 
system that makes use of both the cooperative system and the 
share system. It has components of the collective ownership 
system and cannot be equated to the private ownership system. 
Also, it need not be artificially pushed higher on the question 
of ownership; the key is to look at whether it promotes the 
development of productive forces. The share cooperative system 
is an integration of both capital (funds) and labor, and it is 
suited to complex, changeable productive forces. 
  3. Defining Property Rights Is the Foundation and Premise 
for 
Managing the Market Economy 
  The subject of the eighth symposium was the question of 
property rights. The majority of scholars at the symposium 
pointed out that, in state ownership under the original planned 
system, both profits and losses were actually borne by the 
state. This kind of property rights cannot suit the market 
economy mechanisms. Changing the contract system and management 
mechanisms cannot solve the problem of invigorating state-owned 
enterprises, and basically cannot solve the problem of property 
rights. If property rights are not clear, there will not be a 
property rights system that suits the market economy. Therefore, 
we must transform and take seriously the current property 
relationships of state-owned enterprises. 
  Some scholars pointed out that to deepen the reform of 
state-owned enterprises we must proceed from defining property 
rights so that they are made clear, and must transform the 
original property relationships; promote the separation of the 
kinds of rights, then further separate the ownership rights 
under the premise of maintaining the state's right of final 
ownership of state-owned property, and let the enterprise obtain 
the right of corporate ownership. Only in this way can 
state-owned enterprises be truly invigorated. 
  The definition of property rights, some specialists pointed 
out, makes clear the use rights, earnings rights, and 
possession-transfer rights for natural resources. At present, in 
the experimental-point enterprises for reforming the share 
system of state-owned enterprises, there still exists a problem, 
i.e., state-owned shares cannot circulate. Since state-owned 
shares do not circulate, the problem of effecting an optimum 
disposition of the property held by the state cannot be solved. 
Therefore, we must set up a new kind of property rights system 
for state-owned property in order to create conditions for 
state-owned enterprises to get on the track of the market 
economy. 
  4. The Share System Is the Best Form for Smoothing Out 
Enterprise Property Rights Relationships 
  In their discussions many scholars held that the modern 
share 
system was the great beginning of a commodity economy. It has 
many advantages, the most prominent of which is that property 
rights relationships are extremely clear. Therefore, putting the 
share system into practice is a fairly good choice for deepening 
enterprise reform and making clear entrprise property rights. 
Now many of the share systems being tried out have fallen into 
error. This is mainly manifested in "old wine in new bottles" -- 
the same old stuff with a new label--and is in reality a case of 
changing the appearance of the old system. For example: chairmen 
of the board are selected by the government departments in 
charge, and the sole purpose of some of them is to raise money. 
The transformation of the share system of state-owned 
enterprises must be done strictly in accordance with a 
standardized share system. 
  In the final analysis, the property rights problem is a 
problem of the relationships of interests. The share system, 
with regard to the property relationships and the enterprise 
system, strengthens the owner's restraints on the manager, so 
that the value of state-owned property is guaranteed to maintain 
or increase its value. 
  5. Establish the Idea That "Property Rights Are Sacred and 
Inviolable" 
  Some scholars at the symposium pointed out that the 
constitution stipulates that public ownership is to be 
maintained as the main part, existing side by side with various 
forms of ownerhip. Under any ownership system, property should 
be sacred and inviolable. Both public property and private 
property should be sacred and inviolable; if they are not, the 
constitution becomes a mere scrap of paper, personal safety 
cannot be ensured, the economy cannot develop normally, and the 
state will lose prestige in the eyes of the people. 
  The specialists and scholars from economic theoretical 
circles attending the two symposiums included: Yu Guangyuan 
[0060 0342 6678], Gong Yuzhi [7895 5148], Zhu Houze [4281 0624 
3419], Dong Fureng [5516 6534 4356], Lin Zili [2651 1311 0500], 
Wang Jue [3769 3778], Yang Qixian [2799 0796 0341], Feng Lanrui 
[7458 5695 3843], He Wei [0149 0251], Song Yangyan [1345 7402 
8827], Wan Dianwu [5502 0368 2976], Fang Sheng [2455 3932], Tang 
Zongkun [0781 1350 3824], Xiao Liang [2556 0081], Dong Guoying 
[5516 0948 2819], Fang Gongwen [2455 1872 3306], Liu Wei [0491 
0251], Wei Jie [7614 2638], and He Yang [6320 7122]. 

