BFN 

<F P=106> [By RENMIN RIBAO reporter Yan Xiaoming (7027 2556 2494) and </F>
XINHUA reporter Wu Lan (2976 1526)] 
  [Text] Taiyuan, 5 May (XINHUA) -- China's Huanghe 
Television Network enjoys successful cooperation with the U.S. 
Scola Television Network. By actively exploring ways to promote 
Sino-U.S. cultural exchanges, the Huanghe Television Network has 
built a bridge linking China and the United States as well as 
China and the world. 
  In a recent annual meeting sponsored by the U.S. Scola 
network, television personnel and education experts from the 
United States, France, Germany, Japan, Russia, China, and 
China's Taiwan region expressed their appreciation of the 
achievements attained by the Huanghe Television Network. Lee 
Lubbers, chairman of U.S. Scola Television Network, highly 
praised his Chinese cooperation partner and presented the title 
of "international Scola founder" to Lu Jiasheng, director of the 
Huanghe Television Network. 
  The Huanghe Television Network is China's first television 
station to broadcast news and cultural programs in the United 
States, and it caters to the audience of its mainstream society. 
The station provides 14-hour programs with 21 special topics to 
the U.S. Scola Television Network every week. 
  To strengthen the cooperation and exchanges of international 
educational television programs, the Huanghe Television Network 
produces teaching programs in Chinese with the aim of helping 
children between six to 10 years old living in the United States 
to understand Chinese history and geography. 
  The Huanghe Television Network, which has its headquarters 
in 
Taiyuan, now has an integrated production system which includes 
news gathering, editing, shooting, broadcasting, recording, and 
program controlling. It also has established a programming pool 
with more than 10 local television stations in Beijing, Tianjin, 
Shanxi, Jilin, Liaoning, Shandong, Henan, Hubei, Hunan, 
Zhejiang, and Jiangsu. The network introduces to the world 
China's economic development, natural resources, environment, 
geography, customs, and culture. The network also broadcasts in 
China to an audience of 30 million people living in Shanxi, 
Hebei, Henan, Inner Mongolia, and Shaanxi. 

