BFN 

  [Text] MANERPLAW -- Karen guerrilla leaders have denied 
that their group has formed a political or military alliance 
with opium warlord Khun Sa and his Mong Tai Army (MTA). 
  They said any connection with Khun Sa would only tarnish the 
Karen's anti-narcotics image and reputation. 
  But they did accept that a Karen team had recently made a 
trip to the MTA-controlled area in southern Shan State and met 
Khun Sa. 
  Leaders of the Karen National Union [KNU] said in separate 
interviews that the two-member Karen delegation went to attend 
the celebration of Khun Sa's declaration of an independent Shan 
State and his appointment as Shan State President. 
  The delegation also studied how the MTA had acquired 
logistics and military supplies. 
  The Karen statements came amid strong rumours and reports 
that the Karen and the MTA have struck a deal to cooperate in 
their fight against the ruling Burmese military regime in 
Rangoon. 
  The Burmese defence attache to Bangkok, Col Thein Swe, told 
The NATION early this month that the Karen team went to Shan 
State between April 10-12 to teach Khun Sa's private army how to 
produce anti-personnel mines, and to help set up a munitions 
factory. 
  Thein Swe's charges have been rejected as "groundless 
accusations" aimed at discrediting the Karen and anti-Rangoon 
ethnic movement. 
  In separate interviews with The NATION, KNU President Gen Bo 
Mya, KNU secretary-general Badow Ba Thin, and KNU secretary for 
the organisation department, Maj Gen Maung Maung, flatly 
rejected the Burmese junta's allegations and denied any 
cooperation with Khun Sa and his Mong Tai Army. 
  They said the allegations were intentionally spread to 
discredit the Karen image and reputation, as the KNU had long 
been widely accepted as being against the drug trade. Bo Mya 
said much of the information about the Karen and Khun Sa was 
"exaggerated and untrue". 
  "There is no military cooperation, or any type of political 
cooperation, between the KNU and Khun Sa and his MTA. And there 
will be no cooperation in the future, because I feel that there 
is some kind of understanding between Khun Sa and Slorc [State 
Law and Order restoration Council]," said Bo Mya. 
  The Burmese junta Slorc, or the State Law and Order 
Restoration Council, staged a coup in September, 1988 to 
suppress a nationwide pro-democracy protest. 
  Bo Mya said the Karen delegation went to Khun Sa's area to 
attend the inauguration ceremony after Khun Sa declared the 
independence of the Shan State. The purpose of the trip was "to 
study his type of (political) system, how many people attended 
it (the ceremony) and the real feeling of the Shan population.'' 
  According to Maj Gen Maung Maung, Khun Sa had sent men to 
the 
KNU to ask about developments in peace talks between the Karen 
and Slorc, and invited the Karen to send representatives to the 
Shan celebration. 
  The two men sent to Shan State were KNU Operation Commander, 
Lt Col Law Wadi, and Lt Col Isaac, the KNU assistant quarter 
master responsible for rations and military equipment. 
  KNU secretary-general Badow Ba Thin said the Karen team 
studied how Khun Sa could purchase new supplies of arms and 
ammunition. 
  He rejected the allegation that the Karen trained the Mong 
Tai Army in how to produce landmines, saying that the MTA 
already had the capacity to do so with the help of some 
Europeans. 
  "We got information that the MTA was able to purchase arms 
and ammunitions and can get new supplies. We wanted to know how 
he could obtain them," said Ba Thin. 
  "We also understand that Khun Sa is in a position to 
manufacture landmines because some Europeans visit his area very 
frequently.'' 
  While the KNU staunchly denies any official deals with Khun 
Sa, well-informed border sources confirmed that the Karen and 
other anti-Rangoon ethnic movements have constant low-level and 
unofficial contacts with the MTA and the 11 ethnic groups that 
have already reached an official ceasefire agreement with Slorc. 
  One source said such contacts are normal and "crucial to the 
survival and operations of the armed ethnic groups, who often 
share overlapping territory and objectives. 
  "Most important of all they share the same enemy," said the 
source. 
  One KNU official, who requested anonymity, told The NATION 
that the Karen would consider or take whatever measures or steps 
they have to if they are forced into a corner. 
  He was apparently pointing to the pressure put on the group 
by some Thai authorities and brokers, who have threatened to cut 
supply lines or push back ethnic refugees unless the Karen enter 
peace negotiations with Slorc. 
  "We cannot rule out anything and have to consider every 
possible means ... The enemy of my enemy is my friend," the 
official said. 
  Slorc has urged the Karen, the Mon and the Karenni -- the 
three remaining active armed groups fighting the Rangoon regime 
-- to hold ceasefire talks, but has ruled out similar 
negotiations with Khun Sa, saying that Rangoon considers him a 
drug trafficker and will deal with him by force. 

