BFN 

<F P=106> [Michael Cassell article: "Endgame in a Deadly Zone"] </F>
  [Text] For nine years, nearly 2m pounds has been kept 
frozen in the bank account of a well-known local businessman in 
the Irish county town of Navan, once a fortified outpost of 
British sovereignty. 
  The money was allegedly on its way from a Swiss bank to the 
paymasters of the Provisional Irish Republican Army. But it was 
intercepted by the Garda. 
  The 2m pounds was intended to help fund the IRA's armed 
struggle in Northern Ireland, condemned as the "six-county 
prison house" by Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein president. 
  "The account holder claims it is all legitimate," says a 
high-ranking Garda officer. "But it stays exactly where it is 
until the killing stops." 
  Exactly what happens to the Navan cash when one of the 
world's most intractable conflicts finally ends is low on the 
list of current republican concerns. 
  The recent shadow boxing with the UK government has involved 
matters of much greater moment, such as agreement on the meaning 
of Irish national self-determination and the fate of hundreds of 
convicted IRA prisoners kicking their heels in jail. 
  Ann Anthony, a protestant mother of two from Lurgan in the 
north, could be forgiven for wanting the prisoners to stay where 
they are. This month, with the death toll from 2.5 decades of 
street warfare rising beyond 3,000, the IRA blew up her husband. 
Charge: working as a cleaner at a police station. Penalty: 
death. 
  The cycle of hatred has also cut deep into the flesh of an 
innocent Catholic community caught in the sectarian crossfire. 
Eamon Fox and Gary Convie died together five days after Fred 
Anthony as they tucked into lunchtime sandwiches; 76-year-old 
Roseanne Mallon ended her life alone, at midnight, in a 
bullet-riddled armchair. 
  And yet, in spite of the latest, random murders and the 
cries 
of "no surrender," the 25th anniversary of the deployment of 
British troops in Ulster approaches with hope, not despair, in 
the ascendant. 
  As republicans pick at the Downing Street declaration, a 
document intended to be all things to all parties, a widespread 
belief persists that the end-game is under way. 
  Sir Hugh Annesley, chief constable of the Royal Ulster 
Constabulary, Northern Ireland's police force, expects 
heightened savagery in the short-term but hopes to see an end to 
most terrorist violence within three years. Jim Molyneaux, 
leader of the Ulster Unionists, reckons the worst could be over 
in a year. Adams himself, who has sounded at his most 
optimistic this week, claims the struggle has entered a new and 
final phase. 
  But the choice between peace and another 25 years of human 
tragedy is testing to the limits the cohesion of hardline 
republicans intent on a 32-county socialist state. In the words 
of a convicted IRA bomber: "Not long ago, the mere idea that 
men married to armed struggle should talk to the Brits would 
have meant a beating. Now even the big boys are into it." 
  Out of sight small groups, united under the "ballot box and 
armalite" creed of Sinn Fein and the IRA -- Adams concedes they 
"draw water from the same well" -- are debating the unthinkable. 
  Could violence, which alone has given the cutting edge to 
the 
Irish question, soon be over? Might it be possible to 
decommission the IRA, the world's most technically advanced 
terrorist organisation? 
  The pressures on the republican movement for a political 
deal 
have intensified since last December's declaration, which united 
London and Dublin in leaving open all options for Ulster's 
future but rejected coercion of one part of the Irish community 
by another. Despite unprecedented publicity for the republican 
case and the platform given to the tactically astute Adams to 
sell his peace agenda, the unbending London-Dublin stance has 
won overwhelming backing. 
  Electoral support in the north for Sinn Fein, which won 
78,291 votes in the 1992 general election (10 per cent of the 
vote) has halved, though the British government stresses it 
recognises the party's modest mandate. In the republic, polls 
suggest the party is backed by barely 1 per cent of voters. 
  Political isolation, however, holds no demons for the 
battle- 
hardened men at the heart of the IRA -- the dominant partner in 
its intimate relationship with Sinn Fein -- who number about 400 
-- with perhaps another 50 key players in the south. It is 
these men, who numbered about 1,000 20 years ago, presided over 
by an Army Executive and a seven-man Army Council, who guard the 
soul of the IRA. 
  They look to Belfast, still the political centre of the 
organisation, for guidance. A northern command structure split 
into 11 operational areas (southern command embraces the entire 
republic) plans attacks mounted by active service units. 
  There are thought to be at least two units currently on the 
British mainland. In Ulster, active service units are supported 
by similar numbers of part-time volunteers blooded in minor 
sorties. Behind the volunteers, within the Catholic strongholds, 
are the supporters who offer safe haven in an estimated 2,000 
homes: "There is always someone to run them a bath to wipe out 
the evidence," says an senior intelligence source. 
  In Ulster border towns such as the largely republican 
Crossmaglen, the British army survives under siege, and lamp 
posts carry mock, triangular signs warning: "Danger: Sniper at 
work." 
  Not all support for the IRA in Ulster is freely given. 
Intimidation of Catholics by Catholics is widespread. On a 
night of terror in April, IRA "punishment" attacks in Belfast 
left one man dead and 16 with gunshot wounds to the legs. 
  Growing sections of the IRA leadership now share a 
conviction 
that the prospect of a glorious victory is as remote as the 
threat of complete defeat. And most grass-roots republicans no 
longer have any stomach for slaughter, as a series of Sinn Fein 
public meetings staged to debate the Downing Street declaration 
made clear. 
  At the same time, the IRA confronts a combined north-south 
assault on its manpower, weaponry and financial resources. In 
the republic, which is spending 200m irish pounds a year to 
bring the IRA to heel, the Garda claims recent arms finds have 
dealt a hammerblow to IRA quartermasters moving arms and 
explosives up to the 282-mile border. 
  With Libya no longer supplying the arms which sustained the 
IRA in the 1980s, fresh sources are proving hard to find. The 
recent exposure by British intelligence of attempts to forge new 
supply links with Iran is a further set-back though, for the 
time being, weaponry is not a problem for the IRA, which has 
stored enough to sustain the fight for another 10 years. The 
IRA arsenal includes more than 600 AK47 rifles, 30 machine guns, 
nine SAM7 missiles, a dozen hand-held, surface-to-surface 
missile launchers, eight flame throwers, hundreds of Webley 
pistols and tons of imported Semtex, Irish security sources say. 
  The organisation's engineering and electronics experts can 
add to the arsenal with home-made devices. Though icing sugar 
and fertiliser are still sometimes mixed to provide a deadly 
cocktail, a bomb factory discovered in Kilcock, near Dublin, 
recently yielded sophisticated equipment. 
  Waging a high-tech war -- the IRA now has electronic devices 
to break into police and army frequencies is expensive. The 
annual cost is estimated by the security forces at up to 7m 
pounds, and the rising number of bank raids in the south 
suggests the books are not balancing. 
  Most IRA income comes from organised in the province and in 
the republic -- a network of racketeering and fraud, which 
ranges from video and audio tape piracy to tax abuse. In the 
eyes of those who fight the IRA, this makes it more of a Mafia 
than an army of liberation and means its activities are unlikely 
to be extinguished by a political settlement. 
  The RUC's C13 anti-racketeering unit, which has overseen 
prosecutions involving nearly 50m pounds destined for IRA 
coffers since 1982, has now been bolstered by a finance unit of 
30 tax inspectors, lawyers and accountants. This unit played a 
large role in the recent joint operation, codenamed "Madronna," 
between police on the British mainland and on both sides of the 
Irish border to nail the sources of IRA financing. Meanwhile, 
in the US, funds for the IRA have been dwindling since the early 
1980s. 
  The combination of political and financial pressures on the 
IRA and Sinn Fein to enter the peace process is not lost on 
elements in their leaderships. But they are acutely aware of 
the dangers of moving too far too fast. "If Adams screws it up, 
he could end up with a bullet in his head," says a senior member 
of the RUC. 
  A majority within the IRA army council is now said to favour 
searching for a political accord, but one which will not oblige 
republicans to endorse the Downing Street agreement. A second 
ceasefire this year has not been ruled out. 
  But, remarked a source claiming to be close to one council 
member: "They know it would be of no use just to sign up 
tomorrow. They first have to bring with them the constituency of 
armed, physical-force tradition people. That will take time, 
carries great dangers and will also need the Brits to play the 
game." A former IRA volunteer indicates the scale of the 
challenge within the organisation: "Sure, we are tired, they 
are tired, everyone's tired. But we'll see them out of the six 
counties or in hell before we give up." 
  There are some in the high command opposed to going further 
down the political road, which historically has always ended in 
traumatic disintegration for republicans. 
  To the hard men of south Armagh, east Tyrone and Fermanagh, 
the only option is to continue to wage a war so sacred as to 
justify the killing of schoolchildren in Warrington, nurses in 
Enniskillen and six-month old infants in Germany. 
  Talk of a split, however, provokes impatience among Sinn 
Fein 
heavyweights such as Martin McGuinness -- publicly branded a 
senior IRA figure by Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland 
secretary. "Do you really think," says McGuinness, "we have 
come this far without ensuring full agreement on our position 
each step of the way. There is no split, there will be no 
split." 
  An RUC intelligence officer agrees: "The name of the game is 
to get people on side and gradually isolate the others." 
  The highest levels of the IRA appear confident that before 
the year-end, the organisation will again be in contact either 
directly or indirectly with the British government. Moreover, 
they believe that, ultimately, they will be able to bring their 
argument to the heart of Whitehall not in a stolen, mortar-laden 
van but in a briefcase. 
  This week London and Dublin offered republicans more time to 
choose between peace and continuing armed struggle. The "Brits" 
say they are more than ready to talk. But there is, first, the 
one precondition: an end to all violence; just 12 weeks of 
peace will do. 
  Like Gerry Adams, who recently quoted Irish poet Patrick 
Galvin to express his wish, London and Dublin, too, "dream of a 
green land without death, a new silence descending, a silence of 
peace." 

