BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special interview" with Chen Jiping by staff reporter Liu </F>
Jinghuai (0491 2417 2037); date, place not given: "Radical 
Action Will Be Taken To Improve Rural Public Order -- 
Interviewing Chen Jiping, Deputy Secretary General of the 
Central Commission of Political Science and Law, Member and 
Concurrently General Office Director of the Central Committee 
for Comprehensive Management of Social Security"] 
  [Text] Information from the Central Committee for 
Comprehensive Management of Social Security indicates that 
energetic rectification of public order in rural areas will be a 
formidable task for the comprehensive management of social 
security in China this year. When interviewed by this reporter, 
Chen Jiping, deputy secretary general of the Central Commission 
of Political Science and Law, and concurrently member and 
general office director of the Central Committee for 
Comprehensive Management of Social Security, stressed: In 
rectifying rural public order, we must stick to the principle of 
controlling public security in a comprehensive way and take 
"radical action" to increase the intensity of the work with a 
view to making obvious changes in the situation of rural public 
order in a short period and making further efforts to bring 
about comprehensive development in the rural work. 
  [Chen Jiping] The party Central Committee has invariably 
paid 
serious attention to the issues regarding agriculture, rural 
areas, and peasants. In October last year and in March this 
year, the central authorities convened two successive rural work 
meetings to make overall arrangements for rural work, give 
definite instructions on intensifying the work of 
comprehensively managing social security in rural areas, and 
call for making rapid and marked improvement in rural public 
order within a short period. The action of the central 
authorities to stress rural security work conforms to the 
aspirations of the masses because, after resolving the problem 
of having adequate food and clothing, they wish for a fine 
social environment in which they can live and work in peace and 
contentment. To peasants, the fact that public order is good or 
bad is not a criterion by which to assess the work of a 
department or an organization at any level, but one to judge 
whether or not the party and state really have cared for the 
well-being of the peasants. If the issue of rural public order 
is resolved properly, the party will win sincere support from 
the peasants, and this will be a powerful guarantee for rural 
stability. It can be said that the proper solution of the rural 
public order issue is of decisive significance in maintaining 
stability and prosperity in rural areas, as well as stability 
and development throughout the country. 
  [Liu] Some people have said that the rural public order 
situation in China is deteriorating; what is your view on this? 
What is the real state of affairs regarding rural public order 
in China? 
  [Chen] Generally speaking, rural public order is basically 
stable at present, but the situation in some rural areas is 
grim. Since the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central 
Committee, momentous achievements has been made in the reform to 
restructure the rural economy, and tremendous changes have taken 
place in the appearance of rural areas. The problem of having 
enough to eat and wear has been resolved for the great majority 
of peasants, and quite a few of them have relatively enhanced 
their living standards. This is the most fundamental reason for 
rural stability. 
  Of course, it is necessary to point out that there are some 
rural areas in every province, autonomous region, and 
municipality where public order is bad to varying degrees. In 
some villages, the issue of public order is very conspicuous, 
having the following manifestations: 1) Various kinds of evil 
forces such as hooligans, local ruffians, and village tyrants 
are rampant. They bully the masses and jeopardize society. 2) 
In some areas along highways and water networks, highwaymen, 
train robbers, and pirates run rampant, and serious cases of 
violence including murder, robbery, explosions, and so on have 
increased by a relatively large margin, with their methods of 
committing crimes increasingly cruel. 3) In some areas along 
railways and highways and around oil fields, mines, and some 
large enterprises, mass lawbreaking activities of stealing or 
looting state property cannot be halted despite repeated bans. 
4) Mass fighting with firearms arising from disputes over land, 
forests, irrigation facilities, and so on have occurred 
frequently, and the incidence of fighting has continued to rise. 
5) Ugly social phenomena, including gambling, feudal 
superstition, drug-taking, drug-trafficking, practicing 
prostitution, patronizing prostitutes, and so on, have spread in 
some rural areas. In short, the public security problem in some 
rural areas is very serious, which has evoked strong 
repercussions among the peasants. If we do not concentrate our 
efforts on rectifying these malpractices, but only let them 
continue unbridled, prosperity and stability in rural areas 
certainly will be affected, and the smooth progress of reform 
and opening up will be disrupted. Therefore, the Central 
Committee for Comprehensive Management of Social Security has 
decided to carry out centralized rectification of public order 
in rural areas in the near future, and to vigorously intensify 
the work of controlling social security in a comprehensive way. 
This is a move in conformity with the popular will and in 
keeping with the requirements of maintaining stability and 
prosperity, and of ensuring the smooth progress of reform and 
opening up in rural areas. 
  [Liu] The issue of public order has been a flashpoint 
about which people are always concerned. In recent years, the 
party and state have consistently called for party and 
government organs to take firm control of social security, and 
pertinent departments also have made relentless efforts to 
rectify the problems in rural areas. Why are there still 
prominent social security problems existing in some rural areas? 
  [Chen] In recent years, quite a few localities have carried 
out rectification of public order in rural areas, and the 
Central Committee for Comprehensive Management of Social 
Security also has made deployments for the struggle in specific 
operations regarding rural social security -- such as the 
campaign to combat theft, the operation to surround and 
annihilate "train robbers and highwaymen," and others -- and 
certain results have been attained. Taken as a whole, however, 
the intensity was not stringent enough, and many measures failed 
to be genuinely put into effect at the grass-roots level, so the 
phenomenon of being "hot at the top and cool at the bottom" 
still exists. The major causes are as follows: 1) In some 
localities, the principal leading comrades did not pay adequate 
attention to the problem of rural public order, so that they 
were not powerful enough in work. 2) As some grass-roots 
organizations in townships and villages were lax in discipline, 
they could not exercise their proper role in maintaining social 
security. Meanwhile, these townships and villages also lacked 
ability in performing comprehensive management work, so that 
measures could not be put into practice. 3) As quite a number 
of rural security organizations existed in name only, they were 
in an unorganized state, and villagers were like an expanse of 
loose sand. They also lacked effective mechanisms for 
stimulation and restraint for maintaining public order. 4) Some 
grass-roots political and judicial departments, particularly the 
grass-roots units responsible for cracking down on rural 
lawbreaking activities, did not do their best in carrying out 
the policy of "severe crackdown." 5) There were no effective 
measures for helping and educating local ruffians and village 
gangsters in the course of the crackdown. Moreover, other 
factors -- such as the shortage of cultural life in many rural 
areas, lack of proper guidance for surplus laborers, and so on 
-- also were important causes that led to poor rural public 
order. In short, in a bid to thoroughly resolve the prominent 
social security problems existing in some rural areas, we must 
adhere to the guiding principle of controlling public security 
in a comprehensive way, adopt "radical action" nationwide, and 
increase the intensity of work. 
  [Liu] Nationwide "radical action" to rectify rural public 
order and severely crack down on all sorts of serious criminal 
activities in rural areas indeed accords with the aspirations of 
the vast number of peasants, but how will such "radical action" 
be taken? 
  [Chen] In order to take this "radical action," we call for 
various provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities to 
concentrate their efforts this year and next on the 
rectification of conspicuous problems in rural areas where 
public security is in poor shape, so as to facilitate the 
implementation of various measures for the comprehensive 
management of social security. 
  As far as the entire country is concerned, the following 
four 
kinds of people are the key objects of attack in the current 
struggle to rectify rural public order in a concentrated way: 
1) Various kinds of evil forces, such as hooligans, local 
ruffians, and village gangsters, particularly gangs of hoodlums 
and thieves, as well as criminal organizations of an underworld 
nature; 2) train robbers, highwaymen, pirates, and other violent 
criminals who commit murder, robbery, explosions, rape, and so 
on; 3) serious criminals who destroy railroads, damage 
communications and production facilities, and steal or loot 
state property; and 4) organizers of such activities as 
practicing prostitution, patronizing prostitutes, drug 
trafficking, abducting women and children, cheating people of 
their money by means of feudal superstition, producing and 
distributing pornography, and gathering masses for gambling. 
  In a bid to ensure that the current crackdown will be 
conducted with greater intensity, various political and judicial 
departments, under the unified leadership of local party 
committees and governments, should conduct thoroughgoing 
investigations, tick off the conspicuous problems concerning 
public security and the areas where public order is in poor 
shape on a list as quickly as possible, select and transfer 
selected personnel to enhance coordination between departments, 
organize a few large campaigns to puncture the arrogance of 
criminals, and capture in a dragnet all sorts of criminal gangs, 
particularly those who play the tyrant in a particular locality. 
In every link of handling cases, political and judicial 
departments should further straighten out their ideas of law 
enforcement, observe strict discipline, and unswervingly adhere 
to the guiding principle of cracking down on crimes stringently 
and rapidly according to the law. It is necessary to adopt 
vigorous measures to conscientiously study and resolve the 
prominent problems that have hindered the implementation of the 
"severe crackdown" policy. It is all the more necessary to 
further augment the building of the law enforcement system and 
of political and judicial personnel. In the business 
departments and grass-roots units that also are engaged in 
cracking down on lawbreaking activities in rural areas, the 
system of investigating misjudged cases should be practiced 
strictly, and cases of bending the law for the benefit of 
relatives and friends, taking bribes to pervert the law, and 
other cases in violation of law and discipline also will be 
investigated and dealt with conscientiously. 
  [Liu] The severe crackdown on serious criminals in rural 
areas is based on the law and is feasible in practice, but there 
also exist in rural areas such public security problems of 
certain people often committing minor offenses. These minor 
cases in violation of the law occur frequently and 
substantially, which is the most thorny problem for the 
government and the peasants. What measures will be adopted in 
the current centralized rectification of public order in the 
rural areas? 
  [Chen] The lawbreakers characterized by "never committing 
serious crimes, but often committing minor offenses" have 
accounted for the largest proportion of cases concerning public 
security in rural areas and have been a long-standing, major, 
and difficult problem in rural security work. In particular, 
the masses hate local ruffians and village gangsters bitterly, 
but there are no effective measures to manage and handle these 
people for lack of sound laws and regulations at present. This 
is a major cause giving rise to the rampancy of local ruffians 
and village gangsters. Therefore, we first must proceed from the 
actual conditions of China's rural society at the present stage 
so as to solve the problem. Today, in a considerable portion of 
rural areas, peasants' legal concepts are comparatively weak, 
and owing to a large number of people who are uneducated and 
ignorant of law, the mechanisms of legal work in rural areas are 
very unsound too. On the one hand, we must stress the necessity 
of handling affairs strictly in accordance with the law, conduct 
education in rural areas to publicize knowledge of the law, and 
enthusiastically guide peasants in gradually getting onto the 
track of a socialist legal system. On the other hand, under the 
precondition that the Constitution and law are not violated, we 
must adopt some special policies and measures on certain 
specific objects in light of the national conditions to make 
good the shortcomings in building the legal system at the 
present stage. 
  Some practical measures currently are being probed in quite 
a 
few localities. For example, relevant departments in some 
localities enlisted those lawbreakers who had evoked strong 
repercussions among the masses for refusing to mend their ways 
despite repeated admonition but whose offenses were not serious 
enough for criminal sanction or reeducation through labor, and 
particularly those offenders who had been released after serving 
sentences or from labor education but had recidivist tendencies, 
to study knowledge of the law with a view to helping them mend 
their bad conduct. In other localities, the authorities took 
measures to enhance assistance and education for such people by 
way of practicing a public security responsibility system under 
which village chiefs, group heads of villagers, and parents 
signed letters of responsibility to give assistance and 
education to them, and satisfactory results have been scored in 
practice. 
  [Liu] Some social security problems in rural areas have 
something to do with the laxity and incompetence of some rural 
grass-roots organizations, as well as with the failure to 
properly implement the party's principles and policies by the 
rural leading cadres at the grass-roots level. In the current 
rectification of public order in rural areas, what measures will 
you take to overhaul and strengthen lax and incompetent rural 
organizations and to establish a new rural security structure, 
apart from severely cracking down on criminal offenses? 
  [Chen] The crux of doing the current rectification work well 
lies in devoting a lot of time and energy to strengthening the 
building of party and government organizations at the township 
and village levels and of mass self-government organizations. 
  -- The civil affairs, public security, and other pertinent 
departments should jointly send capable work teams to stay in 
the townships and villages where public order is poor and the 
work foundation weak. While rectifying prominent security 
problems, they should strengthen the building of party and 
government organizations in towns and townships, as well as the 
coordinated organizations, with village party branches as the 
cores, in order to change the rural appearance within a set 
period. 
  -- A deputy secretary should be assigned in each town and 
township party committee to be responsible for the comprehensive 
management of social security so as to amplify the bodies 
leading the work. Led by the principal leading cadres of the 
party organizations, these specially assigned deputy secretaries 
will take charge of day-to-day work. In the towns and townships 
that are designated as key units for rectification or where 
conditions exist, working bodies should be set up or special 
personnel assigned to conduct work in these localities. 
  -- In the towns and townships along traffic lines or with 
complicated public security conditions, local police stations 
should be set up as quickly as possible. 
  -- Rural joint security defense forces should be reorganized 
and augmented, the quality of personnel should be enhanced, and 
their sources of outlay should be resolved. The joint defense 
of public security should be organically combined with militia 
work in a bid to fully exercise the significant role of the 
militia in maintaining public order. However, in places where 
specially formed joint security defense forces are not 
necessary, they should conduct activities such as "joint defense 
among 10 households," "voluntarily on duty during the night," 
and so on, according to the necessity of maintaining public 
security and in line with the wishes of the people. 
  -- Rural public security committees and mediatory committees 
should be strengthened. Taking as focal points those that have 
empty titles only and are in a paralyzed state, we should 
perform conscientiously the work of reorganizing these units. 
The competent departments should provide professional guidance 
and personnel training for them so that they will exploit their 
strengths more effectively. 
  -- The practice of administering villages according to the 
law should be popularized vigorously. In particular, we should 
further ascertain the responsibility for public security and 
should establish incentive and restraining mechanisms to foster 
righteousness and eliminate evils by way of formulating rules 
and regulations for villagers, and should select through 
appraisal advanced households who observe laws and regulations 
in an appropriate manner. 
  -- The work of law propaganda and education among peasants 
should be improved and enhanced. With the grass-roots 
propaganda workers -- particularly the grass-roots judicial and 
administrative departments and their personnel, as well as the 
cultural centers as mainstreams -- propaganda and legal 
education with peasant characteristics should be launched deep 
in the key villages which were designated for the current 
rectification work. 
  In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that party and 
government leaders at all levels should pay serious attention to 
rural security work. It is particularly necessary for the 
principal leading cadres at the county and township levels to 
assume command in person, coordinate with relevant departments, 
fully mobilize the masses, and wage the struggle 
conscientiously. It is necessary to take the organization of 
this struggle as a major aspect of practicing the leadership 
responsibility system on the comprehensive management of social 
security, and to link it with commendation and punishment. With 
regard to the party and government leading cadres and relevant 
officials who have not exercised effective leadership so that 
public order in their localities remains chaotic, they must be 
handled in line with the requirements of the responsibility 
system, and if necessary, the right to veto by one vote relating 
to the comprehensive management of social security should be 
exercised as well. 

