Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Jacques de Barrin: "Tunisia Tetanized"--first </F>
paragraph is LE MONDE introduction] 
  [Text] The presidential and legislative elections should 
not appreciably change political life, paralyzed as it is by the 
Islamist threat. 
  On Sunday, 20 March, when they go to the polls, electors 
will 
vote by color--red, green, blue, gold, etc. The ballot papers 
are in the colors of the seven political parties whose 
candidates are running for the Chamber of Deputies. On the other 
hand, a plebiscite-type vote should give Zine El Abidine Ben 
Ali, 57, another five-year presidential mandate. On 2 April 1989 
already, he had received 99.27 percent of the votes. 
  Placed under the sign of "transparency," even "pluralism," 
this dual election is unlikely to appreciably alter the way 
things stand, considering that political life is actually 
deadlocked in spite of an election code reform that might lead 
us to believe the contrary. No single-color Parliament any more, 
as used to be the case since independence, in 1956. Nowadays, it 
would not look good. 
  Triumph without peril brings no glory. The six formations of 
the legal opposition will share 19 seats in proportion to the 
votes they will get nationwide. Barring a coup de theatre, the 
Democratic Constitutional Rally (RCD), the all-powerful 
government party, is assured of making a clean sweep of the 144 
seats distributed in 25 electoral districts, thanks to the 
majority list system. That is the best you can expect from a 
dominating party that Hamed Karoui, the prime minister, recently 
judged to be "the one best qualified to organize the masses," 
the one in the best position to "manage the change" announced by 
Mr. Ben Ali on 7 November 1987, when he dismissed Habib 
Bourguiba from the government "for reason of senility." In an 
understatement, the local weekly REALITES confessed early in 
March that the RCD "is not yet quite the formation that Tunisia 
needs for a successful transition to democracy." 
<H5>  Setback for Liberties </H5>
  Even though it has begun to recruit younger members into its 
leadership, the RCD does have to bear the very heavy legacy of 
the former single party, the Destourian Socialist Party (PSD). 
It is harder to change mentalities than to replace men. In many 
regions, leaders of this party-state, of which Mr. Ben Ali is 
still the chairman, "are relentlessly giving a hard time" to 
opposition parties, REALITES noted. 
  The past is one thing; today's reality is another thing. 
Paralyzed by the chaos that prevails in Algeria, on the other 
side of their country's borders, Mr. Ben Ali and his friends are 
not keen on political openness, as they are convinced that the 
Islamists of the underground al-Nahdah movement, "preachers of 
sedition and terrorism," would know how to take advantage of it. 
Certainly, Tunisia's antifundamentalist housecleaning was 
done--with a master's hand, if we may put it that way. But the 
government team, always watchful, still uses the "threat from 
outside" as a pretext to disregard the most elementary 
humanitarian and democratic principles. 
  Considering that, according to the RCD political bureau, Mr. 
Ben Ali "is the only man fit to lead the nation's triumphant 
march to prosperity and invulnerability," it was inconceivable 
that anyone else should play opposite him. The former president 
of the Tunisian Human Rights League (LTDH), the fiery Moncef 
Marzouki, could therefore not challenge him, not even as a beau 
geste. All were mobilized in favor of the "man of change"; even 
local journalists, so ill-treated by the government, were forced 
to support the sole candidate "because they know that he is 
sowing the good seed." 
  That political balancing act was far more strange on the 
part 
of the legal opposition that was expected to campaign 
simultaneously for the RCD leader, sole candidate to the highest 
office, and against candidates of that same RCD running for the 
Chamber of Deputies. Mohamed Moada, president of the Movement of 
Socialist Democrats (MDS), assured Mr. Ben Ali of the "unfailing 
confidence" of his militants; and Mohamed Harmel, general 
secretary of the former Communist Party, assured him of the 
"unanimous support" of his comrades. 
<H5>  Bread and Security </H5>
  The existence of seven legally recognized parties, more than 
5,000 associations, and some 120 publications does not in any 
way alter the fact that, behind this democratic decor, the power 
is more than ever concentrated in the hands of one man, 
surrounded by a handful of advisers, even courtiers. Everything 
starts at the Carthage Palace, and everything comes back to it. 
Nothing is decided or said without his approval. As a result, 
any "strategy of dialogue" is reduced to its simplest terms. 
  Many have denounced this autocratic deviation. Last year, 
over 200 Tunisian intellectuals and the General Union of 
Tunisian Students (UGET) deplored "the appreciable setback 
inflicted on liberties" under the pretext of fighting 
fundamentalism. In January, Amnesty International mentioned "the 
chasm" between what the government says and what it does, citing 
"serious and systematic human rights violations." These 
accusations, the government said, were "false and slanderous 
allegations." 
  More relevant is the struggle against the "green peril" 
engaged by Mr. Ben Ali and his friends outside the political 
field proper. For his part, Mohamed Charfi, the minister of 
education and sciences, organizes it masterfully. "It is not 
social conditions, poverty, destitution that are at the origin 
of fundamentalist movements," he likes to say. "Fundamentalism 
is generated by the school." 
  Therefore, a vast reform of the school system was started, 
involving a retraining of the teaching body and a revision of 
programs and textbooks. As a result, young Tunisians are again 
studying the author of Candide. "A student who has read 
Voltaire," Mr. Charfi pointed out, "will never be an 
Islamist..." 
  Habib Bourguiba already had seriously engaged his country on 
the road to modernity. The first birth-control measures date 
back to 1961; the population growth rate thus dropped to below 2 
percent per year. Thanks to the personal status code that came 
into force in 1956, Tunisia now finds itself several tens of 
years ahead of most Arab states as far as polygamy, repudiation, 
conjugal consent, etc., are concerned. "In our country," a 
female Tunis lawyer noted, "the law was ahead of mentality 
changes." 
  "The irrevocable choice of free enterprise" is also 
beginning 
to bear fruit. Efforts to achieve "Chinese-like growth"--5 
percent per year on the average from 1987 to 1992--caused the 
emergence of a middle class, although it was also accompanied by 
a policy aimed at reducing social inequalities, which are far 
less glaring than at the other end of the Maghreb, in Morocco, a 
country always so quick to set itself as an example. 
  Bread and security. Does that mean that everything is for 
the 
best in the best of all possible Tunisian worlds; that, as Mr. 
Ben Ali claims, this country is "a developed country in every 
respect"? Not so fast: paradoxically, Islamism also feeds on 
democratic inadequacies, as can be seen in Algeria, where the 
FLN [National Liberation Front] so thoroughly paved the way for 
the FIS [Islamic Salvation Front]. 

