BFN 

  [Excerpt] Turkish President Suleyman Demirel made new 
provocative statements today aboard the frigate from which he 
watched a Turkish military exercise in the Aegean. Mr. Demirel 
said: We wish that Greece would present Turkey with faits 
accomplis whose consequences Greece itself would not be able to 
address. 
  National Defense Minister Yerasimos Arsenis talked this 
morning about Turkey creating a climate of artificial tension. 
  At the same time, in a letter to the Turkish president, 
President Konstandinos Karamanlis rejects his allegations about 
the training of terrorists in our country. Alkis Mallidhis has 
the following report. 
  [Begin recording] [Mallidhis] In his statement today, 
Turkish President Suleyman Demirel raised the questions of 
territorial waters, the continental shelf, and even of the FIR 
[Flight Information Region]. However, he said that these 
questions should be resolved peacefully. Particularly on the 
territorial waters, Mr. Demirel claimed that if Greece extends 
them to 12 miles then Turkey would be cut off from the sea. 
Athens believes that Ankara is trying to create a climate of 
artificial tension for domestic reasons. 
  [Defense Minister Arsenis] We must not fall into the trap of 
those who want to create artificial tension between Greece and 
Turkey. It is well known that the Turkish Government has many 
domestic problems. These are their own problems and we should 
not play on their chess board. 
  [Mallidhis] At the same time, according to reliable reports, 
President Konstandinos Karamanlis today replied to the Turkish 
president's recent letter. President Karamanlis rejects 
allegations Mr. Demirel made in his letter about the training of 
terrorists in our country and points out that Greece condemns 
terrorism in whatever form it appears. Mr. Karamanlis further 
stressed that the creation of new problems between the two 
countries should be avoided so that a climate of mutual trust is 
created. [end recording] [passage omitted] 

