Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Greece yesterday accused Turkey of fomenting 
artificial tension in bilateral relations and said its 
ambassador in Ankara had requested a formal explanation of 
remarks made by Turkey's top general about Greece's "hostile" 
behaviour. 
  And European Affairs Minister Theodhoros Pangalos sharply 
criticised Ankara for its continued occupation of northern 
Cyprus. "Turkey is the only country in the world which occupies 
militarily the territory of an independent state," he told a 
conference of members of the European Parliament and the U.S. 
Congress. 
  Turkish Military General Staff chief, General Dogan Gures, 
was quoted on Wednesday [12 January] in the press as saying: 
"Greece behaves like an enemy against whom we need to strengthen 
our armed forces." 
  His bellicose statements were made just a day after Turkish 
President Suleyman Demirel tried to pour oil on the waters of 
Greek-Turkish relations, stating that drilling on the 
northeastern Aegean seabed was being conducted in Greek waters. 
The statement was interpreted as a tacit gesture of goodwill. 
Turkey has consistently disputed Greek sovereignty of the 
Aegean, refusing to recognise the continental shelf of the 
Aegean islands. 
  Diplomatic sources in Athens described the conflicting tone 
of the statements coming from Ankara as a deliberate attempt to 
project a reasonable and conciliatory image abroad and a tough, 
no-nonsense image at home. But remarks late yesterday by Mr 
Demirel show the "good cop, bad cop" ploy may be part of Turkey 
to depict Greece as the spoiler [sentence as published]. 
  "There is no benefit to Greece to create a crisis under 
present circumstances," he was quoted as saying. 
  Tension between Greece and Turkey rose slightly after the 
former announced it would proceed with oil explorations on the 
seabed off the coast of the island of Thasos. 
  Asked whether the drilling would create problems, Mr Demirel 
said: "If the explorations are confined within the territorial 
waters of Thasos, no problem will be created. If, however, 
action is taken in waters where there are Turkish interests, 
then there will be a problem. The fact that Turkey is trying to 
safeguard its interests through peaceful means should not be 
interpreted as weakness." 

