Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Ernesto Samper Pizano, aspirant to the </F>
Liberal Party presidential candidacy: "Chiapas, Caracas, and 
Ciudad Bolivar"] 
  [Text] Following the advances achieved in the last decade, 
Latin American democracy will be faced with two serious threats 
before the century ends. They are the crisis in governability 
and the social costs of the "apertura." I will deal with the 
first of these on another occasion in the near future. This 
threat has to do with the fact that the basic elements of 
democracy no longer have credibility in the minds of the 
citizens because of the inefficiency of government, the 
dysfunctional bureaucracy, and administrative corruption. This 
situation paves the way for the "authoritarian temptation" that 
has already produced a coup in Peru, another attempted coup in 
Guatemala, and, according to recent information, the plotting of 
yet another in Brazil. 
  The second threat, which has to do with the social costs of 
the "apertura," has again become the focus of analysis because 
of what has been called the "Chiapas scandal," simply a new 
version of the "Caracazo" in Venezuela four years ago. In both 
cases, violence has erupted as an expression of the 
dissatisfaction of the citizens with the conditions of their 
lives. 
  The Latin American countries have carried out a series of 
desirable and essential economic reforms in an effort to deal 
with the new realities in the economy and the politics of the 
world. As a result of these reforms, this continent can look 
toward the future with optimism, because the attention of the 
international community has begun to be focused on countries 
like Chile, Mexico, and Argentina in which important 
macroeconomic results are beginning to be visible as a 
consequence of the reforms undertaken. 
  The people do not feel that they are partners in the 
"apertura." Nothing could be a more dangerous threat to the 
process itself, which must continue, and to democratic stability 
itself, than the violent rebellion that shook Chiapas a few days 
ago, or that which shook Caracas when President Carlos Andres 
Perez launched the economic adjustment in 1989. The challenge of 
the new developmental model cannot be limited to an increase in 
growth, but must extend to a search for greater equity, and to 
social development. 
  In the United States itself, the subject of income 
distribution and the sharing of the benefits of growth was a 
central focus of the electoral debate in the most recent 
campaign, and it was one of the main themes in the program of 
the man who is now president. The economic policies pursued in 
the past decade have widened the disparities between the richer 
and the poorer classes, causing losses for the latter in terms 
of consumption levels, and today this is the principal concern 
of President Clinton and the first lady. 
  Some countries have made major efforts to increase social 
investments with a view to covering the costs of the "apertura" 
and guaranteeing continuity for the model. In Chile, where there 
are poverty levels of up to 40 percent, social investments have 
been increased to 15 percent of the GDP [gross domestic 
product], without affecting the process of internationalization 
in any way. 
  The document entitled "Social Reform and Poverty," which was 
published last year by the IDB [Inter-American Development 
Bank], says that social reform is indispensable if increases in 
productivity are to be guaranteed such as to allow proper 
incorporation in the international markets. What must be done is 
to ensure that the Latin American economies export productivity 
instead of poverty, low salaries, and inadequate living 
conditions. 
  Colombia is no exception where the deterioration of the 
social indicators in recent years is concerned. The social 
policy implemented beginning in the decade just past has not 
been effective in bringing the benefits of economic growth to 
the people, despite the fact that Colombia has done better than 
the majority of the other nations in this hemisphere. In the 
large cities, the informal sector accounts for 60.3 percent of 
the labor market, a much higher figure than the average for the 
region. Income in the peasant sector has declined in the last 
five years by more than 15 percent, and the number of citizens 
living in absolute poverty has risen. The gap between the rural 
sector and the cities, which had been narrowing in the decade of 
the 1970's, recently began to widen again. 
  Greater competitive capacity for the Colombian economy 
within 
the international context will require an effort in the realm of 
education to improve the conditions that enable human resources 
to be productive. Training and advancement programs for 
individuals are equally essential, so that they can work 
productively. In addition, policies for acquiring and producing 
technology are needed. The country must commit itself to a 
strategy whereby it devotes greater resources to education. 
Otherwise, the economic "apertura" will not produce the expected 
benefits, and the few benefits that are produced will be poorly 
distributed. The creation of productive, stable, and well-paid 
jobs, and the development of the new Colombian man who enjoys 
better housing, health, and education must become the great 
triumph achieved by the internationalization of the economy. 
  A modern social policy is essential if Colombia is to be 
able 
to achieve two priority goals--peace and equity. And the country 
now has a historic opportunity to achieve this, to think right 
now about the people. The "apertura" and the oil bonanza offer 
tools that for decades were not within our reach. This must be 
the hour of the people. If we fail to take advantage of this 
opportunity, we will be creating the possibility that the next 
chapter of violent protest will occur in Ciudad Bolivar, in 
Bogota, in Aguablanca, in Cali, in the black quarter of 
Barranquilla, or anywhere else. If, on the other hand, we make 
the decision to invest in the people and to make "the social 
issue" the priority of the new government and of the entire 
nation, we will in truth be establishing the foundations for the 
prosperous and peaceful society for which we all yearn. 

