Language: <F P=105>Mandarin </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Recorded video report on the 12 March news conference of </F>
the Ministry of Agriculture sponsored by the press center for 
the Second Sessions of the Eighth National People's Congress 
(NPC) and Eighth National Committee of the Chinese People's 
Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC); from the program: 
"Special News From the Second Session of the Eighth NPC"] 
  [Text] [Unidentified moderator] The press center for the 
NPC and CPPCC National Committee sessions holds its second news 
conference here today. We are glad to invite several 
responsible persons of the Ministry of Agriculture to answer 
your questions on China's agriculture, as well as rural economic 
reform and development. Attending today's news conference are 
Minister Liu Jiang as well as Zhang Yanxi and Wan Baorui, vice 
ministers of the Ministry of Agriculture. You are now welcome 
to raise questions. 
  [NONGMIN RIBAO correspondent] I am a correspondent from 
NONGMIN RIBAO [PEASANTS' DAILY]. I would like to ask Minister 
Liu Jiang these questions: How do you view the current 
situation in agriculture? What kind of new work plans does the 
Ministry of Agriculture have? Thank you. 
  [Liu] China's agricultural and rural situations were good 
last year, as demonstrated by the series of figures in Premier 
Li Peng's Government Work Report. Last year our grain output 
posted a record high, exceeding the previous feat and effecting 
an overall balance in supply and demand. Output increased 
across the board for products included in the "vegetable basket" 
project, as we term it, such as meat, poultry, eggs, milk, fish, 
vegetables, and fruit. The development of high-yield, 
high-quality, and high-efficiency agriculture accelerated 
further. Village and town enterprises enjoyed synchronized 
development in their growth rates and economic returns. 
Peasants saw continued growth in their incomes, a lessening of 
their burdens, and bigger steps being taken in reforming the 
system of grain procurement and marketing. The cooperative 
share-holding system and the integrated management of trade, 
industry, and agriculture were developing in the right 
direction. There remained some agricultural problems in spite 
of a relatively good situation in agriculture and rural economic 
development. The major ones were the relatively slow growth in 
peasants' income; the declining relative efficiency of 
agricultural production, particularly grain production; 
inadequacies in measures to support, protect, guide, as well as 
regulate and control agriculture; and a somewhat unstable 
grass-roots system and contingent of personnel for popularizing 
agricultural techniques. Turning to our work plans for 1994, we 
intend to center our work on rural reform and development. The 
focus of our work can be summarized into paying attention to 
these three areas: 1. Developing the rural economy; 2. 
Reforming the rural economic structure; 3. Increasing peasants' 
income. In paying attention to developing the rural economy, we 
will focus on the production of grain, cotton, and oil-bearing 
crops; the production of products included in the "vegetable 
basket" project; and the development of village and town 
enterprises. In paying attention to reforming the [rural] 
economic structure, we will mainly lay stress on improving the 
system of overall regulation and control of agriculture, 
maintaining the basic stability of the farm produce market and 
prices, pushing on with the building of a market system centered 
on the wholesale markets for agricultural and sideline products, 
and further advancing the development of the rural cooperative 
share- holding system, and the integrated management of trade, 
industry, and agriculture. In paying attention to increasing 
peasants' income, we will, after stabilizing and increasing 
grain and cotton production, mainly continue to safely readjust 
the setup of production; develop high-yield, high-quality, and 
high-efficiency agriculture; lessen the burden on peasants; and 
do a good work in aiding the poor through developing production. 
  [REUTERS correspondent] Some southern provinces saw a drop 
in grain output last year. I would like to know how many 
provinces in China are now suffering from a shortfall in grain 
production and are relying on supply from other provinces. 
  [Liu] At a recent national work conference on aiding the 
poor, General Secretary Jiang Zemin talked about the issue of 
rice shortages in the south. He addressed the need to maintain 
an overall and regional balance in supply and demand. As we 
have reaped bumper grain harvests over the past few years, we 
began to readjust the agricultural structure last year, or 
rather the year before. As part of this campaign of readjusting 
the agricultural structure, the grain mix has been readjusted 
under the precondition of maintaining the aggregate supply. We 
were, therefore, still able to turn out a record grain output in 
1993 while readjusting the structure of production. Last year's 
grain production was marked by growth in the north which 
included substantial increases in wheat, corn, and soybean 
production; and an output drop in the south. The southern 
region suffered from a paddy shortage, as it had carried out 
readjustment mainly in (?early rice) plantation. As asked by 
the REUTERS reporter just now: what are the actual numbers of 
provinces needing grain supply from other provinces and of 
supplying provinces? In general, about 10 provinces and 
municipalities are receiving grain, 10 provinces and 
municipalities are supplying grain, and another 10 provinces and 
municipalities are basically maintaining a balance. 
  [Central Television correspondent] I am a correspondent 
from Central Television. Minister Liu, as you mentioned in your 
statement just now, peasants' incomes grew at a relatively low 
rate over the past few years. Can you explain the reasons? 
What measures do you intend to take to continually increase 
peasants' incomes in the future? Thank you. 
  [Wan Baorui] There are three main reasons behind the slow 
growth. The farming efficiency of peasants, particularly those 
planting mainly grain, is relatively low, thus affecting their 
income. This is one reason. The second reason is the lack of 
career choices for peasants. Peasants in most rural areas, 
except those along the coast, concentrate on the sole business 
of planting, which cannot provide enough jobs for the entire 
work force. The third problem is the present rise in the cost 
of the means of production which eats into peasants' income. 
These three reasons all contribute to the relatively slow 
growth of peasants' incomes. At present, we are taking six main 
measures to increase peasants' incomes: 1. To appropriately 
raise the prices of farm produce; 2. The state, [words 
indistinct], and individual localities must all increase 
investment in agriculture; 3. To readjust the setup of 
production to develop high-yield, high-quality, and 
high-efficiency agriculture; 4. To integrate production, 
supply, and marketing of crop-farming, animal husbandry, and 
processing of farm produce; 5. To emphatically develop 
secondary and tertiary industries, and in particular village and 
town enterprises; 6. To carry out the plan for extricating 800 
counties from poverty within seven years [ba qi gui hua]. 
Peasants' income will be increased mainly through these six 
measures. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] I am a correspondent from Hong 
Kong. I would like to ask Minister Liu about the state plan to 
set up an agricultural development bank this year. What impact 
will this policy bank have on national agricultural development? 
  [Liu] The State Council recently decided to form the 
Agricultural Development Bank of China, which will serve as a 
policy bank. The existing Agricultural Bank of China will 
become a commercial bank. The policy bank will play a positive 
role in increasing the injection of agricultural credit funds, 
guaranteeing the prompt extension and effective use of 
policy-related loans, and strengthening the state's overall 
regulation and control of agricultural production and 
circulation of farm produce. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] What measures will the Ministry 
of Agriculture take this year to guarantee a steady and 
sustained growth of the so-called vegetable basket? 
  [Zhang Yanxi] For the period ahead, the Ministry of 
Agriculture will attach even greater importance to work related 
to the vegetable basket. We intend to continue paying attention 
to this matter from three aspects. First, we will continue 
taking good charge of production development. Second, we will, 
in coordination with commerce departments, take good charge of 
the establishment of a market system centered on wholesale 
markets. Third, we will help peasants and agricultural 
production units develop the integrated management of 
production, supply, and marketing, so as to forge even closer 
relations between production and management. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] I am a correspondent from 
France. Mr. Minister, you said you had made various efforts in 
agriculture, but last year many peasants continued to leave the 
countryside for urban areas. Do you have specific figures on 
the flow of peasants or any plans to take whatever measures to 
deal with this issue? 
  [Liu] This problem is known in China as tides of laborers 
from rural areas. This problem is caused by two basic factors 
in the country -- the large population and limited land 
resources in rural areas, and the differences between urban and 
rural areas. According to incomplete statistics, in 1993 about 
50 million people left their homes to work, including 20 million 
who left their homes to work in provinces and regions other than 
their own. There are about 430 million rural laborers in China 
today. Owing to the fast development of village and town 
enterprises, 112 million former rural laborers are now employed 
in these enterprises. In recent years, the number of rural 
laborers these enterprises employed was increasing by about six 
million annually. 
  Nevertheless, the rural areas still have some surplus 
laborers. Because of the development zones and the many 
processing industries established along coastal areas in 
southeast China, many farmers in central and western China are 
moving to coastal areas and cities, causing the annual outflow 
of 50 million people, including the 20 million who leave their 
own provinces and regions, each year. For this outflowing 
population, we follow the principle of guiding, enlightening [su 
dao], and serving them. We have also taken some measures to 
make the flow more rational. Moreover, we plan to set up a 
consolidated, nationwide labor market to regulate the supply and 
demand of laborers between cities and rural areas. 
  [Unidentified correspondent] I am a reporter from the U.S. 
WALL STREET JOURNAL. You just mentioned that you have taken 
some measures for increasing the purchase of grain and cotton. 
It is likely that the purchase of these products will decline 
this year? To what extent will it decline? Moreover, has last 
year's problem of IOU's been completely resolved? Have there 
been any other measures taken to prevent the recurrence of this 
problem? Thank you. 
  [Liu] Let me answer your last question first -- the IOU 
problem. We have taken care of this problem which occurred in 
the agricultural sector in 1993. Now, no more IOU's have been 
given for agricultural purchases. Now for the question about 
purchasing quantities: we fulfilled the 1993 state plan for 
grain purchase but we did not fulfill the state plan for cotton 
purchase. This is primarily because the plan set for cotton 
production was not fulfilled as a result of natural disasters 
and smaller acreage for cotton last year. We only fulfilled 70 
percent of the cotton purchasing target. This lady [the WALL 
STREET JOURNAL reporter] and many other reporters have asked the 
question about the balance of total grain supply and demand. 
Let me answer your question with some figures. Last year when 
I attended a conference of the FAO [UN Food and Agriculture 
Organization], I gave a report on China's grain output in recent 
years. Comparison of the statistics released by the FAO and 
China shows that, on average, China produced 31 kg of every 
additional 100 kg of grain the world produced during the 12- 
year period from 1980 to 1992; and that China produced 40 kg of 
cotton, 34 kg of oil-bearing crops, 37 kg of aquatic products, 
and 54 kg of meat of every additional 100 kg of these goods the 
world produced during that 12-year period. That is to say, 
except for cotton, the production of which declined in China in 
1993, the output of all other crops -- cereal and oil bearing 
crops, aquatic products and meat -- exceeded the average. The 
Chinese population now accounts for 22 percent of the world 
population. In other words, the output of the goods mentioned 
above was proportionally higher than 22 percent. This also 
shows that the Chinese people's living standards are improving, 
and the quantities of agricultural and livestock products they 
consume far exceed the world average even though China's 
population is increasing by 15-16 million each year. At a time 
when the Chinese people are striving for better living 
conditions and a comparatively comfortable life, I think the 
vast number of hard-working Chinese farmers as well as 
intelligent and capable scientists and technicians can, under 
the leadership of the CPC Central Committee headed by Jiang 
Zemin, accomplish the historical mission of improving their 
livelihood and becoming comparatively well off. 

