BFN 

<F P=106> [Boris Boyko report: "Nikolay Gonchar Has Started </F>
Campaigning for Independence"] 
  [Text] In its session yesterday the Federation Council 
refused to adopt the bill, recently approved by the State Duma, 
"On Making Changes and Additions into Some Laws of the Russian 
Federation on Taxation and Providing Privileges on Compulsory 
Payments to Non-Budget Funds." The budget committee proposed to 
reject the bill under the pretext that matters of expanding the 
list of tax breaks must be decided only in the context of 
reforming the entire tax system. The council as a whole, 
however, was more restrained and confirmed its readiness to pass 
the law after it was reworked in a corresponding manner, for 
which purpose it decided to set up a conciliation commission 
(including deputies from the Duma and the Federation Council). 
  It is noteworthy that the law approved by the Duma and 
bearing on tax breaks to election commissions, deputy 
candidates, election associations, and election foundations in 
financing election campaigns was drafted not by the government 
but by Duma deputies. The Federation Council's Budget Committee, 
whose position was presented by its chairman Nikolay Gonchar, 
found some "serious shortfalls" and violations of the current 
tax legislation in the law. Furthermore, the committee, citing 
the experience of foreign countries, also declared itself in 
favor of tougher restrictions on the size of untaxed donations 
by corporate entities to the election funds of candidates and 
election associations (under the law, these sums must not exceed 
the following sums: in elections to federal state power bodies, 
200 times and 20,000 times the minimum monthly wage, 
respectively; and in elections to local power bodies 100 times 
and 10,000 times). In the committee's opinion, financing 
election campaigns with voluntary donations in such amounts can 
result in an elected deputy's dependence on the will of the 
"donors" subsidizing his election campaign. 
  True, this argument appears a little strange. First, any 
deputy, per se, is a representative of certain local, social, 
and group interests in a legislative body (which follows from 
the designation of parliament as a form of social and regional 
compromise). Second, the experience of the United States, with 
its election fund raising race, shows that democracy is well 
compatible with the open financing of candidates; especially 
when this financing is done openly, not secretly. But Russia 
has different political ethics, which Nikolay Gonchar apparently 
follows. 
  According to the last article of the law, its effects extend 
to relations that arose after 1 January 1994. The Federation 
Council saw this not only as a source of possible losses to the 
budget (from which tax sums already paid will have to be 
returned), but also a possibility for the deputies even now to 
obtain funds to prepare the next election campaign. Therefore, 
judging by the nature of the Federation Council's remarks, the 
conciliation commission will have to spend much time to make 
sure the senate's laudable commitment to justice and legality 
(even to its own detriment) triumphs. 
  Interestingly, a Finance Ministry representative (Deputy 
Minister Sergey Aleksashenko), who was to have presented the law 
to the Federation Council, preferred participation in a press 
conference with government members to presence at the session. 
Nonetheless, according to Nikolay Gonchar, "he expressed his 
disagreement with the law on the telephone." 

