Juarez-El   Paso Border 

<F P=102> PA0306172094 Mexico City NOTIMEX in Spanish 2129 GMT 1 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> PA0306172094 </F>
<F P=104>  Mexico City NOTIMEX </F>
<F P=105>  Spanish </F>
BFN 

  [Text] Ciudad Juarez, 1 Jun (NOTIMEX) -- Drug trafficking 
groups from the Mexican mountainous region and Asian criminal 
organizations are flooding the Ciudad Juarez-El Paso common 
border with heroin, which is prohibited in the United States. 
  Felipe Pando, a former chief of the State Judicial Federal 
Police, said that some types of drugs which were until recently 
unknown, such as white heroin, have emerged in the drug market. 
  He pointed out that during the sixties and the seventies 
this 
border became a "giant drug reservoir" for thousands of U.S. 
soldiers stationed at Fort Bliss in El Paso, Texas. 
  He recalled that the soldiers "came by the dozens. They 
crossed the international bridge every night looking for fun in 
the night spots. The drivers of the vehicles at those night 
spots were the contacts who drove them to the houses where 
heroin was sold." 
  The drug cartels that controlled the heroin that came from 
Asia and from the Mexican mountainous region were practically 
born in Ciudad Juarez. 
  Pando explained that "the city had a drug trafficking boom 
until the end of 1970 when the United States installed more 
military bases in other parts of the nation and Fort Bliss 
reduced its personnel. The U.S. soldiers left and the sale of 
drugs in Ciudad Juarez fell; it now concentrates on the export 
of drugs," he noted. 
  During more than one decade the city did not experience 
serious drug consumption problems until the beginning of 1990, 
when the so-called "reservoirs" and the drug traffickers emerged 
once again. 
  The DEA warned about the possibility that the South American 
cartels could form a possible alliance with the Asiatic 
organizations that use this area for the traffic of their 
illegal merchandise. 
  Michael Lappe, special agent in charge of the U.S. Customs 
Agency in El Paso, said that the alliance among international 
trafficking organizations "could be looking at the Juarez-El 
Paso area as a working place. Gangs from Nigeria are important 
players in heroin trade. They could have been testing the El 
Paso-Juarez area as a new contraband bridge to the United 
States," he stressed. 
  He noted that Colombian cartels "could be lending their 
marketing and contraband infrastructure to the heroin smugglers." 
  "This would implicate an alliance between the South American 
and Asian cartels, which is a matter of great concern," he noted. 
  Travis Kuykendall, DEA regional chief in south Texas, said 
that not only the Asian heroin is invading the area but also the 
heroin processed in the [Mexican] Western Sierra Madre. This is 
an area rich in opium seeds that has always been earmarked for 
the United States, although 3 percent remains in Ciudad Juarez 
and El Paso. 

