Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondent] </F>
  [Text] Moscow March 30 TASS -- President Nursultan 
Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan is convinced that successful 
development of the peoples inhabiting the former Soviet Union is 
possible only through their uniting into a new alliance. 
  Nazarbayev, who met Russian media chiefs on Wednesday 
morning, emphasised that he had long been nurturing the idea and 
that Boris Yeltsin was the first to hear his considerations. "It 
is just impossible for us to make progress without such an 
alliance," Nazarbayev said. 
  "I have always been an advocate of a close union. The 
economies of ex-Soviet republics are closely inter-connected. 
The euphoria of sovereignties is over, and ex-soviet states are 
coming to realise that we all need one another", the president 
of Kazakhstan said. 
  Nazarbayev gave the following particular example: Russia's 
submarine fleet is catered for by about 40 enterprises from 
"landlocked" Kazakhstan. Inter-dependence is great whatever the 
branch of industry, he said. 
  Meanwhile, Nazarbayev said, unnecessary customs barriers are 
being installed. Russia has set up 65 customs points at the 
border with Kazakhstan at a time when Kazakhstan does not 
consider it necessary to take similar measures. 
  The president of Kazakhstan believes that much will change 
for the better following his visit to Moscow and his talks with 
Boris Yeltsin. "The strategic policy of partnership has been 
sealed. Abiding by it, we shall enter the 21st Century," he 
stated. 
  Media chiefs wondered why Nazarbayev came forward with the 
Euro-Asian Union (EAU) idea without being content with the 
existence of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). 
  "The CIS is in existence but we get farther and farther away 
from one another," he said. Four hundred documents have been 
signed but they all do not work, he added. 
  The president of Kazakhstan believes that supranational 
bodies are essential for integration to really [be] effective. 
He was confirmed in this belief once again during his recent 
trip to Western Europe. 
  It is necessary to have a supernational [as received] 
parliament and such bodies as a defence ministers' council, a 
foreign ministers' council, an inter-state secretariat, which 
would see to it that the accords reached are implemented. It 
would be also useful to set up a council for education and 
culture and a common information agency. 
  Nazarbayev visualises a Euro-Asian union as a voluntary 
association of states, with a supranational currency, an 
inter-state investment fund, and a common programme for economic 
reforms. The language of inter-nation intercourse in the 
contemplated EAU must be Russian. And "there should be no 
associated members", the president added. 
  Asked about the future of the Semipalatinsk nuclear test 
site, Nazarbayev said no tests would be conducted there any 
longer. Five hundred nuclear detonations over a span of forty 
years turned the land there into a scorched desert, he remarked. 
  As far as the Baykonur Cosmodrome is concerned, the 
president 
recalled that appropriate Russian-Kazakshtan accords had been 
reached. "The main thing is to keep the cosmodrome for joint 
use. As far as money is concerned, we reached agreement on 
acceptable terms," he said. 
  In response to complaints by Russian newspaper editors that 
their publications encounter distribution difficulties in 
Kazakhstan, Nazarbayev promised that the arisen problems would 
be settled. "We are interested in the existence of Russian 
newspapers in Kazakhstan," he assured. 

