BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Jalal al-Mashitah: "'Arafat Believes the Problem </F>
Is With the Occupation Not With Hamas"] 
  [Text] Moscow -- Palestinian President Yasir 'Arafat has 
told AL-HAYAH that negotiations with the Israelis are "useless." 
He said that the Israelis "are quite distant from the so-called 
peace, reconciliation, or settlement." He also attacked the 
U.S. Administration, claiming that "it paid Israel, in advance, 
everything it asked for as a price for peace, and more." He 
stressed that there is no problem with Hamas. "Our problem is 
with the Israelis and the occupation." 
  'Arafat left Moscow yesterday for Bucharest, concluding a 
visit during which he met with President Boris Yeltsin, who said 
that the establishment of peace is one of Russia's "strategic 
priorities." He also promised political support for the 
Palestinians to boost the negotiation process. It is understood 
that he intends to convey 'Arafat's "complaint" to Israeli Prime 
Minister Yitzhaq Rabin who is due in Moscow next Sunday. 
  Abu-'Ammar ['Arafat] told AL-HAYAH that his visit to Moscow 
was "important, positive, and fruitful. It is the first visit 
by an Arab leader to the Russian Federation after the major 
change that has taken place in that country. We held extensive 
and useful talks with President Boris Yeltsin and his Foreign 
Minister Andrey Kozyrev on the grounds that Russia is one of the 
two sponsors of the peace conference and one of the signatories 
of our agreement with the Israelis at the White House. 
Furthermore, Security Council Resolution 904 calls on the two 
sponsors to implement the resolution, and that includes taking 
on the responsibility of sending UN forces to Palestine, 
beginning with Hebron, to protect the Palestinian people." 
  Answering a question, 'Arafat said "I have old links with 
the 
Russian Orthodox Church. I had strong links with the late 
Patriarch Pimen. We discussed many issues with His Holiness 
Aleksiy II, especially the effects of the peace process on the 
position of Jerusalem from the Christian and Islamic angles." 
  On the negotiations on autonomy implementation, he said: 
"Any negotiations with the Israelis are useless because 
Israel's aim is to waste time, maneuver, dither, and 
procrastinate. We are continuing the negotiations but there is 
a limit to patience. I have said that to President Yeltsin and 
I have sent official messages to this effect to U.S. President 
Bill Clinton, the leaders of the permanent members of the 
Security Council, the chairman of the Nonaligned Movement, the 
Islamic summit, and the Arab League to bring all face to face 
with their responsibilities. The aim of this Israeli Government 
is to procrastinate and play for time. It does not want to 
implement anything on the ground, and it bears the 
responsibility for all the consequences of that attitude. Let 
God be my witness that I have told the truth. For our part, we 
have done everything and have been fully flexible but they are 
quite detached from the so-called peace, reconciliation, or 
settlement." 
  Is Israeli intransigence the only reason? He said: "The 
U.S. Administration bears the responsibility, for it has paid 
Israel, in advance and before anything was implemented, 
everything Israel asked for as a price for peace, and more, 
including most advanced aircraft, internationally banned nerve 
gas -- recently seized on a boat near Sri Lanka -- a $10 billion 
loan, and advanced computers. 
  "It has provided economic, financial, and political aid, so 
why do the Israelis not offer anything? Our Arab nation should 
understand this. I consider myself a fedayeen in an advanced 
position in the peace process. God is my witness." 
  Asked whether the Israeli intransigence would lead to 
rapprochement with the other Palestinian factions, particularly 
after statements by Hamas officials that they might accept the 
peace process, 'Arafat replied: "Our problem is with the 
Israelis and the occupation. There are no problems between the 
Palestinian parties. I knew before that my brothers in Hamas 
had a line of accepting it (the peace process) along the road to 
the forthcoming elections, that is if the Israelis allow the 
Palestinian people to hold such elections." 
  Asked what he thought of Israel's deliberate discrimination 
between Hamas detainees and the rest of the Palestinian 
detainees, he said: "The PLO has always worked for the release 
of all the Palestinian detainees from the occupation prisons. 
Actually, that is an important point as far as enhancement of 
the negotiation process is concerned. You may recall that I had 
personally requested the release of Hamas leader Shaykh Ahmad 
Yasin from Israeli prison. There was a promise of that but that 
promise has not yet been fulfilled." 
  On the date of his return to the occupied territory and 
Rabin's assertion that dates are not sacred, the Palestinian 
President said: "If dates are not sacred, then what is sacred? 
As regards my return, I do not see this as a personal issue. I 
speak from a position of responsibility and confront the [peace] 
conference cosponsors with their international, moral, and 
political responsibilities in order to save the peace process 
because the alternative to peace is total chaos in the region 
and Balkanization. [quotation marks as published] 
  He finally emphasized that "there is a need for a united 
Arab 
position to meet the challenges facing the Arab nation and 
resulting from the new world order, to ensure that that new 
order is not at our expense nor at the expense of our nation, 
generations, and wealth." 

