CSO 

    [Editorial Report] After assuming office on 16 March, the 
new Slovak Government, led by Jozef Moravcik, found itself 
confronted with the results of what it believes to be 
last-minute petty acts of pilferage on the part of the outgoing 
government of Vladimir Meciar, as well as evidence of 
questionable financial dealings by officials of the Meciar 
regime. These charges are contained in a 21 March ZEMEDELSKE 
NOVINY article by Ivan Rajecky, who writes that the new deputy 
prime minister, Ivan Simko, found his offices stripped of 
movable property, including even such insignificant items as 
coffee cups and water glasses. Labor Minister Julius Brocka was 
confronted with a work stoppage by ministry officials, who 
refused to serve under him because they "do not officially 
recognize" the Moravcik government. According to Rajecky, 
Brocka did not manage to get even a cup of coffee on his first 
day in office. 
  As had been "predicted" by his predecessor, Roman Hofbauer, 
Transportation Minister Mikulas Dzurinda did not find even paper 
or pencils in his new office. What Dzurinda did find in his 
ministry, however, was former Minister Hofbauer ensconced in the 
civil-service position of deputy minister, having "mysteriously" 
been appointed by a state secretary who was at the time on an 
official visit to Greece. Rajecky also reported that, on taking 
office, many new ministers found gaps in official files and 
records. 
  According to Rajecky, the new government has discovered 
evidence that significant expenditures were made without proper 
parliamentary authorization, including a supplementary budget of 
1.2 million korunas [Sk] obtained by former Prime Minister 
Meciar's secretariat director, Anna Nagy, and Sk1.3 million in 
unauthorized severance payments to government employees who had 
been fired by Meciar because they "did not share his views." 
Rajecky also alleged that the chairman of the Supreme 
Inspection Office, Marian Vanko, was found to have purchased 14 
Audi automobiles off budget, two of which had apparently been 
loaned to the secretariat of Meciar's party, the Movement for a 
Democratic Slovakia (HZDS). Rajecky reported that parliamentary 
investigations of these matters are planned. 
  According to an article in the 21 March ROLNICKE NOVINY, 
Privatization Minister Milan Janicin allegedly has evidence of 
at least 13 instances of illegal actions in privatization 
projects approved by the Meciar government in its last month in 
office. The Bratislava daily reports that Janicin has requested 
that the Finance Ministry freeze the National Property Fund's 
accounts and halt further property transfers until the issue is 
resolved. 

