CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yan Strugach: "Inflation, Petersburg-Style"] </F>
  [Text] If, dear reader, you have been experiencing some 
doubts lately listening to or reading upbeat reports on the 
record low inflation level during past February and the first 
weeks of March, be assured that your inner voice does not lie to 
you. Perhaps somewhere in some cities and villages in Russia 
inflation has indeed slowed down, but in our city it remains as 
high as before. 
  The Center for Economic Situation Assessment under the 
Government of the Russian Federation has calculated the average 
rate of inflation in Russia in February at 9.9 percent. 
Naturally, this figure is like the average temperature in a 
hospital, and naturally, we are more interested in our own 
illness. Well, according to the Petersburg Committee for 
Statistics, the rate of inflation in our city registered 20.2 
percent, the impact of which many compatriots apparently felt on 
their pockets. 
  The problem, of course, is not discrepancy in numbers. The 
map of Russia today is indeed a patchwork, which consists not of 
administrative units but economic regions, which differ from one 
another by inflation index. What is worse is that many 
economists and commentators use this average indicator, which 
does not reflect in any way the trend in inflationary processes, 
as a basis for their conclusions regarding the government's 
course, effectiveness of reforms, political situation, etc. 
  For instance, they associate the aforementioned "record" 9.9 
percent with the fact that Chernomyrdin allegedly has become an 
even greater monetarist than Gaydar and Fedorov, and does not 
give money to anyone, and the Central Bank, too, stopped issuing 
credit. But neither can Petersburg industry boast of any 
monetary "infusions." Interestingly, average wages in February 
also declined as compared to December (by 1 percent in the city 
and 4 percent in the oblast). 
  Another factor that is mentioned frequently is inflationary 
expectations, that is, in anticipation of an imminent jump in 
prices people tend to stockpile some or other goods, which 
causes prices to rise as a result of increased demand. This 
explanation is doubtful, too: Durable goods, which usually are 
the ones purchased ahead, did not go up in price as much in 
February as daily necessities. Nobody can stockpile milk, bread, 
or fish, after all, but these are precisely the items whose 
prices went up by 22-31 percent. 
  The inflation index was also seriously affected by the rise 
in the cost of municipal services (sixfold, due to a 18.9-fold 
increase in water usage rates), consumer services, 
transportation, etc. 
  This means that these price changes did not take place for 
the reasons commentators now describe with hope and elation; 
they happened for other reasons, and not without some doing on 
the part of the leaders of the Russian and local governments. 
Look first and foremost at how wholesale prices have changed in 
industry, because some of them determine the prices for all 
other goods and services and depend above all on government 
decisions. Here we find out that over two months of this year 
wholesale prices in the electric power generation industry, as 
well as in the food processing industry, more than doubled, and 
those in the construction material industry increased by 61 
percent. We also have to keep in mind that over the preceding 
months prices for bakery products were held at a relatively low 
level with the help of subsidies, and now this barrier is gone, 
too. 
  So it turns out that prices (read: inflation) are not 
marriages: they are not made in heaven but in the offices of the 
authorities. Our 20 percent Petersburg inflation in February 
(200 rubles from each R1,000) is the result of a certain 
influence on economic processes in the region--an influence that 
is not exactly correct and timely. 
  Not long ago Chernomyrdin's government used to be accused of 
giving money to all enterprises across the board. Judging by all 
signs, it has now jumped to the other extreme and does not give 
money to anybody, also across the board. The state is the chief 
debtor, and like any debtor, in an attempt to get out of debt it 
puts those close to it in a difficult situation. It shifts 
social and household expenses onto the population's shoulders; 
does not pay industry for the orders it itself placed, so 
enterprises cannot buy raw materials and components, and so fold 
production. 
  The volume of industrial output produced over two months of 
the current year fell by 23.7 percent as compared to the same 
period of last year. This is a catastrophe, or, to be precise, a 
continuation of the catastrophe. It is more significant, of 
course, at defense industry enterprises and in machine building; 
there is no reason to believe, however, that the sectors 
producing consumer goods are flourishing. 
  As I was working on this article, I pulled out at random one 
of the pile of old statistical report books, which also dealt 
with the first two months of the beginning of the year. It 
turned out to be 1987. What were the quantities produced then 
and now of what are called basic necessities? Meat: over the 
first two months of 1987--29,200 tonnes, in 1994--3,700, or 
6,100 if ready-to-cook meats are counted; sausages: 23,300 and 
9,100 tonnes; whole milk products: 184,000 and 31,700 tonnes; 
flour: 157,000 and 81,200 tonnes; cereals: 1,800 and 1,100 
tonnes; and confectionery items--28,700 and 11,000 tonnes. 
  Also characteristic are the figures showing the situation in 
Leningrad Oblast agriculture. Let us not compare volume 
indicators--those may be distorted. But here are those showing 
the level of production as a whole, and its effectiveness: the 
average yield of milk per cow in 1987 amounted to 544 kg, and it 
is now 410; even hens used to lay 40 eggs over two months, and 
now they lay only 37. Add to this an alarming decline in the 
livestock and poultry herd (the herd of horned cattle declined 
from 544,200 head in 1987 to 388,100 in 1994), as well as a drop 
in the population's purchases of piglets and chicks to raise on 
personal plots; add the quantity of machinery at agricultural 
enterprises that has decreased by a factor of 1.5-2.0, and you 
can forecast a meager harvest. 
  I have no intention to paint gloomy pictures of ruin, 
famine, 
and other disasters without having in my possession more 
extensive information and more detailed analysis. Especially 
keeping in mind that the socioeconomic picture is sometimes 
amusing and paradoxical. Along with dark paints when it comes to 
production and inflation, it has rainbow-bright colors that no 
specialist can reasonably explain. The city's consumer market is 
filled with domestic and imported goods; the assortment of a 
score of food products has broadened; and despite rising prices, 
the consumer demand is high and is not declining. 
  The credit for the abundance of goods should go to a large 
extent to new commercial structures, which took upon themselves 
the problem of supplying a huge city. But where does the 
population's money come from, considering that the government 
does not give money to anybody, the average wage is dropping, 
and production is folding? It is unlikely to be 
savings--inflation in tandem with currency reforms would have 
"eaten" them up a long time ago. The only assumption left is 
that in its impoverished state the population has at its 
disposal considerable resources that do not lend themselves to 
counting, estimates, or regulation. 
  This point in such a case becomes a major factor in managing 
the national economy in general and that of Petersburg and 
Leningrad Oblast in particular. Without figuring out and 
understanding this phenomenon, the administrators will never be 
able to offer true anti-inflation measures, organize the budget, 
and revive production. Meanwhile, those in the administrative 
apparatus intuitively sense this strange paradox and gradually, 
but equally tentatively, tighten the screws of price pressure. 
Let us hope that our administrators will sense in time the limit 
for this pressure or will see the true causes of what is 
happening. 

