BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 22 (XINHUA) -- The Foreign Affairs 
Committee of China's National People's Congress (NPC) has today 
expressed its strong indignation and regret over the report on 
Sino- British relations issued by the Foreign Affairs Committee 
of the British House of Commons. 
  A spokesman for the NPC Foreign Affairs Committee said the 
report openly advocated the adoption of a confrontational policy 
toward China and made random comments on China's internal 
affairs while unscrupulously interfering in China's internal 
affairs. 
  The report issued on April 13 admits to the British side's 
change of policy on Hong Kong and its support of Chris Patten's 
wrong practices in Hong Kong, proceeding from its inaccurate 
assessment of the current situation and the prospects in China. 
  While continuing to adopt the policy of confrontation with 
China, the report even advocates seeking international support 
over Hong Kong issue. 
  The NPC Foreign Affairs Committee is shocked by the report 
at 
a time when the British side has repeatedly stated that it would 
cooperate with China on other issues now that the truth of the 
disputes on Hong Kong's political system has been made clear to 
the public. 
  The report has wrongly claimed that China will not 
necessarily change the three-level political framework 
established by the Hong Kong governor in violation of the 
Sino-British Declaration, the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region and the bilateral understandings reached 
by the two sides before. 
  The report even openly attacked some articles in the Basic 
Law which provide that the NPC Standing Committee has the right 
to announce a state of emergency in Hong Kong when necessary and 
that the right to explain the basic law lies with the NPC 
Standing Committee. However, the report claims the articles as 
a serious potential threat to the Special Administrative Region 
of Hong Kong, thus revealing the true motive of the British side 
to attempt to prolong its control and influence over Hong Kong. 
  The promotion of democracy and the safeguarding of human 
rights in Hong Kong as advocated in the report has revealed the 
hypocrisy of the British side, the spokesman said. The essence 
of the disputes over Hong Kong's political system is whether or 
not to abide by international commitment and whether or not to 
ensure the smooth transition of Hong Kong in line with the basic 
law. The basic law has provided adequate and specific 
provisions on the development of democracy in Hong Kong after 
the Special Administrative Region is established. There has 
been no democracy or human rights to speak of over the past 
century or more while the British codes for colonies have still 
governed Hong Kong. To make much fanfare about democracy and 
human rights just a few years before the ending of its rule over 
Hong Kong is nothing but to create confusion, the spokesman said. 
  The report also suggests that a human rights committee and 
human rights supervision agency be established in Hong Kong. 
The purpose is to create new barriers for smooth transition of 
the sovereignty over Hong Kong. The Chinese side will not 
recognize British unilateral decision on major affairs extending 
beyond 1997, according to the spokesman. 

