BFN 

  [Text] A high-ranking officer of the Khmer Royal Armed 
Forces said on 22 April that government forces are planning to 
retake Pailin within one month. Pailin fell back into Khmer 
Rouge hands on 19 April, embarrasing the government which 
controlled that place for only exactly a month (19 March-19 
April). 
  This army officer, a general in the high command of the 5th 
Military Region headquartered in Battambang, and who requested 
anonymity, said that "the operation to retake Pailin will be 
completed within a month using infantry troops and the Air 
Force, because the rainy season has now arrived; we cannot use 
tanks, trucks, or heavy weapons." 
  However this official stressed that the helicopter unit of 
the Air Force has started strafing with rockets and fired 
hundreds of artillery shells daily on various Khmer Rouge 
positions around Pailin. Furthermore, a lot of reinforcement 
troops are being dispatched to the forward positions, bases of 
the royal government. These reinforcement troops are taken there 
by helicopters from Svay Rieng, Prey Veng, and Kompong Chhnang 
Provinces. 
  It is not known how many reinforcement troops or what the 
total number of troops involved in the operation to retake 
Pailin will be. It is still remembered, however, that on 19 
March when the government forces captured Pailin, about 10,000 
troops were involved, while there were not even 500 Khmer Rouge 
soldiers. When the rebels took back Pailin on 19 April, the 
Khmer Rouge used more than 3,000 troops, nearly half of all the 
rebels' forces. 
  During a recent mission to Battambang Province, Second Prime 
Minister Samdech Hun Sen accused Thailand of helping the Khmer 
Rouge retake Pailin and threatened to ban Thai companies from 
doing business with the Khmer Rouge as has happened before. 
  A high-ranking government official, who requested anonymity, 
pointed out the reason for the defeat in Pailin, saying that 
this also stemmed from the morale of the front-line troops who 
were facing harsh living conditions. It was also started by 
jealousy resulting from the distribution of property and houses 
in Pailin town and also the distribution of war trophies. 
  A general said that if we successfully take back Pailin this 
time the 5th Military Region will issue a new order prohibiting 
the repeat of this process. 
  The general also said: "If we retake Pailin, we will not 
allow army officiers or any soldiers to take over property in 
Pailin; furthermore, army officiers and soldiers will not be 
allowed to live in houses in Pailin." 
  This high-ranking army official stressed: "We will build a 
new base in Pailin town by putting up tents to avoid jealousy 
among troops, strengthen discipline, and avoid eventual 
incidents." 

