CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Anatoliy Dyakov of the Center for the Study of </F>
Problems of Disarmament, Energy Development and Environmental 
Protection (Moscow Physics and Technology Institute): 
"Plutonium: New Aspects of National and International Security"] 
  [Text] A high-level U.S. delegation to include 
representatives of Congress and the Department of Energy will 
arrive in Russia in May to consult on the issue of shutting down 
nuclear reactors in the "closed" cities of Tomsk-7 and 
Krasnoyarsk-26. 
  This visit by American government experts is taking 
place within the framework of agreements reached between 
Chernomyrdin and Gore in December 1993 regarding the creation of 
a joint working group to study and develop a number of issues 
connected with nuclear arms reduction. During the May visit 
there are plans to: study opportunities for achieving greater 
transparency and irreversibility in nuclear arms reduction, and 
placing civilian plutonium and surplus military plutonium under 
monitoring; discuss the technical details of mutual inspections 
of sites where parts made of fissionable materials are stored; 
and discuss possible means of utilizing plutonium to prevent its 
accumulation. This is a multifaceted issue and involves not only 
technological aspects, but serious political aspects as 
well. 
  By the mid-1980's the nuclear arsenals created by the former 
Soviet Union and the United States during the Cold War totalled 
more than 60,000 nuclear warheads. Of that number, more than 
one-half belonged to the USSR. The process of nuclear 
disarmament begun by the two superpowers and the development of 
that process, in which the collapsed USSR's place has been taken 
by Russia, will result in a sharp reduction in the size of that 
arsenal. In compliance with the START I and START II treaties 
the total number of strategic warheads retained by each side 
must not exceed 3,500 by the year 2003. Taking into 
consideration unilateral pledges to reduce tactical nuclear 
weapons, over the next decade Russia and the United States will 
have to destroy several tens of thousands of warheads. The 
result will be a sharp reduction in the threat of nuclear war. 
  According to various estimates, the process of destroying 
nuclear warheads will result in Russia and the United States 
freeing up a total of approximately 900 metric tons of highly 
enriched uranium and more than 100 metric tons of weapons-grade 
plutonium (approximately 50 metric tons for each country). These 
two materials are the basis for the manufacture of nuclear 
detonation devices. It takes 3-5 kg of plutonium to make a 
single nuclear device, and three or four times that much highly 
enriched uranium. Therefore acquisition of these materials is a 
priority goal for states seeking to acquire nuclear weapons. 
  The existence of surplus fissionable materials presents a 
threat both to Russian and U.S. national security and to world 
security. Retention of those materials retains the possibility 
that they will be used to make nuclear weapons again, thereby 
undermining the irreversibility of nuclear disarmament efforts. 
The emergence of any crisis in Russian-American relations could 
quite easily provoke a resurrection of the nuclear arms race. 
Therefore the goal should be the permanent removal of these 
materials from the military realm. For Russia the situation is 
made more difficult by internal political instability, 
slackening of state monitoring functions, and a difficult 
economic and environmental situation. Consequently, for it the 
choice of the optimum means of utilizing (or destroying) surplus 
weapons-grade fissionable materials and monitoring them is a 
task of priority importance. 
  Highly enriched uranium (which consists primarily of the 
U-235 isotope) may be de-enriched by mixing it with natural 
uranium and then used in the production of fuel for the nuclear 
power industry. An agreement has been reached under which Russia 
will sell the United States uranium with an enrichment level of 
4 percent for the purpose of manufacturing fuel. Within the 
framework of that agreement 500 metric tons of Russian 
weapons-grade uranium made available through warhead elimination 
will be reprocessed over a period of 20 years. The value of this 
contract is in excess of $12 billion. A separate agreement also 
provides for mutual monitoring measures that will prevent Russia 
from using uranium that does not come from military sources and 
America from using the uranium for purposes not stipulated in 
the contract. Thus there are presently no technical or political 
obstacles to the utilization of weapons-grade uranium. 
  Plutonium is a different matter. Neither Russia nor the 
United States currently has any real means of destroying it or 
utilizing it. Realizing the nationwide scale of the plutonium 
issue and the fact that plutonium is one of the most closely 
guarded topics, decisions in regard to which are made by a small 
group of experts, I would like to direct public attention to 
this matter as well. 
  Plutonium is in the group of transuranium elements, and is 
number 94 in Mendeleev's periodic table of elements. It does not 
occur naturally on Earth, and was obtained by artificial means. 
The first samples were created by the Seaborg Group (United 
States) in 1941 by bombarding with neutrons a uranium nucleus 
with a mass number of 238. 
  Just like U-235, plutonium-239, when it interacts with 
neutrons, breaks down, releasing energy and neutrons, which are 
essential in maintaining a nuclear chain reaction. It is this 
characteristic that makes it a strategic material. It is used to 
produce nuclear weapons, and its small critical mass compared to 
U-235 makes it preferable as a source of nuclear detonation. 
  The toxic effect of plutonium on living organisms is due to 
the alpha particles formed when it decays. Alpha particles that 
enter living tissue destroy the tissue at the cellular level. 
The radioactivity of one gram of weapons-grade plutonium is 
approximately 0.7 curie. Therefore just 2 micrograms of that 
type of plutonium in the body of a human being weighing 70 kg 
could prove fatal. 
  Weapons-grade plutonium is produced in special industrial 
reactors with a low level of fuel combustion. These are 
graphite-water fuel-channel-type reactors with an output of 
around 2,000 megawatts. There were 13 such reactors in the 
USSR/Russia: five at Chelyabinsk-65, five at Tomsk-7 and three 
at Krasnoyarsk-26. According to various estimates, the former 
USSR had produced approximately 150 metric tons of weapons-grade 
plutonium. There are only three reactors still in operation -- 
two at Tomsk-7 and one at Krasnoyarsk-26 -- but they increase 
the quantity of weapons-grade plutonium, for which Russia no 
longer has any use, by two metric tons a year. 
  Plutonium can also be produced by any nuclear power plant 
operating on ordinary uranium fuel. But nuclear power plant 
reactors that have a high level of fuel burn-up produce 
energy-grade plutonium. Note that energy-grade plutonium can 
also be used to made a nuclear detonation device. 
  All the technological steps involved in obtaining plutonium 
are accompanied by the creation of a large quantity of liquid 
radioactive waste. The process of setting up radiochemical 
technology and the operation thereof result in radioactive 
contamination, among other things by plutonium, of huge areas 
where the radiochemical production facilities are located: the 
Mayak Production Association in Chelyabinsk Oblast, the Siberian 
Chemical Combine at Tomsk-7 and the Krasnoyarsk Mining and 
Chemical Combine at Krasnoyarsk-26. Restoring these contaminated 
areas will require a tremendous amount of work. 
  According to figures cited in American articles, the 
production of a single kilogram of weapons-grade plutonium 
involves the creation of four cubic meters of liquid radioactive 
waste with a radioactivity concentration of 2 Yez [expansion 
unknown] curies/cubic meter and a plutonium concentration of 
0.005 kg per cubic meter. Thus the former USSR's production of 
150 metric tons of weapons-grade plutonium was accompanied by 
the creation of liquid radioactive waste containing as much as 
half a billion curies of radioactivity. A substantial portion of 
this radioactivity was pumped into underground clay strata (at 
Tomsk-7 and Krasnoyarsk-26). At the Mayak combine these wastes, 
totalling 570 million curies, are stored in steel containers. 
The explosion of one such container in September 1957 resulted 
in the release of 20 million curies of radiation into the 
environment and the radionuclide contamination of 23,000 sq. km. 
The population of that area was 272,000, more than one-third of 
whom were subsequently resettled. The current proposal is that 
the stored highly radioactive waste left over from the defense 
program be vitrified, yet at this time there is no reliable, 
functional vitrification technology. 
  Plutonium's strategic significance and extremely high 
radioactivity require a responsible approach to its storage and 
the selection of a means of utilizing it. Among the proposals of 
various means of utilizing weapons-grade plutonium there are two 
that are preferable from the current standpoint: use as fuel in 
nuclear power plants or vitrification along with the radioactive 
waste created during its production, with subsequent burial of 
the waste. 
  Both these proposed means do not destroy the plutonium as 
such, they merely shift it from the weapons-grade category to 
reactor grade. It is essential to note that the greater portion 
of the plutonium produced in the world as of the present time by 
energy-producing nuclear power stations--approximately 700 
metric tons--is contained in spent fuel. It is assumed that this 
fuel's high level of radioactivity serves as a sort of physical 
"self defense" and prevents the extraction of plutonium from it 
without highly developed technology. Vitrification also reduces 
weapons-grade plutonium to the standard for "spent fuel." 
  At the present time none of the proposed methods has any 
convincing scientific, technical or economic arguments to 
support it, therefore use of any one of them will require a 
preparatory period of at least 10 years. In this context 
cooperation between various organizations in the United States 
and Russia aimed at thoroughly studying all possible means of 
utilizing plutonium appears highly desirable. 
  It is worth noting that the choice of a means of utilizing 
weapons-grade plutonium will also be influenced by such factors 
as the adoption of a concept for the fuel-and-energy cycle. A 
number of countries--France, Belgium, Russia and until recently 
Great Britain, Japan and Germany--support the concept of a 
closed fuel cycle. But only France has made some progress with 
regard to the use of extracted plutonium to produce fuel. As of 
the present time Russia has extracted approximately 30 metric 
tons of energy-grade plutonium, which is stored at the Mayak 
combine. However, in contrast to France, Russia does not 
currently possess the ability to utilize it. 
  The utilization concept for weapons-grade plutonium drawn up 
by the Ministry of Atomic Energy presumes that it will be used 
as fuel. Within the framework of that concept there are plans to 
utilize either existing VVER-1000 reactors or the BN-800 [fast 
neutron] reactors that are under construction at the South Urals 
Atomic Power Station. It is possible that specially designed 
thermal reactors will also be used. 
  VVER-1000 reactors could be used to denature weapons-grade 
plutonium using a 30 percent MOX fuel charge (MOX fuel is made 
from a mixture of slightly enriched uranium and plutonium). 
However, extensive preliminary work will be necessary to assess 
the capabilities of reactor control and protection systems and 
to analyze the effects of possible accidents. Furthermore, 
Russia does not have an existing enterprise producing MOX fuel 
for the VVER-1000, and construction of the RT-2 complex at 
Krasnoyarsk-26 has been suspended. 
  Nor can the idea of using fast neutron reactors be 
implemented immediately, due to the lack of such reactors. The 
existing BN-600 reactor uses uranium fuel, and BN-800 reactors 
are still under construction. Complex 300 at the Mayak combine, 
designed to produce MOX fuel for BN-800 reactors, is currently 
in a state of 50 percent readiness. 
  The United States supports the concept of an open fuel cycle 
and currently rejects reprocessing, primarily for two reasons: 
1. reprocessing would encourage the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons; and 2. the use of uranium to produce fuel for power 
reactors is currently much more economical than the use of 
plutonium. 
  Although the United States does not preclude the possibility 
of reprocessing fuel in the future, at the present time it has 
no desire to signal that weapons-grade plutonium has any 
significance as an energy source, thereby giving the nuclear 
power industry hope of receiving additional government subsidies 
for the development and construction of a new generation of 
nuclear reactors. 
  Thus both countries will be forced to store their plutonium 
for a fairly long period of time. We should note that storage is 
an expensive undertaking. According to various estimates the 
cost of storing a single gram of plutonium is $1.00-2.00 per 
year. Moreover, Russia, according to statements by Ministry of 
Atomic Energy officials, does not possess an appropriate storage 
facility, creating difficulties both with regard to the warhead 
disassembly process and the implementation of reliable 
monitoring. The cost of building an appropriate storage facility 
is estimated at several hundreds of millions of dollars. 
Responding to requests from Russian officials, the U.S. Senate 
has passed a special act under which Russia will be allocated 
$400 million to help with disassembly of its warheads (the 
so-called Nunn-Lugar bill). However, this bill states that the 
money may be used only upon receipt of convincing evidence that 
Russia will not use the materials thus made available to produce 
new nuclear warheads, and that the United States will have the 
right to monitor the nuclear weapon dismantling process in 
Russia. Whereas the first condition seems quite reasonable and 
acceptable, the second has clearly discriminatory overtones and 
is unlikely to be accepted by Russia in that form. The solution 
might be an agreement on mutual monitoring. The primary argument 
in favor of that approach is the fact that agreements regarding 
mutual monitoring of nuclear arsenals will provide a solid 
political foundation upon which to strengthen the nuclear 
non-proliferation system and get the other nuclear countries 
involved in the nuclear disarmament process. However, 
achievement of a comprehensive agreement including provision of 
complete information on nuclear weapons arsenals, the full 
amount of fissionable materials produced and the process of 
nuclear weapons storage and destruction will require much time 
and could thus have an effect on the rate of destruction. 
Therefore it would be more appropriate to move toward that goal 
in stages by concluding a number of intermediate agreements on 
monitoring of newly produced weapons-grade plutonium, on a 
complete halt to such production, and on transfer, under 
bilateral monitoring, of a portion of the plutonium freed up by 
the process of warhead elimination. At the present time both 
sides are conducting consultations toward this end. Achievement 
of these agreements could create a good foundation for progress 
on the issue of monitoring the disassembly of warheads slated 
for destruction and in the direction of a full-scale exchange of 
data regarding nuclear arsenals. 
  One possible solution to the issue of a Russian storage 
facility could be to conclude a bilateral Russian-American 
agreement on the transfer of surplus weapons-grade plutonium in 
both countries to bilateral or international control under the 
aegis of the International Atomic Energy Agency. This would make 
it possible to resolve issues relative to the funding of its 
construction and create certainty about reliable storage and 
monitoring of surplus weapons-grade plutonium until such time as 
reliable means of utilizing it have been developed. 

