BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "Mitterrand: `The Alternative is </F>
War'"] 
  [Text] French politicians did not appreciate being called 
to order by an intellectual. With the exception of Ecology 
Generation President Brice Lalonde, who gave Bernard-Henry Levy 
the title of "France's conscience for Bosnia," the political 
class has been very harsh. On Monday, 16 May, the president of 
the Republic himself reacted vigorously to the comments made by 
Mr. Levy the day before, questioning France's attitude in 
relation to Bosnia. Without mentioning the philosopher by name, 
Francois Mitterrand spoke of the "sincere voices that are being 
heard," but which "are sometimes misled by passion." He 
continued: "I note that those who accuse the executive powers 
are careful not to mention the alternative to international 
negotiation, for what is this alternative if it is not war?" 
  Defending his position before the representatives of the 
European administrative courts, the head of state said: "My and 
the government's responsibility is to ensure that progress is 
made in negotiations in the spirit of justice so that the state 
of law we aspire to is created. If people speak of doing 
anything else, that would mean war. If France was ready to go 
to war, I know no other state that would join us." In a comment 
directed at the person "who addresses the French public to rouse 
indignation," Mr. Mitterrand added: "I agree, I feel the same 
way." However, he stressed: "before accusing people of 
inhumanity or indifference, we should refer this choice to the 
French people." 
<H5>  `Media Diplomacy' </H5>
  On Monday morning, Jean Glavany, the spokesman for the 
Socialist Party [PS], was the first to voice his annoyance at 
the philosopher's "lessons." According to Mr. Glavany, 
Bernard-Henri Levy's announcement of a possible "Sarajevo" 
election list "is not a threat" and "does not scare the PS." He 
added that Mr. Levy "has the right" to say what he thinks, "but 
on condition that we cannot merely accept his ideology." 
Stressing that "no one can teach the Socialists lessons," Mr. 
Glavany pointed out: "When [PS First Secretary] Michel Rocard 
went to Sarajevo, no one took any photographs. He went to see 
without being seen." Mentioning Bernard Kouchner [former 
Socialist humanitarian minister] (number three on the PS list), 
who is currently in Rwanda, the spokesman observed: "He is 
getting fired on in the true sense of the word while others 
merely figuratively shoot on sight at everyone else. That is the 
difference." 
  Jean-Pierre Chevenement [former Socialist defense minister] 
did not have any kinder words for the Bernard-Henri Levy's 
comments. In a press release, the Belfort deputy said: "The 
priority today is to end the massacre and stop using human 
suffering for political ends." The leader of the Communist list, 
Francis Wurtz, considered for his part that Mr. Levy "is doing 
the Bosnians a disservice," by letting them "foster the illusion 
of a military solution." 
  Movement of the Radical Left [MRG] President Jean-Francois 
Hory said that establishing a Sarajevo list ran the risk of 
"wasting political energy." Warning against the rise of 
"corporatist groups that want to address public opinion 
directly," Mr. Hory considered this "divisive approach to be 
scarcely in line with the workings of representational 
democracies." 
  Fierce criticism also came from the Right. The UDF-RPR 
[French Democratic Union-Rally for the Republic] majority left 
it to the "intellectual" on its list, Helene Carrere d'Encausse, 
to reply to Mr. Levy. Taking the opportunity to speak at the 
public meeting that launched the UDF-RPR campaign in Toulouse on 
Monday evening, Mrs. Carrere d'Encausse said that while "Europe 
had not been prepared" for the Yugoslav conflict, "no one has 
the right to be indignant." She wondered: "Apart from 
negotiation, what else is being proposed apart from outright 
war?" and warned against "comments whose real effects we do not 
know." 
  Richard Cazenave (RPR deputy for Isere), who had spoken for 
the neo-Gaullist group in the parliamentary debate on Bosnia on 
12 April, did not attach any worth to a Sarajevo list, either. 
In his opinion, this approach was "completely oversimplified." 
  Condemning the philosopher's "media diplomacy," Philippe de 
Villiers accused Mr. Levy of "recommending dangerous 
initiatives" and of running the risk of "preventing peace." 

