Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by V. Savchenko: "Poetry and Prose of Economics"] </F>
  [Text] It is not everyone who experiences in one day as 
many changes, significant ones at that, as have occurred for 
Yevgeniy Fedorovich Saburov. On Friday 11 March the Supreme 
Soviet of the Republic of Crimea appointed him vice premier of 
the Crimean Government. 
  Saburov's citizenship was simultaneously an issue at the 
session. N.V. Bagrov conveyed to the deputies the words of the 
representative of the president of Ukraine to the effect that he 
had no objection to Saburov's appointment to the office of vice 
prime minister of the Government of Crimea, but after [line 
missing] Ukraine. However, the deputies voted for the wording of 
Yu.A. Meshkov, president of the Republic of Crimea, in 
accordance with which Saburov will petition L.M. Kravchuk to be 
admitted to citizenship of Ukraine following his appointment to 
office. 
  Ye.F. Saburov held a news conference this day also. True, it 
had to be broken off after just a few minutes, and for a most 
serious reason. Journalists witnessed Yevgeniy Saburov writing 
the application requesting that he be granted citizenship of the 
state of Ukraine in connection with his appointment to the 
office of vice prime minister of the Government of the Republic 
of Crimea. 
  Saburov spent two hours altogether initially telling the 
session of his vision of the situation concerning reform of the 
economy of Crimea and then answering the questions of the 
deputies and, in conclusion, of journalists. 
  We have to yet fully recognize that a prominent economist 
who 
has held important positions in the Government of Russia and who 
has as of late been head of the Information and Social 
Technology Center under the auspices of the Government of the 
Russian Federation has become vice prime minster of the 
government. Now Ye.F. Saburov will have an opportunity to test 
his theoretical efforts in practice. 
  "I believe that Grigoriy Yavlinskiy, who said that it is 
impossible to work with a prompter, is right. If you are going 
to do something, you should do it yourself because your 
proposals become distorted to such an extent and are introduced 
so maladroitly that you are subsequently yourself ashamed of 
what you proposed." 
  Saburov is of a mind to change the "sinking ship" situation 
and to begin economic reforms. What does he need for this? 
Primarily, as he observed, a favorable political climate, but 
the situation in the Republic is complex and it could be a 
serious obstacle. 
  Second, serious changes in legislation are needed -- and not 
only this. Unless the legislative base keeps pace with the 
progress of the reforms, there will be breakdowns continually. 
Rule by decree was introduced in Russia to this end. The 
president of Crimea should have this right also. 
  And, third, the existence of a program worked out in detail 
down to the level: do this first, then do this. Thanks to the 
fact that it has been possible to enlist professional personnel, 
such a program will be put to the verdict of the inhabitants of 
Crimea in the very near future. 
  There is great experience of the generation of programs in 
the Council of Ministers of Crimea also. Sixteen have been 
compiled, but they have simply not been introduced. As a result 
Crimea is reminiscent in terms of reform of the Russia of 
1990-91. But on the other hand,this is, perhaps, good inasmuch 
as negative experience may be avoided. Of course, there would be 
greater confidence in the programs had the reforms produced 
results and improved people's lives on if only one territory of 
the former space of the Union. 
  To what extent does Crimea need ties to Russia? Saburov 
answered this question at the session twice, but a lady 
journalist from Canada put it more sharply: 
  "Many people regard your appointment merely as an attachment 
to Russia. What do you think?" 
  "The severance of ties to Russia has been quite tragic for 
the economy of Crimea. It is structured such as to be oriented 
toward sale of the product of goods and services. It is a 
question, therefore, not of some political convergence with 
Russia, but of the normal economic life of Crimea and the 
settlement of financial relations. Democratic countries should 
treat the express say of the people of Crimea with understanding 
and not seek in this an argument for confrontation and tension." 
  "But it is said that Crimea cannot live without Ukraine 
either?" was a question put by a Ukrainian journalist. 
  "There is the question of dependence and there is the 
question of orientation. When it is a question of a close 
connection with Ukraine, this is true, and it is, indeed, 
impossible for Crimea to be a `Crimean Island,' however good 
Aksenov's similarly entitled book may be. Both the North Crimean 
Canal and questions of power engineering are closely connected 
with Ukraine. As far as orientation is concerned, the industrial 
product should be sold in Russia, and the agricultural product 
geared to the north. Recreation is oriented toward Russia also. 
  "In the severance of ties between Russia and Ukraine the 
former is no less to blame than Ukraine, and the inhabitants of 
Crimea do not understand this, unfortunately." 
  "There will be no miracle," Saburov uttered these words more 
than once during his meetings in the two different auditoriums, 
and they applied mainly to the hopes linked with Russia. Thus, 
there is no point expecting lines of credit of the Central Bank 
of Russia. Saburov's team is attempting settle this question, 
but a great deal of difficult work has to be done. 
  Where are the most painful spots in Crimea, what will be the 
starting point for the work? 
  Saburov believes that it is necessary first of all to change 
the status of the Central Bank of Crimea. It must have the right 
if only to register foreign banks. In this case banking in 
Crimea could begin to flourish. And this would be a base for all 
the rest. 
  There is, in addition, the question of privatization. It 
would be better to undertake it in accordance with a special 
program, and applying the German plan would be best, Saburov 
believes. 
  A revision of the tax system brooks no delay. The one in 
effect currently has stifled the producer and shrunk the tax 
base. 
  Summing up this topic, Saburov said told the deputies that 
there was not a clause of the program that could be put off 
until later. It will be necessary to do many things 
simultaneously both in terms of operational management and 
strategic direction. Budget and currency regulation are 
essential. It is disadvantageous to Crimea's enterprises to 
offer their products for export. 
  Judging by the fact that Saburov condemns the actions of 
Gaydar, who failed to notify the people of his program, Crimeans 
will be kept sufficiently informed as to the government's 
actions pertaining to emergence from the crisis situation. The 
reforms, incidentally, need to be implemented strictly, rapidly, 
and intelligently, Saburov believes. Not experiments on people, 
but reforms in the name of man. 
  Today the whole government of the Republic has resigned, and 
although Saburov has said that 99.9 percent of the entire former 
machinery of the Council of Ministers matches the required 
standard, this is hard to believe. The vice prime minister 
wishes to see henceforward a more professional government. It 
will include also specialists from Moscow invited by the vice 
premier into the "key" offices. But the vice prime minister has 
just as many questions and uncertainties as the journalists. 
  The participants in the news conference put questions on 
more 
than just the economy. They inquired as to where the vice prime 
minister would be living, what his horoscope sign is, and what 
he does in his spare time. Studies economics, apparently, but he 
sometimes writes poetry, not having time for prose. He was never 
a member of the Communist Party and is devoutly religious. 
  It is believed, as we all know, that by fall.... A 
negligible 
amount of time, to be frank, for the implementation of an 
economic program, but there are to have been changes in Crimea 
by this time. Certainty and awareness of his responsibility are 
Saburov's most compelling features. 

