BFN 

  [Excerpts] Sarajevo, April 10 (AFP) -- Bosnian Serbs kept 
up heavy shelling of the beseiged Moslem enclave of Gorazde on 
Sunday after the breakdown of ceasefire talks, as a row 
developed over the use of chemical weapons there. 
  In Belgrade on Sunday, the agency SNRA said Bosnian Serb 
forces had seized two villages south of Gorazde and their 
commander was declaring himself ready to allow an evacuation of 
civilians from the Moslem enclave. [passage omitted] 
  UNPROFOR spokesman Rob Annink confirmed Sunday that Serb 
shelling had destroyed a strategic bridge over the river Drina 
at Sadba, in the south of Gorazde. This would help any possible 
Serb capture of the south-east part of the enclave still held by 
the mainly Moslem Bosnian army, he said. 
  Serb guns also targetted a bridge in the Gorazde suburb of 
Bacci which had been hit by Serb artillery fire, along with 
three other heavily populated suburbs, Annink said. [passage 
omitted] 
  A shell fell 1,000 metres (yards) from the headquarters of 
the UN High Commissioner for Refugees in the centre of Gorazde 
Saturday, UNHCR spokesman Kris Janovski said in Sarajevo. 
  Local people protested in front of its offices Saturday, 
handing in a petition which demanded "more energetic action" to 
defend Gorazde by the international community, he said. 
  In Zagreb, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees told AFP 
that more than 1,500 people fled in panic from intense Serb 
shelling in the southern area of the enclave Saturday night, 
streaming into Gorazde. 
  "There is real panic south of Gorazde and in the town 
itself," spokesman Peter Kessler said, adding that shelling had 
intensified Sunday morning. 
  Annink poured cold water on accusations by Bosnian leaders 
that the enclave had been hit by chemical gas. "We think it was 
smoke grenades, probably M84s for 120mm mortar guns," he said. 
  The Bosnian presidency accused Serbs Saturday evening of 
killing "many people" in a gas attack. 
  Bosnian Serb military leaders denied the charges, accusing 
the Bosnian army of using tear gas in the Bokovo region earlier 
this month. [passage omitted] 
  Serb troops seized two villages in the south of the Gorazde 
enclave, according to a report by the agency SRNA. The troops 
took Djindici and Zupcici, which the agency described as "Moslem 
strongholds." Serb forces now hoped to repulse the mainly 
Moslem Bosnian government forces from heights around the 
Oglecevo region in the south of the enclave, it said. 
  The Serb commander said he was ready to allow the evacuation 
of civilians wishing to leave the enclave as far as the village 
of Osjecani, where they would be handed over to United Nations 
troops, the agency said. 
  The agency SRNA said fighting between the two sides was 
continuing Sunday along front lines on the Drina river, on which 
both the captured villages are situated. Bosnian Serb forces 
also routed Moslem troops in the north of the enclave at Kopac, 
SRNA said. [passage omitted] 

