BFN 

<F P=106> [By John Kohut in Yanji, Jilin Province] </F>
  [Text] Anti-government demonstrations in Tibet and 
Beijing's ever simmering troubles with its Muslim population in 
Xinjiang have focused world attention on the resentment China's 
national minorities feel towards their Han Chinese masters. 
  Yet, in the annals of China's handling of its 55 ethnic 
minorities, there do seem to be a few success stories, and one 
of them is in the Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture in the 
country's northeast bordering Russia and North Korea. 
  "Sometimes there are conflicts. In such cases, they lean 
towards their people and we lean towards ours. But there aren't 
any major conflicts," said a plump Han Chinese fortune teller in 
Yanji, the seat of the prefectural government. "The Koreans are 
smart and work hard and they do well," said the woman, who works 
alongside an ethnic Korean. 
  Perhaps there is more friction than immediately meets the 
eye. But, in contrast to many other parts of China where 
minorities readily approach foreigners to recount bitter tales 
of what they describe as Han repression, there are few signs of 
racial tension here. And if statistics are anything to judge 
by, then it seems that the Koreans of Yanbian, who account for 
840,000 of the prefecture's 2.14 million population and half of 
the ethnic Koreans in China, have been doing well -- in fact, 
better than the local Han Chinese. 
  Officials say this success is due to Beijing's national 
minorities' policy. But the reason why that policy has failed 
elsewhere and worked relatively well here may have to do with 
the Koreans themselves. For one, an historic affinity between 
Korean and Chinese culture makes for fewer conflicts. 
  An obsession with education -- a Korean saying has it that 
families will give up their oxen and fields to send a child to 
school -- is said to be a major reason for the upward mobility 
of ethnic Koreans in China. "Our tradition emphasizes 
education," said Jin Zhongguo, an ethnic Korean who heads the 
Yanbian Nationalities Affairs Committee. "If there is a 
parent-teacher meeting, all Korean parents will show up. In 
contrast, only half of the Han will attend. If you ask families 
to donate 100 yuan (Hong Kong $88) each to their children's 
school, no Korean will give anything less than that, while Han 
parents will give only 10 yuan." 
  Koreans perform much better than the Han in education. There 
are 304 college graduates for every 10,000 Koreans, twice the 
national average. A high proportion of Koreans attend top 
universities such as Beida and Qinghua. 
  Seventy percent of the students, 70 percent of instructors, 
and 80 percent of administrators at Yanbian University, the 
prefecture's most prestigious school, are Korean. 
  As with other minority regions, the prefectural party boss 
is 
Han while the head of local government is selected from the 
minority population. (Unlike many of his counterpart's in other 
minority areas, Yanbian's party supremo, Zhang Dejiang, does 
speak the minority language, as do almost a sixth of the Han who 
live here.) 
  Koreans account for 40 percent of Yanbian's population, but 
constitute 60 percent of the prefecture's delegates to the 
National People's Congress, and 56 percent of prefectural 
officialdom. 
  At political meetings, the main language is Korean, with 
translation into Chinese. All road and shop signs are in both 
languages. 
  Ten of Yanbian's 11 art groups focus on Korean culture, 12 
of 
the 16 locally published magazines appear in the Korean 
language, and 10 of the 14 local newspapers are in Korean. 
There are radio and television broadcasts in both Korean and 
Chinese. Of Yanbian's five universities and colleges, four 
teach courses in the Korean language. 
  In family planning, the Koreans have a lower birth rate than 
the Han. 

