Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Shika Nuclear Power Plant's Reactor No. 1 
(Shika-machi, Hakui-gun, Ishikawa prefecture. Boiling Water 
Reactor=BWR, output= 540,000kW), which began commercial 
operations at the end of July is the 43rd (22nd in terms of BWR) 
commercial nuclear power generation facility. For Hokuriku 
Electric Power, however, it represents the company's first 
effort in nuclear power generation. Moreover, of all domestic 
nuclear power plants, it is the only reactor construction site 
whose first reactor entered the commercial operational stage in 
the 1990s. At the same time, with the operation of this reactor, 
Japan's nuclear power setup, commemorating its 30th year, has 
added a new distinction, in that all 9 electric power companies 
now have nuclear power generation capabilities. Hokuriku 
Electric Power has submitted a proposal for construction of 
Reactor No. 2, a 1.35 million kW-class improved version of BWR 
(ABWR). The company is targeting 2005 as the year which will see 
the commercial operation of this reactor. 
<H3>  Reactor No. 1, the Only Reactor To Begin Commercial 
Operation in 90's </H3>
  It has been 30 years since [Nippon Genshiryoku Hatsuden] 
first succeeded in nuclear power generation on 26 October 1963. 
In October 1993, Japan's nuclear power industry will commemorate 
the 30th anniversary. Although, of 9 electric power companies, 
Shika Nuclear Power Plant is the last to become a commercial 
nuclear power plant, it was in November 1967 that Hokuriku 
Electric Power first announced its plan to construct this 
Reactor No. 1. Although the plan itself was conceived quite 
early, the company had to spend ensuing 26 years battling with 
local residents before the reactor can be built and become ready 
for operation. 
  It took 17 years in the first phase of the development plan, 
beginning with preliminary surveys, including an environmental 
impact survey, and ending with the agreement obtained from the 
locals. It required only 4 years and 8 months for Hokuriku 
Electric Power to start construction and bring the project to 
conclusion with the commercial operation of Shika Power Plant. 
Stalemates and difficult negotiations involving the local 
community caused undue prolongation of preliminary survey 
period. In fact, these factors are causing serious problems not 
only at Shika site but at all other development sites as well. 
  As a matter of fact, seven development sites throughout 
Japan, whose development plans involving the initial reactor 
have been pending in the preliminary survey stage for over 20 
years, waiting for negotiation settlements with locals. 
Moreover, under the present conditions, not even one development 
plan can be brought to the operational stage before the year 
2000. 
  As touched upon previously, such a situation has elevated 
the 
position of Shika Nuclear Power Plant's Reactor No.1 as the only 
first reactor to emerge in the 1990's. This reactor's output of 
540,000kW is small from the present standard. However, looking 
back, from the beginning until it became operational 
commercially, its significance in the history of Japan's nuclear 
power industry cannot be ignored. 
  The total construction cost of Reactor No. 1 is 
approximately 
&yen;290 billion. Placing a premium on safety and reliability, 
the company aggressively introduced new BWR technologies and 
operating know-how employed by other companies which have BWR 
plants. The reactor's body diameter is 20 meters and height 35m. 
Use of an advanced MARK-I type containment vessel, designed to 
increase the vessel's volume 1.6 times that of the conventional 
MARK-I; of CRT in monitoring which is a focal point of the 
reactor's central control panel; of improved 8 x 8 fuel; and of 
a glass-cement solidification method, highly effective in 
reducing the volume of radioactive wastes;--these are some of 
the examples of new technologies incorporated into the Reactor 
No. 1. 
  From the standpoint of environmental protection, a 
breakwater 
was built in a straight line parallel to the coast. This has 
minimized change in tidal currents. Also, in order to preserve 
natural beauty of the coast, a landing place is constructed 
using a [Dejima] method, and for water intake/discharge 
channels, an undersea tunnel was built so that the shoreline in 
front of the power plant can be protected. 
  When 540,000kW power generated by Shika Nuclear Power Plant 
is added to the company's hydraulic power output of 1.86 million 
kW and thermal power output of 2.662 million kW, the total 
supply capacity of Hokuriku Electric Power has risen to 5.8 
million kW. 
  Since hydraulic power played a central role in the company's 
operation in the beginning, of the nine electric utility 
companies, Hokuriku Electric Power has the largest ratio of 
hydraulic power (in the current composition ratio, it is 
29%). 
Subsequently, thermal power became the main source of supply, 
which has been extended to Shika Nuclear Power Plant 
(15%). 
From hydraulic power to thermal power and then to nuclear 
power--such diversification in the source of power is a course 
of action taken by all electric power companies in Japan, and 
the most typical example of this can be seen in Hokuriku 
Electric Power Co. 
  In the case of Hokuriku Electric Power , it is expected that 
the maximum power output of 4.55 million kW recorded for 1992 
will climb to 6.27 million kW for the year 2006. For this 
reason, the company has undertaken construction of Nanao Ohta 
Thermal Equipment No. 1 (500,000 kW; operation to begin in 
December 1994), Equipment No. 2 (700,000 kW; operation to begin 
in 2000), and Tsuruga Thermal Equipment No. 2 (700,000kW; 
operation to begin in 2000). However, capability margin, showing 
a balance of demand and supply, will have been reduced to 
approximately 3% by the year 2006. This means that a new 
power 
source will be required. 
  Shika Nuclear Reactor No. 2, a 1.35 million kW class ABWR, 
is 
creating expectations as a new source of power. On 24 May 1994, 
Hokuriku Electric Power submitted a proposal to Shika, Ishikawa 
Prefecture, regarding the construction of Reactor No. 2 as well 
as an environmental impact survey. At a cabinet meeting held on 
29 June 1993, to discuss energy measure, Shika was approved as 
an additional energy development site. 
  In order for Reactor No. 2 to begin operating in 2005, the 
company intends to obtain agreement from the local community and 
begin the required environmental impact survey as soon as 
possible. If Reactor No. 2 can begin operations as scheduled, 
the capability margin for 2006 will climb to 24%. When the 
output of Reactors Nos. 1 and 2 are combined, the ratio of 
nuclear power in terms of composition ratio of power generation 
will be 47%, overtaking both hydraulic and thermal power 
ratios. In the initial stage of commercial operation of Reactor 
No. 2, the company also can consider ensuring what is considered 
a reasonable margin and supply other utility companies on an 
interchange basis. 
  A 1.35 million kW-class ABWR used in constructing Reactor 
No. 
2 also is being used by Tokyo Electric Power in its 
Kashiwazaki-Kariba Nuclear Power Plant's Reactors Nos. 6 (to 
begin operations in December 1996) and 7 (to begin operations in 
July 1997) currently under construction. 
  The latest technologies, such as a nuclear reactor internal 
recirculation pump and a reinforced-concrete nuclear reactor 
containment vessel, are being utilized in ABWR. It is expected 
that a large volume BWR will become the ``main stream'' in 
future reactor development. 
  By adding a large-scale ABWR to Shika Nuclear Power Plant, 
Hokuriku Electric Power will be expanding all at once its base 
power source, with nuclear power as its nucleus. At the same 
time, the company is able to establish the best mix (an optimal 
combination of various power sources) to deal with future energy 
demands. 
<H5>  Joint Plan Involving Three Companies at Sasu Sites </H5>

<FIG ID=JPRS-JST-011L-54A>           Graphic </FIG>




  Situated in the Noto Peninsula in jurisdiction of Hokuriku 
Electric Power is Sasu (Sasu-machi, Ishikawa Prefecture) nuclear 
development site on which Hokuriku, Chubu, and Kanto Electric 
Power Companies are jointly planning to construct a nuclear 
power plant. The plan calls for the construction of 1.35 million 
kW-class Reactors Nos. 1 and 2 at two adjacent sites. As in the 
case of Shika Nuclear Power Reactor No. 2, these two sites will 
be designated as new significant power source which merits 
government support. 
  The three companies pursued power development promotional 
activities by forming Sasu Power Source Development Council, 
with Hokuriku Electric Power to be in charge of matters not 
specifically related to an individual location and those shared 
by two locations, while Chubu Electric Power and Kansai Electric 
Power to be responsible for Teraya and Takaya locations, 
respectively. Many residents of both Teraya and Takao, where 
sites are planned for construction of nuclear power plants, are 
mobile. For this reason, Sasu City is making every effort to 
obtain local consent by cooperating in policy formulation of 
``creation of new town'' in which the regional development plan 
plays a central role. 
  The three companies are cooperating in wide-area 
coordinating 
power development. They are considering the construction of two 
nuclear power sites in one city, something which has never been 
attempted before. At the present stage, in order to conduct a 
field survey at Teraya location, the companies are trying to 
obtain consent from land owners and [mobile residents]. At Takao 
location, the companies are dealing with the problem of 
reopening the construction feasibility survey which has been 
suspended. No visible progress, therefore, is being made at the 
present time. It appears that much more time will be required 
for the companies to complete the initial stage requirement 
imposed by the section of the government energy policy 
pertaining to important power source requiring government 
support. 
<H5>  Interview with Mr. Yoshio Hosokawa, Mayor of Shika </H5>
  NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN: On 14 September, Shika Town 
Assembly voted for adding Reactor No. 2 to Shika Nuclear Power 
Plant. 
  Hosokawa: The content of the resolution was, 
``Operation of Reactor No. 1 has contributed not only to 
secondary economic effect but also to improvement in the 
well-being of local residents. Use of the subsidy received will 
make it possible for the town to reorganize social capitals and 
improve welfare facilities related to daily living of residents. 
In order to achieve further development of the town, provided 
that safety is guaranteed, we hereby pass a resolution for 
addition of Reactor No. 2 to the nuclear power facility.'' 
Although some are saying that output of the 1.35kW class ABWR is 
too large, in view of the performance record of Reactor No. 1 up 
to now, we feel that we can trust the company to continue 
providing safety measure. 
  NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN: What are your aiming for in 
the first place by inviting the utility company to construct a 
plant in your town? 
  Hosokawa: Regional development is the only thing 
we have in mind.. In the case of Shika Nuclear Plant, it took 26 
years before Reactor No. 1 began operating. It was back in 1965, 
when the assembly voted for nuclear power development, as you 
know. So, we did have many turns and twists, but we had 
maintained our basic posture during the whole process--that the 
construction of the nuclear power plant represented ``the use of 
land which will revitalize our region.'' Unless we utilized the 
subsidy granted under the ``Three Laws concerning power source 
development'' (Power Source Development Law, Special Account for 
Power Source Development-Related Measure Law, and Power 
Facility's Surrounding Area Improvement Law) and increased 
revenues from fixed assets centering around the regional 
development, there was no future for Shikamachi. Our vote for 
the installation of Reactor 2 stems from our determination to 
strengthen further the town's financial base so that we can take 
stronger and bigger steps toward achievement of regional 
development goals. 
  NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN: Can you tell me about the 
regional development plan which is pivotal to the revitalization 
of Shika-machi? 
  Nishikawa: The town first of all is an energy 
supply base equipped with a nuclear power plant. Secondly, the 
town is equipped with a complete industrial foundation, made 
possible by the Noto Nucleus Industrial Complex. Thirdly, 
development of the town as a resort by fully taking advantage of 
the scenic beauty of the Noto Peninsula. In other words, power 
source, industry, and resort--these three things provide a 
framework for the development of Shika-machi. 
  Surrounding cities, towns, and villages on the Noto 
Peninsula 
are aging. They are rapidly losing population every year. This 
was true of Shika-machi at one time. Although at present, our 
population has leveled off at around 17,400. By enlarging the 
three developmental frameworks, we hope to meet a somewhat lofty 
goal we have established for ourselves, namely to increase the 
size of the population to 22,000. 
  NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN: Can you discuss ``Three Laws 
Concerning Power Source Development''? 
  Nishikawa: By using a subsidy granted by the Three 
Laws, we have steadily acquired public facility equipment to 
improve road, communication, education/culture, environmental 
sanitation, social welfare, and sports recreations. As most 
other nuclear-power-plant towns probably will agree, it will be 
very helpful if the government will allow some degree of 
flexibility in handling subsidies so that each region's unique 
needs will be met. 
  NIKKAN KOGYO SHIMBUN: I have heard that you are 
considering the establishment of an endowment fund using fixed 
asset tax on nuclear power facilities. 
  Hosokawa: We submitted to the town assembly 
meeting in December our plan designed for equitable return, to 
every segment of the town, what is gained by the construction of 
the nuclear power plant on a long-term basis. We hope to be able 
to establish it under the name, ``Autonomous District 
Development Fund,'' (temporary designation) for the fiscal 1994. 
Since the Shika Nuclear Power Plant's fixed asset tax will be 
paid in 1994, our plan is to allocate this as a source of 
revenues and save up about &yen;1.2 billion to &yen;1.3 billion 
as a reserve during the next 3 years. Interests generated by 
this amount will be distributed equitably among districts 
according to the size of each district's population. We will be 
requesting the districts to use this money to pay for 
maintenance of assembly halls and regional activities as they 
see fit. We are hoping that this will bring home to them the 
kind of benefit brought about by the town's decision to go for 
nuclear power. 
  NIKKAN KOGYO SHIM: Your vision of Shika-machi? 
  Hosokawa: It will be important to expand job opportunities 
for the young people. This will lead to population growth, also. 
Although currently 22 companies are located at the Noto 
Peninsula Industrial Complex, its occupancy rate is no more than 
60%. Our vision is focused on the creation of an 
attractive 
town where young people want to settle down and raise family. As 
a part of our effort to realize this vision, with the 
cooperation of Ishikawa Prefecture, we are planning to create 
New Town containing 430 divided lots, with each parceled lot 
measuring just over 330m[.sup]2[/]. These lots are to be sold 
at bargain prices. In other words, we are targeting a new 
Shika-machi possessing the kind of charm not easily found in big 
cities. 

