CSO 

<F P=106> [Article entitled: "PSA and Fiat to Jointly Produce a Direct </F>
Competitor to Renault's Espace"; first paragraph is LE MONDE 
introduction] 
  [Text] Gerard Longuet, minister of industry, postal 
services and telecommunications, and foreign trade; Jacques 
Calvet, CEO of PSA Peugeot-Citroen; and Giorgio Garruzo, general 
director of Fiat Spa, were scheduled to inaugurate the new 
factory the Sochalian group built with Fiat on Monday, 16 May. 
The plant is located in the north, in Hordain-Lieu Saint-Amand 
near Valenciennes, where the two automakers will jointly 
manufacture a new minivan to compete directly with the current 
top seller in Europe, Renault's Espace. 
  It is not the first joint outing for PSA Peugeot-Citroen and 
Fiat, who have been collaborating for 15 years. Indeed, their 
first venture was in June of 1978, when the French and Italian 
automakers decided to produce a utility vehicle able to carry 
800 to 1,800 kilos of freight. They formed a joint company, 
Sevel Spa (European Light Vehicle Co.), which was held 25 
percent by Automobiles Peugeot, 25 percent by Automobiles 
Citroen, and 50 percent by Fiat Auto. Located in Italy, in Val 
di Sangro near Pescara, the factory produces Peugeot's current 
Boxers, Citroen's Jumpers, and Fiat's new Ducato, which is now 
being marketed. 
  Ten years later, in December of 1988, the two automakers 
decided to repeat their first adventure. They agreed to study 
the industrialization and production of a minivan to compete 
directly with Renault's Espace, which already dominates the 
highly lucrative market segment of minivans. At that point the 
partners decided to construct an entirely new factory, to be 
called "Sevelnord," in Hordain-Lieu Saint-Amand, between 
Valenciennes and Cambrai in the north. The two partners are 
splitting capital, expenses, and responsibility exactly as they 
did in Italy (25 percent Peugeot, 25 percent Citroen, and 50 
percent Fiat). Work began in 1990. It will end on Monday, 16 
June, when a plant costing 6.5 billion French francs [Fr] and 
expected to employ 3,500 people by late 1995 is inaugurated. 
<H5>  Four Brands, Four Names </H5>
  Indeed, Sevelnord's 230,000 square meters were designed to 
manufacture 120-130,000 vehicles a year at full capacity. The 
minivans will be sold under four different brands and names: 
Peugeot 806, Citroen Evasion, Fiat Ulysse, and Lancia Z (Zeta). 
The various models, which were presented at the last Geneva Show 
(see LE MONDE, 14 January), required an investment of Fr4 
billion, and are virtually identical, save a few details such as 
radiator grills and headlights. 
  Sevelnord is both an industrial and commercial gamble in a 
market whose growth has slowed. It is also a gamble for the 
Nord-Pas-de-Calais region, which is on its way to becoming a 
rust belt. The plant, whose promoters liked to refer to it as 
"the biggest industrial project underway in France" during its 
construction, is being introduced in an area devastated by 
unemployment (see LE MONDE, 29 November, 1992). Ten thousand 
people applied to work at the factory. 
  PSA Peugeot-Citroen, which voluntarily limited its use of 
robots, must have taken that social reality into consideration. 
Robots will handle only 50 percent of sheet metal operations, 
compared to 85 percent in other plants of the French group. PSA 
Peugeot-Citroen has also decided to organize production to make 
it cheaper, simpler, and better adapted to manual labor. A true 
sign of the times... 
  [[Boxed Material]: 
<H5>  The Minivan War to Heat Up </H5>
  It was 10 years ago, in 1984, that Renault and Matra sent a 
totally novel type of vehicle, a sort of minibus with the look 
of a high-class automobile, out onto French roads. Chrysler had 
floated the design a year earlier in North America. France's 
"Espace" and America's "Voyager" gave birth to the minivan 
concept. Espace's first victory was to win over companies and 
reconcile high-ranking executives to carpooling. Where 
motor-coaches--even small, metallically painted ones--inevitably 
evoked summer camp, buses full of sports fans, or cheap tours, 
where the CombiVolkswagen-style minibuses of the time suffered 
from identification with partying bands of hippies, the 
"minivan" seemed an essential accouterment to society's 
managers. It was modern, tasteful, and as comfortable as a 
high-speed-train car. Gradually the minivan also conquered the 
well-off professional class, hysterical, as summer approached, 
at the thought of journeying across France with a noisy load of 
offspring packed into the back of an overheated sedan. 
  As a result, the minivan--the only real automobile 
innovation 
in the last decade--has become a model every good automaker must 
offer. Top of the line (the base price is about 120,000 French 
francs [Fr]) and high margin, minivans are an essential niche in 
an economic climate that makes selling ordinary models tricky. 
Minivans account for about 1.2 percent of total automobile sales 
in Europe. The number sold doubled in three years from a 1989 
level of 60,000, then jumped to 150,000 in 1993. And even if 
growth does slow a bit, PSA says the European market should top 
the 400,000 mark by 1998. 
  France remains the market leader in Europe (28.5 percent of 
sales), followed by Germany (21 percent), and Great Britain (9.6 
percent). Renault is still top dog on the continent (44 percent 
of sales in 1992), ahead of Chrysler (17 percent). But 
competition is heating up: Mitsubishi has launched its Space 
Wagon, Nissan its Serena model, Pontiac (GM) its Transport, and 
Toyota its Previa. Starting next month, PSA and Citroen are 
going to add their own model offered under the four brand names 
Peugeot, Citroen, Fiat, and Lancia. Ford and Volkswagen will 
bring out their joint model, made in Portugal, next year. 

