Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Viktor Korytko and Vladimir Oshchenko: </F>
"Japanese Lobby in the Maritime Territory Administration? High 
Policy Around Radioactive Contamination"] 
  [Text] Vladivostok--The political leaders of Tokyo, 
Moscow, Vladivostok, and even Stockholm are unanimous: Only 
Japanese decontamination plants can save the Sea of Japan from 
radioactive wastes... 
  As VLADIVOSTOK correspondents have learned from unofficial 
but completely reliable sources, the meeting that took place 
last week between Russian Minister of Foreign Affairs A. Kozyrev 
and American Secretary of State Warren Christopher, in addition 
to the resolution of high policy, also had a specific result for 
the Maritime Territory, which, it appears, could have not 
entirely favorable consequences for the territory. 
Specifically: A transfer of documentation on a project for 
utilization of liquid radioactive wastes in the Maritime 
Territory proposed by the Marubeni Corporation took place in a 
lobby of the summit with a view to its coordination in our 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs for the purpose of allocating $40 
million to this corporation... 
  In the meantime, as VLADIVOSTOK has already reported, 
scientists of the Far Eastern Department of the Russian Academy 
of Sciences came to the conclusion that the Japanese technology 
is obsolete, energy-intensive, and expensive to operate 
(VLADIVOSTOK, 16 March). But the technology created in the 
Maritime Territory was not even considered in the territorial 
administration, and it can be assumed that nothing is known 
about it in the Russian Government. 
  At the same time, the problem of utilizing liquid 
radioactive 
wastes in the Maritime Territory is one of the most important 
categories on the agenda of the official visit to Moscow of 
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Japan Tsutomu Hata. Hata's visit 
to Russia starts Saturday. 
  A week earlier, Prime Minister of Japan Morikiro Hosokawa 
talked about this in a conversation with Kirsti Krondall, 
chairperson of the parliament of Norway, who was visiting Tokyo. 
Krondall told the Japanese prime minister that the problem with 
disposal by the Russian Navy is common for both Japan and 
Norway, and her country intends to find an opportunity to render 
Russia technical and financial support for the construction of 
enterprises in the area of Murmansk for processing liquid 
radioactive wastes (ZhRO). 
  The same--and only--variant of a resolution of the problem 
of 
utilization of liquid radioactive wastes in the Maritime 
Territory will also be discussed by the minister of foreign 
affairs of Japan during his visit to Moscow. 
  The day before yesterday, Yevgeniy Nazdratenko, head of 
administration of the Maritime Territory, reported in an 
interview on the television program "Vostok-TV" that the 
Japanese Government had decided to deliver equipment and finance 
the construction of two installations for processing liquid 
radioactive wastes in Bolshoy Kamen and at a facility of the 
Pacific Ocean Fleet. According to Nazdratenko, the total value 
of the resources being allocated by Japan under this project 
amounts to $12 million. 
  Nazdratenko said that Japanese representatives (he did not 
know exactly who) are disturbed by the problem of effective and 
speedy implementation of construction and also want guarantees 
that not one dollar of the proposed sum will be expended for 
purposes that are not directly connected with the project. The 
governor of the Maritime Territory sees such guarantees in the 
mechanism of the resources being transferred directly from Tokyo 
to Vladivostok. Nazdratenko said in the television interview 
that a document concerning such a mechanism was actually turned 
over to Kozyrev. However, any investment operation presumes the 
presence of some kind of accounts (what is the money to be paid 
for?), and it is perfectly clear that the Japanese project 
specifically will be discussed during Hata's negotiations with 
representatives of the Russian Government. 
  This, in general, is logical: If the Japanese Government 
intends to build a plant (it is unimportant whether in Japan, 
the United States, or Bolshoy Kamen), then it is Japanese and 
not American or Bolshoy Kamen companies that should get the 
profit and the work positions... 
  However, the total disregard of the territorial 
administration's incomparably more effective technology for 
decontaminating radioactive waste proposed by Vladivostok 
scientists was also confirmed by the fact that literally two 
days before the Kozyrev-Christopher meeting, Governor of the 
territory Ye. Nazdratenko promised to receive V. Sergiyenko, 
chairman of the Far Eastern Department of Russian Academy of 
Sciences, regarding this question, but the meeting did not 
occur. As his reception room invariably reported: "The 
governor is very busy with preparations for the "summit 
meeting"... The result of this "preparation" is now clear: 
Nazdratenko personally handed over to the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs the documentation of Marubeni lobbying. As a result of 
this, there can no longer be any doubt regarding persistent 
pushing to the detriment of our interests by officials of the 
territorial organization of what they know to be an obsolete and 
extremely expensive Japanese project. 
  Meanwhile, literally the other day scientists of the Far 
Eastern Department of the Russian Academy of Sciences received a 
new multicomposite sorbent from local materials which in its 
characteristics already surpasses those that are available. 
Laboratory tests for the purpose of decontaminating liquid 
radioactive wastes of the Zvezda plant produced simply brilliant 
results. This sorbent "cleaned" these wastes to such an extent 
that as a result not even highly sensitive special apparatus 
could record the content of such a highly active radioactive 
element as strontium... In order to bring the technology of 
utilization of liquid radioactive wastes from the stage of 
laboratory tests to the creation of an industrial test 
installation using the given sorbent, our scientists are asking 
for a little more than 1 billion rubles all told, which, of 
course, is not comparable to the $40 million for which the 
Japanese corporation is selling its 30-year-old technology. 
  One way or another, VLADIVOSTOK intends to follow the 
development of events around this scandalous deal, although it 
is possible that we still will not be able to give the numbers 
of bank accounts in Japan regarding the transfer of unspecified 
hard currency sums on behalf of some of our officials and 
persons from middleman firms. 

