BFN 

  [Text] Acting Prime Minister Dr. Muhammad Sa'id al-'Attar 
has stressed that the rebels against legitimacy are violating 
the cease-fire and seek to internationalize the Yemeni crisis. 
  In an interview with the Jordanian Television Space Channel 
last night, al-'Attar said the Cabinet met in an emergency 
session last night to discuss the decision of the Higher 
National Defense Council and adopt the necessary measures to 
guarantee the survival of the cease-fire, which started as of 
2400 the day before yesterday in response to the calls made by 
UN Secretary General Butrus-Ghali and the humanitarian appeals 
by the brothers and friends to observe a cease-fire. However, 
the Cabinet received during its extraordinary session a number 
of military reports confirming that the rebels have violated the 
cease-fire. The Cabinet decided to summon the ambassadors of 
the UN Security Council permanent members. The ambassadors were 
briefed on these observations and told that the rebels are not 
serious about responding positively to, or accepting the 
cease-fire decision. 
  Dr. al-'Attar said the rebels continued to attack, with 
aircraft, rockets, and artillery, the forces of unity and 
legitimacy throughout yesterday morning, and inflicted heavy 
human losses on the Armed Forces and the citizens of the areas 
in which these troops are deployed. He stressed that this was 
categorical evidence that the rebels do not want an end to the 
fighting, or Yemen's stability and unity. 
  He said UN Secretary General Butrus-Ghali and Brother 
Lakhdar 
Brahimi were contacted and briefed on the situation and the 
rebels' violation of the cease-fire decision. He indicated that 
the forces of unity and legitimacy are abiding by the cease-fire. 
  The acting prime minister said the rebels are searching for 
excuses and justifications to continue their lost battle against 
the victorious forces of unity and legitimacy. 
  He stressed that the entire Yemeni people adhere to unity, 
support legitimacy, and defend their democratic achievements, 
particularly the 27 April 1993 elections, whose fairness and 
success were recognized by the entire world. 

