BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, April 8 (XINHUA) -- French Prime Minister 
Edouard Balladur today expressed his hope that France-China 
relations will be further strengthened. 
  Speaking at a press conference here this evening, the prime 
minister said that during his stay in Beijing, he had met with 
Chinese leaders and during the meetings they all expressed their 
satisfactions over the current Sino-French relations. They 
pledged to conduct more political dialogues and establish closer 
relations of cooperation in economy, science and technology 
between the two countries, Balladur said. 
  He said that France will pay close attention to the economic 
development in the Asian region, and enhance its exchanges with 
Asian countries, especially with China. 
  Since both France and China are nuclear powers and permanent 
members of the U.N. Security Council, Balladur noted, they 
should play a more important role in international affairs to 
safeguard world peace. 
  He said that he had in-depth discussions with the Chinese 
leaders on world political situation and the Asia-Pacific region 
in particular. In the discussions, he said, both he and the 
Chinese leaders hoped that France and China would cooperate more 
closely in world affairs. 
  Now the opportunities for the two countries to establish 
closer cooperation in economic and other fields are ripe, he 
said, adding that the two should grasp them with joint efforts. 
  On issues of China's re-entry in GATT, Balladur said that 
China was a signatory party in GATT and now it is playing a more 
and more important role in the world trade. Therefore, he said, 
its request for the restoration of its status of a signatory 
party in the organization is quite logical and reasonable. 
  Answering questions concerning the human rights issue, 
Balladur said that France attaches importance to the issue, 
adding that it holds that specific conditions of each nation 
should be taken into consideration. 
  Balladur and his party are scheduled to leave here for 
Shanghai tomorrow. 

