BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "News" program] </F>
  [Text] Delegates attending a regional conference on 
propaganda and ideological work have in the past few days 
enthusiastically discussed party Secretary Chen Kuiyuan's speech 
at the conference. His speech was entitled "Stabilize the 
Situation [wen ding ju shi] and Strengthen Our Propaganda and 
Ideological Work." They have also expressed many opinions and 
made many suggestions on the region's propaganda and ideological 
work for this year. 
  During their discussions, delegates unanimously held: This 
is a year of crucial importance for our country in the course of 
reform and development. Development and stability are two major 
tasks in the region's work. To carry out the region's various 
reform tasks for this year, it is necessary to correctly handle 
the relationship between reform, development, and stability. To 
implement reform in an all-round way, we must have a stable 
social environment and favorable public opinion. 
  They further pointed out: Ours is a region where minority 
nationalities live in compact communities. Strengthening the 
unity of various nationalities and maintaining the unification 
of the motherland accord with the fundamental interests and 
common aspirations of all nationalities throughout the region. 
The unity of various nationalities is of fundamental importance 
for the region's social and economic development. Practice has 
proved that whenever our work is effectively performed among 
various nationalities, our economy develops rapidly in a stable 
situation. Reform and development will become empty talk without 
a stable social and political environment. For this reason, we 
who are engaged in propaganda and ideological work should regard 
maintaining social stability as our own duty. In propaganda and 
ideological work, we should always give priority to the struggle 
against splittism, maintaining the unification of the 
motherland, strengthening the unity of various nationalities, 
and preserving social stability. We should rid ourselves of the 
past practice of doing propaganda and ideological work off and 
on. We should always do solid work in this regard. We should 
constantly keep a clear head and should not, to the slightest 
degree, slacken our efforts to publicize the importance of 
stabilizing the situation [dui wen ding ju shi de xuan chuan]. 
In propaganda, we should keep to the central theme of our 
society and carry forward our national spirit and the spirit of 
the times. We should arm the party with Comrade Deng Xiaoping's 
theory of building socialism with Chinese characteristics. We 
should educate people in the theory and make it take root in the 
hearts of the people of various nationalities across the region 
so that it will become the basic guiding principles for all of 
our work. 
  Meanwhile, we should comprehensively and accurately 
publicize 
the party's basic theory and line and its principles and 
policies; we should publicize the creative spirit and heroic 
deeds demonstrated by the masses of people in the course of 
reform and construction; and we should help people emancipate 
their minds, change their ideas, do pioneering work, and make 
progress. We should focus our attention on doing a good job in 
reform and opening up, establishing a socialist market economic 
structure, and promoting the sustained, rapid, and healthy 
development of the economy. 
  Delegates said: In short, propaganda and ideological work 
is, 
as Comrade Jiang Zemin put it, to arm our people with scientific 
theories, guide them with correct publicity, inculcate them with 
high ideals, and encourage them with fine works of literature 
and art. 
  Delegates held: Propaganda and ideological work is 
systematic 
work. This work cannot be done by propaganda and ideological 
departments alone. Party committees and governments at various 
levels should further enhance their awareness of propaganda and 
ideological work and mentally overcome the practice of 
concentrating on economic work to the neglect of propaganda and 
ideological work. We must effectively carry out propaganda and 
ideological work as we do economic work. Propaganda and 
ideological departments should live up to the expectations of 
the party and the people by extensively carrying out propaganda 
and ideological work in order to mold favorable public opinion 
for our region's social stability, reform, and opening to the 
outside world. 

