BFN 

<F P=106> [Hainan Provincial Government Work report delivered by </F>
Hainan Governor Ruan Chongwu (7086 1504 2976) before the Second 
Session of the First Provincial People's Congress on 1 March: 
"Government Work Report"] 
  [Text] Fellow Deputies: 
  On behalf of the Hainan Provincial People's Government, I 
hereby present the Government Work Report to the congress for 
your consideration. It is also requested that all Chinese 
People's Political Consultative Conference members and other 
persons attending as nonvoting delegates offer their opinions. 
<H5>  I. A Review of Work in 1993 </H5>
  Over the last year, under the guidance of Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics, we have seriously implemented the spirit of the 
14th party congress and the Third Plenary Session of the 14th 
CPC Central Committee, and led the people of all nationalities 
throughout the province in tightly centering on the goal of 
building a socialist market economy structure and achieving 
modernization. This was for the purpose of deepening reform and 
expanding opening up, so that the national economy and the 
various social undertakings would see sustained, rapid and 
healthy development, and so as to lay down a firm base on which 
the Hainan Special Economic Zone could move to a higher stage. 
  --The major national economic indices continued to see rapid 
growth. The GDP totaled 20.4 billion yuan, up 22.8 percent as 
compared with the previous year. Of the total, primary industry 
added value [zeng jia zhi 1073 0502 0237] was 7.55 billion yuan, 
a growth of 10.5 percent; secondary industry added value was 6.2 
billion yuan, a growth of 51.6 percent; and tertiary industry 
added value was 6.7 billion yuan, an increase of 15.3 percent. 
The speed of growth of these economic indices in each case 
exceeded the requirements of the annual plan and of the Eighth 
Five-Year Plan, and was higher than the average level of growth 
over the years since the establishment of the province. 
  --There was new development in agricultural production, and 
great progress was achieved in structural readjustment. The 
gross output value of agriculture was 8.86 billion yuan, up 11.3 
percent on the previous year. This continued the double-digit 
growth which had been maintained for two years. Good results 
were realized in eco- agriculture, tourist agriculture and 
township and town enterprises. While grain and sugar-cane saw 
declines in output volume as a result of dry weather, output of 
fruit, vegetables, meat and aquatic products all grew by over 20 
percent. The gross output value of township and town 
enterprises totaled 4.57 billion yuan, up 84.3 percent on the 
previous year. Forestry production completed the tasks for the 
year. Even in this dry year, five cities and counties--Danzhou, 
Lingao, Tunchang, Chengmai and Qionghai--all saw increased 
production of grain. 
  --The speed and benefits of industrial production grew in 
tandem, and the development of communications, transport and 
posts and telecommunications was accelerated. Gross industrial 
output value reached 10 billion yuan, up 38.9 percent over the 
previous year. Added industrial value totaled 2.8 billion yuan, 
a growth of 36.2 percent. For the first time, gross industrial 
output value exceeded gross agricultural output value. 
Industrial production and sales both prospered and economic 
benefits continued to improve. Transport and the posts and 
telecommunications industries achieved added value amounting to 
1.26 billion yuan, a 26.7 percent increase over the previous 
year. All cities and counties throughout the province were 
connected to long-distance direct-dialing telephone facilities, 
while the average number of telephones installed has now 
exceeded the national average figure. In Haikou City, there are 
27.9 telephones per 100 persons, the highest figure for any 
provincial capital in China. 
  --Fixed-asset investment increased and the best achievements 
ever were realized in construction. Total social fixed-asset 
investment was 16.94 billion yuan (not including the Yangpu 
Development Zone), an increase of 94.6 percent over the previous 
year. The investment structure was further improved and the 
amount of investment in basic facilities and basic industries 
rose from 2.4 billion yuan in 1992 to 3.5 billion yuan. The 
intensity of key construction investment and the rate of 
construction progress both saw the best figures since the 
establishment of the province. 
  --Obvious results were achieved in the drawing in of foreign 
funds, forming links with domestic enterprises, and attracting 
businesses and capital. The year 1993 was Hainan's 
International Business Attraction Year and, over the year, 15 
large-scale activities for attracting foreign businesses were 
arranged, while opening up to the outside continued to be 
expanded. Over the year, 3,106 contracts involving the use of 
foreign funds were signed, and the amount of investment involved 
in the contracts was $6.4 billion, an increase of 81.1 percent 
as compared with the previous year. The amount of foreign funds 
actually used was $970 million, an increase of 82.7 percent over 
the previous year. Foreign exchange receipts from tourism 
totaled $350 million (in foreign exchange certificates), an 
increase of 13.2 percent over the previous year. The total value 
of commodities exported in foreign trade was $900 million, a 
growth of 2.3 percent, while the total value of imports coming 
through the ports was $167 million, an increase of 105 percent. 
  --Fiscal income saw a great increase while, through 
macroeconomic regulation and control, the financial situation 
moved toward stability. Local fiscal income totaled 2.91 
billion yuan, up 94.5 percent on the previous year. Fiscal 
expenditure was 3.85 billion yuan, up 51.9 percent. The 
percentage growth in fiscal income was the highest figure ever. 
The balance of deposits in financial organs throughout the 
province at the end of the year (not including foreign-funded 
banks) was 43.3 billion yuan, up 24.8 percent. The credit 
outstanding at the end of the year totaled 37.1 billion yuan, a 
growth of 37.5 percent on the figure at the beginning of the 
year. Of these two figures, the balance of deposits in state 
banks was 3.4 billion yuan, 23.2 percent up on the figure at the 
beginning of the year, while the outstanding credit from these 
banks totaled 30 billion yuan, up 43 percent on the figure at 
the beginning of the year. The savings deposits of urban and 
rural residents at the end of the year was 18.4 billion yuan, 
63.2 percent up on the figure at the beginning of the year. 
  --Urban and rural markets have been vigorous and the 
people's 
standard of living has been continuously improved. Markets have 
prospered throughout the province, with both purchases and sales 
being good. The total volume of retail sales throughout society 
reached 7.74 billion yuan, up 32.6 percent on the previous year. 
Supply-demand relationships were relatively stable. The average 
increase in the level of retail prices throughout society was 
23.9 percent. The per-capita living expenditure of urban 
residents was 2,774 yuan, up 32.5 percent. The average 
per-capita net income of peasants was 1,016 yuan, a growth of 
13.9 percent. 
  --The various social undertakings, including science and 
technology, education, sport and health, all saw thriving 
development. Throughout the province, 17 national-level "torch" 
programs, "spark" programs and local problem-smashing programs 
were approved and established. Another 35 projects won 
scientific and technological achievement awards at the 
provincial level or above. There were new advances in new 
product development, in technology market development and in the 
training of skilled technological personnel, and the pace at 
which scientific and technological achievements were turned into 
commodities and industrial products was accelerated. Investment 
in education was increased and educational conditions were 
continually improved. The funds put into education throughout 
the province grew by 31.2 percent over the previous year. Basic 
education was consolidated and developed, and the rate of 
school-age children entering school and the consolidation rate 
[gong gu lu 2255 0942 3764] were both raised. There was further 
development in tertiary education, adult education and 
vocational and technical education. The total number of 
students in schools at all levels and of all types was about 
1.38 million, which represents a higher proportion of the total 
provincial population than is the case for the national average. 
A thriving situation was seen in the cultural and arts spheres, 
and we successively built or expanded a number of cultural 
halls, libraries and cinemas. The "round-island cultural 
corridor" activities were carried out smoothly and obvious 
achievements were realized in television, news, publishing and 
literature and art creation. Big strides were made in sports 
undertakings, and in 1993 for the first time our provincial team 
participated in the national games. We also participated in 25 
national competitions for various sports and events. In this we 
realized fine results. Mass sports activities were also widely 
developed. Medical and health facilities were gradually 
improved, and there was continual improvement in the levels of 
prevention and cure. Over the year, 23.41 million yuan was 
invested in 77 projects to build and expand township and town 
hospitals, public health centers and epidemic prevention 
stations. The incidence of infectious diseases was down 10.7 
percent as compared with the previous year. The planned 
parenthood target responsibility system completion rates were 
quite good. Calculated on the basis of a permanent population 
at the end of last year of 7.012 million persons, the natural 
rate of population increase was 15.55 per thousand. Work in 
foreign affairs, overseas Chinese affairs, nationality affairs, 
religious affairs, the work of supporting the Army and giving 
preferential treatment to the families of heroes and martyrs, 
militia work, the building of reserve service contingents, as 
well as work in comprehensive improvement of social order, 
opposing corruption and promoting the building of clean 
government all achieved good results. 
  In looking back at the work in 1993, it can be seen that we 
placed stress on grasping the following several aspects: 
  1. Increasing the strength of the reforms, and 
accelerating the building of a socialist market economy 
structure. 
  From the beginning of last year, we accelerated the pace at 
which we engaged in building a socialist market economy 
structure, and successively instituted a series of major reform 
measures. First, in accordance with the principle of relaxing 
examination and strengthening management, we promulgated and 
implemented the "Regulations on Registration and Management of 
Enterprise Corporate Bodies in Hainan Province," which changed 
the process of applying to establish an enterprise from a system 
of registration following examination and approval to a system 
of direct registration. This reform simplified the application 
procedures, relaxed the operational scope and, on the systems 
level, blocked the loopholes which gave rise to improper 
practices, while promoting the building of clean government. 
Second, Haikou City took the lead in reforming the tax levying 
and management regulations. The system of specialized tax 
personnel being assigned to specific tax accounts was abolished 
and they initially established a new tax levying and management 
system whereby taxpayers take the initiative to report their 
tax, where intermediate organs act as agents in the payment of 
tax, where computer systems assess tax in accordance with the 
regulations and where judicial organs handle cases in accordance 
with the law. In deepening reform of the tax levying and 
management system, beneficial experiments were carried out. 
Third, great efforts were put into promoting the shareholding 
system. Throughout the province, permission was given to newly 
establish 75 limited shareholding companies. Of these, the 
shareholding companies involved in communications and energy 
construction raised large amounts of funds, thereby guaranteeing 
the needs of key basic facility construction and the development 
of basic industries. 
  Experimental work was begun on 
developing mutual shareholdings among enterprise corporate 
entities, and this played a positive role in perfecting the 
property rights transfer system and promoting the optimized 
deployment of production factors. Fourth, the transformation of 
enterprise operational mechanisms was accelerated. We abolished 
a number of management departments for industrial and 
communications enterprises and implemented manager (director) 
responsibility systems under the leadership of boards of 
directors. In respect of the managers (directors) of some of 
the enterprises under the provincial commercial and trade 
system, open recruitment was implemented. The organizational 
construction of the Hainan Chamber of Commerce was strengthened. 
This created conditions for strengthening enterprise links, 
safeguarding enterprise interests and increasing enterprise 
self-discipline. Fifth, reforms were implemented to promote and 
improve the social security system, to expand the coverage of 
social security, and to strengthen the collection and management 
of social security funds. Sixth, the urban housing system 
reforms have already been instituted in organs directly under 
the province and in some cities and counties. 
  Legislative work has been strengthened, and reform and 
legislation have been organically combined. Last year, on the 
basis of an overall clearing up, in the light of Hainan's 
realities, we promulgated 25 laws and regulations related to the 
building of a socialist market economy structure. We also 
strengthened supervision and inspection work in respect of law 
enforcement and carried out specific inspections of law 
enforcement situations in terms of reducing the burden on the 
peasants, environmental protection, and health. That is, we 
ensured that the laws and regulations were being implemented and 
also strengthened the concept of handling matters in accordance 
with the law. 
  2. Firmly grasping basic industries, accelerating 
construction of basic facilities. 
  Firmly upholding the goal of increasing peasants' income and 
taking the market as guidance, we put great efforts into 
readjusting the rural industrial structure, into strengthening 
the building of basic agricultural facilities, into strongly 
developing the "two highs and one excellent" agriculture and 
township and town industries, and into promoting the overall 
development of the rural economy. Last year, we convened two 
provincial agricultural work conferences and, on the basis of 
summing up work and spreading experiences, we further 
strengthened the basic status of agriculture and strengthened 
guidance of agricultural work. In a situation which saw a 
serious dry spell, we actively organized all sides to 
participate in drought-relief activities, so as to reduce the 
harm to grain production. Last year, there were great increases 
in agricultural credit funds and in agricultural-support fiscal 
expenditure, and grain and sugar-cane purchase funds were 
basically able to meet demand in a timely way. In order to 
truly reduce the burden on the peasants, throughout the province 
we sorted out the situation in respect of "the issuing of white 
slips" and formulated "Various Regulations on Earnestly Reducing 
the Burden on the Peasants," so as to safeguard the production 
enthusiasm of the peasants. It is particularly worth pointing 
out that last year, through the wide-ranging attracting of 
businesses and drawing in of funds, township and town 
enterprises and the comprehensive development of agriculture 
both saw very great advances. 
  In order to speed the pace of construction of basic 
facilities, we carried out reform of the investment structure 
and the management structure, and reorganized basic facility 
project ownership through standardized shareholding systems. 
Preferential comprehensive compensation policies were 
implemented, so as to encourage all spheres of society to invest 
in key projects in order to greatly speed the construction of 
basic energy, communications and telecommunications facilities. 
The first 60,000-kw generating set at Daguangba [1129 0342 
1056] hydroelectric station is already generating electricity 
and has been connected to the electricity grid, while a further 
148 km of 220-kilovolt transmission line has been added. A 
further 129 km of high-speed highway has been added and the 
handling capacity of the ports is now 800,000 tonnes. 
Program-controlled telephone switching systems with a capacity 
of 105,000 lines were newly added, and an additional 4,320 
long-distance telephone lines were installed. The Nanshan power 
station began generating electricity in the first half of this 
year and it is guaranteed that the Fenghuang Airport at Sanya 
will open in July this year. The Meilan [5019 5695] airport 
project has already received the approval of the State Council 
and the Central Military Commission. A vibrant situation has 
been seen in the building of basic energy, communications and 
telecommunications facilities throughout the province. 
  3. Expanding opening up to the outside world, 
attracting businesses and drawing in funds. 
  Taking the development of economic and trade activities as 
the center, we successively held major celebratory activities to 
commemorate the fifth anniversary of the establishment of Hainan 
Province and Special Economic Zone, the Second International 
Coconut Festival, a maritime communications conference, and the 
Third Alliance and Friendship Conference for Hainan Hometown 
Associations Throughout the World. We also organized and held 
Hainan Introduction Conferences in Hong Kong and other places, 
where we introduced to people from China and abroad a number of 
projects for attracting businesses and drawing in capital. The 
drawing in of foreign businesses and the arranging of domestic 
links realized pleasing results. The development of the Haikou 
Bonded Zone and the Yangpu Economic Development Zone was 
smoothly completed. There was new progress in the construction 
of the Yalongwan tourism and holiday area. Following approval by 
the state, the Yangpu and Basuo border trade points were 
established and developed. 
  The reform of the foreign trade 
structure was further deepened, foreign trade export policies 
were relaxed, open tenders were called for for some export 
commodity quotas, and the mechanism of competition was drawn in 
so as to promote the development of foreign trade. Last year, 
in a planned way, our province sent delegations to visit the 
various countries of Southeast Asia, and we received visits from 
distinguished guests including Prime Minister Mahathir of 
Malaysia, Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai of Thailand, Singapore's 
Senior Minister Lee Kuan Yew, President Cheddi Jagan of Guyana, 
and President Brazauskas of Lithuania. These visits promoted 
Hainan's external economic and cultural cooperation and 
interchange. 
  4. Rectifying financial order, strengthening 
macroeconomic regulation and control. 
  Our province has seriously implemented the series of major 
decisions by the central authorities on strengthening 
macroeconomic regulation and control, and has formulated and 
implemented the 12 measures on "Strengthening Macroeconomic 
Regulation and Control, Deepening Financial Reform and Doing 
Well in Current Financial Work." We organized 22 work groups to 
go to all financial organs throughout the province to 
investigate the situation in respect of inter-borrowing of 
funds, and to stop that inter-borrowing which violated the 
regulations. Grasping the opportunity afforded by the two 
national readjustments of interest rates, deposits were actively 
sought, and bank savings deposits gradually revived. 
Account-settling management was strengthened so as to guarantee 
normal payments. Financial order thus saw a marked turn for the 
better and the financial situation moved toward stability. 
After May last year, there was a landslide in enterprise 
deposits. Banks then readjusted the credit structure so that 
credit funds were slanted toward key projects and basic 
industries. The investment in "two highs and one excellent" 
agriculture and other high-efficiency industries was increased, 
so as to guarantee, on the funds level, the speedy development 
of the economy. 
  In order to further standardize the real estate market, the 
provincial government formulated the "Ideas on Strengthening 
Macroeconomic Management of the Real Estate Market." All cities 
and counties carried out an overall clean-up and readjustment of 
real estate companies and development zones, canceled 88 
development zones which had not been examined and approved by 
the State Council and the provincial government, and recovered 
some land which had passed the period approved and still not 
been put to use. Great attention was paid to drawing up a 
comprehensive provincial program for state land use and overall 
programs for land use in the cities and counties, and the "five 
unifieds" development model was actively promoted. Supervision 
over the implementation of the "Land Management Law" was 
strengthened, so as to guarantee the smooth carrying out of 
development and construction. 
  We rectified economic order, seriously implemented the 
"Product Quality Law" and powerfully struck at illegal 
activities of producing and selling fake and low-grade 
commodities in order to safeguard the rights and interests of 
consumers. In accordance with the principle of striking in a 
focused way and achieving comprehensive improvement, throughout 
the province we adopted joint actions to strike at smugglers and 
criminals, in order to stabilize the economic situation. 
<H5>  5. Strengthening social order and launching the </H5>
anticorruption struggle, in order to coordinate the development 
of the various social undertakings. 
  Since the beginning of last year, we have put great efforts 
into strengthening widespread education in the legal system, and 
we have seriously implemented the various tasks of the "5 
February [er wu 0059 0063]" law popularization. We have firmly 
upheld the policy of "concurrently striking and stressing 
prevention, treating both the symptoms and the cause, but 
placing stress on treating the cause," established the system of 
patrolling policemen, organized joint defence against criminals 
by the Army, the police and the people, and firmly struck at all 
sorts of criminal activities. At the same time, the various 
measures for comprehensively improving social order were further 
implemented. In developing the struggle against corruption, we 
have earnestly examined and handled some cases of illegal 
actions, punished the corrupt elements, rooted out corrupt 
phenomena, promoted the building of clean government in 
government organs and further improved the investment 
environment. 
  We seriously implemented the principle of "using science and 
technology to invigorate Hainan," accelerated the construction 
of science and technology demonstration areas, firmly 
implemented the "torch," "spark" and "problem-smashing" 
programs, and successfully hosted the 1993 Chinese New Science 
and Technology, Patented Technology and Patented Products 
Exhibition, which promoted the development, propagation and 
application of scientific and technological achievements. 
  We conscientiously implemented the "Program for the Reform 
and Development of China's Education," strengthened various 
aspects of educational reform, positively implemented plans for 
nine years mandatory education, strongly promoted vocational and 
technical education, readjusted the structure of tertiary 
education, and in coordination with the implementation of the 
"prairie fire" program, strengthened peasants cultural education 
and vocational and technical education. "Project Hope" 
activities were developed throughout the province and marked 
results were achieved. The cultural market was reorganized so 
as to eliminate ugly social phenomena and so as to promote the 
healthy development of cultural undertakings. 
  With the control of the spread of infectious diseases as the 
center, we strengthened preventative and health protection work. 
We were firm in the enforcement of health laws, supervision and 
management of medicines was strengthened, we struck firmly at 
those who manufactured and sold fake or poor quality medicines 
or engaged in other criminal activities, and we reorganized the 
medical and health market. 
  With villages as the focal point 
and using tubal ligations in families with two daughters as the 
central point, we tightly grasped the implementation of the 
population and family planning target responsibility systems, in 
order to realize the annual population plans. 
  Fellow Deputies! Over the last year, under the leadership of 
the party Central Committee, the State Council and the Hainan 
Provincial CPC Committee, the people of all nationalities 
throughout the province have united in struggle, developed and 
pushed forward and quite satisfactorily completed the various 
tasks for 1993 set down by the First Session of the First 
Provincial People's Congress. On behalf of the provincial 
people's government, I would like to express heartfelt thanks to 
the people of all nationalities throughout the province for 
their trust in and support of the government's work! I would 
also like to express sincere thanks to the People's Liberation 
Army forces stationed in Hainan, to Hong Kong, Macao and Taiwan 
compatriots, to overseas Chinese and to friends from all circles 
who have concerned themselves with and supported the 
modernization of Hainan! 
  In 1993, our province's national economy and the various 
social undertakings all saw strong development. However, we 
must also soberly realize that there are still some deficiencies 
and problems in government work, and that many difficulties and 
problems continue to exist in development. Basic industries and 
basic facilities still do not accord with the needs of the 
national economy and social development, and the restrictions of 
these bottlenecks are still very prominent. The task of 
building basic facilities is onerous and there is a great lack 
of funds. The agricultural base is weak, and the capacity to 
withstand natural disasters is quite poor. The province still 
has 100,000 people who have not yet escaped poverty, and the 
tasks associated with poverty alleviation are still arduous. 
The scale of industry is too small, and some products are 
lacking in competitiveness. Growth in exports has been slow and 
a relatively stable export commodity production base has not yet 
been formed. Prices have seen quite large increases. In some 
areas the social order situation is not good, and among a small 
number of government personnel there still exist phenomena such 
as bureaucratism and corruption. We must give great attention 
to these problems, so that they can be earnestly dealt with and 
resolved. 
<H5>  II. The Targets and Tasks for 1994 </H5>
<H5>  I. Development targets </H5>
  Seen from the national situation, the overall national 
economy has continued to move in a direction of speedy and 
healthy development, the domestic market potential is very 
great, and around the world there are optimistic opinions of 
China's future prospects. These all provide us with a rare 
opportunity. The CPC Central Committee has strongly pointed out 
that grasping the opportunity, deepening reform, expanding 
opening up, promoting development and promoting stability are 
work for the whole party and the whole country. We must, in 
every aspect of work, recognize this overall situation, 
subordinate ourselves to and serve this situation, and seriously 
handle well the relationships among reform, development and 
stability. Thus, the overall guiding ideology in our province's 
economic and social development is: Taking Comrade Deng 
Xiaoping's theory on building socialism with Chinese 
characteristics and the basic line of the party as guidance, we 
will in an overall way implement the spirit of the 14th party 
congress and the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee, speed up the pace of construction of a socialist 
market economy structure, stabilize and enrich Hainan's 
preferential policies, further expand opening up to the outside, 
put great efforts into readjusting the economic structure, 
strive to raise economic results, and maintain the sustained, 
rapid, and healthy development of the national economy. At the 
same time, we will firmly grasp the building of spiritual 
construction, safeguard social stability, coordinate the 
development of the various social undertakings and promote 
Hainan's modernization in an overall way. 
  In accordance with this guiding ideology, our province has 
set down that the targets for the national economy and social 
development this year will include: A GDP of 27 billion yuan, a 
growth of 18 percent on last year. Of this, tertiary industry 
will grow 23 percent. Gross agricultural output value of 9.74 
billion yuan, a growth of 10 percent. Agricultural added value 
of 8.5 billion yuan, an increase of 7 percent. Gross industrial 
output value of 13.03 billion yuan, an increase of 30 percent. 
Industrial added value of 3.8 billion yuan, an increase of 28 
percent. Total social fixed-assets investment of 20 billion 
yuan, an increase of 18 percent. Actual utilization of foreign 
funds amounting to $1.1 billion, an increase of 13.2 percent. 
Local fiscal income of 2.59 billion yuan, together with 760 
million yuan of refunded tax income and a net proportion of 
central fiscal revenue [jing shang hua zhong yang cai zheng 0403 
0006 0439 0022 1135 6299 2398], giving a total of 3.35 billion 
yuan, which represents a comparable increase of 18.4 percent. 
Fiscal expenditure of 4.09 billion yuan, an increase of 6.3 
percent. Total value of commodity imports of $1.8 billion, an 
increase of 8 percent. Total value of exports of $960 million, 
an increase of 6.1 percent. Per-capita net income for peasants 
of 1,100 yuan, an increase of 8.3 percent. The increase in 
commodity retail prices will be kept under about 15 percent. 
The total population at year end will be 7.137 million, a 
natural rate of increase of 15.77 per thousand. 
  II. Key reform measures 
  This year is a crucial year in implementing the spirit of 
the 
"Decision" taken by the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC 
Central Committee and in promoting economic structural reform. 
We will, in accordance with unified deployments by the central 
authorities, actively push forward the various aspects of 
reform, place stress on studying the new situations and new 
problems in reform, and continuously guide reform to deeper 
levels. 
<H5>  1. Taking company system transformation as the focal point, </H5>
and speeding the establishment of a modern enterprise system. 
  We will speed the coordinated reforms in transforming 
enterprise operational mechanisms. We will earnestly promote 
the three types of systems reform within enterprises, carry out 
in an overall way the reform of the enterprise personnel system 
and reform of the leadership system, and implement a system of 
manager (director) responsibility under the leadership of a 
board of directors. We will abolish the administrative 
department jurisdictional relationships, and implement 
management by industry. We will abolish the administrative 
grades of enterprises, remove the various status distinctions 
between enterprise staff and workers, and implement an overall 
system of labor contracts for all personnel. This will allow 
staff and workers to freely flow between enterprises under 
different ownership systems and in different regions, thereby 
achieving a situation where enterprises can freely decide on 
whom they employ and laborers can freely decide on for whom they 
work. 
  The implementation of the company system in state-owned 
enterprises is a beneficial exploration in the establishing of a 
modern enterprise system. This year, we will carry out the 
company system transformation of several major state-owned 
enterprises under the industrial and communications systems of 
our province, so as to transform mechanisms and strengthen vigor. 
  We will actively promote the readjustment of enterprise 
organizational structures. In accordance with the demands of 
the market economy, we will adopt various modes, including 
merging, leasing, contracts, auction and equity transfer to 
gradually realize the flow of enterprise property rights, to 
optimize asset deployment, and to optimize industrial 
structures. Urban collective enterprises, township and town 
enterprises and nongovernment science and technology enterprises 
will, through diverse forms, be gradually reorganized as 
cooperative shareholding enterprises. Some might also be 
reorganized as joint-stock companies. 
  We will accelerate the establishment of a property rights 
trading market, organize some property rights trade fairs on a 
trial basis and encourage the circulation of various types of 
property rights in the market. State-owned assets stock should 
also see optimized deployment through the property rights 
market. We will actively create conditions so that more 
enterprises participate in experiments involving cross-holdings 
by corporate entities. 
<H5>  2. Rationally readjusting the fiscal system of the cities </H5>
and counties, and implementing in an overall way a modern tax 
levying system. 
  This is the first year in which we are implementing the 
revenue- sharing system reform, and also the second year in 
which our province is implementing the fourth-round [di si lun 
4574 0934 6544] city and county fiscal system. In order to 
better link up our province's fourth-round city and county 
fiscal system with the revenue-sharing system, we will, in 
accordance with the ideas and requirements of the 
revenue-sharing system, take as base figures the revenue and 
expenditure set down by the fourth-round city and county fiscal 
system. Then, first in Haikou, we will implement 
revenue-sharing between the province and the city, and for the 
other cities and counties, we will carry out appropriate 
readjustment in accordance with the existing system. This year 
we need to implement throughout the province a modern tax 
levying and management system, and on the basis of a 
computerized tax-computation system in Haikou City, we will 
establish a Hainan electronic tax levy service center. This will 
form an overall system, to be used by the central authorities, 
the province and the city. 
  We will continue to perfect a "fair, light and simple" 
taxation system. While implementing the unified national tax 
laws, in accordance with the tax levying management jurisdiction 
assigned to our province by the central authorities, and 
proceeding from reality, we will organically combine strict tax 
levying management with the low tax policies of the special 
zone. The preferential policies of the Hainan Special Economic 
Zone will have to be maintained and kept relatively stable, so 
as to create the economic conditions by which to continue to 
draw in domestic and foreign funds. 
  We will reform the funds-use management methods and employ 
fiscal funds to support enterprises' technological progress. 
Funds management will mainly rely on fiscal management, while 
project feasibility will mainly be decided by enterprises and 
industrial departments. In accordance with the industrial 
policies and the principle of compensated use, disregarding 
ownership type, we will stress support for high-technology and 
new-product development by our province's local enterprises, as 
well as investment projects with good results. 
  Fiscal budgetary management will be strengthened. In future, 
all administrative levies will be included in the budget. At 
the same time, it will be necessary to strengthen supervision 
over and management of extrabudgetary funds. 
<H5>  3. Bringing into play the superiorities of the special zone </H5>
and speeding up the formation of an open, externally oriented 
economic structure. 
  We will reform the management methods in respect of 
enterprises' external operational powers and, within a certain 
scope, operations will be freed. The management method of 
import and export quotas and targets will be reformed and 
gradually we will abolish mandatory planned management and the 
system of administrative examination and approval of imports and 
exports. 
  With respect to the import and export quotas handed 
down by the state, in a way which is beneficial, fair and open, 
we will implement a system of calling for tenders for the quotas 
and licenses or will have a standardized means of distribution 
so that we can use the mechanism of competition to invigorate 
external economic relations. 
  We will strengthen cooperation with the outside in order to 
speed the development of Hainan's resources. In the development 
of basic tourist facilities, the development of tropical 
agriculture resources, the building of basic agricultural 
facilities and the development and utilization of marine 
resources, it is possible to widely solicit business 
participation from outside and to develop those areas, using 
forms such as joint equity, cooperation, sole- funding and joint 
operations. 
  We will allow those Hainan enterprises with the conditions 
to 
adopt various forms by which to directly invest abroad and 
develop multinational operations. 
<H5>  4. Reforming the management system using a standardized </H5>
highways and communication levy, and improving the method of 
comprehensive compensation for investment in basic facilities. 
  Beginning 1 January this year we implemented the "Hainan 
Special Economic Zone Management Measures on the Levying of a 
Value-Added Charge on Motor-Vehicle Fuel" and abolished all road 
checkpoints. We "combined the four charges into one" by 
combining the highway maintenance levy, the bridge-crossing 
levy, the road levy and the highway transport levy into a 
single, value-added levy on motor-vehicle fuel. We have 
reformed the system of diverse levies and established a levying 
and examination bureau for provincial communications 
standardized levies. This bureau will take on, in a unified 
way, the work of levying and examining standard highway and 
communication levies. We have implemented a fuel sellers and 
operators licensing system so as to strengthen management over 
fuel sales, in order to resolve well the problem of fuel 
supplies for non-vehicle use. We have established a standard 
levy use system so as to strengthen management over the standard 
levy income. 
  5. Implementing overall reform of the urban housing 
system. We will concurrently carry out leasing, sale and 
construction (that is, supply subsidies, provide preferential 
conditions for purchase of housing, and raise funds to build new 
houses), with sales as the main part of the policy, so as to 
speed the sale of public housing. At the same time, we will 
seriously resolve problems in the sale of houses, such as 
property rights transfer, and socialized service management for 
housing following sales, so as to eliminate future worries for 
staff and workers. We will establish a complete housing fund 
management system to handle well the reinvestment of funds 
obtained through the sale of houses, and realize a fine cycle of 
investment in housing construction. We will readjust the 
structure of the real estate industry, implement the "peaceful 
abode project," issue mortgage credit, and speed the 
construction of economical and comfortable housing, so as to 
improve people's living conditions and to guide and protect the 
healthy development of the real estate market. 
<H5>  6. With the implementation of old-age pensions, industrial </H5>
injury pensions, unemployment benefits and medical and health 
insurance as the focal points, we will deepen the reform of the 
social security system. 
  The range of cover of the various types of social security 
will be expanded from the staff and workers of the various types 
of enterprises to the persons who work in administrative and 
institutional units and to individual laborers. All central 
units based in Hainan will be included in local arrangements. 
At the same time, we will grasp well social security 
experimental work in some prosperous villages. 
  We will speed the reform of medical and health insurance and 
establish a medical and health insurance system for society in 
which personal medical and health accounts are combined with 
unified overall medical and health arrangements for major 
illnesses. In some of the prosperous villages we could, on the 
basis of voluntary participation, establish a major illness 
medical and health insurance system which is in accord with the 
level of economic development of the village. 
<H5>  7. Speeding the structural reform of the administrative and </H5>
institutional units. 
  This year, in accordance with the unified deployments by the 
central authorities, we must engage in reform of the structures 
of provincial, city and county party and government organs. The 
focus of the structural reform will be the transformation of the 
government's economic management function. In accordance with 
the principle of separation of government and enterprise 
functions, and the separation of the government's socioeconomic 
management function and its function as the representative of 
the owners of state assets, we must make efforts to put in order 
the relationship between the government and enterprises, 
continually raise the government's ability to use indirect 
regulatory and control measures, such as economic measures and 
legal measures, to manage the economy, and limit administrative 
measures to the scope where they have to be used. In 
conjunction with this, we must speed the implementation of a 
civil servant system and, on the basis of implementing 
differential management for cadres, we must gradually achieve a 
situation where some of the workers in administrative and 
institutional units move toward society. 
<H5>  8. Continuing to deepen rural reform. </H5>
  We will reform the rural economy's organizational forms so 
that rural production moves toward enterprise operations. 
Relying on farms, comprehensive experimental agricultural 
development areas, agricultural enterprises, and large 
specialized rural households, we will guide the dispersed rural 
households to link up through all sorts of modes, so that they 
can carry out production operations in accordance with market 
demand, and greatly develop economies of scale. 
  We must 
fully bring into play the role of transport and marketing 
enterprises for agricultural products so that they become 
backbone forces for our province's agriculture and spur on the 
development of the rural market economy. 
  We will reform the rural circulation service system. The 
basic avenue in resolving the problem of sales of agricultural 
and sideline products lies in actively guiding and supporting 
the peasants to enter the circulation sphere. We need to 
establish a marketing contingent in which the peasants are the 
the main part, so as to form an integrated production, sales and 
processing service system. In accordance with the degree of 
specialization and scale of operations, we must help to build 
rural enterprises or specialized rural associations such as an 
aquatic producers association, a vegetable farmers association, 
a sugar-cane farmers association and so on, in which peasants 
constitute the main part. Governments at all levels must 
encourage and safeguard fair competition, let market entities 
diversify, firmly eliminate illegally established obstacles, and 
prohibit the various departments from arbitrarily levying 
charges in the circulation links. In this way, the entire 
provincial agricultural and sideline product market will form an 
unimpeded circulation network. 
<H5>  III. The main tasks of our work </H5>
<H5>  1. Strengthening the building of a legal system in the </H5>
special zone and earnestly doing well in planning work. 
  In order for a socialist market economy structure to be more 
speedily established in our province, we must fully utilize the 
legislative power which the National People's Congress [NPC] has 
given to our province, positively learn from and draw in 
international practices, and earnestly grasp well the work of 
legislation in the special zone. We must seriously organize the 
implementation of the provincial government's 1994 legislative 
plan and tightly grasp the drawing up of legislative plans for 
the next five years. Through legislation, we will standardize 
the activities of market entities, readjust market exchange 
relations, safeguard the normal order of the market and promote 
the building of clean government and of spiritual civilization. 
We must gradually establish a socialist legal system which has 
a complete range of legislation, under which the law is firmly 
enforced, in which there is effective supervision and in which 
there is full legal consultancy service. In the various spheres 
of market competition, it is necessary to handle all matters in 
accordance with laws and regulations, to create conditions for 
fair, equal and open market competition, and to firmly strike at 
actions which bend the law for friends or relatives and at 
illegal actions. In respect of the actions of the government 
itself, we must also gradually create a situation where the laws 
and regulations standardize and restrain government actions, so 
that the government acts in accordance with the law. We must 
continue to do well in the "5 February" law popularization work, 
so as to raise consciousness of the law among all people. 
  We must place great stress on planning work. Economic and 
social development must be carried out in a planned and 
step-by-step way. In accordance with the requirements of the 
"Hainan Province National Economic and Social Development Eighth 
Five-Year Plan and 10-Year Program" the planning departments 
must tightly grasp the formulation and revising of the "Hainan 
Province Comprehensive National Land-Use Plan" and begin 
formulating the Ninth Five-Year Plan. Governments and 
departments at all levels must, as quickly as possible, 
formulate development plans for their region or their 
department, seriously implement the planned measures and 
guarantee the realization of the planning blueprint. 
<H5>  2. With the increasing of peasants income as the target, we </H5>
must put great efforts into the rural economy. 
  The greatest difference between the Hainan Special Economic 
Zone and other special economic zones is that it has 
wide-ranging rural areas. Agriculture and rural industry are 
major components of our province's economic work. Striving to 
increase the income of the peasants is a crucial element in 
reducing the differential between industry and agriculture, 
developing public welfare undertakings in rural society, raising 
purchasing power in rural areas and promoting the development of 
the rural market. In accelerating the development of the rural 
economy, first we must put great efforts into readjusting 
agriculture and the economic structure of the rural areas. The 
various cities and counties must begin by doing well with 
regional plans for the agricultural economy and setting down a 
regional deployment for productive forces, with the building of 
commodity grain bases, vegetable bases, economic crop bases, 
livestock- and poultry-breeding bases, and agricultural product 
processing bases as the focal points. Within the rural economy, 
the proportion of secondary and tertiary industry should be 
increased and the transfer of surplus rural labor to 
high-efficiency industries should be accelerated. We need to 
fully bring into play the natural advantages of our province and 
centralize funds to do well in the building of 
fine-strain-variety bases, in propagating fine strains, and in 
optimizing the agricultural product structure. We must continue 
to develop aquatic breeding and ocean harvesting industries, so 
as to build Hainan swiftly into a major aquatic product 
province. Second, in accordance with the demands of the 
socialist market economy, we will continue to perfect the 
dual-level operational system which has household output-related 
contracts as the main element, to actively promote rural 
cooperative shareholding enterprises and joint-stock 
enterprises, to develop rural production and operation 
organizations in which production and sales are combined, to 
grasp well the building of socialized service systems in the 
rural areas and to spur on the overall development of the rural 
economy. 
  Third, we will earnestly safeguard the interests of 
the peasants, stabilize grain production, and tightly grasp the 
"vegetable basket" project. The various cities and counties 
must all formulate plans for protected cultivation areas, 
establish a number of permanent high-output fields, and firmly 
control the use of cultivated land. We must gradually increase 
the investment in agriculture and improve basic agricultural 
facilities. We must continue to grasp well the work of reducing 
the peasants' burden, and must systematize and prescribe by law 
a rational burden for the peasants. We must gradually raise and 
increasingly free the purchase prices for agricultural products, 
so as to continually raise the peasants' income. Fourth, we 
must continually uphold the principle of using science and 
technology to invigorate agriculture, and speed the development 
of township and town enterprises. With the fostering of persons 
skilled in using science and technology in the rural areas as a 
focal point, we must stabilize the agricultural science and 
technology contingent, strive to spread practical scientific and 
technological achievements, raise the rate of transformation of 
scientific and technological achievements and the rate at which 
practical technology enters households, and raise the quality of 
labor. This year, it is planned that the overall output value 
of township and town enterprises will grow 64.1 percent and 
reach 7.5 billion yuan. We must set our sights on both domestic 
and international markets and put efforts into developing our 
island's resource-processing industries as well as other 
labor-intensive industries which are in accord with the 
characteristics of the rural areas. With the townships and 
towns as well as the ports at the mainstays, we should create 
and develop a large swathe of township and town industrial 
areas. Fifth, we must speed the building of a rural market 
system and gradually form a market network in which facilities 
are complete, deployments are rational, information flows 
freely, comprehensive markets and specialized markets are 
combined, futures markets and spot markets are combined and 
where primary agricultural product markets and highly processed 
agricultural product markets coexist. 
  We need to fully bring into play the demonstration role of 
the state-owned farms and comprehensive agricultural development 
experimental areas, so as to speed the development of the rural 
market economy. The various farms must do well in readjustment 
of the industrial structure and, on the basis of grasping 
agriculture, develop processing industries and tertiary 
industry. In order to establish the production and operational 
autonomy of the farms, it might be possible to establish various 
companies based on specialties or industries. It might also be 
possible to turn the existing regions or teams into companies. 
We must allow the state-owned farms to use their land as their 
share contribution, draw in domestic and foreign funds and take 
the road of the shareholding system, so as to speed the 
development of the state-owned farm economy. In respect of the 
agricultural comprehensive development experimental zones, we 
must further clarify property rights relationships, speed 
transformation through cooperative shareholdings, and gradually 
realize the goal of turning them into companies. 
<H5>  3. With the improving of benefits as the focus, earnestly </H5>
grasping industrial and communications production. 
  This is a year for deepening reform in an overall way. The 
external environment for enterprises will undergo very great 
changes and this will provide both opportunities and challenges 
for our province's industrial and communications enterprises. 
We must take development of the market as a target, take the 
raising of enterprise quality and the improving of economic 
results as the focal points, and strengthen enterprise capacity 
to meet changes and to compete. We need to increase investment, 
draw in advanced technology from within the country and abroad, 
speed the technological transformation of enterprises and put 
efforts into developing new products. The quality and volume of 
the products of our province's construction, natural beverages, 
pharmaceutical, clothing, electronics and vehicle industries 
must be greatly improved and increased. This year we must speed 
the pace of construction in the industrial base areas, including 
Laocheng, Jinpai, Chahe, Basuo and Jinshan. Our province has a 
wide sea area. We must actively develop and utilize the 
resources of the southern ocean, and develop our province's oil, 
chemical industry and maritime transport industries. We must 
continue to expand the capacity of electricity generating 
stations, and electricity production must be raised to a new 
level. Communications and transport departments must place 
stress on guaranteeing agricultural support transport, transport 
for goods and materials, foreign trade transport and transport 
of the products needed by the people in their lives, and 
guarantee the completion of the state's transport tasks. We 
must continue to increase investment in posts and 
telecommunications and place stress on raising the level of 
telecommunications in the various cities and counties and major 
development areas. 
  We must continue to uphold the strategic policy of 
coordinated development of economic construction and 
environmental protection, further formulate and perfect 
environmental protection laws and regulations, strengthen law 
enforcement in the sphere of environmental protection, firmly 
stop and punish those actions which seriously pollute the 
environment and harm society, and guarantee the healthy 
development of economic construction. We must continue to 
implement the "Product Quality Law," firmly strike at actions 
involving production or sale of fake and poor quality 
commodities, strike at criminal activities such as smuggling, 
safeguard economic order and protect fair competition. 
<H5>  4. Actively developing the two markets, speeding the </H5>
development of tertiary industry. 
  We need to further expand opening up to the outside, 
positively develop the domestic and the foreign market and 
promote the speedy development of tertiary industry. 
  Our 
target is, within five years, to gradually establish a tertiary 
industry structure which has tourism as its main part, which 
offers a complete variety of services, which has rational 
deployment of resources and which is knowledge-intensive. In 
this way, we can form an open, multilevel, multifunction market 
system and comprehensive socialized service system. 
  We must actively draw in foreign funds, technology, skills, 
and management experiences so as to draw the Hainan economy into 
the international market. This year, apart from further doing 
well in the work of attracting businesses, we must switch the 
focus in implementing the memoranda of intention, the agreements 
and the contracts, seriously grasp well follow-up service for 
projects and raise the rate at which promised investment 
arrives, the project commencement rate and the enterprise 
survival rate, so as to strive to achieve a situation where 
every initiated enterprise comes to fruition as a complete 
operational enterprise. There is great potential for economic 
cooperation between Hainan and Taiwan, and there are broad 
prospects. We need to actively create conditions and welcome 
industrial and commercial business people from Taiwan to come 
and invest in and develop Hainan. 
  Centering on the theme "Take a Holiday in Hainan when 
Visiting China in `96," which was decided on by the Chinese 
National Tourism Administration, we must tightly grasp the 
building of tourist facilities, speed the development of tourist 
sites and strongly develop a tourist market, so as to attract a 
greater number of tourists from home and abroad. We need to 
strengthen industry management, seriously implement tourist 
industry quality standards, and draw in foreign hotel chains to 
invest in and manage our province's high-class hotels, so as to 
continually raise the level of management of the tourist 
industry. 
  We must continue to deepen reform of the domestic and 
external foreign trade system, achieve an integration of 
domestic and international trade, open markets and gradually 
form in our province a circulation structure which is in accord 
with general international patterns and operational mechanisms 
and in which diverse economic components coexist. We must as 
quickly as possible provide import and export operational rights 
to Hainan enterprises, and encourage domestic and foreign 
enterprises of all sorts to travel along a road where trade, 
industry, agriculture and technology are combined and internal 
and external trade are combined. We must speed the development 
of the Yangpu Economic Development Zone, the Haikou Bonded Zone 
and the other bonded stores and warehouses. We must further 
expand opening up to the outside and expand the operational 
scale of border trade. We must positively promote the strategy 
of market pluralization, strengthen the building of export 
production bases and actively open up international markets, and 
help and assist poor regions in developing domestic and 
international trade. 
  We must grasp the opportunity, speed the pace of 
readjustment 
of the structure of financial organizations, do well in the work 
of separating and delimiting policy-nature financial business 
from commercial-nature financial business, and speed the 
track-changing by state-owned commercial banks. We must further 
develop and perfect the financial market, actively strive to 
establish local Hainan stock company commercial banks, establish 
urban cooperative banks and rural cooperative banks, positively 
develop financial intermediary organs and promote the electronic 
transformation of the finance business. It is necessary to 
standardize financial actions, readjust the structure of credit, 
ensure firm discipline in account settling and establish a fine 
financial order. We must set up financing centers, develop an 
international funds market, actively raise funds, enliven stored 
funds, improve funds-use benefits and support the economic 
construction of Hainan. 
<H5>  5. Optimizing the investment structure, continuing to speed </H5>
the construction of key projects. 
  In accordance with the basic requirements of the state 
investment structure reforms, our province must formulate and 
implement the "Hainan Special Economic Zone Regulations on 
Comprehensive Compensation for Investment in Basic Facilities," 
and strengthen the stimulatory power of industrial policies. We 
must optimize the investment structure and continue to speed the 
construction of key projects. The planned investment in 
Hainan's key projects during 1994 is 7 billion yuan, which will 
guarantee the construction of 24 key projects. In addition, 
there are 10 key construction projects for which advance 
preparatory work has to be done. The most important of the 
major tasks in basic construction for our province this year are 
to have the Fenghuang Airport ready for flights, to link up the 
Eastern line high-speed highway, and to put into production on 
time the Daguangba Electricity Plant and the Nanshan Electricity 
Plant. We must complete these on time. The work on Meilan 
Airport at Haikou and the third-stage project of the Haikou 
Electricity Plant must also soon be commenced. For key 
construction projects, we must further open up funding channels, 
encourage investors from all sides to compete equally, and 
achieve a pluralization of investment entities. We must 
establish and perfect a corporate responsibility system for 
projects, actively implement a project supervisory system, 
guarantee project quality, reduce construction periods and 
improve investment benefits. 
<H5>  6. Seriously grasping the work of assisting the poor, and </H5>
speeding the economic development of the "three types of 
regions." 
  We must implement preferential policies in respect of old 
revolutionary base areas, minority nationality areas and 
poverty-stricken areas, and help the people in these areas shake 
off poverty and become prosperous as quickly as possible. With 
the market as guidance, we must readjust the industrial 
structure of the "three types of areas," and guide the people in 
these areas in tapping the potential of local natural resources, 
in greatly developing planting and rearing industries, 
agricultural and sideline product processing industries and 
township and town industries. 
  We need to mobilize the broad masses of people to give play 
to their spirit of self-reliance, so that they invest funds and 
invest work in developing the economy in order to resolve the 
problems of food, clothing and shelter. We need to help young 
people in the "three types of areas" to leave agriculture and 
engage in industry. We also need to encourage some of the 
people to get rich first. We must continue to grasp 
construction of water, electricity, roads and other basic 
facilities in the "three types of areas" and raise the degree to 
which these areas are open to the outside and their degree of 
attraction. We need to actively attract businesses and draw in 
funds, so as to do well in poverty alleviation projects. The 
Baihualing Development Zone in Qiongzhong County and the 
Qizhiling Development Zone in Baoting County must strive to put 
projects in place at an early date and achieve early results. 
It is necessary to strengthen the work of fostering ethnic 
backbone elements and professional and technical training of 
peasants, so as to essentially raise the level of laborers. We 
must continue to grasp well the transformation of housing 
conditions for minority nationalities and resolve their 
difficulties in terms of drinking water, and truly work hard in 
many respects in order to allow the nationality areas to throw 
off poverty and become prosperous. 
<H5>  7. Speeding the progress of science and technology and </H5>
strongly developing education. 
  Science and technology are the primary productive force, and 
in invigorating the economy of the special zones, it is 
necessary to promote science and technology. Governments at all 
levels must continue to implement the strategic policy of "using 
science and technology to invigorate Hainan" and, at the same 
time as actively supporting scientific and technological 
research organs and institutes, they should fully utilize the 
relaxed environment of the special economic zone to powerfully 
develop all types of nongovernment scientific and technological 
enterprises. We need to foster and develop a science and 
technology market, formulate "Hainan Provincial Measures for 
Managing the Technological Market," encourage the rational flow 
of skilled scientific and technological personnel, and promote 
the drawing in, absorption and transformation of scientific and 
technological achievements. We must seriously implement laws 
protecting intellectual property rights, respect the results of 
the work of scientific and technological workers, protect their 
legitimate rights and promote the rapid transformation of 
scientific and technological results into modern productive 
forces. Cooperation and interflow with scientific and 
technological circles both at home and abroad must be 
strengthened, so as to promote the development of science and 
technology in our province. 
  We must further clarify the guiding ideology that education 
is the key link, continue to increase investment in education, 
and levy education surcharges in accordance with the law. We 
must further increase education facilities, transform the 
dangerous buildings currently used for primary and middle 
schools, improve education conditions, truly implement nine 
years of mandatory education and continue to reform the tertiary 
education system and the system of employment assignment for 
graduates of middle and tertiary vocational schools. We must 
implement autonomy in education for tertiary institutions, 
optimize specialist structures and increase the vigor of 
tertiary institutions. It is also necessary to powerfully 
develop professional and technical education and adult 
education, firmly complete the task of eliminating illiteracy 
among 30,000 persons, and combine anti-illiteracy education with 
the study of practical technologies. Schools of all types at 
all levels must implement the party's education policies in an 
overall way and put efforts into raising the quality and 
benefits of education. We need to widely propagate and 
seriously implement the "Teachers Law of the PRC," safeguard the 
legitimate rights of teachers, improve the remuneration and 
conditions of teachers and create a fine living and working 
environment for teachers, so as to form throughout the province 
a fine practice of placing importance on education. We need to 
strengthen the building of a teaching contingent, and 
continually raise the quality of teachers so as to accord with 
the demands of developing education. 

<H5>    8. Bringing prosperity to the special zone's culture, </H5>
promoting the development of the special zone's sports and 
health undertakings. 
  In bringing further prosperity to the socialist special zone 
culture, we must stress the development of literature and 
culture, news and publishing, and broadcasting and film, so as 
to provide the people of the province with sufficient spiritual 
food. It is necessary to consolidate the socialist cultural 
front and speed the construction of basic cultural facilities 
such as the provincial color television center, the Haikou 
library, and the performance theater, and the building of a 
basic cultural contingent. At the same time, we must place 
stress on the building of rural cultural bases, widely develop 
mass cultural and entertainment activities, and continue to do 
well in terms of the "1,000-li round-the-island cultural 
corridor," and newly construct a number of demonstration points. 
We need to further expand the area which radio broadcasts and 
television can reach, enrich the contents of radio and 
television programs, and raise the quality of programs. We must 
strengthen management of the cultural market, so as to promote 
its healthy development. We must strengthen the building of a 
sports contingent and raise the competitive level of sports 
competitors. Schools need to stress physical education, so that 
students develop in an overall way. We need to widely develop 
mass sports activities so as to strengthen people's physical 
stature. Over the next two years we should build a number of 
sports facilities in Haikou and Sanya to resolve the problem of 
a lack of sports venues in these cities. 
  We must continue to do well in archival, historical and 
gazetteer-compilation work. 
  At the same time as grasping well medical and health work 
in the cities, we must place the focus of medical and health 
work on the rural areas. We must continue to strengthen the 
three types of health construction in the rural areas and strive 
within two years to transform 100 rural hospitals and raise the 
level of rural medical and health care. We must also strengthen 
the work of guarding against and treating parasitic infections 
in the rural areas, and strive to bring the incidence of 
infectious diseases down by more than 5 percent as compared with 
last year. We must earnestly do well in urban health 
management, improve health conditions, beautify the urban 
environment, and strengthen the enforcement of and supervision 
over health laws. We must seriously implement the "PRC Law on 
Safeguarding Women's Rights and Interests," protect the 
legitimate rights of women and children, and do well in mother 
and child health care work. We must continue to implement the 
basic national policies on family planning, seriously grasp well 
the implementation of population and family planning target 
responsibility systems, put an end to the phenomena of false 
reporting and under-reporting of family size, and firmly realize 
the population control plans for this year. 
<H5>  9. We must continue to strengthen work in terms of social </H5>
order, opposing corruption and promoting clean government, as 
well as work in external affairs and overseas Chinese affairs, 
and improve the social environment of the special zone. 
  Maintaining social stability and creating a fine social 
environment are preconditions for Hainan's reform, opening up 
and development, and are also the ardent hopes of the broad 
number of investors and the masses. I want to especially stress 
that governments at all levels must continue to uphold the 
policy of "grasping with both hands and ensuring that both hands 
have a tight grip," and earnestly strengthen the building of 
socialist spiritual civilization. It is necessary to seriously 
implement the "Regulations on the Comprehensive Improvement of 
Social Order," to strengthen the function of the people's 
democratic dictatorship, to correctly handle the two 
contradictions of different natures, to firmly strike at various 
types of criminal activities, and to adopt firm measures to 
guard against and restrict the occurrence of malignant cases. 
We must strengthen militia work and reserve service work, fully 
bring into play the political superiority of the socialist 
system in terms of achieving full cooperation, firmly uphold the 
principle of combining specialized work and the mass line, 
uphold the fine practice of joint actions by the military, the 
police and the people, widely and deeply mobilize the strengths 
of all sides of society to grasp and handle problems together, 
and truly implement, at the basic level and in every household, 
the various measures for comprehensive improvement of social 
order. Law enforcement departments must strengthen the building 
of their own contingents and raise both the quality of law 
enforcement personnel and the quality of law enforcement itself. 
The broad masses must strengthen their consciousness of the law 
and great efforts should be put into citing advanced persons and 
incidents which demonstrate conscious observance of the law and 
a willingness to struggle against illegal activities. In this 
way, social order will be brought onto the track whereby matters 
are handled in accordance with the law. 
  We must continue to strengthen the work of opposing 
corruption and promoting clean government. The government must 
strengthen the building of systems, so that loopholes can be 
blocked on both the systems and procedural levels. Thereby, it 
will be possible to guard against the occurrence of corruption 
and unhealthy trends. We must pay attention to the education 
and training of cadres, raise the political quality and 
professional level of cadres, change the style of work, overcome 
bureaucratism, establish a truth-seeking and pragmatic 
workstyle, firmly enforce work discipline in organs, and raise 
work efficiency. We must fully bring into play the functional 
roles of the supervisory departments and the judicial organs, 
continue to wage the struggle against corruption, organize 
forces to investigate and handle major cases involving graft and 
bribery, and seriously strike at the activities of economic 
criminals. At the same time, we must continue specific work to 
rectify improper practices within specific spheres, so as to 
promote the building of clean government in the government 
organs of our province. 
  Departments involved with external affairs and overseas 
Chinese affairs must utilize their own superiorities, make 
efforts to spread information about Hainan, raise awareness 
abroad about Hainan, actively facilitate the drawing in of 
funds, technologies and skilled persons from abroad, and provide 
convenience for the foreign business people who come to invest 
in and do business in Hainan. It is necessary to widely make 
known and implement the "PRC Law on Safeguarding the Rights and 
Interests of Returned Overseas Chinese and Their Relatives," so 
as to protect the legitimate rights and interests of returned 
overseas Chinese and their relatives. We must also widely 
develop activities of supporting the Army and giving 
preferential treatment to families of revolutionary soldiers and 
martyrs, strengthen the unity between the Army and the 
government and the Army and the people, and bring into play the 
special role of the people's military forces in building the 
special zone. The people's governments at all levels must 
strengthen socialist democracy and the building of the legal 
system, strengthen the concept of the law, consciously accept 
supervision by the people, seriously implement the resolutions 
of the NPC and its standing committee, and firmly engage in 
administration in accordance with the law. 
  Fellow Deputies! 
  The year 1994 is an important year for our province in 
deepening reform, expanding opening up and accelerating 
development. The situation is good and such an opportunity is 
difficult to come by. In the new year, under the guidance of the 
party Central Committee and the State Council, the people of all 
nationalities throughout the province must seriously implement 
the spirit of the 14th party congress and the Third Plenary 
Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, liberate their 
thought, work with one heart and one mind, strive arduously, and 
jointly struggle to complete the various national economic and 
social development tasks of our province. 

