Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] La Paz, 5 Jan (EFE) -- Bolivian Social Development 
Minister Fernando Romero said today that the Indian rebellion in 
Mexico is "a voice of alarm" for Latin American governments. The 
minister admitted the possibility of a social explosion "in 
Bolivia and any other part of the world" if extreme poverty 
conditions persist. 
  Various indigenous and labor groups expressed support for 
the 
Mexican natives and charged that the IMF and World Bank were 
responsible for the misery afflicting most Latin American 
peoples. 
  The leaders of these associations criticized the declaration 
made by Vice President Victor Hugo Cardenas, who ruled out the 
possibility that Bolivia might be affected by a situation 
similar to the Mexican rebellion. 
  The social development minister said: "Neglect has provoked 
this reaction (the Indian rebellion in Mexico) that, in my 
opinion, is a voice of alarm for all rulers who spend their time 
making rhetorical speeches and promises." 
  Romero, the official responsible for seeking solutions to 
the 
dramatic poverty afflicting a large percentage of the Bolivian 
population, said: "If we do not find effective and quick 
solutions, we might expect this type of social explosion in 
Bolivia and any other part of the world." 
  The Tupac Katari-1 Indian Movement (Mitka) of Kollasuyo 
(Bolivia) expressed its decision to give "moral and material" 
support to the Mexican Indians and asked the United Nations to 
intervene in order to prevent the further shedding of the blood 
of their "Zapatist brothers." 
  Another Mitka faction expressed "the duty to salute and wish 
all the necessary success" to the actions leading to a victory 
in the Chiapas' struggle and the expulsion of the "invaders" who 
usurped native peoples's rights. 
  Hilarion Mamani, a leader of the El Alto Labor Federation, 
said the exploitation suffered by Bolivian peasants could 
provoke something similar to what happened in Mexico. 
  What happened in Chiapas is the result of poverty, Mamani 
said, accusing the World Bank and the IMF of provoking the 
misery afflicting a large part of Latin American populations. 
"It is a warning for them to change their policies against the 
impoverished nations of this continent," Mamani said. 

