Language: <F P=105> Finnish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Most Finns Favor Conventional </F>
Peacekeeping"] 
  [Text] STT--Nearly nine out of 10 Finns support Finland's 
participation in conventional peacekeeping operations in the 
future, but only a fourth of them would be willing to expand the 
UN peacekeeping mission of the Finns so that they could 
participate in peace enforcement with combat forces. Nearly 60 
percent of them oppose this system. 
  Reports have appeared on a poll commissioned by the National 
Defense Information Planning Board in which Finns' opinions on 
our security policy are analyzed. It is also evident from them 
that more Finns than before think that their life during the 
next few years will be more insecure than now. They worry most 
about the situation in Russia, economic developments, and 
unemployment. 
  Finns take a more doubtful view than before of the chances 
of 
ending the war in the Balkans. Thirty-seven percent of them do 
not support intervention in the civil war in former Yugoslavia 
but would, instead, let the parties involved fight out their war 
among themselves. Last spring, 25 percent of the respondents 
held this view. 
  At the present time, 57 percent of all Finns want the 
international community to somehow intervene in the events 
taking place in the Balkans. This is 12 percentage points less 
than last spring. 
  Nearly 80 percent of them support humanitarian aid for the 
Balkan theater of operations and aid for the refugees. 
Furthermore, over 70 percent hope that the UN peacekeeping 
forces will try to keep the warring factions apart from one 
another. The same number also support peaceful sanctions and an 
embargo of the Balkans. 
<H5>  Life Looks Gloomier Than Before </H5>
  How Finns feel about the security and insecurity of their 
own 
lives was also examined in the poll. Less than half of the 
respondents, 46 percent, think that their personal lives will 
become more insecure in the course of the next five years. On 
the other hand, 16 percent of the respondents think they will be 
more secure than now, and 31 percent think there will be no 
difference. 
  The number of those who felt that their lives were insecure 
in the fall of 1990 has increased by 16 percentage points. On 
the other hand, the number of respondents who viewed their lives 
as being secure has decreased by 5 percentage points. 
  Women's and men's views of the future clearly differ from 
one 
another. Sixty-one percent of the women view the future as being 
more insecure, while 48 percent of the men do. The members of 
the youngest age group, 15 to 24, viewed this most favorably. 
One out of every five of them viewed the future as being more 
secure. 

