Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Guatemala City, 18 Feb (NOTIMEX) -- Guatemalan 
President Ramiro de Leon Carpio today justified the presence of 
the U.S. troops on Guatemalan territory that are participating 
in the Fuertes Caminos program. 
  The president justified the presence of 200 American 
soldiers 
who represent 10 percent of the total contingent that will be 
arriving in the Central American nation this year to participate 
in social welfare projects. De Leon regretted the involvement of 
Rigoberta Menchu, a Guatemalan Indian and 1992 Nobel Peace Prize 
winner, who sent a letter to President William Clinton urging 
him to reconsider the "current U.S. military policy toward 
Guatemala." 
  At a meeting with the press the president explained that 
joint projects are being carried out with the U.S. Government to 
improve the standard of living of residents in Salama, Baja 
Verapaz, which is located 150 km north of Guatemala City. 
  Nevertheless, Menchu pointed out that the presence of U.S. 
troops in Guatemala "is unacceptable," especially when one 
considers that the United States is a member of the Group of 
Friendly Countries and "must demonstrate neutrality at all 
times." Furthermore, it "complicates our reality and 
considerably hinders the process of demilitarizing Guatemala and 
its society." 
  The U.S. Embassy in Guatemala has announced that from 6 
January through the beginning of June 1994, 10 groups of 200 men 
each will be sent to Guatemala for training. For the Fuertes 
Caminos program the troops will use 150 vehicles including 
tractors, semi-trailers, trucks, bulldozers, perforation 
equipment, and jeeps for personnel transportation, as well as 
two helicopters for emergency medical evacuations. 
  De Leon Carpio expressed surprise over Menchu's position, 
saying that "she lacks the information" to oppose the Fuertes 
Caminos project, the purpose of which is to increase the 
well-being of the inhabitants of Salama, Baja Verapaz. 

