Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["News Release"] </F>
  [Text] Tallinn, March 28 -- Board of RAS Rahva Haal that 
publishes the second-biggest Estonian daily RAHVA HAAL decided, 
on Monday [28 March], to end the labour contract with the 
editor-in-chief of the daily TOOMAS LEITO and stop publishing 
the daily starting Tuesday. 
  Managing editor of the paper Tiit Lehiste told ETA that as 
soon as publishing the daily will be stopped, AS RH, a 
joint-stock company, founded by the staff of the paper last year 
to participate at the privatization of the paper, was ready to 
start issuing a new Estonian daily with the same contents. 
  Turmoil over the daily started already in May last year when 
Estonian Privatization Agency decided to privatize the 
state-owned newspaper. Head of the Privatization Agency Liia 
Hanni has admitted later that in the course of the 
privatization, the result of which is that two applicants to the 
daily gave the matter to the court, the Agency acted in 
disagreement with existing laws. At present the matter has 
reached the Supreme Court and the privatization of the daily has 
been stopped. 
  In October last year the board of the daily was changed with 
majority given to representatives of the government coalition. 
On March 18 the board adopted a decision to change the statutes 
of the company, abolishing the institution of editor-in-chief 
and create a new institution of publisher-in-chief. On Monday 
majority of the staff of the paper, in protest to the decision, 
resigned and decided to join RH. On Tuesday, the 
editor-in-chief was sacked, a decision which was later, in the 
course of week-long talks between the board of RAS Rahva Haal, 
AS RH and Ministry of Culture and Education, abolished. 
Editor-in-chief of Rahva Haal Toomas Leito told ETA that the 
decisions of the board of RAS Rahva Haal had been of "purely 
political" nature. 
  The decisions of the board were followed by a series of 
statements by Journalists and Newspapers Unions and well-known 
public figures, denouncing the decisions of the board, saying 
they aimed at creating censorship in Estonia. 
  RAHVA HAAL is the biggest daily distributed all over Estonia 
that belongs to the state. Its circulation is 47.6 thousand at 
week-days and 50 thousand at Saturdays. 
  On Monday, East and Central-European Newspaper Publishers 
Forum protested against the Estonian government's "attempts to 
put ideological pressure on the newspaper". In its letter to 
Estonian Prime Minister Mart Laar the Forum demands quickening 
of privatization of newspapers in Estonia in the way the 
government has promised to do it. "During privatization debates 
there should be no ideological control over RAHVA HAAL or any 
other newspaper", the participants of the Forum Bucharest 
meeting stress in their statement. 
  The Forum calls stopping privatization of press in Estonia 
as 
"causing extreme concern", recalling the government's promise to 
privatize also the state news agency ETA and a state radio 
channel, which have also come to a deadlock. "It is already the 
third time during the last half year that international press 
organisations have had to protest against the media policy of 
Estonian government," editor-in-chief of the BALTIC INDEPENDENT 
weekly and deputy chairman of the board of the Estonian 
Newspapers Union Tarmu Tammerk told ETA, recalling government's 
attempts to establish an 18 per cent turnover tax to all press 
publications in Estonia and government's first attempt to 
privatize RAHVA HAAL. 

