Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Guwahati, Jan. 30--The controversy over the 
electoral rolls in Assam has taken a new turn with the Guwahati 
High Court holding that Clause 7.4 of the "Special Revised 
Instructions" of the Election Commission, issued on May 18 last, 
"unconstitutional, arbitrary and violative of the Representation 
of the People Act, 1950, and rules framed thereunder." 
  Specifically, the Court has held that this Clause violated 
Article 14 of the Constitution. 
  A Division Bench of the Court, comprising the Chief Justice, 
Mr. R.K. Manisena Singh and Justice Ms. Meera Sarma, passed the 
order on Friday while disposing of writ petitions challenging 
some of these guidelines filed by some leading members of the 
United Minorities Front (UMF). 
  The controversial clause read: "7.3. The Electoral 
Registration Officer shall also take every possible care to 
ensure that names of persons in whose cases objections were 
filed and upheld, as well as names of persons whose claims were 
rejected during any earlier revisions of 1990, 1985, etc., on 
the ground that they were not citizens of India are not to be 
included in the draft roll. He should also ensure that cases 
where enquiries have been initiated by the police with a view to 
filing cases under the Foreigners Act, 1946 or IM(DT) [expansion 
not given] Act, 1983, are also excluded. 
  Similarly under Clause 7.4, the Electoral Registration 
Officer should ensure that the names of encroachers on 
VGR/PGR/forest lands/khas lands or any other Government lands 
are not included in the draft rolls. 
  These guidelines provoked Opposition from virtually the 
whole 
spectrum of political opinion in the State, though the grounds 
for such opposition were different. The fact is that 
encroachments on Village Grazing Reserves (VGR), Professional 
Grazing reserves (PGR), and forest and Khas lands are a 
generalised phenomenon with every section of the population 
encroaching upon them, though the perception about the nature of 
such encroachment, or about the identity of such encroachers, 
has always been selective, with "popular" opinion holding that 
it is only the descendents of erstwhile migrants from former 
East Bengal who are predominantly such encroachers. 
  Modified guidelines: Faced with such opposition, 
to which the State Government too was a party, the Election 
Commission modified those guidelines with the following proviso 
added to Clause 7.4: "Provided that the above instruction shall 
not apply in relation to such eligible Indian citizens whom the 
State Government of Assam does not propose or plan to remove 
from the lands under their encroachment immediately and at least 
up to the end of the year 1993. "In other words, the 
modification of the original guideline not merely acknowledged 
that they were difficult (if not impossible) to implement, but 
also constituted an escape clause, as it were, enabling the 
Election Commission to make a retreat from an untenable position. 
  The petitions filed in the Court had also challenged Clauses 
6.7, 6.9 and 6.10 of the Special Revised Instructions which had 
provided for the publication of two "Lists" of enumerated 
voters: a List I, "containing the names of persons who are 
verified by the District Magistrate to be Indian citizens": and 
a List II, "containing those names which are not considered 
Indian citizens by the District Magistrate," (6.7). Further, 
Clause 6.10 said that "Where the police have initiated inquiries 
in respect of any person with a view to filing cases under 
Foreigners' Act, 1946 or Illegal Migrants (determination by 
tribunals) Act, 1983, the names of every such person shall be 
included in List II and not in List I." The result of following 
that directive was that List II had about 15,76,000 [as printed] 
names which included the names of 13,73,000 who had filed 
claims, and in respect of about nine lakhs of whom such claims 
had been accepted. 
  According to a document prepared by the United Minorities 
Front (UMF), whose intervention on the issue in the court has 
led to the order, the Election Commissioner's directives 
envisaged treating all persons included in List II, including 
about eight lakhs whose cases had been referred to inquiries 
under the Foreigners' Act and the IM(DT) Act, were treated as 
"non-citizens." 
  According to the UMF, of these only about 58,000 cases had 
been referred to the tribunals formed under the provision of the 
two Acts, and according to sources in the State Government, only 
20,000 of these had been finally and indubitably found to be 
illegal aliens. 
  The Court which had in an earlier order directed that the 
names in List II should be published has now questioned the very 
classification of people into groups of "citizens" and citizens 
whose status is "suspect." It has held that the classification 
should be reasonable and not based merely on "suspicion." 


