Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Moscow, Jan 17 (AFP) -- Russian parliamentary 
leaders have blocked ultra-nationalist leader Vladimir 
Zhirinovskiy from heading the influential foreign affairs 
commission, a position which he had wanted, handing him instead 
the chairmanship of a newly- created "geopolitical" commission. 
It was not immediately clear what the geopolitical commission 
would do. 
  Zhirinovskiy and fellow members of the Liberal Democratic 
Party (LDP), who took the second largest number of seats in the 
lower house of parliament, also failed to get the key security 
and defence parliamentary chairmanships. 
  The nominations for four deputy speakers of the State Duma 
-- 
as the lower house is called -- and heads of 21 parliamentary 
commissions, were released early Monday prior to voting on the 
appointments by the lower house of parliament later in the day. 
  The 444 State Duma lawmakers are due to vote on the key 
posts 
Monday evening. The nominations were published after discussion 
between the various parliamentary factions over the weekend. 
  Zhirinovskiy had said he hoped to be nominated to head the 
foreign affairs commission in the parliament. That commission 
chairmanship is expected to go instead to Vladimir Lukin, former 
Russian ambassador to Washington and a member of the reformist 
Yabloko party of Grigoriy Yavlinskiy. 
  Security is expected to go to communist Viktor Iliyukhin, 
formerly an official in the dissolved parliament, while the 
nomination for chairman of the defence commission went to a 
member of the reformist Russia's Choice grouping, who was not 
immediately named. 
  Zhirinovskiy's party did win some nominations. Viktor 
Kobeliyev, the party's number two, was proposed as one of the 
four deputy speakers in the Duma, whose speaker was earlier 
named as former communist and anti-reformer Ivan Rybkin. 
  LDP member Mikhail Lemeshev was nominated to head the 
parliamentary ecology commission. The ultra-nationalist party 
is the second largest in the Duma, with 70 deputies. Russia's 
Choice, which backs the government, has 96 and the communists 
have 65. 
  The post of first deputy speaker was expected to go to 
reformist Mikhail Mityukov, former head of the legislative 
committee of the dissolved parliament. 
  Alevtina Fedulova, head of the Women of Russia faction in 
parliament, was proposed for another deputy speaker's post. The 
nomination for the fourth deputy speaker's position was not 
immediately known. 
  Reformist candidates Mikhail Zadornov of Yabloko and Mikhail 
Poltoranin of Russia's Choice were respectively nominated to 
chair the budget and press freedom commissions. 
  Two members of deputy premier Sergey Shakray's centrist 
Party 
of Unity and Accord party were nominated -- Constantin Zatulin 
to head the commission on relations with the Commonwealth of 
Independent States and Shakrai himself to head the regional 
policy commission. The legislative commission nomination went to 
communist Vladimir Issakov. 
  Monday evening's vote by the State Duma deputies will be on 
the nominations as a whole rather than individually. 
  The nomination announcements came after the resignation 
Sunday of Yegor Gaydar, first deputy premier and the architect 
of Russia's reforms. The resignation was accepted by President 
Boris Yeltsin earlier Monday. 

