Panel 

<F P=102>   94AS0229A Bombay THE TIMES OF INDIA in English 17 Feb 94 p 6 </F>
<F P=103> 94AS0229A </F>
<F P=104>  Bombay THE TIMES OF INDIA </F>
<F P=105>  English </F>
CSO 

  [Text] New Delhi, Feb. 16--The external affairs minister, 
Mr Dinesh Singh, yesterday urged for Indo-U.S. co-operation 
against terrorism during his meeting with the U.S. Senator, Mr 
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, here. 
  While providing the Senator an account of the present 
situation in Kashmir, Mr Dinesh Singh provided details about 
Pakistani aid being provided to terrorists in Kashmir. 
  While urging for the need for the two large democracies to 
cooperate against terrorism and promotion of peace, Mr Dinesh 
Singh told the visiting U.S. Senator that it was also necessary 
for Pakistan to desist from supporting terrorism if it was 
serious about normalising relations. 
  During discussions which otherwise focused on bilateral 
relations, both the leaders felt that economic relationship was 
being strengthened by the day and that this was a happy 
development that should be taken even further. Mr Moynihan 
observed that there had indeed been great increase in the United 
States' economic engagement with India which augurs well for the 
future. 
  The minister of state for external affairs, Mr Salman 
Khursheed, said today Indo-U.S. relations were "alike and close" 
though, inevitably, there were differences on many issues. 
  Speaking at a meeting of the Indo-U.S. sub-commission on 
education and culture, he said the differences sometimes became 
sharper and acute, but would not come in the way of the growing 
strong and mature relations between the two nations. 
  Mr Khursheed said with the liberalisation of the Indian 
economy, new channels of co-operation had opened up between 
India and the United States. India provided a vast market of 250 
million middle-class people. India and China would play an 
important and active role in the world economies. Globalisation 
of economy could help forge strong bonds of friendship. 
  Referring to the shortage of funds being faced by the 
commission, Mr Khursheed said this had to be remedied since the 
body greatly helped to develop strong "cultural and educational 
bonds between the two nations." At the same time, he expressed 
apprehensions about invasion of foreign culture. The commission 
should play an active role in avoiding a clash of cultures. 
  He said the United States offered vast opening to India in 
science and technology, professional management and other fields. 
  In his speech, Mr Moynihan stressed the need for upgrading 
the Indo-U.S. relations in all spheres since some described the 
two countries as "estranged democracies." 
  He said non-resident Indians in the United States were 
playing an active part in commercial and political activities. 
  Meanwhile, the former foreign secretary, Mr J.N. Dixit, 
today 
said Indo-U.S. relations were passing through a difficult patch 
which could last up to two years. 

