CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Volodymyr Prytula, Simferopol: "Emigration of </F>
the Crimean Government"] 
  [Text] The winds of election campaigns have been 
blowing throughout Crimea. There has been no abatement of the 
hurly-burly caused by the election of a Crimean president to 
take charge of this peninsula. Jostling one another are long 
lists of candidates for the Ukrainian parliament and the Crimean 
Supreme Council; these elections are scheduled to take place all 
on one day--27 March 1994. "Our own elections are closer to our 
hearts." That is the opinion expressed by most of this 
peninsula's inhabitants, who react only faintly to the 
respectable portraits of those Crimean candidates who have 
ventured to run for the Ukrainian Supreme Council. 
  Nevertheless, 118 candidates have been registered in the 19 
Crimean election districts. Another 30 candidates are on the 
lists of the election districts in Sevastopol, which has 
traditionally stood aloof from Simferopol, even when it is a 
matter concerning elections. A particular feature of the present 
election process is its semi-boycott by the organized 
pro-Russian forces, which have put up their own candidates in 
only a few districts. However, the Crimean Communist Party did 
send its stalwarts into all the Crimean election districts. To 
be sure, there is not a single one of them whose name is known 
even in the neighboring rayon. The first secretary of the KPK 
[Crimean Communist Party], Leonid Hrach, and the remaining party 
leaders consider it better to be on the ballot for the Supreme 
Council of this autonomous republic. Aside for some faithful 
Leninists from the KPK-KPU [Ukrainian Communist Party], Crimeans 
will see on their election ballots quite a few names of 
candidates put up by the Crimean Federation of Independent Trade 
Unions; their views and make-up are very similar to those of the 
communist comrades. 
  The Crimean organizations of three other political parties 
have put up their own candidates: the Ukrainian Republican 
Party, the Party for the Democratic Rebirth of Ukraine, and the 
Party for the Economic Rebirth of Crimea. This last party has 
All-Ukrainian status. The Republicans have formed a bloc in 
these elections with the Ukrainian Civic Congress of Crimea, 
which has regional structures in all the cities and rayons of 
this peninsula. The leader of the Congress, Serhiy Lytvyn, is on 
the ballot in Simferopol Rayon; the head of the Crimean URP 
[Ukrainian Republican Party], Professor Oleksandr Fedorenko, is 
running in the Kiev Rayon of Simferopol; and the deputy chief of 
the UGKK [Ukrainian Civic Congress of Crimea], Professor Petro 
Volvach, is on the ballot in the city of Saki. Realistically 
speaking, the URP-UGKK bloc can count on victory for two or 
three of its candidates--something which--in the opinion of the 
URP and Congress leaders--could be considered a success. 
  Among other more or less well-known local political figures 
in this peninsula who have a chance of winning is Vladyslav 
Khmylovskyy--head of the Crimean Civic Forum. He is on the 
ballot in Simferopol's Zaliznychyy District. He is opposed there 
by the RDK [Crimean Republican Movement] activist and Crimean 
people's deputy, Hennadiy Chernysh. The co-chairman of the Party 
for the Democratic Rebirth of Ukraine's Crimean Section, 
Volodymyr Polyakov, is registered in the Central Election 
District. Among his rivals is the present Ukrainian people's 
deputy, writer, and RDK member, Volodymyr Terekhov. It is 
interesting that of the present-day deputies to the Ukrainian 
Supreme Council, except for Terekhov, only two have risked being 
on the ballot: Hennadiy Vaneyev in Sevastopol and Volodymyr 
Sevastyanov in Simferopol. Yuriy Koltsov has registered in 
Feodosiya; he is a former USSR deputy and now is an activist of 
the Association for Support of the Crimean Republic. 
  In the opinion of local observers, all the above-mentioned 
persons have only fair-to-middling chances of making it to the 
Ukrainian parliament. Each of them could be circumvented and 
beaten out by some director of a state enterprise. And there are 
several such candidates in each and every election district. 
  Among the favorites are those ministers of the Crimean 
government for whom the victory of Yuriy Meshkov in the 
presidential election drastically cut down the possibilities of 
scampering off to Kiev. The chairman of the autonomous 
republic's Council of Ministers, Borys Samsonov, was gratefully 
nominated by his fellow-townsmen in Dzhanka. The people of 
Krasnoperekopsk will see on their ballots the name of Heorhiy 
Kapchuk--the administrator of affairs for the Crimean 
government. He is a person already well-known for losing his 
position in 1991 as deputy chairman of the Crimean Supreme 
Council because of his too-active sympathy for the GKChP [State 
Committee for Emergency Measures]. In other districts several 
Crimean ministers are also on the ballot--ministers who have 
already fallen between two stools. 
  There are only 6 Crimean Tatars among the 150 or so 
contenders for deputies' seats. They are all on the ballots as 
independents of parties or movements. But--as I was informed by 
the deputy head of the mejlis, Refat Chubarov--they are 
supported by the representative organ of the Crimean Tatar 
people. It is hardly likely, however, that any of the Crimean 
Tatars will make it to the Ukrainian parliament. And 
this--according to Chubarov--will provide grounds for talking 
about a representation of the Crimean Tatar people in the 
Ukrainian Supreme Council. 

