Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Leonid Sergeyevich Sokolov, chief of the </F>
Geochemical Party of the Moscow Experimental-Methodological 
Geochemical Expedition of the Institute of Mineralogy, 
Geochemistry, and Crystalochemistry of Rare Metals, and Yevgeniy 
Davidovich Astrakhan, candidate of Geological-Mineralogical 
Sciences: "Pollution of the Territory of Moscow With Metals"] 
  [Text] Leonid Sergeyevich Sokolov, chief of the 
Geochemical Party of the Moscow Experimental-Methodological 
Geochemical Expedition of the Institute of Mineralogy, 
Geochemistry, and Crystalochemistry of Rare Metals (IMGRE), a 
specialist in geophysical and geochemical methods of prospecting 
for mineral ores and ecological-geochemical analysis of 
pollution of the environment with metals. 
  Yevgeniy Davidovich Astrakhan, candidate of 
Geological-Mineralogical Sciences, chief geologist of the same 
Geochemical Party. At the present time he is working on a 
geochemical study of pollution of cities with metals. 
  The results of human economic activity have begun to impact 
the environment so appreciably that it is simply impossible not 
to notice them. An extremely unfavorable situation has developed 
in many territorial industrial complexes of Russia, including 
the Moscow cosmopolitan area, which includes thousands of 
enterprises of Moscow and Moscow Oblast. 
  More than 15 million people live on the territory of this 
largest metropolitan area in the country. As a result of the 
multiple-profile industrial and agricultural production and also 
municipal service activity in Moscow itself and in the adjacent 
territories, a powerful pressure has formed which has a negative 
impact both on the environment and on people's health. 
  Among the most dangerous pollutants here, as in the majority 
of other territorial industrial complexes, are metals (more 
precisely, their compounds). In terms of the reaction to contact 
with metals, all components of the environment may be divided 
into two groups: migrational--which transport them, and 
depository, in which the metals are mainly accumulated. The 
migrational group includes surface and underground waters and 
also the atmospheric air. The depository group includes ores, 
bottom deposits, solid precipitates from the atmosphere, soil, 
and living organisms. 
  The two groups are closely related. The natural environments 
of the latter bear signs of the presence of metals in the former 
after a certain time lag. This makes it possible to study the 
dynamics of the technogenic pollution of the territory and 
evaluate the degree of danger of this kind of pollution for 
human health. 
  The situation was complicated, however, by the fact that 
until recently there has not been a single methodology for 
conducting evaluations of this kind. Last autumn the minister of 
environmental protection and natural resources, V.I. 
Danilov-Danilyan, approved an important normative 
document--"Criteria for Evaluating the Ecological Situation of 
Territories in Order To Reveal Zones in Which There Is an 
Emergency Ecological Situation and Zones of Ecological Disaster" 
(Moscow, 1992). A large number of branch and academic 
institutes, ministries, and departments participated in 
developing these criteria. 


Scale of Pollution of Soil With Metals (according to degree of danger for 
human health) 

Intensiveness of      Total indicator   Degree of danger   Assessment of 
pollution             of soil           to human health*   ecological 
                      pollution                            situation** 

Minimal pollution     &lt;8                Not dangerous      Relatively 
                                                           satisfactory 
                                                           situation 

Weak pollution        8-16              Not dangerous 

Medium pollution      16-32             Moderately 
                                        dangerous 

Strong pollution      32-64             Dangerous          Emergency 
                                                           ecological 
                                                           situation 

Very strong           64-128            Highly dangerous 
pollution 

Maximum pollution     &gt;128              Maximally          Ecological 
                                        dangerous          disaster 

*"Methodological Guidelines for Evaluating the Degree of Danger of Pollution 
of the Soil with Chemical Substances," USSR Ministry of Public Health, 
Moscow, 1987, p. 16, Table 4. 

**"Criteria for Evaluating the Ecological Situation on the Territories To 
Discover Zones With an Extreme Ecological Situation and Zones of Ecological 
Disaster," Moscow, 1992, p. 24. 


  Chemical pollution of the soils with metals, according to 
the 
proposed criteria, are evaluated in terms of the total indicator 
of chemical pollution Z&lt;inf&gt; c&lt;/inf&gt; . This indicator is defined 
as the sum of the coefficients of concentration of individual 
metals participating in the pollution: 
&lt;/graphic&gt; 

  where n--the number of metals determined, 
C&lt;inf&gt; i&lt;/inf&gt; --concentration of i polluting metal in the 
sample, S&lt;inf&gt; fi&lt;/inf&gt; --concentration of i metal in the 
background (pure) soil. 
  Maps of environmental pollution are compiled from the 
calculated total indicators. Example of such maps for Moscow are 
given in this article. 
  Through special experimental-methodological studies under 
the 
leadership of Yu.Ye. Sayet and B.A. Revich a scale was developed 
which reflects the danger to human health of pollution of soils 
with chemical elements (Table). This scale, on which the degree 
of pollution of soils was evaluated in the same amounts 
Z&lt;inf&gt; c&lt;/inf&gt; , was approved by the Main 
Sanitary-Epidemiological Administration of the USSR Ministry of 
Public Health. 
  With moderately dangerous pollution of the soil the 
incidence 
of disease among children increases, and the total incidence of 
disease of the population may increase up to 15 percent. With 
dangerous pollution there is a sharp increase in the number of 
children with chronic illnesses, and disturbances of the 
functional condition of the cardiovascular system appear. The 
total incidence of illness increases by 40 percent then. Highly 
dangerous pollution of the soils is accompanied by an increase 
in the total incidence of illness of 70 percent, the female 
reproductive function is disturbed, and many children are ill. 
  During the past 20 years associates of the Moscow 
Experimental-Methodological Geochemical Expedition [IMGRE] have 
been studying pollution of soils on the territory of Moscow. 
Utilizing the aforementioned composite indicator for evaluating 
pollution with metals not only of soils but also the snow 
cover&lt;sup&gt; 1&lt;/sup&gt; , (Footnote 1) (When there is snow, the 
composite indicator of chemical pollution is less stable (it 
depends on many natural factors, the method for taking and 
processing the samples, and so forth). Therefore this indicator 
was not included in the "Criteria...") they follow the dynamic 
of the pollution of the environment. 
  The spread of technogenic pollution over the area is 
established by means of ecological-geochemical 
mapping.&lt;sup&gt; 2&lt;/sup&gt;  (Footnote 2) (For more detail see: E.K. 
Burenkov, I.A. Morozova, R.S. Smirnova, et.al. "Tasks and 
Methods of Large-Scale Ecological-Geochemical Mapping // 
Ecological-Geochemical Studies in Regions of Intensive 
Technogenic Impact." Moscow, 1990, pp. 4-15.) First the 
functional purpose of the territory is evaluated (residential 
area, industrial zone, and so forth), then a natural description 
of the soil and ground is compiled, weather conditions are 
evaluated, and finally, samples are taken. After they are 
analyzed for metal content, it is possible to calculate the 
composite indicator of pollution for each specific territory. 
The mapping is conducted with varying degrees of detail 
reflected in the density of observation points on a particular 
area. 






  The present article gives a study of the degree of pollution 
of the territory of Moscow (with a scale of 1:100,000) done in 
1986-1987. After that more detailed work was started in 
individual sections. The area covered by ecological-geochemical 
mapping was gradually expanded: It covered the forest park zone 
adjacent to Moscow, nearby rayons, and satellite cities. 
  When the pollution of soils with metals and solid 
atmospheric 
precipitates the snow was studied, the samples were taken with a 
density of one sample point per one square kilometer. The method 
for taking the soil samples could be called classical: Analogous 
methods are used in geochemical prospecting for ore deposits. 
The depth of the soil sample (0-5 cm) is based on the 
penetration of pollutant elements established during the process 
of experimental work. Each soil sample consists of five 
specimens with an overall weight of 200 g. The processing of the 
sample in general is quite simple: It consists in drying it, 
spreading it out, and putting it through a millimeter sieve. 
  Snow samples are taken in such a way as to characterize the 
amount of dust in the atmospheric air. When snow samples are 
taken, the area and depth of the hole in the snow are measured. 
The dimensions of the hole are established in keeping with the 
depth of the snow cover and a visual estimate of its pollution: 
It is necessary to obtain no less than one gram of settled dust. 
Usually the weight of the snow sample is about 15 kg. The 
melting is done at room temperature. A solid insoluble fraction 
is isolated by centrifuge and after drying, removal of outside 
impurities, and weighing, it is sent for analysis.&lt;sup&gt; 3&lt;/sup&gt; 
(Footnote 3) (The proportion of metals in dissolved form in this 
case is not high and therefore it can be ignored.) The snow 
samples are selected in the middle or at the end of the winter 
season. At that time the number of days that have passed since 
the snow began to remain on the ground is registered. 
  Samples of soils and solid precipitates from the atmosphere 
were analyzed by the approximate-quantitative spectral method 
with lithium, strontium, barium, titanium, manganese, chromium, 
vanadium, nickel, cobalt, copper, silver, zinc, cadmium, lead, 
arsenic, antimony, bismuth, beryllium, tin, molybdenum, 
tungsten, gallium, indium, thallium, germanium, mercury, 
phosphorus, scandium, yttrium, ytterbium, lanthanum, cerium, 
zirconium, hafnium, niobium, tantalum, and boron--a total of 37 
metals. The permissible margin of error for determining the 
concentration of each element does not exceed 30 percent. 
  The composite indicators of pollution for each specific 
section were calculated from these analytical data. The results 
were entered on a map and thus territories were singled out with 
varying degrees of pollution. 
  Our research showed that on almost 60 percent of the city's 
territory the pollution of the soil is creating an emergency 
ecological situation. The soil in the city was polluted to the 
point of a condition of ecological disaster within the 
Kamer-Kollezhskiy Val and also on the territory of 
Volgogradskiy, Lyublinskiy, and Proletraskiy Rayons. In the 
strongly polluted soils, silver, zinc, and tungsten had 
accumulated in the largest quantities. 
  On the indicated area in industrial zones and around them 
there are sections of maximally polluted soils. These sections 
are influenced by such extremely large industrial zones of the 
city as Lyublino-Pererva (here, in addition to the 
aforementioned metals in the soil, cadmium, chromium, and copper 
also accumulate) and ZIL (the quantity of lead and tin are 
greater in these soils). In the industrial zone along Pravda 
Street the soil is very strongly enriched with all of the 
aforementioned metals. Areas of intensive soil pollution were 
also revealed in Khinki--Khovrino (nickel, molybdenum), the 
industrial zone of Degunino (tungsten, copper, bismuth), 
Tushino--Trikotazhnoy (silver, zinc), Meyerovskiy Drive (silver, 
zinc, bismuth), at the Khromatron plant (cadmium, copper, 
chromium), and at the intersection of the Highway of the 
Enthusiasts and Moscow Ring Highway (tungsten, zinc). 
Incidentally, one can judge the type of production from the 
range of metals polluting the soil. 
  A significantly large area of severe soil pollution is 
linked 
to the industrial zone of the Prozhektor plant in Karacharovo. 
Such metals as zinc, cadmium, and chromium accumulate on its 
site. There is a special danger of soil pollution on the 
territory of Losinyy Island, where a considerable quantity of 
tungsten, nickel, and molybdenum have accumulated. 
  A different distribution of metals throughout the area of 
the 
city is typical of solid precipitates from the atmosphere in the 
snow. The largest territory where a considerable quantity of 
metals settle is in the northwestern and northern part of the 
city. It includes several industrial zones together: Tushino, 
Trikotazhnaya, Brattsevo, Koptevo, Vagonoremont, Aviamotornaya, 
Degunino, Altufyev Highway, the Timiryazev Agricultural Academy, 
Butyrskiy Khutor, Pravda Street, and Mitkovskaya Spur. Maximum 
precipitation of metals was noted in connection with the 
industrial zones of Tushino-Trikotazhnaya and Brattsevo-Koptevo. 
The main metals that accumulated were nickel, cobalt, tungsten, 
and vanadium. 
  Another section where the snowfall was polluted with metals 
was caused by another group of nearby industrial zones: 
Khapilovka, Meyerovskiy Drive, Kirpichnaya Street, Sokolinaya 
Mountain, the Prozhektor plant, Perovo, and Gayvoronovo. The 
maximum concentration of metals was near the northern part of 
this territory. In addition to the aforementioned metals there 
were also high contents of molybdenum and chromium here. 
  The third section that was strongly polluted with metals of 
solid precipitates from the atmosphere is located in 
Kuryanovo-Lyublino--Pererve-Chagino. The fourth stretches from 
the Poveletskaya industrial zone to Ochakovo. 
  Very strong and sometimes even maximum pollution of snowfall 
with metals is also associated with the industrial zones of 
Vorontsovo and Verkhniye Kotly. The strips with snowfall 
polluted with metal extend from Verkhniye Kotly to the Ring 
Highway. Solid precipitates from the atmosphere here are 
enriched with silver, tungsten, nickel, and chromium. 
  In addition to the aforementioned territories near 
individual 
industrial zones there were also local sections where dust 
falling out with the snow was strongly polluted by toxic metals. 
In the northern part of the city it is the industrial zone of 
Vagonoremont, in the center--Volgograd Avenue and Southern Port, 
and in the south--Biryulevo-Tsaritsyno. In all of the 
aforementioned zones there were high concentrations of nickel, 
tungsten, chromium, and cobalt. In the northern part of the city 
the snowfall typically also contains silver, and in the 
south--molybdenum. 
  What has caused the differences in the distribution 
throughout the area of the city of metals in the soil and solid 
precipitates from the atmosphere? It is linked to the varying 
nature of the accumulation of technogenic pollution in them: 
Soils are an indicator of many-year processes, and in solid 
fallout from the atmosphere one can register modern technogenic 
accumulations. 
  A comparative analysis of the maps of the distribution of 
anomalous concentrations of metals in the soil and solid fallout 
from the atmosphere with the snow makes it possible to reveal 
the specific nature of pollution processes. Here it is possible 
to delineate zones of stable, relict, and modern pollution, 
which is very important for predicting its further development. 
  Stable pollution is characterized by the same 
intensity of the accumulation of metals in the soil and the snow 
cover. As a rule, areas with this type of pollution are located 
near the sources that are operating up to the present time. 
  Relict pollution is registered with greater 
pollution of the soil cover than the snow cover. With this type 
of pollution the source of the metals has either ceased to exist 
or at the present time is not making a significant contribution 
to the pollution of the air basin. Being residual, relict 
pollution may present a danger as a source of secondary 
pollution of layers of atmospheric air near the land. 
  Recent pollution, which is accompanied by more 
intensive accumulation of metals in the snow cover than in the 
soil, is progressive in nature. Obviously it is linked to 
currently active sources of pollution of the territory with 
metals. 
  Using the proposed gradation one can try to evaluate the 
city's ecological condition in a new way. Relict accumulation of 
metals is typical of the largest part of the polluted territory 
of Moscow. It was noted within the Kamer-Kollezhskiy Val and in 
Volgogradskiy, Lyubinskiy, and Proletraskiy Rayons. Stable 
pollution of the territory is traced in the northwestern and 
northern part of the city and in places where solid particles 
enriched with metals precipitate from the atmosphere. Recent 
pollution is established in connection with the industrial zone 
of Vorontsovo, and also in the south of the Ochakovo industrial 
zone and on the territory from Ochakovo to Donskaya Street. 
Local sections of modern pollution are concentrated in the north 
of the city (Vagonoremont industrial zone), the northeast 
(Koloshino industrial zone), and in the south 
(Biryulevo-Tsaritsyno industrial zone). 
  The sizes of these severely polluted territories continue to 
grow, taking up ever larger spaces along the periphery of the 
city and beyond its borders. During the period from 1977 through 
1987 the territory on which the soil was severely polluted 
increased 10-fold, and the area where snow strongly enriched 
with metals falls has doubled. This is a serious sign of danger. 
When developing environmental protection, urban planning, 
social, and medical-health policy it is necessary, at least, to 
constantly keep track of this increasing pollution of the 
territory of the city. 
  The Moscow Experimental-Methodological Geochemical 
Expedition 
IMGRE is continuing its work on evaluating the modern condition 
of the city's territory. A prognosis of the degree of pollution 
during 1993-1995 has been prepared and it is planned to verify 
this prognosis with direct testing. At the present time research 
has been started on revealing the dependency between the degree 
of pollution of the soil with metal and the illness rate of the 
child population. This work will contribute to the creation of 
the ecological maps themselves. 
  COPYRIGHT: Rossiyskaya akademiya nauk zhurnal "Priroda" 1993 

