Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Major-General Petr Karpyuk, chief, Central </F>
Directorate of Military Construction Units, by NEZAVISIMAYA 
GAZETA correspondent Aleksandr Kuznetsov: "Military Construction 
Troops Reorganizing; Contract Service, Separate Quarters on 
Way"; date and place not given; first paragraph is NEZAVISIMAYA 
GAZETA introduction] 
  [Text] In December of 1993, President Yeltsin signed 
the Decree on reorganization of Military Units," which pertains 
to military constructions units of the Russian Federation 
Ministry of Atomic Energy. Following is the text of an interview 
granted a NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA correspondent on the subject of 
military construction troops by Major-General Petr Karpyuk, 
chief, Central Directorate of Military Construction Units, 
Ministry of Atomic Energy of Russia. 
  [Kuznetsov] What is the purpose behind the reorganization of 
the military construction troops? 
  [Karpyuk] In effect, the reorganization signifies a change 
to 
contract service. Our units will be among the first to be 
affected. The Army has acquired little experience in contract 
service so far, and it is always difficult to be the first. 
  Contract service presupposes an interest in service not only 
in the financial aspect, but in living conditions as well. The 
contract should specify how long the serviceman will be billeted 
on the barracks basis and when he will be assigned his own 
housing. Our plans make provision for moving soldiers out of 
barracks and placing them into separate quarters, with enhanced 
personal comfort and recreation conditions. 
  The reorganization should effect a change in the very nature 
in which military construction subunits are organized. Inductees 
will be able to acquire basic specialties by attending 
vocational and technical schools in military construction units. 
The decree calls for our completing the reorganization by the 
end of 1999, but we believe that we can accomplish it earlier. 
  [Kuznetsov] Military construction subunits participated in 
rebuilding the White House. Has that work been completed? 
  [Karpyuk] We were assigned the mission of cleaning up the 
11th and 18th floors. The 11th floor was in a relatively normal 
condition, but everything on the 18th floor was in a state of 
ruin -- the floor, walls, window openings. We had to set up 
three shifts. One thing the soldiers had to do was form a line 
on the stairs and manually pass down polyethylene bags 
containing the debris. The assigned mission was accomplished on 
time, for which all enlisted men, officers, and warrant officers 
taking part in the work were commended. We came out with the 
initiative of performing the repairs proper on the floors, using 
our own personnel, but we unfortunately were not given that 
opportunity; foreign firms were engaged to make the repairs. 
  We have something of which we can be proud. The military 
construction units in all cases performed their work in an 
exemplary manner, regardless of where they were assigned. That 
was true for Chernobyl, Armenia, Arzamas, Sverdlovsk, etc. There 
may have been danger in Chernobyl, but in Armenia it was simply 
terrible. They worked under most difficult conditions, living in 
tents. Our units were the only ones to complete their mission 
there on time by preparing all the trouble sites. I consider 
that we did our duty with honor. 
  [Kuznetsov] What is the greatest difficulty you are 
presently 
facing? 
  [Karpyuk] One of our principal problems, the same as that 
plaguing many ministry enterprises, is the financial. The 
government at one time handed down an instruction requiring that 
additional compensation be paid, with funds taken out of 
construction profits. It must be realized that the legislation 
was a mistake. The financial situation is such that customers 
became indebted to us in the amount of about one billion rubles. 
However, soldiers have no interest, nor should they have, in our 
financial problems. The leadership of military construction 
units did all it could so that the soldiers would be paid 
individually for they money they earned. As an example, the 
average pay of soldiers in the Urals area as of the end of the 
year was approximately 120,000 rubles, while the average amount 
for Russia was 80,000 to 90,000 rubles. 
  [Kuznetsov] I know that the manpower of the military 
construction units has undergone a reduction. Have you been able 
to retain the cadre? 
  [Karpyuk] We have taken all measures to retain our 
specialists - our backbone, and I believe that in this we have 
been successful. It is necessary to avoid making hasty 
decisions, of course. V. Mikhaylov, the Russian Minister of 
Atomic Energy, signed an agreement with the head of the Voronezh 
Oblast administration dealing with construction of the second 
section of the Novovoronezh AES [Atomic Energy Station], but, 
several days prior to that event, our unit stationed in 
Novovoronezh was disbanded. 
  [Kuznetsov] How is the call-up coming along? People are 
presently unwilling to enter the service. 
  [Karpyuk] As far as the conscription process is concerned, 
we 
are suffering a shortfall, the same as the rest of the Army. 
However, in this area we are receiving support from the 
Committee of Soldiers' Mothers of Moscow and of other regions. 
They have spent some time visiting several of our units - in 
Elektrostal, Protvino, and other locations, and while there saw 
for themselves the high level of our officer cadre and the 
latter's understanding of the problems facing young soldiers and 
their proper approach to the organization of service and 
leisure. The Committee is supporting us in nurturing work and is 
helping obtain access to theaters and museums. Set up in each of 
our units is a dispensary for treating youths in poor health by 
dispensing to the latter healthful diets. 
  The number of criminal offenses committed in military 
construction subunits of the MINATOM [Ministry of Atomic Energy] 
of Russia dropped by more than half in the past year, and this 
includes the area of nonregulation interpersonal conduct, and, 
in the case of hooliganism, incidents are down by a factor 
greater than 5. I believe that the Committee of Solders' Mothers 
plays a definite role in crime abatement. 
  And so, if any draftee wishes to acquire a civilian job 
skill 
while in the service, he should request assignment to a military 
construction unit of the MINATOM of Russia. We will be happy to 
take him. 

