Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Antonio Marcello] </F>
  [Text] Brasilia -- International agreements, draft bills, 
provisional measures, presidential messages and vetoes: More 
than 200 bills are paralyzed in Congress, the Senate, and the 
Chamber of Deputies as a consequence of a permanent lack of 
quorum or of unresolved party negotiations. Without the bills 
being analyzed by the technical committees, there are 221 
proposals on the agenda of the congressional chambers, an amount 
that increases daily with the arrival of new draft bills. 
  The situation became worse over the past few months with the 
Budget CPI [Congressional Investigating Committee], the fiscal 
reform, and the constitutional review. The paralyzation of the 
plenary halls, while discussions outside them became more 
heated, has created difficulties for both the executive and 
legislative branches. The Senate has managed to impose a 
minimum of discipline on the plenary by establishing a calendar 
of sessions, but surprises in voting sessions, like the one on 
the fiscal reform, have forced senators to hold meetings late 
into the evening. 
  Chamber of Deputies President Inocencio de Oliveira (PFL-PE) 
[Liberal Front Party-Pernambuco] insists on the approval in the 
lower house of a resolution establishing sessions every day of 
the week. A resolution is a legal measure on any internal issue 
in either of the two houses. Only one weekly session is being 
currently held; it is scheduled for Mondays -- when the quorum 
is reduced to nearly zero which thus prevents voting on 
important subjects. Daily sessions will also serve as a 
parameter for the time the Constitution and Justice Committee 
(CCJ) will have to judge the congressmen whom the Budget CPI 
recommended be stripped of their political rights. Inocencio 
guarantees that this is not the reason behind his draft bill. 
"We have more than 70 draft bills on which to vote. The House 
cannot remain paralyzed," he maintained. 
  His draft bill was included in the agenda last 24 January, 
but a petition by PDT [Democratic Labor Party] leader Deputy 
Luiz Salomao (RJ) [Rio de Janeiro], and supported by the PT 
[Workers Party] and the PC do B [Communist Party of Brazil], 
postponed the voting session. The leaders want the subject to 
be further debated to avoid charges that the bill was placed on 
the agenda to reduce the period of defense of the deputies 
accused by the CPI. According to the internal regulations of 
the Chamber of Deputies, the term for their defense is five 
sessions. If these are weekly sessions, the judgment process 
will take much longer than was thought. Inocencio wants the 
bill approved on 31 January. 
  The executive branch also suffers from the delayed voting 
sessions. There are at least 14 draft bills in Congress 
establishing supplementary credits for ministries, like the 
Health Ministry, which are on the congressional agenda and ready 
to be voted on but which remain on the waiting list. 
  Among the 97 subjects to be discussed or voted on, and which 
are on the Congress agenda, are 17 draft bills, 22 resolutions, 
14 provisional measures, and 44 decisions on executive branch 
vetoes. In the Senate there are 27 accumulated subjects: 7 draft 
bills, 10 resolutions, and 10 legislative decrees. The Chamber 
of Deputies has 97 bills: 19 urgent decisions, 56 draft bills, 5 
resolutions, 10 legislative decrees, 1 message from the 
executive branch, and 6 preliminary resolutions on decisions 
suggested by technical committees. 
  Here are some of the subjects on the waiting list of 
Congress, the Senate, and the Chamber of Deputies: 
<H5>  In Congress </H5>
  A draft bill that establishes the revision of the 
Multi-Annual Plan for 1994 and 1995. It has been on the agenda 
since 7 November. 
  A draft bill that estimates the income and establishes the 
expenses of the Federal Government for fiscal year 1994. It has 
been on the agenda since 6 December. 
  A draft resolution that modifies the structure of the Mixed 
Committee of Public Plans, Budget, and Fiscal Control. It has 
been paralyzed since it was first read in Congress on 22 
December 1991. 
  A draft resolution that creates the Permanent Mixed 
Committee 
for the Control of Illegal Drug Trafficking and Prevention of 
Drug Abuse. This has been paralyzed since it was first read on 
10 March 1992. 
  A draft resolution that creates the Permanent Mixed 
Committee 
for Nuclear and Strategic Affairs. This has been paralyzed 
since it was presented for a vote in the Senate and the lower 
house in 1991. 
<H5>  In the Senate </H5>
  A draft bill approved by the Chamber of Deputies that 
suspends the effects of the resignation of congressman being 
investigated for lack of decorum. 
  A draft bill establishing the Brazilian Space Agency, which 
was approved by the Chamber of Deputies last year. 
  A draft bill proposed by Senator Mario Covas, which 
establishes the number of candidates for this year's elections 
in accordance with the proportional system. 
  A draft bill that prohibits state-owned companies from 
paying 
dividends or having profit-sharing programs based on the credit 
balance of the monetary correction account [saldo credor da 
conta de correcao monetaria]. It was approved by the Chamber of 
Deputies in 1992. 
  A congressional draft decree approving the text of the 
International Labor Organization convention on lodgings on board 
fishing vessels. The convention was signed in 1966 and has yet 
to be ratified by the Senate. 
  A congressional draft decree approving the text of the 
Inter-American Convention on Legal Conflicts Related to the 
Issuance of Checks, which was written in Montevideo in May 1979 
and has yet to be ratified. 
  A congressional draft decree approving the text of the 
Inter-American Convention on International Restitution of 
Children, which was signed in Montevideo in July 1989. 
<H5>  In the Chamber of Deputies </H5>
  A draft bill establishing rules for the micro- and small 
enterprises, regarding differentiated and simplified treatment 
in the administrative, fiscal, social security, and labor 
fields. It has been under consideration since 1989. 
  A draft bill that makes it mandatory for attorney generals 
to 
participate in lawsuits involving disputes over land ownership. 
It has been under consideration since 1992. 
  A draft bill establishing rules for granting of legal 
assistance to destitute citizens. It has been under 
consideration since 1989. 
  A draft bill creating a free-trade area in Oiapoque County 
(Amapa State). It has been under consideration since 1990. 
  A congressional draft decree approving the text of the 
Agreement on Portuguese Language Spelling, which was signed in 
Lisbon in December 1990 and has yet to be ratified by Congress. 
  A congressional draft decree authorizing the holding of a 
plebiscite to reestablish the states of Guanabara and Rio de 
Janeiro. It has been under consideration since 1992. 
  A congressional draft decree that authorizes holding a 
plebiscite to create the states of Aripuana and Tapajos. 

