Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Former chief of Bangkok's World Bank Regional 
Mission said if US President Bill Clinton ends the embargo 
against Vietnam now, it will be tantamount to a "total 
anti-climax in Vietnam and on the international scene." 
  Speaking at a seminar in Bangkok entitled "Doing Real 
Business in Vietnam," Philippe Annez, managing director of 
Griffon Ltd and former chief of Bangkok's World Bank Regional 
Mission, said: "Americans believed they could strangle Vietnam 
by refusing to lift the embargo. Now they realize they can't. 
It (the lifting) is not important anymore. Well, maybe two 
years ago was a better time than now." 
  Jointly held by the Human Resources Institute of Thammasat 
University and Vietnam State Planning Committee (SPC), the 
seminar was to give a preview of Vietnam to 20 businessmen who 
are to visit Vietnam from Feb 23-March 2, 1994. 
  According to Annez, it is too late for Americans even with 
the embargo lifted to establish a strong foothold in Vietnam, 
with which investors from Japan, Europe and other Asian NlCs 
[newly industrialised countries] developed ties years ago. 
  Annez's view was, to a certain degree, orchestrated by Dr 
Luu 
Bich Ho, a senior-ranking Vietnamese official. 
  Dr Ho, chairman of Vietnam's Institute for Long-Term and 
Regional Planning, State Planning Committee told THE NATION he 
welcomed last week's US Senate vote which sent a signal to 
Clinton to Iift the decades-old embargo against Hanoi, against 
Hanoi, and said that there is no reason for the US to maintain 
such an embargo. 
  "It is a good sign...the US Senate voting for lifting the 
embargo," Ho said. Ho was in Bangkok to give a presentation at 
the seminar. 
  According to Ho, Washington had no other motives to maintain 
the embargo against Vietnam because Hanoi had resolved two 
issues: US soldiers missing in action in Vietnam, and the issue 
ot Cambodia. 
  "The US now understands the determination of Vietnam to 
resolve the POW-MIA issue. This has led to the embargo-lifting 
vote," Ho said. "The US also recognized Vietnam's best effort 
to support the peace process in Cambodia," he said. 
  "Last week's Senate vote was a result of a series of 
meetings 
between top leaders of Vietnam and senators from the US," added 
Ho. 
  After over two decades of the embargo, Clinton, since taking 
office in 1993, has eased the embargo two times but refused to 
lift it. 
  US investors have long asked that the embargo be lifted, 
saying that it prevented them, unlike Taiwanese and Japanese 
investors, from enjoying the business opportunities in the 
thriving market economy of Vietnam. 
  Ho, who oversees the strategic planning institute for 
Vietnam's SPC, said that now it is up to the US president to 
officially announce the time to normalize relations. 
  Asked how soon he thought the announcement would come, Ho 
said that Clinton had to resolve the conflicts between different 
US interest groups who are for and against lifting the embargo. 

