BFN 

  [Text] Thousands of Nigerians and members of the diplomatic 
corps defied a heavy downpour to witness the launching in Abuja 
today of the War Against Indiscipline and Corruption, WAIC, by 
the head of state, General Sani Abacha. The launching, which 
took place at the parade ground, was described by Gen. Abacha as 
a further proof of the determination of his administration to 
sanitize the Nigerian society. State House correspondent Chris 
Mbu has the details. 
  [Begin recording] [Mbu] Launching the war, Gen. Abacha said 
it has become very clear that a profound social and moral reform 
program that will sanitize society is essential. He said that 
not only should indiscipline and corruption be routed out; 
Nigerians must seek to inculcate such basic values as honesty, 
trustworthiness, and respect for elders. The head of state said 
if human beings who constitute the active agents in the 
development process are not transformed, the very process of 
development can be frustrated or made considerably difficult. 
The war against indiscipline is not new in Nigeria but the 
fresh onslaught launched today under the present administration 
has defined objectives some of which are here given by the head 
of state. 
  [Abacha] To mobilize the nation to fight against corruption 
and economic crimes; 
  To create a special and more humane society through the 
inculcation of such basic values as honesty, integrity, 
patriotism, respect for the sanctity of human life, and respect 
for the rule of law; 
  To develop appropriate work ethics that will produce 
efficiency, effectiveness, high productivity, and (?real) 
commitment [words indistinct] within the context of a just and 
fair (?work system) anchored on the principle of dignity of 
labor; 
  To instill in the business and (?industry) at large the 
values of honesty, trustworthiness, efficiency, patriotism, 
fairness, and social compassion. 
  [Mbu] The other objectives include inculcating the values of 
patriotism, nationalism, integrity, quality work ethics, respect 
for constituted authority, and the promotion of a just, fair, 
and peaceful society that places immense value on the dignity 
and sanctity of human life. Gen. Abacha reminded Nigerians that 
indiscipline and corruption exist not only in the conduct of 
public affairs but also in the area of private affairs. He said 
the pervasiveness of corruption and indiscipline undermine the 
principle of equity and just reward for honest contributions of 
citizens to national well-being. He appealed to Nigerians to 
join hands with government in this fresh onslaught against 
indiscipline and corruption. The head of state symbolically 
launched the campaign by letting off some balloons. [end 
recording] 

