BFN 

<F P=106> [Peter Scherer report: "Drug Mafia Launches Offensive on </F>
the German Drug Market"] 
  [Text] Security experts are sounding the alarm: They fear 
that the international drug mafia will significantly increase 
its activities in Germany this year and will "more or less 
flood" the German market with drugs of all kinds. To stimulate 
demand, one can expect "dumping prices" for a transitional 
period. 
  This trade offensive can be interpreted as a response to the 
Federal Constitutional Court ruling on hashish and the new drug 
policy adopted by North Rhine-Westphalia, say top German police 
officials. 
  Using their stocks in North Africa and Europe, the drug 
cartels have been bringing more hashish and marijuana onto the 
German market over the past few months. According to the 
Federal Office of Criminal Investigations (BKA) in Wiesbaden, 
the quantity of cannabis products that have been found has 
increased steeply to 1,352 kilograms during the first quarter of 
1994. In the corresponding period last year, police and customs 
officials confiscated 711 kilograms. In 1993, German law 
enforcement agencies removed a total of almost 11.4 tonnes of 
cannabis products and 2.5 tonnes of hard drugs from the market. 
  The overwhelmingly greater part of the cannabis products 
delivered to the drug scene in Europe by "tightly controlled, 
top criminal organizations" came from Morocco. The country is 
one of the states--alongside Lebanon and Pakistan--that 
primarily produces hashish, whereas America and the African 
states of Zaire, Nigeria, Ghana, Uganda, and South Africa mainly 
produce marijuana. Nigeria is the main source of marijuana on 
the German scene. 
  The largest European port of entry for cannabis products 
smuggled from Africa is Spain. The dealer organizations run the 
European wholesale trade from there. Various points in the 
Netherlands serve as the largest "half-way storage center" for 
Germany. The Netherlands and German ports organize the bulk of 
the cannabis for the German drug scene. The BKA's view of the 
current situation is: The so-called ant-like process of 
smuggling from the Netherlands is "continuing unabated." 
  According to BKA information, in addition to German drug 
dealers, Turks, Algerians, Moroccans, Italians, and Austrians 
are particularly involved in large-scale trading in cannabis. 
  Because of the relatively large volume, cannabis tends to be 
transported by container via sea, air, truck, or railroad. A 
tried and tested option is the use of barges, that is, pontoons 
used for transporting freight that smugglers use to take the 
drug to ships. This means that ships no longer have to enter 
ports, which means that the turnaround in the use of containers 
is higher and port dues are avoided. In 1992, 9.5 tonnes of 
marijuana were found on these special boats in ten cases. In 
every case, the cargo came from Lagos in Nigeria. 
  The readiness to resort to violence in the drug business is 
causing the police considerable concern. Addressing 
international experts at a working conference in Wiesbaden, BKA 
boss Hans-Ludwig Zachert said: "Organized smugglers and 
wholesalers as well as street dealers are in extensive 
possession of weapons. This great availability of weapons means 
that there is an increased danger that such weapons will be used 
in conflict situations. Police forces at the laender level have 
indications that members of the drug scene are preparing 
themselves for such conflicts. Reports have been received of 
training in the use of firearms. The criminals themselves are 
preparing for the danger of being hit by wearing bullet-proof 
vests." 

