CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Yelena Taran: "Will Glass Recycling Centers </F>
Rescue the Economy of the Republic?"] 
  [Text] Had the government of the republic come up with such 
economic stabilization measures as recently as two years ago, 
the prime minister would have perhaps become a national hero, 
and deputies would have greeted each new proposal of the Cabinet 
of Ministers with loud applause. However, at the current, 20th 
extraordinary session of the Supreme Soviet, the deputies 
listened to M.G. Sabirov's report even without particular 
attention: Either they knew ahead of time what he was going to 
say, or they had already decided for themselves how they were 
going to vote. 
  Indeed, in the opinion of many deputies the proposed 
measures 
for rescuing the economy are...about two years late. One would 
think that the prime minister also understands this; responding 
to questions from the members of parliament, he admitted that 
the government also needed time to adapt itself to the market 
economy and to rise to the understanding of its postulates. 
  The government proposes to reduce the tax on profits by 10 
to 
15 percent. However, this will hardly make the position of 
enterprises easier since profits have dropped to minimal levels. 
The striving to attract foreign investment may remain mere 
wishful thinking: Foreign businessmen are somehow not 
particularly eager to invest funds in enterprises which are 
burdened by unpaid credit and a tremendous social 
infrastructure. Besides, noted Deputy I. Sultanov, would 
investors want to buy the shares of our enterprises if the state 
has controlling interest, or if the state has only one share, 
but it is the "golden share?" In addition, the deputies 
themselves appear to not be particularly interested in the 
inflow of foreign capital since, according to an apt remark by 
Deputy G. Kobelev, they are unable to spare half an hour in 
order to review the amendments of the Republic of Tatarstan 
president to the law on foreign investment. 
  The accelerated small-scale privatization is another remedy 
which the government of the republic has prescribed to our 
economy. It has been planned to sell up to 50 (!) percent of 
shops, cafes, and consumer service enterprises within three to 
five months. In the opinion of a number of deputies, the 
intentions of the Cabinet of Ministers are dubious, and here is 
why. In the two previous years we succeeded in privatizing no 
more than 15 percent of trade facilities, consumer services, and 
public catering, despite the menacing decrees, programs, and 
edicts of the president; we have not completed their 
commercialization (that is, have not even opened accounts for 
them); we have kept trade directorates and associations as the 
bastions of the old system of organization in the sector. How 
are we to restructure, within this short period proposed by the 
government, things that in individual countries and regions of 
the Russian Federation were restructured over years? 
  However, as they criticized the government, the deputies in 
all honesty did not make a great constructive contribution 
themselves. Let us set aside the concern with hormonal 
contraceptives and glass recycling centers which was voiced by 
the deputies (both are important in their own right, but was it 
worthwhile to talk about them in the course of discussing the 
program?). 
  The deputies suggested that prior to making decisions the 
Cabinet of Ministers compute financial flows, the amount of 
money that we take out of the republic, and the financial 
resources we could find and earn at home. Of course, it is not 
wartime, but the situation is difficult, and as A. Shtanin put 
it, it would be good to "scrape the nooks" just as we did in 
those hungry years. It is hard to disagree with T. Abdullin, who 
brought to the attention of the prime minister the fact that the 
government, carried away by centralized credit, is increasing 
the external debt of the republic. This may cause us to be 
simply unable to pursue an independent economic policy in the 
immediate future. Deputy I. Salakhov sees the resolution of 
problems as rooted in the decentralization of management and 
property, and Deputy A. Yefremov--as rooted in restoring 
elementary order and eliminating mismanagement. 
  Republic of Tatarstan President M. Shaymiyev, speaking in 
summation, asked the parliament to give the Cabinet of Ministers 
an opportunity to carry out the planned measures. In particular, 
he invited the attention of the Cabinet of Ministers to the need 
to support entrepreneurship and develop the circulation of bills 
of exchange. At present, the situation is such that commercial 
structures are beginning to play a leadership role in generating 
budgetary revenues, and may be helpful in solving the problem of 
unemployment and organizing efficient production facilities. Why 
are we being cautious--do we fail to fully understand, or are we 
afraid of the market economy toward which we are proceeding? 
  Incidentally, individual deputies badly wanted to shift the 
discussion of the issue of measures to stabilize the economy to 
a different area, namely, to engage in a debate on the 
resignation of the government. Moreover, some just could not 
wait to see how the president and the Cabinet of Ministers, the 
prime minister and his deputies would clash in full view of the 
entire republic. Thank God, the spectacle did not happen on the 
first two days. Let us hope that it will not happen during 
subsequent days either: Our situation is too difficult for 
political games to be staged. 
  The current session also considered a package of laws and 
decrees on social issues, of which a raise in the minimum 
remuneration for labor to R50,000 was the principal. Previously 
the deputies greeted all proposals of the government as to the 
growth of the "minimum" with "hoorays" and were even proud of 
this indicator in Tatarstan being higher than in Russia, whereas 
this time the arguments of Deputy Prime Minister R. Muratov got 
through to the parliament with difficulty. The deputies are 
primarily concerned about enterprises being unable to ensure 
this level of minimum salaries, and this bringing about a new 
wave of hidden and obvious unemployment and reductions in budget 
revenues. Wage outlays will have to be passed on in the 
self-cost of products, whose prices have approached world levels 
to begin with. 
  President M. Shaymiyev made an absolutely unambiguous 
statement on this: Whether we allow the further impoverishment 
of the population to occur will depend on whether we go for a 
raise in the "minimum." 

