Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Amman--A significant number of members of the 
Palestine National Council (PNC) and Palestine Central Council 
(PCC) and independent Palestinians as well as leaders of 
hardline Palestinian factions Wednesday [9 March] called on 
Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO) Chairman Yasir 'Arafat 
not to return to the suspended peace talks with Israel until the 
Jewish state complies with a set of basic demands. 
  It was the strongest yet call on the PLO chairman to quit 
the 
28-month-old peace talks in the wake of the Feb. 25 massacre of 
Palestinian worshippers by a Jewish settler at a Hebron mosque 
and seek fundamental changes to the format of the negotiations, 
which he suspended after the massacre. 
  The memorandum added to the growing pressure on Mr. 'Arafat 
not to return to the talks. Reports from Tunis, where the PLO 
is headquartered, said senior PLO officials and 'Arafat 
confidants were also calling on Mr. 'Arafat not to relent on his 
demands for international protection for the Palestinians in the 
occupied territories and the inclusion of the status of the 
Jewish settlements there was a topic for negotiations related to 
the Sept. 13 autonomy agreement--an idea that Israel has 
rejected. 
  A memorandum, signed by 130 PNC and PCC members, including 
six members of the PLO Executive Committee and 115 Palestinian 
businessmen, professors, unionists, journalists and acadamics, 
demanded that Israel suspended all settlement activities in the 
West Bank and Gaza Strip as well as Jerusalem, dismantle 
existing settlements and remove all settlers from the occupied 
territories. 
  It demanded that international protection be offered to two 
million Palestinans living under Israeli occupation and a United 
Nations force take control over the occupied territories until 
the Palestinians assume responsibility for the terrorities. 
  The memorandum denounced the killings at the Ibrahimi Mosque 
in Hebron as "a brutal, premeditated massacre," and held Israel 
solely responsible for the attack as well as the violence that 
followed, "killing tens of martyrs and wounding hundreds...." 
  "We condemn the American policy that encouraged Israeli 
intransigence and aggression and helped cover up the direct 
responsibility of the Israeli occupation authorities in the 
massacre," said the signatories, who included PLO Executive 
Committee members Taysir Khaled, Abu 'Ali Mustafa, 'Abdallah 
Hurani, 'Abd al-Rahim Malluh, Shafiq al-Hut and Muhammad 
Isma'il, who have either resigned from the panel or frozen their 
membership. 
  "We demand that the ongoing negotiations with the Israeli 
enemy, the bilaterals and multilaterals and all secret and 
public (talks) be stopped until the international community, 
especially the Security Council, responds to us and Israel 
adheres to our just demands," said the memo, also signed by 
prominent PNC and PCC members such as Ibrahim Bakr, Hani Hurani 
and Saji Salameh as well as Popular front for the Liberation of 
Palestine (PFLP) leader George Habash and Democratic Front for 
the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP) Nayif Hawatimah. 
  The PFLP and DFLP are not opposed to negotiated solution to 
the Arab-Iraeli conflict, but they object to the present 
conditions of the peace negotiations which they say are stacked 
against Palestinian aspirations and objectives and would not 
lead to the creation of an independent Palestinian state. 
  The memorandum set the following conditions for the 
resumption of peace talks: 
  --"The elimination of all settlements and settlement 
activities in accordance with U.N. resulutions, specifically 
Resolution 464 of 1980, which considers settlements as illegal, 
and the evacuation of all settlers from all occupied Palestinian 
territories, including Jerusalem. 
  --"Providing of international protection for the Palestinian 
people under occupation and applying the Fourth Geneva 
Convention of 1949 and forming a U.N. force to temporarily 
provide security there until the Palestinian people and its 
national authority assume responsibility there. 
  --"Negotiations with the Israeli enemy be based on the 
commitment to the resolutions of international legitimacy and of 
the United Nations related to the Palestinian issue and the 
Arab-Israeli conflict with a view to implementing them in a 
manner that guarantees the rights of the Palestinian people to 
return and build their own independent state with Jerusalem as 
its capital. 
  --"The immediate annulment of all agreements, be they 
secret, 
public, political, economic or security, that deny the rights of 
our people to full sovereignty over its land or undermine their 
right to national indepdnence." 
  The memorandum praised Jordan, Syria and Lebanon for 
suspending their peace talks with Israel and caled on them to 
remain steadfast on their position until Israel adheres to the 
legitimate resolutions related to the arab-Israeli conflict." 
  "We call on our people under occupation to solidify their 
national unity and escalate their resistance and holy intifadah 
against the occupation forces and settlers," said the one-page 
memo, accopanied by 16 pages of signatures. "We express our 
deep condolences to our people in Hebron over the death of the 
martyrs. 
  "We call on the Arab states and their political and popular 
forces to unify their efforts in their fight against the 
occupation. 
  "We demand the international community and its human and 
democratic institutions to work on exposing the fascist 
practices of the Israeli occupation authorities." 

