Language: <F P=105> Czech </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Marian Jusko, vice governor of the National </F>
Bank of the Slovak Republic, by Oldrich Zabojnik in Bratislava; 
date not given: "The Slovak Republic Intends To Honor the 
Payments Treaty"] 
  [Text] [Zabojnik] What approach will the National Bank of 
the Slovak Republic [NBS] or, possibly, the Slovak Finance 
Ministry use? Will it regularly cover the clearing margin, or 
have you considered some changes? 
  [Jusko] The NBS intends to honor the payments treaty between 
the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic currently in effect. 
This treaty clearly specifies that margin calls must be covered 
within 15 days. Our national bank intends to act accordingly. 
For the time being, we want to keep the payments treaty in 
effect and operational as long as possible. 
  [Zabojnik] The Czech National Bank [CNB] has several times 
expressed its willingness to abolish the old lot [separate 
record of payments due from the time before the currency 
division]. Does the NBS or the Slovak Finance Ministry (if 
applicable) agree with this? 
  [Jusko] The NBS is just as willing to abolish the old lot as 
the CNB is. I believe that it is in the interest of both banks. 
  [Zabojnik] An extension of the currency exchange-rate margin 
within the framework of the clearing account has been mentioned 
as a possible solution. How do you feel about this proposal? 
  [Jusko] I cannot take a definite stand on this. 
Nevertheless, 
it could result in the creation of two price levels that, on a 
long-term basis, could be unfavorable. In any event, this idea 
would have to be developed. However, I do not expect that the 
Czech side would be interested in extending the exchange-rate 
margin within the framework of the clearing. 
  [Zabojnik] According to the CNB, a substantial part of the 
old lot--and therefore the margin excess--is a result of 
speculation. According to the Czech Finance Ministry, it is not 
so. What do you think? 
  [Jusko] I would like to divide this question into two. The 
first one is whether some speculation payments have taken place 
on the old lot. I believe I can safely claim that certain 
signals indicate that such payments have been made. The second 
part of this question concerns the size of the share of these 
speculations in the margin excess. I believe that the 
speculations are responsible for only a small part of this 
excess because such a speculation has to pass through both lots. 
Therefore, to a great degree, it is compensated. 
  [Zabojnik] According to the Czech Finance Ministry, 
approximately 20 billion korunas in favor of the Czech Republic, 
the amount by which the debts of Slovak enterprises exceed their 
claims in the Czech Republic, are still to pass through the 
clearing process. What are the figures at your disposal? 
  [Jusko] This probably applies to the old lot--that is, 
obligations and claims that arose before 8 February. The amount 
of 20 billion seems to me to be rather high. I was present at 
the signing of the payments treaty. The opinions differed 
regarding the surplus of the Slovak obligations--that is, 
obligations of the Slovak enterprises over the obligations of 
the Czech entities. 
  [Zabojnik] The amalgamation of the two lots is technically 
possible immediately. However, the Finance Ministries of both 
republics must decide on the compensation in the transfer to the 
new exchange rate. What are your plans, and have you discussed 
them with the Czech side? 
  [Jusko] We have talked unofficially about it with the Czech 
side. I have talked with the CNB representatives myself. It is 
not a foregone conclusion that the finance ministries of the two 
republics must solve this problem. A different approach is 
possible provided the consequences of the closing of the old lot 
would be borne by the Czech enterprises. The Slovak enterprises 
should lose nothing by the cancellation of the old lot. 
  [Zabojnik] To what degree is this situation reflected in the 
current financial position of the Slovak Republic? 
  [Jusko] From the point of view of the deficit manifested at 
the end of December, the situation is getting rather dramatic. I 
consider it a very bad approach. Balanced payments or settled 
clearing payments with a single country cannot be the objective 
of any country. It is much more important whether its overall 
payments are balanced, or, more precisely, whether the balance 
of its current account is in the black. A deficit with respect 
to one country is balanced out by a surplus with respect to 
another country. That is how we should perceive the mutual 
relations between the Slovak Republic and the Czech Republic. It 
is important that the payments treaty is followed exactly. I 
believe that this treaty proved itself. It is--and it should 
remain--the goal of the Slovak Republic and the Czech Republic 
to keep it working as long as possible in the economic relations 
between our countries. 
  [Zabojnik] The total sum of the Slovak clearing deficit 
comes to 6.5 billion Slovak korunas. That is a substantial 
amount for the payment ability of a country that is entering 
this year with such a deficit budget. One may subscribe to your 
opinion that a certain section of the balance of payments of a 
country with any other entity does not necessarily have to tell 
all about the economy of the given state. At the same time, 
however, you admit that the relations between our two states are 
special. What does this mean to you? 
  [Jusko] I dare to say that the interest of the NBS is very 
serious. We see the advantages of the payments treaty that we 
are going to follow to the letter. Regarding the amount of the 
deficit on 31 December 1993, it is true that it amounts to 
approximately 6.5 billion korunas. Thus, the margin excess is 
about 1.5 billion over the margin. Therefore, we will pay the 
CNB 39 million ECU's. These figures, one could say, are not 
favorable, but they do not represent a disaster, either. It 
apparently is a matter conditioned by the historical development 
of two independent economies, where one of them is more 
dependent on the other. After all, the Slovak economy is smaller 
than the Czech one. 
  [Zabojnik] It seems evident that the difference between our 
two countries continues to grow. Do you believe that this also 
applies to the financial relations between the Slovak Republic 
and the Czech Republic? 
  [Jusko] Every central bank should be an independent and 
apolitical institution. Therefore, I do not dare to judge and do 
not even want to take a stand on whether the societies of the 
two countries are drifting apart. The results in the currency 
sphere are quite comparable. Of course, the currently accessible 
results are more favorable for the Czech Republic. In some 
spheres, however, the differences are not major. I have in mind 
the inflation rate, for instance, which is higher in the Slovak 
Republic than in the Czech Republic, although, one can say, the 
values are comparable. Nevertheless, there certainly are areas 
where our results are substantially worse. 
  [Zabojnik] Would you then admit that these results indicate 
certain economic drifting apart, after all? 
  [Jusko] As the federation was divided into two states, a 
certain divergence occurred, which apparently is a necessary 
phenomenon in all spheres of life. Of course, this does not mean 
that it should continue. Eventually, it has to stop. In the 
beginning of the operation of the NBS, we cooperated with the 
CNB much more closely than today. Cooperation continues on a 
very good level. These relations are preserved not only as 
regards the financial institutions but also in the enterprise 
sphere. The enterprises of both states will continue to 
cooperate on the basis of mutual benefit. We must differentiate 
between economic laws that lead to a certain divergence and 
various irrational and, perhaps, politically based approaches 
permeating the economic relations. If disharmonies of this type 
were to occur, it would be very bad, and it certainly would not 
benefit either country. 

