BFN 

  [Text] Officials of Okinawa City and the prefectural 
government are shocked by the crash of an F-15 fighter belonging 
to the U.S. Forces [USF]. Shusei Arakawa, mayor of Okinawa 
City, expressed his anger, saying: "Today's accident clearly 
shows that the existence of the military base itself is a 
danger. It happened on a military base but the military base is 
in Okinawa, and there is an ammunition dump near the site of the 
accident. The accident could have resulted in disaster." 
Governor Ota commented: "I feel like saying here we go again. 
We will file a stiff protest with the USF." On the other hand 
[as published], all political parties on Okinawa are taking the 
accident seriously. They plan to convene an extraordinary 
meeting of the prefectural assembly to adopt a protest 
resolution. The prefectural government also plans to file a 
protest with the USF, and demand the USF immediately find out 
the cause of the accident. 
<H5>  It Is Serious and Regrettable That the Accident Happened </H5>
  Governor Ota's comment: It is serious and regrettable that 
the aircraft belonging to the USF crashed near a residential 
area. They are saying that nobody was injured, and no damage 
occurred to property, but we are concerned by the fact that the 
aircraft crashed near an ammunition dump. I have asked my staff 
to find out the details. 
<H5>  The Accident Occurred Because There Is a Military Base </H5>
  Okinawa City Mayor Shusei Arakawa's comment: I have already 
been to the site of the accident. The aircraft crashed on 
farmland. People who had been working near the site of the 
accident said they heard a roar and saw fire shoot out when the 
aircraft crashed, and that they were terrified. Several 
accidents occurred in the past too because of the existence of 
the military base, and we lodged a protest each time. However, 
today's accident clearly shows that the existence of the 
military base itself is a danger. It happened on a military 
base, but the military base is in Okinawa, and there is an 
ammunition dump near the site of the accident. The accident 
could have resulted in disaster. We will immediately begin to 
study how to deal with the situation. 

