BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Time for Europe To Search Again"] </F>
  [Text] For once the British may be right in standing alone 
in Europe. 
  John Major's refusal to compromise over the choice of a new 
President of the European Commission will certainly infuriate 
the Germans, who had hoped that the issue would be settled 
neatly before they take over the six-month rotating presidency 
of the Union next month. It will doubtless make Britain look 
once again as if it is intent on stopping Europe's progress, the 
bad-tempered child who would rather take the ball away than 
continue playing a game it is losing. 
  If Britain is doing the right thing on this occasion, it is 
doing so for all the wrong reasons. The idea, promulgated by 
John Major and Douglas Hurd yesterday that Britain was opposing 
the Franco-German candidate, Jean-Luc Dehaene, because of the 
manner of the choosing -- rather than the man who would have 
been chosen -- is so much hogwash. 
  The President of the Commission has always been chosen 
behind 
the scenes by the leaders of the European states. Helmut Kohl 
raised the name of Dehaene to John Major a couple of months ago 
and received no objection. Indeed, the Prime Minister had none 
at that time. 
  What has happened since is that the presidency has become an 
issue in the Conservative Party, a litmus test of Major's 
willingness to stand up against the Continentals. The Prime 
Minister has chosen to take his stand for reasons wholly of 
domestic politics, and he will be condemned by his major 
European colleagues as a man who can never be depended on. 
  But he will also gain the quiet approval of other smaller 
countries which fear, and dislike, being bounced into things by 
the self-approved Holy Alliance of France and Germany. The 
manner of choosing a Commission President was not aided by the 
unfortunate fact that the presidency of the Union was held by 
Greece, which had neither the skilled officials nor the 
necessary interest to prepare the Corfu summit fully -- or in 
chairing it once it started. But the process was also badly 
handled by France and Germany. 
  They wanted a candidate amenable to their joint purposes. 
They were also desperately anxious to get Europe on the move 
again after the setbacks of the Maastricht ratification 
processes and in preparation for their successive occupation of 
the presidency of the Union. 
  The style in which they announced their desire to merge 
their 
presidencies and their choice of candidate -- let alone the 
personal and petty hostility shown by Chancellor Kohl against 
the alternative candidacy of the Dutch Prime Minister, Ruud 
Lubbers -- was bound to cause offence to other smaller countries. 
  Britain cannot possibly hope to lead a new unholy alliance 
of 
southern countries against the joint might of France and 
Germany. Still less can it hope to counterbalance the economic 
clout of Germany that is bound to be increased by the entry of 
Austria, Sweden and Finland. But John Major can reasonably say 
that the choice of the successor to Jacques Delors has to be 
done in a more careful and open way. 
  That choice is particularly important at this time, for the 
new man must run affairs through the critical Review Conference 
of 1996 which will consider radical reform of Europe's 
decision-making processes as well as future integration in 
military, monetary and foreign policy terms. 
  What the Commission needs is an experienced politician who 
can provide the stability and ideas to ensure that the 1996 
conference succeeds. For all his qualities, Dehaene is not 
necessarily the best man for the job. An old-fashioned 
beer-swilling fixer of a politician, he represents the world 
that has made European politics so unpopular. But then neither 
could Ruud Lubbers be called a perfect choice. Even Leon 
Brittan, practiced politician and negotiator though he is, could 
probably be considered too inept at public presentation to help 
restore public belief in Brussels. 
  There is nothing shameful in European leaders taking a step 
back now, calming their irritations and looking for another 
candidate by the time of the special summit called for 15 July. 
The Irish head of GATT, Peter Sutherland, would be an excellent 
choice. There may be others. A new man may not necessarily 
suit Britain. It has to be remembered that Jacques Delors came 
to the job only after Margaret Thatcher had vetoed the French 
first choice, Claude Cheysson. But at least now there is a 
chance to make the list more public and the manner of choosing 
more open -- and to take the final decision with a view to the 
requirements of the job rather than the national interests of 
Premiers. 
  John Major will have done no harm if he pursues this 
co-operatively. The important point is that he should approach 
the special summit in July as if he cares that Europe succeeds. 
Nothing does this country so much harm as the sense that it 
would prefer the whole institution to go away and stop bothering 
the British Government. It won't. 

