Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Michael Anders: "German Metalworkers Get Set To </F>
Go on All-Out Strike"] 
  [Text] Bonn, Feb 18 (AFP) -- Workers in Germany's key 
metalworking and electrical industries are getting ready to face 
their employers and the government with an all-out strike to 
defend their pay-packets. 
  By Friday afternoon [18 February], all 14 regions of the 
powerful IG Metall trade union had declared the failure of 
negotiations, clearing the way for a strike ballot which union 
leaders are expected to decide when they meet in Frankfurt 
Monday. 
  Under this procedure, and failing any unexpected last-minute 
breakthrough, an all-out strike in a chosen region could begin 
the first week of March, union sources said. A vote of 75 
percent in favour is needed. 
  Union officials in the heavily-populated industrial 
heartland 
of North Rhine-Westphalia, who said they were unanimous, asked 
that their region be called on to settle the issue "in 
particular because of the extremist attitude" of the local 
employers. 
  The employers' federation Gesamtmetall has rejected the 
union's demands for a pay increase, insisting that the difficult 
situation of its member firms means they have to cut labour 
costs to stay in business. It has sought to cut holiday bonuses 
and wants the possibility of extending the workweek. 
  IG Metall, which with 3.2 million members is Europe's 
largest 
trade union, has offered greater flexibility in working hours in 
exchange for job security guarantees, but has rejected any 
attempt to impose pay cuts. It has however proposed shorter 
hours with some loss of pay. 
  The dispute has already been festering for weeks, with 
government and business spokesmen from Chancellor Helmut Kohl 
downwards repeatedly urging compromise in a sector which employs 
3.6 million workers and constitutes a pillar of the German 
economy. 
  Since a required notice period ran out January 28, more than 
1.2 million workers have taken part in short, "warning" strikes 
in western Germany, according to the union, hitting such 
household names as Mercedes, Bosch and Siemens. 
  In a last bid to resolve the dispute, Gesmatmetall president 
Hans-Joachim Gottschol held talks at his initiative in Darmstadt 
last Friday with IG Metall's national leader Klaus Zwickel, but 
these failed to produce agreement. 
  No new contacts are scheduled, and the union says it plans 
to 
hold more strikes and demonstrations next week. 
  Zwickel said he considered it very unlikely that there would 
be fresh talks before the strike decision, although he has 
repeatedly said that the union wants to avoid a protracted 
struggle. 
  The employers have warned that up to 10 percent of firms 
would close with the loss of another 100,000 jobs in such a 
event, in a sector which has seen the loss of hundreds of 
thousands of jobs in the last two years. 
  Zwickel said that the union had gone as far as it could, and 
an IG Metall source told AFP Friday that Zwickel was under 
pressure from the grass-roots which were preventing him from 
compromising any further. 
  But the source said that an all-out strike was not yet 
inevitable. 
  The source also pointed to the danger such a strike would 
pose for the government, as the dispute coincides with an 
outstanding wage raise demand by 3.5 million public service 
workers, for whom Kohl has said he wants a pay freeze. 

