Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [``Expert Analysis'' article by Igor Vlasov, head of sector </F>
of the Russian Federation President's Committee on Problems of 
the Chemical and Biological Weapons Convention: ``Chemical 
`Thorns' in the Country's Side'' -- passage within slantlines 
published in boldface] 
  [Text] The problem of the destruction of chemical weapons 
has alarmed the country's public. The sociopolitical situation 
has been sharply aggravated in the regions where it is planned 
to site installations for the destruction of the chemical 
weapons arsenal, and certain representatives of social movements 
are trying to exploit the currently fashionable topic of 
chemical disarmament in their own interests. Journalists are 
citing unverified facts, and people weighed down with science 
degrees are now trying to draw attention to themselves by making 
revelatory statements. The press increasingly often carries 
articles in which so-called chemical weapons experts who like to 
pose as major specialists try to intimidate the public with 
reports on the alleged continuation of scientific research into 
chemical weapons, their unauthorized destruction, secret burials 
on land and in water, and so forth. 
  In our view, such activity by ``experts'' and ``selfless 
campaigners'' is pursuing an unseemly aim: Using unverified and 
sometimes knowingly false statistics, they juggle this 
information around and impose on the public a distorted and 
unobjective view of the problem of the destruction of chemical 
weapons. 
  That is why I consider it expedient to examine consistently 
the basic stages in the implementation of the 1993 Convention on 
the Banning of Chemical Weapons. 
  First of all, I would recall that the state, which signed 
the 
Convention, is beginning work on the destruction of chemical 
weapons within a maximum of two years and will complete it no 
more than 10 years after the convention's entry into force. In 
the first stage, that is no more than two years after the 
ratification of the Convention, tests of the first facility for 
the destruction of chemical weapons will be carried out and 
then, no more than three years later, at least one percent of 
the stocks of these weapons is to be destroyed. In Russia's 
case this will mean 400 tonnes of toxic agents. In the 
subsequent stages, which are to be carried out no later than 
five, seven, and 10 years after the convention's entry into 
force, at least 20-45 percent of the weapons are to be 
destroyed, as are eventually all the remaining stocks of 
chemical weapons. Each state will choose its own method of 
destruction independently. It should be noted that the 
destruction process is to correspond to the very latest 
scientific achievements and be carried out at specially equipped 
sites. Meanwhile the destruction of toxic agents by burial on 
land, underwater, or by incineration in the open air is not 
permitted. 
  According to specialists' estimates, as far as Russia is 
concerned the Convention on Banning Chemical Weapons could come 
into force in 1995 and the operation of the first facility for 
the destruction of toxic agents could begin in 1997. Russian 
President B. N. Yeltsin made a statement in spring last year in 
which he said among other things: ``The world has changed, 
Russia's position in the world has changed, and we do not intend 
to attack anyone. The time has come to get rid of chemical 
weapons -- they are the past which we have inherited.'' Let us 
note that the problem of the destruction of chemical weapons is 
of great sociopolitical and social significance for Russia, due 
first and foremost to the need to lower the level of ecological 
tension in regions where the arsenals of these weapons are 
based. The program for the destruction of chemical weapons that 
the state is elaborating gives priority to the unconditional 
guarantee of safeguarding the life and health of the population 
as well as measures to protect the environment. 
  Social protection is also envisaged for the population 
living 
in zones where enterprises for the destruction of chemical 
weapons are to be sited: The latest technologies will be used 
and the volumes of toxic substances to be shipped across 
Russia's territory will be kept to a minimum. All this will 
involve considerable material expenditure especially since there 
is no special-purpose industrial facility for the destruction of 
chemical weapons in the Russian Federation. 
  The Committee on Problems of the Chemical and Biological 
Weapons Convention has been created to coordinate the 
verification of the fulfillment of international commitments in 
the sphere of the destruction of chemical and biological 
weapons. The policy of chemical disarmament in Russia has long 
needed an agency which would be independent of such powerful 
structures as the Defense Ministry and enterprises in the 
military-industrial complex, could carry out the process of 
disarmament in our country in a highly skilled and objective 
way, and could worthily represent Russia's interests in the 
international arena. Academician A. Kuntsevich, the well known 
scientist, was appointed chairman of this committee. In the 
past a military chemist, he made a major contribution to the 
creation of decontamination procedures which render toxic 
substances harmless and he set up a scientific school. 
  ...Today all Russia's chemical weapons stocks are housed in 
special-purpose arsenals of the Russian Federation Defense 
Ministry -- these are the seven chemical ``thorns'' in Russia's 
side: the city of Kambarka and the settlement of Kizner 
(Udmurtia), the settlement of Gornyy (Saratov Oblast), the city 
of Shchuchye (Kurgan Oblast), the city of Pochep (Bryansk 
Oblast), the settlement of Leonilovka (Penza Oblast), and the 
settlement of Maradykovskiy (Kirov Oblast). The total quantity 
of chemical weapons is 40,000 tonnes, made up as follows: 
organophosphorous toxic agents (sarin, zamin [as 
transliterated], and VX) -- 32,300 tonnes; mustard gas, 
lewisite, and their compounds -- 7,700 tonnes; and phosgene -- 
5,000 tonnes. If the Paris convention is ratified, the process 
of the destruction of these weapons should begin in 1997. 
  To enable the Russian Federation to fulfill its 
international 
commitments, the Committee on Problems of the Chemical and 
Biological Weapons Convention under the Russian Federation 
President, in conjunction with the Russian Federation Defense 
Ministry, the Russian Federation Ministry of Ecology, the 
Russian Federation Ministry of Health, the Russian Academy of 
Sciences, and other ministries, elaborated in 1992 the draft 
first stage of the comprehensive program for the destruction of 
chemical weapons. Leaders of local administrations and 
representatives of public organizations in those regions where 
it is planned to site facilities for the destruction of chemical 
weapons took part in the discussion of this program. The draft 
was adopted after comments, amendments, and clarifications. 
  An essential condition of work on the draft is the public 
discussion of proposed decisions, a state ecological feasibility 
study of them, and the elaboration of the corresponding 
legislative acts. It is also recommended that a federal 
targeted program be elaborated to eliminate the consequences of 
the production of chemical weapons on the territory of the 
Russian Federation. 
  The chemical ``thorns'' can be removed from Russia's side 
only if there is a skilled, comprehensive, and well-balanced 
approach to the problem of the destruction of chemical weapons 
and joint efforts by scientific specialists, state and public 
organizations, and the local administration and population of 
the regions where the installations for the destruction of 
chemical weapons, one of the most treacherous types of weapon of 
mass destruction, are to be sited. 

