BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Liu Junjie (0491 0193 2638): "Wang Qun and Qian </F>
Fenyong Inspect Hulun Buir League"] 
  [Text] Further deepen reform, vigorously enliven 
enterprises, suit the development of the situation, and develop 
foreign economic relations and trade. This is what Wang Qun, 
secretary of the regional party committee, emphatically pointed 
out during his investigation and study activities in Hulun Buir 
a few days ago. 
  After inspecting the Honghuaerji fire-extinguishing scene 
and 
extending regards to the officers and men of the forest police 
forces and the staff and workers of the forestry bureau who 
fight fires, leading comrades, including Wang Qun, secretary of 
the regional party committee and chairman of the regional 
people's congress standing committee; and Qian Fenyong, deputy 
secretary of the regional party committee and chairman of the 
regional committee of the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference, jointly studied and discussed the 
issues on enterprise reform and foreign trade with the 
responsible comrades of Hulun Buir League, Hailar city, 
Manzhouli city, and Ergun Right Banner on 24-25 April in Hailar 
city. Wang Qun made an important speech during the talks. 
  In regard to the issue of enterprise reform, Wang Qun 
pointed 
out: Hulun Buir League has firmly attended to the enterprise 
reform. Its experience can be summarized as "great 
determination, powerful strength, accurate ways, meticulous 
work, and good results." Particularly, some good examples with 
outstanding achievements in reform have emerged. Hulun Buir 
League has made a good start in enterprise reform and should 
persist in its achievements. At present, we should further 
upgrade our understanding, enhance the sense of urgency and the 
sense of crisis, get rid of all difficulties, and make up our 
minds to accelerate the pace of enterprise reform. We must 
strengthen leadership and collective policy-decisions, and 
organize powerful forces to grasp the enterprise reform in the 
next few years. We should first make breakthroughs and then 
make improvements, conduct reform first among key enterprises 
and then among general ones, make overall plans and take all 
factors into consideration, and promote overall reform. Hulun 
Buir League's practice of organizing and sending more than 700 
cadres to enterprises to help conduct reform should be 
popularized. The fact that the party and government office 
cadres go deep to the grass roots to grasp the enterprise reform 
is conducive to changing the government functions and making the 
government work suit the socialist market economic system. To 
grasp the enterprise reform, we should grasp the buildup of 
leading bodies as well as the setup of mechanism and the 
upgrading of products. This is so-called auxiliary reform. 
Specific methods are to proceed from actual conditions; to seek 
truth from facts; to make different policies for different 
plants; to boldly conduct experiments; to make enterprises 
improve their quality, standing, and efficiency through reform; 
to conform to the "three-conducive" principle; and to avoid 
repetition of low quality. Through reform, we should enliven 
enterprises, turn deficits into profits, and increase efficiency 
and speed. We should have enterprise staff members and workers 
not only have meals to eat but also make contributions to the 
state. The more difficulties the enterprises have, the more 
necessary they should strengthen the ideological work and expand 
the dynamics of reform. Enterprises should first change their 
ideas to conduct reform. Like Hulun Buir League, all localities 
should organize groups and send them deep to the enterprises to 
disseminate the necessity of reform as well as the reform 
policies and measures, unify the thinking of the staff members 
and workers, and mobilize them to support and join reform. Only 
by so doing will we be able to ensure the smooth progress of 
enterprise reform. 
  In regard to the issue of foreign trade, Wang Qun pointed 
out: The Sino-Russian and Sino-Mongolian border trade, 
characterized by goods exchange, conforms to the needs of the 
peoples of both sides. Achievements have been made in this 
aspect. However, the border trade must not always stay at the 
level of goods exchange. We must develop border trade. Now, 
border trade is being changed into spot exchange trade. This is 
a trend of development as well as a new situation. Under the 
new situation, it is inevitable that temporary difficulties in 
border trade crop up. So, the foreign trade enterprises should 
study the new situation, resolve new problems, and upgrade to a 
new level. To this end, first, we should change ideas, reform 
simple foreign trade viewpoints, combine foreign economic 
relations and trade, link trade with industry and agriculture 
(animal husbandry), promote industry and agriculture (animal 
husbandry) with trade, and promote trade with industry and 
agriculture (animal husbandry,) develop general trade and 
multilateral trade, and expand foreign economic relations and 
trade. Second, the governments at various levels should regulate 
and control the macroeconomy, make unified plans in a coordinate 
manner, readjust the production of industrial enterprises and 
their product mixes according to the demands of the 
international market, and form economic and trade cohesive 
power. Third, we should expand the scale of opening up, bring 
in capital from all sides, and promote development through 
opening up. We should introduce foreign capital to conduct 
grafting transformation, develop production, increase the 
varieties of products, upgrade the quality, and enter the 
international market. 
  Qian Fenyong stressed in his speech during the talks: The 
key to conducting the enterprise reform is to mobilize the 
enthusiasm of staff members and workers. So long as the 
enthusiasm of the staff and workers is mobilized will 
enterprises be able to make good products and create good 
efficiency. He said: Hulun Buir League is an area 
experimenting with reform and opening up as defined by the 
state. So, the league should proceed from actual conditions, 
boldly make experiments, and have the courage to be the first to 
conduct enterprise reform and to develop foreign economic 
relations and trade. 

