BFN 

  [Text] Bonn -- Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel has 
criticized the violation of human rights and the treatment of 
the Kurdish population in Turkey. The situation is not 
satisfactory and has deteriorated recently, Kinkel stated during 
the government statement at the German Bundestag today. 
  The chairman of the Free Democratic Party of Germany 
mentioned the arrest of Kurdish members of the parliament in 
Ankara last month. Thus, the Turkish leadership created the 
impression that it wants to silence the voices of Kurdish 
citizens in Turkey. During his talks with his Turkish 
counterpart Hikmet Cetin, he frequently discusses the situation 
of the Christians, torture during police custody, and the 
restriction of the freedom of press and opinion in Turkey, 
Kinkel stressed. 
  He admonished Turkey to wage the struggle against the 
terrorist Workers Party of Kurdistan (PKK) on the bases of the 
existing laws and of international rules. The Federal 
Government believes that the Kurdish issue can only be settled 
with peaceful means and in mutual agreement between the Turkish 
government and the Kurds. Any solution must take into 
consideration the cultural identity of the Kurds. 
  Kinkel also referred to the accusation that weapons supplied 
by Germany are used against the Kurdish civilian population. He 
emphasized that Bonn has suspended further deliveries until the 
issue is clarified. Recent allegations by human rights groups 
that were handed over to the Foreign Ministry yesterday with 
alleged proof are being examined carefully. So long as no 
conclusive evidence is furnished, there is no reason to doubt 
Ankara's assertions. 
  Kinkel appealed to the Kurds living in Germany to stop 
waging 
their conflicts with Turkey in a violent manner. "Those who 
misuse Germany's hospitality and commit crimes must reckon with 
the full severity of our laws, with legal proceedings, and with 
deportation. It will naturally be examined in every individual 
case whether those affected are facing the death penalty or 
torture." 
  Kinkel mentioned the long-standing and exemplary friendship 
between Germany and Turkey. The Federal Government is 
determined to cultivate this asset even in difficult times. 

