Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The Philippines yesterday lifted a key restriction 
to trade with Vietnam, ahead of President Ramos' official visit 
to Hanoi next week, the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) 
said. 
  "In response to Vietnam's shift towards a market economy," 
Hanoi was being delisted from the list of socialist and other 
centrally planned economy countries in which bilateral trade is 
regulated by the official Philippine International Trading Corp. 
(PITC), DTI Secretary Rizalino Navarro said. 
  Mr. Ramos, along with a small official party of government 
officials and a group of businessmen, are scheduled to visit 
Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City on 28 to 30 March in an attempt to 
develop and expand bilateral economic ties. 
  Total two-way trade was $17.4 million in the first half of 
1993 with the Philippines enjoying an $11.93 million surplus. 
  The delisting and the planned presidential visit came after 
the United States lifted an economic embargo against Vietnam. 
  Philippine traders must still secure approval from the PITC 
before they can export to, or import from, Albania, Angola, 
Burma, China, Ethiopia, Laos, Libya, Mongolia, Mozambique, 
Nicaragua, and North Korea. 
  Manila has already identified science research and 
environmental protection as two possible areas in which the 
Philippines and Vietnam could work out a cooperative deal. 
  The two countries will implement a bilateral agreement on 
these areas only after consulting all the other countries with 
claims to the disputed island chain in the South China Sea. 
  Briefing reporters on the president's visit, acting Foreign 
Secretary Rodolfo Severino said the cooperative arrangements 
being explored by Manila with Hanoi is part of 
confidence-building measures to prevent armed conflict in the 
disputed territories. 
  Severino said the visit is also part of efforts of the 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations to speed up the 
integration of Vietnam into the ASEAN community. 
  In Palawan, Mr. Ramos said his trip to Vietnam would be the 
first step in reaching a common position in jointly exploring 
and exploiting untapped mineral, oil, and other resources in the 
South China Sea. Hanoi had entered into a similar cooperative 
agreement with Kuala Lumpur. But the agreements cannot be 
implemented without approval from other claimant countries. 
  Apart from Vietnam, Malaysia, and the Philippines, other 
countries claiming about a hundred islands atolls and reefs in 
the South China Sea very near Palawan are China, Taiwan, and 
Brunei. 

