BFN 

  [Text] Expecting the 1994 budget bill to soon be enacted, 
the Construction Ministry announced on 20 June the bidding 
systems it will adopt for ministry-controlled public works 
projects. According to a prearranged program, it will adopt an 
open bidding system for projects worth more than 730 million yen 
[Y], in which any firm can participate if it fulfills certain 
standards. But the standards include a criterion to limit the 
number of bidders to about 70. When the ministry applied an open 
bidding system to a public works project in fiscal year 1993 on 
an experimental basis, only 20 to 30 A-rank general contractors 
were allowed to bid. The new open bidding system will likely 
double this number and facilitate competition. 
  For projects worth between Y200 million and Y730 million, 
the 
ministry will adopt a public offering designated bidding system, 
in which it invites contractors wishing to take part in biddings 
and designates about 10 of them as bidders. For some of 
projects worth between Y100 million and Y200 million, the 
ministry will introduce on an experimental basis an 
intention-confirmation designated bidding system, in which it 
first invites about 20 contractors, selects 10 based on whether 
or not they have a desire to participate in biddings, and allows 
those selected to make a tender. 
  The ministry plans to notify eight regional construction 
bureaus, which are in charge of carrying out public works 
projects, of the adoption of the new bidding systems on 21 June. 
Meanwhile, regional construction bureaus will announce details 
of projects subject to the new systems, such as project names, 
work location, term of works, work outlines, and a bidding 
schedule immediately after the 1994 budget bill becomes law. 
  Judging from past results, the ministry expects the number 
of 
projects subject to an open bidding system will be about 100. 
To participate in open tenders, contractors will be required to 
receive certain marks in a screening on management and the value 
of works completed in the past. The ministry has set the marks 
in such a way that about 70 contractors can pass the screening. 
  Under the public-offering designated bidding system, 
contractors can reflect their opinion in biddings to some 
extent, but to do so, they have to be designated as bidders by 
government offices which place orders. The 
intention-confirmation designated bidding system has an effect 
tantamount to increasing the number of designated bidders to 20 
from the current 10. 

