1993 
<DATE1>   17 June 1994 </DATE1>
<F P=100></F>
<F P=101>   Geopolitics and Security </F>
<H3> <TI>   The Military Interests of Russia </TI></H3>
<HT><F P=107><PHRASE>    The Military Interests of Russia </PHRASE></F></HT>

<F P=102>   94UM0311E Moscow VOORUZHENIYE, POLITIKA, KONVERSIYA in 
Russian No 1, 1993 (Signed to press 5 Jul 93) pp 27-37--FOR </F>

OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
<F P=103> 94UM0311E </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow VOORUZHENIYE, POLITIKA, KONVERSIYA </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by S.M. Rogov, deputy director of the Institute of </F>
the United States and Canada, under the rubric "Geopolitics and 
Security"] 
  [Text] Sergey Mikhaylovich Rogov is a deputy director 
of the Institute of the United States and Canada of the Russian 
Academy of Sciences, President of the Center for National 
Security and International Relations of the International 
Affairs Committee of the Supreme Soviet of the Russian 
Federation, and a member of the Presidium of the Association to 
Assist the United Nations. Sergey Mikhaylovich is a prominent 
political scientist, and is well known from his features in the 
press and on television on issues of military policy. 
  The end of the Cold War has led to the destruction of the 
bipolar system of international relations. The world climate, 
however, faces new and unforeseen threats--the uncontrollable 
development of events in the former Soviet Union, the 
uncertainty relative to the role of the new power centers, the 
increased tensions between North and South and the absence of 
effective, regional systems of security oriented toward the 
needs of a multipolar world. 
  The collapse of the Soviet Union has led to sharp changes in 
the global balance of forces, dominated for years by the United 
States and the USSR. The Soviet Union, as the "second 
superpower," was able to maintain strategic parity with the 
United States for several decades, countering the actions of the 
United States with regard to the nuclear arms race. The 
strategic stability was largely a by-product of this approximate 
parity. 
  The new Russian leadership, although a continuation of the 
Soviet Union and the Russian Empire that had existed before it, 
differs from both of them politically (striving to become a 
democracy), economically (moving to a market economy) and 
geographically (Russia has never existed within today's 
borders). The new Russia still has to define its essence, 
nature, national interests and place in the world. 
  The principal threat to the security of Russia comes from 
internal rather than external factors. Russia could encounter 
external threats in the future, but today its security could be 
threatened by explosive internal problems. 
  Another factor is the fundamental difference in the system 
of 
international relations in which Russia is operating today from 
the bipolar system that existed for 45 years. In a multipolar 
world against a background of such power centers as the United 
States, Western Europe, Japan, China and India, Russia could be 
at best one of the great powers, but not a "superpower." 
  Russia, with only about 60 percent of the GNP of the former 
Soviet Union and roughly the same percentage of its population, 
could continue the arms race that was such a heavy burden for 
all 15 republics of the USSR. 
  This would not signify, however, that Russia can and should 
disarm unilaterally. Military power remains an important factor 
in ensuring national security, but the necessity hardly remains 
of continuing an arms race in which the Soviet Union tried to 
counter the entire rest of the world by itself. Russia, from the 
standpoint of international relations, needs not a rivalry with 
former Soviet republics and the principal power centers such as 
the United States, Western Europe, China and Japan, but rather a 
search for reliable partners and allies. The vital interests of 
Russia require a re-orientation of its efforts away from a 
useless arms race to economic reconstruction and improvement in 
the standard of living of the population, which demands 
cooperation with the United States and Europe as a whole. 
  The national interests of Russia in the military sphere (or 
the interests of military security) could be defined as averting 
the use of force on the part of other states threatening the 
territorial integrity, economic and social prosperity and human 
rights of citizens of Russia or the democratic political system 
in Russia. 
<H8>  The Military Interests of Russia in the Former Soviet </H8>
Republics 
  The interests of the national security of the Russian 
Federation may be represented in the form of three concentric 
circles. 
  The first priority of Russia should be its relations with 
the 
other former Soviet republics. The greatest threat for Russia 
today arises out of the possible territorial and national 
conflicts with those republics that have become independent 
states. Conflicts in Moldova, Abkhazia, South Ossetia, 
Nagorno-Karabakh and Tajikistan are already threatening to spill 
across the borders of Russia. 
  The resurrected Russian state has run up against its own 
first foreign-policy crisis. The agreement on the creation of 
the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), composed of 11 
former Soviet republics, could prove to be just paper devoid of 
any substance. 
  It is vitally important for Russia to establish friendly 
relations with the former Soviet republics and, if it is able to 
do so, to create a union at least with the largest new states 
such as Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan, where tens of millions 
of Russians reside. 
  The whole system of defense of the former Soviet Union 
collapsed as well. The Russian potential in conventional arms in 
Europe will be 4--6.5 times less in the number of types of 
surface weapons, restricted by the Paris accord, and half as 
much in aviation weapons. All Soviet short- and medium-range 
missiles that could have been aimed at Europe are also being 
destroyed in accordance with the INF Treaty (Table 1). 


Table 1 -- Conventional Arms of the USSR and Russia in Europe (1988-90) 

Country                 USSR               USSR               Russia 

Year                    1988               1990               1995 

Tanks                   41,580             20,725             6,400 

Armored combat          45,000             29,890             11,480 
vehicles 

Artillery systems       42,400             13,938             6,415 

Combat aircraft         6,682              6,611              3,450 

Attack helicopters      2,220              1,481              890 


  Russia, in the opinion of experts, has also lost the first 
and second echelons of its "forward lines of defense" in Europe. 
In the words of General L. Kuznetsov, "We were oriented toward 
the English Channel, created strike groups, and all the best 
officers, warrant officers and extended-service servicemen were 
sent to the West, to the first echelon: WGF, CGF, NGF, SGF and 
the Belorussian, Baltic and Ukrainian military districts. If you 
take the three Ukrainian military districts (today the armed 
forces of Ukraine) and our three military districts of Moscow, 
North Caucasus and Volga-Urals, the correlation of forces will 
be three to one in favor of Ukraine. Both in hardware and in 
arms. Especially in combat-ready divisions in the ground forces. 
The troops that were advanced far to the west of the Northern, 
Western and Baltic groups of forces, as well as the units of the 
Belorussian district, are in a state of withdrawal, and one 
cannot count seriously on their combat readiness. A minimum of 
troops has been left to Russia on European territory" (Table 2). 


Table 2 -- Distribution of Arms Among the Republics in Accordance with 
the Tashkent Accord (15 May 1992) 

Republics     Tanks     Armored     Artillery    Combat      Attack 
                        combat      systems      aircraft    helicopters 
                        vehicles 

Armenia       220       220         285          100         50 

Azerbaijan    220       220         285          100         50 

Georgia       220       220         285          100         50 

Moldova       210       210         250          50          50 

Russia        6,400     11,480      6,415        3,450       890 
(European 
portion) 

Belarus       1,800     2,600       1,615        260         80 

Ukraine       4,080     5,050       4,040        1,090       330 

TOTAL:        13,150    20,000      13,175       5,150       1,500 


  The ceilings stipulated by the CFE Treaty do not give Russia 
the opportunity of having more than 20--25 tank and 
motorized-rifle divisions in Europe. But even the placement of 
those forces could run into serious difficulties. Some of the 
Russian troops from Germany, Poland and the Baltic states could 
be withdrawn into isolated Kaliningrad Oblast, which is 
separated from Russia by Lithuania. But it hardly makes sense to 
keep too many divisions there. Kaliningrad Oblast, aside form 
everything else, is part of the "extended Central Europe 
(subzone V.2.)," and the placement of a large quantity of arms 
restricted by the Treaty could lead to Russia's violation of the 
CFE Treaty, if Ukraine and Belarus take the entire quotas 
established for them by the Tashkent accord. 
  An agreement on the placement of some Russian troops on the 
territory of a number of the former Soviet republics that are in 
the flank zones as stipulated by the CFE Treaty could gain 
particular significance in this regard, since the quantity of 
Russian arms in the flank zone for Russia was cut back sharply 
under the Tashkent accord. 
  The levels for the flanks were quite tight even for the 
Soviet Union. The Soviet Union could maintain no more than three 
fully deployed motorized-rifle divisions in its flank zone 
(including four military districts--Leningrad, Odessa, North 
Caucasus and Transcaucasus). This factor played a role, forcing 
the Soviet leadership to transfer three motorized-rifle 
divisions from the ground forces to the composition of the three 
fleets of the USSR in Europe--the Northern, Baltic and Black Sea 
(a fourth division was transferred to the Pacific Fleet). These 
divisions were renamed coastal defense divisions (DBO). This 
step was deemed an attempt at "a deception" in the West, and the 
USSR agreed to count the arms of those divisions under the 
ceilings stipulated by the CFE Treaty under pressure from the 
West. 
  The situation became even more complicated in Russia's case 
after the fall of the Soviet Union. Russia, under the Tashkent 
accord, has the right to place no more than two fully manned 
regular motorized-rifle brigades in the flank zones. This could 
make inevitable the disbanding of the DBO in Arkhangelsk. The 
same decision could also be made by Ukraine with regard to the 
DBO in the Crimea. 
  The flank zone for Russia, meanwhile, includes the 
extraordinarily unstable region of the Caucasus, where a many 
armed conflicts are already underway. The northern flank for 
Russia includes a region with the "second Russian capital"--St. 
Petersburg--and the most powerful Russian fleet, the Northern 
(where approximately 1/3 of all Russian strategic warheads will 
be located after the fulfillment of the START-1 and START-2 
treaties). The possibility of warehousing the arms (in 
particular the BBM [armored combat vehicles]) for three 
additional motorized-rifle brigades could prove to be 
insufficient to ensure the necessary level of military security 
for Russia. 
  At the same time the Russian arsenal in Asia, including the 
arms of the regular forces and in storage areas, total no less 
than 20,000 tanks, 15,000 BBMs, 30,000--40,000 artillery systems 
and one and a half thousand aircraft, according to the estimates 
of experts (not counting the former Soviet arsenals in 
Kazakhstan and Central Asia, which are still under de 
facto Russian control). While the correlation between 
Soviet conventional arms in Europe and Asia was roughly 2:1 
before the CFE Treaty, it is changing for Russia and will now 
evidently be 1:3 or 1:4, excluding aircraft. 
  The geographical location of Russia, on the one hand, does 
not permit the construction of a new "Maginot Line" along its 
territorial borders. The restoration of the "forward defense" 
the Soviet Union had is impossible as well. Russia needs to have 
friendly surroundings, and should avoid any confrontation or 
arms race with its closest neighbors. 
  The new independent states, on the other hand, can scarcely 
pose any threat to Russia in the traditional sense. It is very 
difficult to imagine a situation where the former Soviet 
republics would "make an incursion" into Russia. 
  This signifies that the armed forces of Russia should not 
create major force groupings on the borders with Ukraine, 
Belarus and Kazakhstan. There is no need to preserve enormous 
ground forces with a hundred or more "heavy" tank and 
motorized-rifle divisions. Quite limited forces will be 
sufficient for Russia to cover its western and southern borders. 
  A high risk of "local" or "border" conflicts exists at the 
same time. Specially prepared "light" troops could thus be 
required, which (as was demonstrated by the war in Afghanistan) 
could prove to be more effective in low-intensity conflicts than 
heavy divisions. 
  The most favorable variation in relation to the former 
Soviet 
republics would likely consist of an agreement for joint 
defense, which would make it possible to expand markedly the PVO 
[air-defense] zone of Russia and effectively rule out any 
possibility of a land attack on the Russian Federation from the 
west or south. This variation would make it possible for Russia 
to preserve inviolate the SPRN [missile attack warning system] 
strategic system, which would facilitate a strengthening of 
strategic stability. Russia would also thus remain the sole 
inheritor of Soviet nuclear weapons. This variation could lead 
to the creation of an integrated organization for collective 
defense along the lines of NATO. The high command of the CIS 
combined armed forces would be converted into a truly joint 
structure therein, with equal participation of the 
representatives of the CIS member nations and rotation of the 
important posts in command and staff structures. 
  If this scenario proves to be impossible, Russia could try 
to 
reach bilateral agreements, especially with Ukraine and Belarus, 
with the aim of streamlining military collaboration and using 
some military facilities on their territory in the interests of 
Russia. Russia would likely have a vested interest in seeing its 
gigantic military industry become the chief supplier of weapons 
and military hardware to those nations. 
  In the extreme case, Russia would like to rule out the 
participation of the newly created states in any hostile 
military blocs and the placement of foreign forces or the 
creation of military bases of other nations on the territory of 
the former Soviet republics. Russia could hardly consent to the 
receipt of de jure nuclear status by any republic. 
  The agreements of the CIS as a whole could lead to various 
results, from a military-political alliance of Russia and some 
other nations to a "civilized divorce," i.e. the 
peaceful division of the Soviet nuclear arsenal. The military 
differences between Russia and Ukraine, unfortunately, could 
have highly serious, negative consequences. Although the 
greatest attention has been gained by the dispute on the Black 
Sea Fleet, the significance of which has been fanned beyond all 
measure, the real problem could be connected with the strategic 
nuclear forces that are located on the territory of Ukraine. 
  It appears that Ukraine is trying to become a nuclear power, 
and Kazakhstan could also take that route. It cannot be ruled 
out that Belarus would follow them. If the Soviet nuclear arms 
were to be divided among three or four republics, it would 
provide an impetus to the ambitions of India, Pakistan, Iran and 
some other Third World countries. This would lead, in the worst 
case, to a collapse of the regime of the non-proliferation of 
nuclear weapons at the conference to review it in 1995, and 
could have an effect on the attitude toward toward nuclear 
weapons of even such nations as Germany and Japan. 
  All of the former Soviet republics that have become 
independent states are striving to ensure their own legitimacy 
and security. Ukraine, however (on whose territory are 176 SS-19 
or SS-24 ICBMs with MIRVs), has undertaken active measures to 
possess the former Soviet nuclear weapons. Ukraine sees nuclear 
weapons as a kind of means of restraining possible Russian 
intervention in its internal affairs and the collapse of 
Ukraine, which has never been an independent nation within its 
current boundaries. 
  Ukraine made use of the lack of clarity in American policy 
to 
attain important concessions on the part of the United States 
that are recorded in the Protocol signed in Lisbon in May of 
1992. This Protocol (if we do not count Article 5) was a major 
victory for Ukrainian diplomacy: 
  Ukraine and two other republics are deemed to be equal 
successors to the INF Treaty along with Russia; 
  Ukraine attained equal rights with Russia in the 
implementation of the INF Treaty, acting as an independent 
participant in it; 
  Ukraine and the other former republics should 
themselves determine, on an equal basis, how the restriction 
levels stipulated by the INF Treaty should be distributed; 
  Ukraine independently fulfills all of the obligations 
connected with cutbacks, and their monitoring and 
verification. 
  Ukrainian diplomacy successfully "sold" to the United States 
its own, extremely murky obligation, having received in return 
substantial confirmation of its nuclear pretensions. Article 5 
moreover does not indicate the time frame for joining the 
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. And Ukraine and the other 
nations have undertaken no steps whatsoever to join that treaty, 
and references to a proper ratification process by legislative 
bodies provide grounds to assume that the Ukrainian parliament 
could block ratification or make it conditional with amendments 
that would transform non-nuclear status into a fig leaf. 
  The question of the nuclear status of the former Soviet 
republics is potentially the most acute among all of the issues 
connected with the collapse of the USSR, and in the event a 
solution to it is not found, it could lead to unpredictable 
consequences. 
<H8>  Russian Military Interests in Eurasia </H8>
  The second circle of security interests of Russia is 
connected with such regions as Europe and the Near and Far East, 
which have traditionally had important strategic significance 
for our country. Russia is currently separated from those 
regions of the world, with the exception of the Far East, by the 
newly appeared independent states. But the development of events 
in those regions of the world cannot be ignored, for both 
economic and geopolitical considerations. 
  This circle includes, at least, three of the most major 
centers of power in the postwar multipolar world. It also 
includes the interaction of Russia with the heart of the Islamic 
world. The former Soviet republics in Central Asia could become 
a bridge between the Russian Federation and Western and Southern 
Asia, or they could be transformed into an area of collision of 
existing interests. 
  Some of the former Soviet republics could be drawn into the 
sphere of influence of such global or regional power centers as 
Germany, China, Japan and Iran. Russian control over Siberia and 
the Far East could be threatened if Russia is drawn into 
conflict with such great neighbors as China and Japan, which 
have territorial claims against the Russian Federation. 
  Russian-Chinese relations are developing very well today, 
but 
China could theoretically pose a serious military threat to 
Russia. A large-scale conventional conflict with China is a 
nightmare for Russian strategy. The population of Russia is one 
eighth that of China, and China is outstripping Russia 
economically. 
  Although no real military threats to Russia exist today 
within the second circle of its military interests, the 
appearance of such threats is possible in the near- and 
long-term future, and Russia can scarcely count on its own 
qualitative or even quantitative military supremacy in a clash 
with the new power centers. 
  The CFE Treaty and the Tashkent accord on the division of 
the 
Soviet quota for conventional arms have created a new balance in 
Europe. There will be no serious imbalances among the European 
nations, as Table 3 testifies. 


Table 3 -- Final Variation for Distribution of Types of Arms Reduced in 
Accordance with the Paris Treaty 

Countries         Tanks     Armored     Artillery    Combat      Attack 
                            combat      systems      aircraft    helicopters 
                            vehicles 

Belgium           334       1,099       320          232         46 

Canada            77        277         38           90          13 

Denmark           353       316         553          106         12 

France            1,306     3,820       1,292        800         352 

Germany           4,166     3,446       2,705        900         306 

Greece            1,735     2,534       1,878        650         18 

Italy             1,348     3,339       1,955        650         142 

Netherlands       743       1,080       607          230         69 

Norway            170       225         527          100         0 

Portugal          300       430         450          160         26 

Spain             794       1,588       1,310        310         71 

Turkey            2,795     3,120       3,523        750         43 

Great Britain     1,015     3,176       636          900         384 

United States     4,006     5,372       2,492        784         518 

NATO total in     19,142    29,822      18,286       6,662       2,000 
Europe 

Bulgaria          1,475     2,000       1,750        235         67 

Czechoslovakia    1,435     2,050       1,150        345         75 

Hungary           835       1,700       840          180         108 

Poland            1,730     2,150       1,610        460         130 

Rumania           1,375     2,100       1,475        430         120 

Total for         6,850     10,000      6,825        1,650       500 
former Warsaw 
Pact countries 

Ukraine           4,080     5,050       4,040        1,090       330 

Belarus           1,800     2,600       1,615        260         80 

Moldova           210       210         250          50          50 

Georgia           220       220         285          100         50 

Armenia           220       220         285          100         50 

Azerbaijan        220       220         285          100         50 

Total for         6,750     8,520       6,760        1,700       610 
former union 
republics 

Russia            6,400     11,480      6,415        3,450       890 


  The ultimate distribution of conventional arms, agreement on 
which was reached in 1992, completely alters the military map of 
Europe. Whereas the Soviet Union dominated the continent at the 
end of the 1980s, now NATO is becoming the predominant military 
force in Europe. Half of all conventional arms on the continent 
belong to NATO, which allows the NATO members to have three 
times more ground weapons and twice as many aircraft and 
helicopters as Russia. This evidently explains why the NATO 
countries did not object to the excessive demands of Ukraine and 
the other former Soviet republics during the negotiations on the 
division of the Soviet quota for conventional weapons. The West 
had a clear vested interest in seeing that Soviet arms be cut 
back as much as possible (Table 4). 


Table 4 -- Correlation Between NATO, the Former Eastern European Warsaw Pact 
Countries, the Former Union Republics and Russia 

Countries     Tanks      Armored      Artillery     Combat       Attack 
                         combat       systems       aircraft     helicopters 
                         vehicles 

Total for     20,000     30,000       20,000        6,700        2,000 
NATO in 
Europe 

3.13          2.61       3.12         1.94          2.25 

Total for     6,850      10,000       6,825         1,650        500 
former 
Warsaw Pact 
countries 

1.07          0.87       1.06         0.48          0.62 

Total for     6,750      8,520        6,760         1,700        610 
former 
union 
republics 

1.05          0.74       1.05         0.49          0.69 

Russia        6,400      11,480       6,415         3,450        890 

1             1          1            1             1 


  Russia has lost its supremacy in conventional arms and, 
although it remains as before a major military power, it has 
been "squeezed" into a position where its capabilities are 
balanced by the forces of the other former Soviet republics, the 
Eastern European countries and the NATO countries. 
  This means that it will be very difficult for Russia to act 
alone in the foreseeable future. Russia thus has a vested 
interest in multilateral agreements, both within the 
European-wide system of security that is taking shape and within 
the framework of the Commonwealth of Independent States. 
  This trend is strengthened by the Final Act on the levels of 
the armed forces that was reached in Vienna in the summer of 
1992. The armed forces of Russia will have a ceiling of 
1,450,000 personnel, which is 40 percent lower than the size of 
the armed forces of the USSR in Europe in 1989. 
  Ukraine, meanwhile, seems to be turning into one of the 
"European superpowers." It is acknowledged to have the second 
largest (after Russia) armed forces in Europe, exceeding those 
of the United States by 11 percent and Germany by 27 percent. 
Belarus is roughly equivalent to such great powers as France, 
Great Britain and Italy. Ukraine will surpass them twice over in 
many types of weapons. The size of the armed forces of Ukraine 
(450,000 men) is second only to Russia, and considerably 
surpasses that of Germany (345,000), France (325,000), Italy 
(315,000), Spain (300,000), Great Britain (260,000) and the 
United States (250,000). Ukraine is equal in the size of its 
armed forces and quantity of arms to its three Western 
neighbors--Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary. 
  Even though the CFE Treaty reduces the quantity of 
conventional arms in Europe considerably, too many arms remain 
on the continent as before. The ceilings established by the 
Treaty make it possible to conduct large-scale military 
operations. Even after the fulfillment of all of the provisions 
of the Treaty, there will be more tanks in Europe than there 
were in 1945. 
  This situation makes it possible to conclude that Russia 
requires a strategic reserve of highly mobile conventional 
forces located close to the Urals that would make it possible to 
"project" force within its territory. This approach could also 
include the preliminary stockpiling of some heavy weapons and 
hardware in the three most important theaters, but rules out the 
permanent placement of large-scale, fully deployed forces close 
to the border. 
  The conclusion could thus be drawn that the consequences of 
the Cold War have still not been entirely overcome. Potential 
risks remain that threaten a resurgence of military 
confrontation, including the possibility of an arms race among 
the former Soviet republics. The CFE Treaty should thus be 
considered a first step, rather than the end point, in a radical 
transformation of military structures and policies "from 
Vancouver to Vladivostok." 
  The geopolitical position of Russia makes impossible the 
successful regulation of international relations in a multipolar 
world without the participation of Russia. And although Russia 
may not be a "superpower," it will be one of the most important 
participants in efforts to maintain international peace and 
stability. 
<H8>  Russian-American Interaction in the Military Sphere </H8>
  The third circle of interests encompasses the relations of 
Russia with the West, and first and foremost the United States. 
It should be emphasized that the participation of Russia in 
European and North Atlantic integration, aside from the military 
aspects of these ties, could prove decisive for the development 
of democratic institutions and a market economy within the 
Russian Federation itself. If Russia ends up outside the 
boundaries of the integration processes, its economic progress 
will be called into question, and the "Euroasian nature" could 
take on an Asiatic coloration. 
  Russia has virtually no vitally important interests of a 
global nature beyond the limits of these three circles. It is 
doubtful that events in South America or Africa have any direct 
consequences for Russia. The Russian Federation, however, as one 
of the great powers, cannot evade its responsibility to 
participate in activity to maintain peace, or even to establish 
peace, under the flag of the UN. 
  Russia, of course, should not disarm unilaterally. In 
sharply 
reducing its military efforts, is will nonetheless preserve a 
substantial military potential that should be re-oriented toward 
countering the dangers than could arise in the future on its 
southern and eastern borders. The military threat on the part of 
the United States is in need of reassessment. 
  Russia will be able, even after radical cutbacks in 
strategic 
nuclear weapons (by 75--80 percent compared to today's levels), 
to maintain conditions of mutually assured destruction with the 
United States. This gives a special nature to Russian-American 
relations. 
  Extremely delicate joint management of the brittle strategic 
balance that the United States and Russia have inherited from 
the prior historical period is consequently necessary. Russia 
will maintain sufficient capability in the next decade to 
guarantee retribution against the United States. But the forms, 
and even the substance, of mutual nuclear restraint between the 
two countries could be fundamentally altered. Russia and the 
United States, in the long run, have a host of points of 
coincidence of interests in relation to questions of 
military-political stability, and Russian-American strategic 
relations could potentially be markedly different than the 
relations between the United States and the USSR. 
  The national security interests of Russia and the United 
States would not seem to be mutually exclusive. 
  The disappearance of the ideological sources of the Cold 
War, 
on the one hand, will hardly lead to a clash of the geopolitical 
interests of Russia and the United States. In a multipolar world 
these two countries, on the other hand, could share such 
fundamental interests as averting the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons and the means of delivering them, or restraining the 
challenges of new power centers. Russia will of course remain 
the sole power in the foreseeable future able to threaten the 
national existence of the United States (and vice versa). That 
ability, however, should not necessarily be a cause of rivalry 
between the two countries. The common and parallel interests of 
the two states could help not only to control, but also to 
reduce and ease, the elements of rivalry in relations between 
them. 
  The process of military disconnection of Russia and the 
United States that has started in Europe could also affect the 
Far East. Even though Russian-American interaction in this 
region as a whole lags behind their interaction on a number of 
other problems in world politics, it cannot be ruled out that 
the conclusion of the INF, CFE and START treaties will have a 
positive effect on their mutual relations in that area of the 
world as well. 
  Russia and the United States could acquire certain parallel 
interests under the new conditions, connected with the specific 
forms of collaboration to maintain strategic stability and 
reinforce international peace. 
  Possible components of a future Russian-American regime of 
mutual security are: 
  the uncoupling of armed forces in those regions where 
they are immediately opposing each other, and where a danger of 
the outbreak of military operations exists; 
  the restriction of some types of military activity, 
including the scale and areas of military exercises etc.; 
  transparency measures, including confidence-building 
measures and the monitoring and verification of international 
agreements; 
  quantitative cutbacks in armed forces and armaments; 
  limitations on the qualitative arms race; 
  a transition to military doctrines of a defensive 
nature; 
  the creation of a multilateral mechanism to reinforce 
global and regional security. 
  The goal of the next stage could be achieving maximum 
predictability in the behavior of the nations, through practical 
collaboration in the sphere of security. This task requires 
joint decision-making to dismantle the mechanism of military 
confrontation inherited from the Cold War. Even though cutbacks 
in the accumulated arms will remain an important task in the 
future, the main goal will become the creation of a mechanism 
for joint decision-making, not only on cutbacks or bans of 
existing armaments, but also limitations on military scientific 
research and experimental design, coordination of cutbacks in 
military spending and organization of the profound conversion of 
the military industry. Mutual security will require the 
coordination of Russian and American plans for the deployment of 
new arms, i.e. the joint determination of which types 
of new arms could be deployed and which not. Interaction in the 
military sphere should lose its threatening nature and begin to 
be based on cooperative and non-confrontational principles. 
  The creation of a mechanism of mutual security will require: 
  the institutionalization of the negotiation process; 
  the joint assessment of threats; 
  the adoption of mutually acceptable criteria for the 
deployment of new arms systems (negotiations before rather than 
after deployment); 
  collaboration in assisting in the development of 
regional plans for arms control, utilizing the experience and 
some methods of the agreements between the USSR and the United 
States and European arms control treaties. 
  The nature and intensity of the interaction between Russia 
and the United States in the sphere of military security could 
thus move in the future beyond the framework not only of the 
Cold War, but of detente as well. The new model of mutual 
relations will be reminiscent in many respects of collaboration 
between allies. Arms control, however, cannot and should not be 
aimed at creating a military alliance of the traditional type. 
Such an alliance, after all, would require a common enemy, while 
the new international situation makes a search for common 
enemies unnecessary. The task arises in a mutually dependent 
world of joint counteraction to common threats in such spheres 
as global ecological catastrophe, hunger, disease and the like. 
  Let us consider the prospects for concrete collaboration 
between Russia and the United States in this decade. 
  A. The joint resolution of common problems of the nuclear 
inheritance 
  The paramount task is the creation of a mechanism for the 
resolution of problems connected with the joint resolution of 
common problems of the nuclear inheritance. The strategic arms 
that both countries have today are of an inherently competitive 
nature, they are opposed to each other. A dangerous policy of 
rivalry in the realm of strategic weapons could thus force both 
sides to continue the arms race even under conditions where both 
sides do not have hostile intentions or a clash of interests, 
and could lead to a resurgence of political tensions between the 
United States and Russia. 
  It is clearly impossible to get away from the mutual nuclear 
restraint that was institutionalized during the Cold War, 
insofar as both sides today possess forces that have been 
optimized for just such a form of strategic interaction. The 
problem thus consists of whether it is possible to strengthen 
strategic stability qualitatively within the framework of the 
system of mutual nuclear restraint in the short run, as well as 
whether Russia and the United States will move beyond the model 
of mutual nuclear restraint and move toward relations that are 
based on other principles. 
  The START-2 Treaty could largely facilitate an improvement 
in 
strategic stability under conditions of the end of the Cold War. 
The decision to destroy a large quantity of strategic arms of a 
counterbalancing nature and able to destroy heavily protected 
targets in a short time, together with the decision last year to 
destroy or put away a large quantity of tactical nuclear 
weapons, provides an opportunity for a considerable 
strengthening of mutual nuclear restraint not only through 
cutbacks, but through fundamental changes in the structure of 
the strategic forces as well. 
  Russia has agreed to eliminate MIRVed ICBMs, which was a 
significant concession to the United States since Russia is 
deprived of the opportunity to make a pre-emptive counterforce 
strike. All of the missiles in Ukraine and Kazakhstan are being 
destroyed under that decision as well. The United States will 
thus be left with 500 ICBMs in single-warhead versions, and 
Russia with up to 500 SS-25 road-mobile ICBMs and approximately 
400--500 single-warhead ICBMs in launch silos. 
  The United States has also made a significant concession in 
agreeing to cut back the quantity of warheads on its 
submarine-launched ballistic missiles to a level identical with 
Russia (1,700--1,750 warheads), to reduce the number of warheads 
on the D-5 submarine-launched ballistic missiles by half and to 
halt production of the W-88 warhead, which would have converted 
the D-5 missiles into an excellent counterforce weapon able to 
destroy heavily protected targets in a short time. 
  This agreement will make possible a substantial 
strengthening 
of strategic stability. The new structure and composition of the 
Russian and American nuclear forces rules out a series of former 
scenarios of escalation, and gives no advantages in a preventive 
strike. This signifies that the United States and Russia will 
move toward more stable mutual relations. Even though mutual 
nuclear restraint remains, it will be altered in substance, 
being redirected toward averting war and not controlling 
escalation. 
  These new mutual relations in the strategic sphere provide 
an 
opportunity to reject the concept of the reciprocal strike, 
reduce the degree of combat readiness of the strategic forces 
and move to a clear-cut stance of adherence to an exclusively 
answering strike. Such a transformation could be accompanied by 
broad, bilateral verification and monitoring measures. 
  A whole series of possible steps exists in this sphere that 
could be taken by Russia and the United States on a bilateral 
basis: 
  1. The creation of a permanent mechanism of political and 
military consultations to observe the everyday activity of the 
strategic forces. 
  This could include the creation of permanent liaison 
missions 
at the General Staff of the Armed Forces in Moscow, at the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff in Washington and the command-and-control 
centers of the strategic forces of the respective countries. 
  Regular meetings could also be held by working groups to 
discuss issues connected with interaction in the realm of 
strategic forces, and to exchange information on nuclear 
planning (including question of the distribution of targets) and 
procurements of nuclear arms. 
  2. Both countries could strengthen currently existing 
national means of early warning of a missile attack through 
certain joint measures. 
  This could include the joint launching and use of 
early-warning satellites that could provide both sides with 
information in real time, and could also become the core of a 
global surveillance system. 
  Collaboration in the realm of early warning could include 
automated or non-automated radar stations or sensors (optimized 
exclusively for the detection of missile launches) at missile 
bases and ballistic-missile submarine bases. This would create 
unprecedented mutual openness in the most sensitive realm of the 
national security of both nations. 
  3. It is also possible to reduce the degree of combat 
readiness for all or most of the strategic forces of Russia and 
the United States through: 
  removing from combat alert duty, as soon as possible, 
all arms whose destruction is envisaged by the START-1 and 
START-2 treaties; 
  removing all nuclear charges (cruise missiles, 
non-guided bombs, short-range missiles) from heavy bombers and 
storing them separately from the aircraft; 
  removing from combat alert duty all except a small 
quantity (100, for example) of single-warhead missiles in the 
future; 
  reducing the number of ballistic-missile submarines 
that are on combat patrol; 
  reducing the degree of combat readiness of ballistic 
missiles on the ballistic-missile submarines that are at bases; 
  restricting the combat-patrol areas of the 
ballistic-missile submarines. 
  4. The restriction of dangerous military action against 
strategic facilities of both countries could also have a very 
important stabilizing effect. The sides could agree to certain 
"rules of the game" relative to those general-purpose forces 
that could cause serious losses of the other side. It could be 
agreed, for example, not to conduct air force or naval exercises 
close to the bases of strategic forces, which would create 
additional guarantees. 
  The creation of "security zones" for ballistic-missile 
submarines (areas into which the ASW forces of the other side 
could not enter) could also be a useful and important step. 
  5. Collaboration in the realm of the safe servicing, 
storage, 
transport and dismantling of nuclear warheads. Continuing 
efforts in this area could help resolve a serious problem 
connected with the fact that both sides are to destroy, within a 
relatively short time, a total of up to 30,000 tactical and 
strategic nuclear warheads. The large expenditures for these 
purposes should not force Russia and the United States to slow 
this process. The absence of Russian-American collaboration in 
this realm, aside from this, could be made use of by Ukraine and 
other former Soviet republics in order to keep the national 
warheads on their territory from being withdrawn. 
  6. The necessity also exists of coordinating efforts in the 
realm of national research. The development of new types of 
nuclear arms does not seem necessary today, which makes it 
possible to halt nuclear testing entirely. This is necessary in 
order to preserve and strengthen the regime of nuclear 
non-proliferation. 
  These agreements will clearly give Russia and the United 
States an opportunity to move beyond the framework of relations 
of mutual nuclear restraint. The possibility of mutual 
destruction is preserved, but it does not necessarily require 
being locked into a confrontational system of mutual relations. 
The example of the relations of Great Britain and France shows 
that mutual restraint is not the sole possible variation even 
with the availability of nuclear weapons. 
  B. Monitoring the transfer of arms and military technology 
  The transition from a bipolar to a multipolar world entails 
processes of diffusion of military force. The cutbacks in 
strategic and conventional arms of Russia and the United States 
are eroding the enormous advantage that they had over all other 
countries during the Cold War. The cutbacks in this excessive 
force potential are inevitable and play a useful role, giving 
the United States and Russia an opportunity to be occupied with 
more important domestic priorities. Neither the one country nor 
the other wants other nations to replace them as "superpowers," 
or to reach a level of military might equal to them. That is why 
they they want to limit the augmentation of the military 
potential of other power centers, and to establish monitoring of 
the global process of the diffusion of military force. The two 
countries thus have one field of overall fundamental security 
interests as pertains to controlling the new, multipolar balance 
of forces. 
  1. The first challenge in this case is connected with the 
necessity of preventing the destruction of the Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty. The restraining nature of nuclear 
weapons could make them a unique means of a "great equalizing of 
opportunities" that does not correspond to the interests of the 
United States and Russia. The non-proliferation treaty played a 
very important role in limiting the number of members of the 
nuclear club. The new situation, however, creates a threat to 
the treaty. 
  That is why it is important to achieve the inclusion of 
Ukraine and the other republics of the former Union in the 
treaty as non-nuclear states as soon as possible. Such an 
understanding could be expressed by an invitation to those 
states by the United States, Russia and Great Britain to sign 
the Non-Proliferation Treaty by a certain date. If they refuse 
to do that, the rise of political and economic pressure is 
possible. 
  2. The strengthening of the non-proliferation regime could 
also require measures to improve the system of guarantees of the 
IAEA, which could include much tighter monitoring of the whole 
cycle of existence of the plutonium and other radioactive 
materials necessary for the production a a nuclear weapon. The 
violators of that regime should be subjected to sanctions by the 
world community. 
  The deep cutbacks in the current arsenals of strategic and 
tactical nuclear weapons that exist in the United States and 
Russia leaves at their disposal an enormous quantity of 
components necessary for their production, although neither of 
the sides will have any need for it. Since there is currently no 
regime for monitoring the dismantling of warheads, both 
countries could without difficulty come to an agreement relative 
to the procedures to verify the the fact that the radioactive 
materials extracted are not being used to produce weapons. 
Sealing and inspection at warehouses could provide substantial 
guarantees of this. 
  This will make it possible to achieve tighter control over 
plutonium by the IAEA over other countries. 
  3. The necessity exists for Russian-American collaboration 
to 
eliminate the possibility of the proliferation of other types of 
weapons of mass destruction [WMD], which are easier and cheaper 
for the non-developed countries to obtain. 
  The financial and technological problems in implementing the 
Soviet-American agreement on chemical weapons that face Russia 
should not postpone the destruction of chemical weapons. A 
global ban on chemical weapons is impossible without this. 
  The United States should consequently grant Russia the 
necessary assistance in order to destroy its chemical arms at 
the stipulated times. The Americans should also be more flexible 
with regard to commercial secrets in the chemical industry. 
  4. The control of the proliferation of ballistic missiles 
that are potential means of delivering WMD is yet another 
important area in the collaboration of the United States and 
Russia. 
  Russia, on the other hand, is still not yet a full-fledged 
participant in the multilateral control regime for the transfer 
of technology for the creation of ballistic missiles. This lack 
of clarity relative to the Russian stance is leading to the 
appearance of problems such as the sale of missiles to India. 
Russia must thus officially become a member of that regime. 
  The current regime is imperfect, however. Iraq and some 
other 
countries were able to increase the operational radius of 
short-range missiles successfully. It is clearly necessary to 
cut back the maximum possible range of the missiles being 
supplied to 100 km or even less. Otherwise a whole series of 
countries will be able to bring their range to 500 km by 
improving the missiles. 
  A great deal of attention should also be paid to the problem 
of cruise missiles, especially short- and medium-range 
sea-launched cruise missiles, whose proliferation started with 
the substantial build-up of the naval forces of many countries. 
  5. The end of the Cold War in Europe and the Treaty on 
Conventional Forces and Weapons in Europe have reduced the 
requirements of the industrially developed countries for many 
types of conventional weapons (tanks, armored personnel 
carriers, artillery systems, combat aircraft and attack 
helicopters). 
  This will provide a significant impetus for the defense 
sectors of those countries to expand exports of products in 
order to avoid shutting down enterprises. The importance of the 
arms market in the Third World will thus increase, and new and 
modern conventional arms will end up in the most explosive 
regions, such as the Near East. 
  The coordination of Russian and American policies thus seems 
essential in order to avert the military strengthening of such 
centers of power as China, India and some of the countries in 
the Near East. 
  The necessity of some common approaches exists for Russia 
and 
the United States. This could lead to the appearance of an 
agreement to split the market. Other weapons exporters could 
also be included in this system of collaboration. 
  The necessity of cutbacks and restructuring in the armed 
forces and the regulation and monitoring of the transfer of arms 
and military technology signifies that military production 
should be cut back radically, and that a considerable number of 
personnel be discharged from the armed forces. This requires 
taking the appropriate socio-economic steps, which are moreover 
extremely expensive. 
  C. Collaboration in maintaining international peace 
  The end of ideological confrontation, with its mutual 
negation, has opened up the way to a new partnership in the 
interests of maintaining international security. The principal 
tasks in the sphere of international security and arms control 
at the global level are: 
  not permitting the proliferation and use of nuclear, 
chemical or biological weapons and the means of delivering them; 
  taking confidence-building steps and creating a regime 
of transparency in the military sphere in order to prevent a 
surprise attack; 
  strengthening regional security for the purpose of 
reducing military tensions; 
  restraining the quantitative and qualitative arms race 
in order to reduce the possibility of broad-scale military 
conflicts; 
  averting the escalation of regional conflicts and 
border clashes; 
  reducing the influence of internal political conflicts 
on international relations; 
  creating conditions for the political settlement of 
regional conflicts. 
  The resurrection of the role of the United Nations makes it 
possible to hope seriously that it will be able to perform its 
functions in the sphere of security as defined in the UN Charter 
more effectively, and which were blocked during the Cold War 
years. The UN, in a multipolar world, could become the most 
effective means of ensuring global and regional stability and 
peace, if it is supported in full by the United States, Russia 
and the other great nations. The functions of the UN could 
include: 
  giving security guarantees to all regional nations on 
the basis of Security Council resolutions; 
  exercising the functions of monitoring and tracking the 
military situation in a region; 
  regulating the deliveries of arms and military 
technology; 
  serving as a political intermediary between 
participants in a conflict; 
  offering diplomatic and technical assistance to carry 
out regional measures to build trust; 
  observing the fulfillment of those provisions of 
regional agreements on arms control that go beyond the bounds of 
the region; 
  sending in UN multinational forces, if the nations of 
the region consider it necessary. 
  An effective role for the UN in maintaining international 
peace will likely require the resurrection or the de 
facto creation anew of the UN Military Staff Committee and 
the organization of its subordinate structures, which could 
include three levels. 
  The first level will evidently consist of 
permanent peacekeeping UN forces, with the participation of 
chiefly neutral and non-aligned nations (such as Ghana and 
Fiji). These forces could be financed by the UN and placed 
partly by agreement of the concerned parties in a region. The 
stationing of the troops of the great powers is hardly expedient 
for these purposes. 
  The second level could include a system of staff 
and rear support for sea and air transport and communications, 
which could be used in the event UN troops are necessary. 
  The third level could include the formal 
allocation of certain national armed forces of the great powers 
among the permanent members of the Security Council, which could 
be put into action by a resolution of the Security Council in 
the event an emergency situation arises. 
  The participation of Russia and the United States in UN 
forces could be limited principally to staff and rear support 
and the like. It should be clear on a political level, however, 
that the UN multinational forces could count on the full 
military might of those nations and the other permanent members 
of the Security Council if an aggressor decides to use force 
against the UN permanent forces. This role assumes the automatic 
participation of the great powers in the event of an escalation 
of aggression. This does not, however, require the stationing of 
major forces in the regions. 
  In the event of a large-scale aggression along the lines of 
the Iraqi attack on Kuwait, forces that were allotted in 
advance--including, for example, airborne assault forces and 
U.S. Marines, Russian air-mobile forces and those of other 
nations--could be put into action quickly so as to halt the 
aggression and establish peace. The creation of small, standing 
multinational naval forces under the UN flag is also possible, 
so as to guarantee the freedom of sea lines of communication. 
American and Russian participation could be more substantial in 
that case. 
  Regular interaction, including the holding of maneuvers with 
the participation of the forces placed at the disposal of the UN 
for emergency situations, is naturally essential for the 
effective functioning of such a mechanism. Russian-American 
interaction under a multilateral aegis could prove more 
effective than on a bilateral basis. 
  COPYRIGHT: Vooruzheniye, Politika, Konversiya 1993 No 1 

