BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Salamah Ni'mat: "No Change in Main Portfolios; </F>
Jordan: Al-Majali's Cabinet Includes 10 Deputies"] 
  [Excerpt] Amman -- The cabinet of Prime Mininster 
'Abd-al-Salam al-Majali was reshuffled yesterday. Its political 
base was enlarged with the inclusion of 10 deputies from the 
main parliamentary blocs with the exception of the Islamic 
Action Front bloc. The main cabinet portfolios were not 
affected. 
  Official information shows that al-Majali kept the defense 
and foreign portfolios, and the ministers of finance, 
information, and industry kept their posts, which confirms 
continuation of the economic team with the exception of planning 
Minister Ziyad Fariz who has been replaced. 
  It was clear that there would be no change in the 
government's policy on the peace process, as the prime minister 
kept the foreign portfolio and Minister of State for Foreign 
Affairs Talal al-Hasan retained his. The appointment of Dhuqan 
al-Hindawi as deputy prime minister replacing Deputy Prime 
Ministers Ma'n Abu-Nuwar and Sa'id al-Tall indicates that 
al-Majali wants to entrust the internal affairs to al-Hindawi so 
that he could devote himself to the peace process which has 
witnessed some activity on the Jordanian-Israeli track in the 
past few days. 
  The cabinet reshuffle came one day after the announcement in 
Washington that some progress had been made in the 
Jordanian-Israeli negotiations on issues pertaining to the 
occupied Jordanian territory, the demarcation of international 
borders, water quotas, and economic cooperation, in addition to 
the announcement of a joint decision to move the negotiations on 
these topics to "the region" in July. 
  Observers see the cabinet reshuffle as a bid to rescue 
al-Majali's government which was heavily burdened with the 
increasing parliamentary opposition and criticism of its 
domestic and foreign policies. 
  Political circles are unanimous that the reshuffle will 
facilitate the work of the government which will be tackling the 
results of moving the negotiations to the region and the 
reactions and effects that will have on the Jordanian and 
Palestinian public opinions. 
  According to independent political sources, the reshuffle 
"reassures the Jordanian and Palestinian people" that there will 
be no change in the government's policy of commitment to 
proceeding with the peace negotiations in a way that would 
parallel the progress made on the Palestinian track. It should 
be noted that the appointment of Talal 'Urayqat, Crown Prince 
Hasan's private secretary, as energy minister has been seen as 
an example of that trend. 'Urayqat comes from the village of 
Abu-Days in the suburbs of Jerusalem, the same place which 
Palestinian official Sa'ib 'Urayqat and negotiator Ahmad Quray' 
(Abu-al-'Ala') hail from. [passage omitted] 

