BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Developing Links With Indonesia"] </F>
  [Text] Australia has an abiding interest in the economic 
success, social progress and regional leadership of Indonesia. 
Indeed, no country is more important to our national interests, 
as the Prime Minister, Mr Keating, said when launching an 
Australia-Indonesia trade and cultural promotion in Sydney on 
Wednesday [16 March]. This is a political tenet that will 
become even more apparent as the Asia-Pacific region fulfills 
its economic potential. 
  Three of the world's four most populous nations -- China, 
India and Indonesia -- are in Asia. All three are involved in 
phases of unprecedented economic growth. Australia's challenge, 
as a democracy becoming more independent of its non-Asian 
traditions, is to develop ways to participate in this expansion 
and to benefit from it. Our success depends on enhancing our 
relations with nations about which many Australians still hold 
alien and fearful views. 
  In these terms Indonesia is integral to Australia's destiny. 
Bilateral relations have been rigorously tested over the years 
-- hardly surprising between two such disparate neighbours. 
There will be other difficult encounters in the future. As Mr 
Keating said, "We are different people with different cultures 
and different views on issues which matter to us." The strength 
of the relationship will depend on being able to manage those 
differences. The evidence is both sides are prepared to make 
the effort. 
  The political understanding between Canberra and Jakarta is 
perhaps sounder now than at any time since the first few years 
of Indonesian independence. Efforts to broaden mutual contacts 
are supported on both sides. Both nations are committed to the 
Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation [APEC] forum as a vehicle for 
regional policy development -- with most APEC members 
considering Indonesia's leadership as fundamental to the group's 
success. On issues of defence, security and regional 
co-operation, such as the United Nations effort to restore 
peaceful government in Cambodia, Jakarta has been active and 
positive in its involvement. 
  At another important level, the governments of Queensland, 
Western Australia and the Northern Territory have shown 
initiative by developing extensive links with Indonesian 
regions. Two-way traffic in trade, education, defence and 
tourism is growing -- though it continues to be modest in terms 
of potential projections. 
  These developments have been largely guided by the advent in 
Jakarta of a regime that, while not democratic in the western 
tradition, can be characterised as moderate. The challenge 
inside Indonesia to liberalise the political system without a 
loss of national stability is also being faced in a positive 
way. The prospects for a smooth succession from the long reign 
of President Suharto appear good. The system is not as open as 
Australians are used to. But in the peculiarly Indonesian 
context of having to balance complex political, military and 
ethno-cultural allegiances it has been successful in raising 
living standards for most people, and in a relatively stable 
manner. 
  It would be wrong to raise expectations about the Australia- 
Indonesia relationship beyond what can be sustained. Our 
peoples and languages are and ever will be different. So are 
the values we admire in our respective societies. However, the 
relationship is gathering strength. Continuing efforts to 
remove misconceptions on both sides are needed. But thanks to 
the broadening of mutually beneficial contacts, there is less 
excuse for the relationship to be clouded by misunderstanding or 
ignorance. 

