Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Sergey Assekritov, first vice president of the </F>
"Reforma" Foundation, under the rubric "Talk about Oneself": 
"The `Shatalin Team' and the `Gaydar Team': Each Person Has His 
Own Interpretation of What Is Occurring in Russia"] 
  [Text] The joint report of the international "Reforma" 
Foundation and the economics division of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences provoked a stormy debate on the pages of the press and 
passed through several stages of fairly serious discussion. 
  The leaders of some of the factions of the State Duma (the 
Agrarian, Democratic, and Communist parties and the New Regional 
Policy) were the organizers of the first review of it. Then this 
document, along with the alternative programs of S. Glazyev and 
Ye. Saburov and the report of the Ministry of Economics, were 
the subjects of a constructive discussion at an expanded meeting 
of the collegium of the Ministry of Economics. And the very next 
day, 10 February, parliamentary hearings were held; they drew to 
the State Duma a significant number of deputies who responded in 
an animated and involved way to this particularly important 
topic. The meeting at the "Reforma" Foundation with ambassadors 
and representatives of all the CIS countries and the Baltics was 
not covered in the mass information media, although, in the 
opinion of its participants, it was a very interesting and, most 
importantly, useful one. 
  The meeting of the "Vzaimodeystviye" (Cooperation) Club 
under 
the chairmanship of Ye. Gaydar was clearly out of tune with all 
these discussions. But it is undoubtedly of interest, since the 
position of the members of the Gaydar team (P. Aven, A. 
Nechayev, and A. Illarionov) and its sponsors from business 
circles (M. Yuryev and K. Bendukidze), as well as the active 
propagandists of "shock therapy" (O. Latsis and M. Leontyev), 
was most explicit. 
  It is certainly clear that each person has his own 
interpretation of the processes occurring in Russia. There is 
nothing surprising in the fact that the attitudes of the 
"retired" members of the government and the current ones, the 
nouveau riche from speculation and the contingent of directors, 
and the independent and employed journalists toward the methods 
of the reform and toward its results and consequences are varied. 
  In the opinion of Ye. Gaydar and his comrades, even age is 
significant, and that has suddenly become one of the main 
arguments for not accepting the Academy report. The fact that 
young associates of a number of leading economic institutes also 
participated in preparing the report did not have an effect, of 
course; since battling with academicians who have become wiser 
and are well known is more honorable, and most importantly, the 
external effect is something altogether different. And then 
academicians are Soviet, so an anti-imperialist fuse can be 
displayed. 
  But which of the crucial problems of the report irritate and 
even openly anger the purveyors of "shock therapy" the most? 
  The first is their fundamental disagreement with the 
evaluation of the results of the 2-year period of reform and the 
conclusion that the policy they followed failed. According to 
the allegation of Ye. Gaydar and A. Illarionov, a period of 
stabilization began and a gradual rise in the standard of living 
of Russia's citizens was underway. 
  Like most of Russia's population, we naturally cannot agree 
with that. The report has figures which suggest just the 
opposite. Social indicators signal an alarming situation in the 
fields of demography, public health, the structure of 
consumption, monetary income, stratification of society, the 
strike movement, unemployment, and the like. Mr. Illarionov says 
that we must look at the statistical reports in a different, 
more "professional" way. That, incidentally, is from the same 
opera where the minister of internal affairs, V. Yerin, suddenly 
says that the crime rate has dropped to almost one-tenth its 
previous level, while before our eyes gangs with automatic 
rifles organize fights every day and ordinary citizens have 
completely forgotten evening walks. Obviously, in the evenings 
they should study the statistics in a "professional" way behind 
armored doors. It is important to note that the results of the 
analysis of the 2 years of "shock therapy" and the conclusions 
from it by the authors of all three alternative drafts that this 
policy was a complete failure virtually coincide. So accusing 
the academicians of a certain bias and a desire to slander the 
activity of Gaydar and Company is simply inaccurate. 
  The second problem. The authors of the report proposed the 
mechanism of fixing prices for a restricted list of output for a 
certain amount of time as one of the elements of stabilization. 
It is clearly stated that this means energy media, weapons, and 
transport rates. What is more, Gaydar immediately accuses the 
"old" academicians of yearning for the past and wanting to set 
prices for all output produced. 
  But, in the first place, the academicians' proposal is not a 
repeat of the past, since even now the government and the local 
executive authorities set prices correspondingly on, for 
example, gas, electricity, weapons, freight hauling rates, 
domestic services, and municipal passenger transport. 
Incidentally, prices for oil are also regulated by special 
governmental decision, not in absolute amounts but through a 
limit on profitability. 
  In the second place, throughout the world the state actively 
participates in regulating prices for the output of monopolies 
and for certain strategic types of goods. Even now Japan 
regulates prices for... rice. So the allegations of P. Aven and 
A. Nechayev that prices can be regulated only under a Stalinist 
regime seemed strange. Academician Shatalin should really be 
ashamed of his former pupils here. 
  In the third place, the proposed model is considered a 
temporary measure to eliminate the enormous disproportions which 
have taken shape in the levels and ratios of prices. How long 
can we repeat the necessity of preserving price parity for 
agricultural output and goods delivered to run agriculture and 
not make even one attempt to achieve it? 
  The report contains a by-stage plan for leveling prices 
which 
cannot, however, be realized exclusively through market 
mechanisms. 
  Problem No 3. There is abundant criticism of the proposal to 
introduce another exchange rate for the ruble during the 
transitional period in addition to the market rate, a rate 
determined by the Central Bank of the Russian Federation and 
used as the official one. Such a rate, in our opinion, should be 
established based on the real export-import price proportions 
and taking into account the rates of the "baskets" of foreign 
currencies and the dynamics of domestic prices and rates. 
  You must agree that 1,500 per dollar is not reality; it is a 
speculative, distorted rate, a "Snickers" [candy bar] rate. But 
it is precisely what is used to convert the currency earnings of 
enterprises in order to then confiscate it in the form of taxes, 
customs duties, and charges. Only speculators hold to this rate, 
which enables them to buy our industrial giants for 100,000 
greenbacks. All the country's national wealth, if it is 
converted into dollars, puts Russia among the most 
underdeveloped countries. Isn't that absurd? 
  The fact that a ruble rate which is much much too low 
encourages dumping exports causes prices for imports to rise 
unacceptably, and everyone, even people who are not scientists, 
understands that it has become a cause of inflation and higher 
prices. An ordinary person feels this in his bones, if you will. 
But the former team of the powers-that-be discourse seriously on 
why all the entrepreneurs are hiding money abroad and why no one 
is investing hard currency in developing our own production. 
  There can be a healthy currency only in a healthy economy! 
As 
long as the economy is sick, it must be treated! If you do not 
like our medicine, suggest a different one, but the patient must 
be treated rather than watching him die. 
  The fourth problem. Privatization. As is well known, the 
very 
first critic of the RAN [Russian Academy of Sciences] and 
"Reforma" Foundation report was the legendary and inflexible A 
Chubays. Without reading them, he swept aside all the proposals, 
categorically announcing (for some reason on behalf of the 
entire government) that there was no reason to examine this type 
of document. And for greater persuasiveness he took the 
president as his ally, although B. Yeltsin has not yet reacted 
to the report even now. 
  The directive, all-out nature of the supersonic 
privatization 
being conducted under the principle "treat everyone the same" 
cannot accomplish any end except mercenary ones. And they are 
being accomplished right in front of a population fooled by the 
universal distribution of vouchers. 
  Our position is that privatization should be considered an 
instrument of structural perestroyka and investment policy. The 
fiscal tasks are accomplished in passing, of course, that is to 
say, the state treasury must not be diminished. 
  The slogan, let us create millions of owners, has no 
economic 
or social sense. First, we all have our own property now, thank 
goodness. Secondly, by no means does everyone want to get a part 
of state property and then manage it and be responsible for this 
piece like private property, and there are even fewer who know 
how to do this. It is appropriate to cite an example from the 
experience of some of the European countries. There anyone can 
buy land, but only those who have a qualified permit have the 
right to use it to run a farm. Thirdly, scattering property and 
the functions of managing it among millions of small owners, as 
world experience shows, leads to the erosion rather than 
augmentation of fixed capital. 
  That is why that from the beginning we were absolutely 
against duping the population with vouchers. They are still 
being touted. On television now there is such an ad every half 
hour: sometimes First Voucher, sometimes MMM-Invest, and 
sometimes someone else with these fantasies. But it was evident 
at the past meetings of the check funds that there is nothing to 
use to pay people dividends. They even wanted to borrow bank 
credits (the newspaper KOMMERSANT called this madness). 
  Our report suggests that the focus must be changed from 
privatization of property to privatization of management. We 
must truly rid the state of the command of those sectors which 
must "hustle" in market conditions. The process of destatization 
must force enterprises to adapt themselves to the market. But 
the state sector must also be preserved in certain spheres. And 
it must be managed and aided. 
  But of course these approaches do not please Mr. Chubays and 
other members of Ye. Gaydar's team. And besides, we dared to 
announce that all privatization work must definitely not be 
entrusted to one department. In the newspaper IZVESTIYA (10 
February 1994), Ye. Gaydar writes that he is "by no means making 
any personal insinuations and, moreover, is confident of the 
personal honor of many people, especially among the higher 
managers." But I personally am not so confident. Yegor 
Timurovich says that "bolstering the state's role is for the 
sake of the possibility of quick enrichment at state expense." 
But I personally think that the state withdrawing from a 
multitude of functions has already enriched many people, 
including certain higher managers. 
  And the last thing, the state's role. We devoted an entire 
section to the problem of bolstering state regulation. This 
theme runs through the entire report. I will not repeat the 
essence of the proposals, but for readers and for zealous 
monetarists I will cite one quote. Don't believe the Russian 
academicians, it is your business. But here is what their 
foreign colleagues from the leading institutes of the world 
(Germany, the United States, Austria, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, 
and Poland) which joined into a special working group to study 
the problems of the socioeconomic reconstruction of Central and 
Eastern Europe write: 
  "The historical experience of the `economic miracle' of the 
postwar restoration of Western Europe convincingly contradicts 
the opinion that Europe will reach the heights of capitalism 
quickly and without planning. Thus, during the period of 
reconstruction: 
  "1) the exchange rate of currencies was under control and 
the 
movement of capital was strictly regulated, while the free 
convertibility of currency for business transactions was 
introduced over a period of more than 10 years; 
  "2) control over prices for the key commodities and 
subsidies 
to maintain them were preserved for that same long period of 
time, while in some sectors (agriculture and power engineering, 
for example), they are in effect even now; 
  "3) privatization of state property never had a high 
priority. For decades many large companies (Volkswagen, for 
example) did not enjoy the privileges of private property, 
without apparent damage to the results of their activity; 
<H6>  * * * </H6>
  "7) it was understood that monetary reform as well as 
stabilization measures should promote the reconstruction and 
expansion of production potential; in no case was achieving 
abstract monetarist goals allowed to lead to the ruin of the 
production apparatus; 
  "8) a vigorously operating state able to manage the market 
and maintain it by creating the appropriate institutions and 
legal structures as well as tax and financial programs was a 
crucial factor for normalizing the economic situation in order 
to step up entrepreneurial activity. 
  "An important historical lesson can also be derived from the 
successful modernization and growth of the Japanese economy, and 
subsequently from the development of the `little tigers': Hong 
Kong, Taiwan, Singapore, and South Korea. Their success is based 
on the nondogmatic recognition of the fact that the market must 
be managed..." 
  Those are the interesting conclusions which independent 
scientists of foreign countries make in the book entitled "The 
Market Shock" [ISBN 0-472-08204-3, pp 131-133). Doesn't that 
convince you? 
  There is the popular term "self-involved" ["zatsiklennost"] 
which is applied to a certain category of people. They are very 
pig-headed; they see everything in their own terms. I am 
absolutely convinced that the entire Gaydar team is wrapped up 
in itself and all dialogues with it are now absolutely useless. 
But, thank goodness, there are sensible people and progressive 
forces. We must rely on them now, during this period so 
difficult for our country. 

