BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Hasan 'Asfur, deputy head of the Palestinian </F>
delegation to the Cairo talks with Israel, by Sha'ul Menashe in 
Cairo; date not given -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Menashe] The PLO is scheduled to take over in Gaza 
and Jericho shortly. Does it have a list of priorities ready 
for these territories? 
  ['Asfur] There is no doubt that it will be a historic event 
when the PLO and the national Palestinian authority take over in 
the Gaza Strip and the Jericho area. It will mark the first 
step in building the Palestinian homeland. We think that 
security for the Palestinians in Gaza and Jericho and the 
rebuilding of the national economy that has suffered long under 
occupation will top the agenda. 
  [Menashe] What does the PLO leadership think relations will 
be like with the forces opposed to the peace process, notably 
the Islamic Resistance Movement, Hamas? 
  ['Asfur] It is not possible to say that there is opposition 
while the PLO exists. This is because the PLO is the national 
framework encompassing all the Palestinian political forces. 
However, there is opposition within the framework of the PLO to 
the Declaration of Principles. This opposition is open and 
always speaks out. The PLO, as the leadership of the 
Palestinian people, handles opposition within the framework of 
the Palestinian people's democratic principles consecrated by 
long years of national Palestinian struggle. We do not think 
that the democratic principles have been compromised. Our 
people's national forces will uphold these values. We think 
that political opposition within the framework of the PLO will 
respect the values and political traditions of the Palestinian 
people on which the PLO was built. 
  [Menashe] Do you have a contingency plan to counter 
violence, if, God forbid, it materialized? 
  ['Asfur] Let's not discuss such complications just yet. I 
am confident, however, that the political forces of opposition 
are sufficiently enlightened to express their opinion within the 
framework of the Palestinian political legitimacy. 
  [Menashe] One last question: According to Palestinian 
sources cited in Tunis yesterday, Mr. 'Arafat, after assuming 
power, will visit the territories, along with 120 Palestinian 
figures. Can you confirm that report? 
  ['Asfur] As for the logistics of President 'Arafat's return 
to the occupied Palestinian territory after the Israeli 
withdrawal, these have yet to be worked out. I think it is 
premature for me to discuss this matter. We are going to take 
over the national Palestinian authority. We have been working 
on that for some time. We think our people are looking forward 
to that moment. The PLO and its affiliated bodies are poised to 
take over. 

