BFN 

<F P=106> [By reporter Hu Xudong (5170 2485 2639)] </F>
  [Text] Bonn, 11 May (XINHUA) -- While meeting with Xie Fei, 
member of the CPC Central Committee Political Bureau and 
secretary of the Guangdong Provincial CPC Committee, German 
Chancellor Helmut Kohl spoke about the good progress in 
German-Chinese relations and the great potential for developing 
bilateral relations. 
  Kohl met with and feted Xie Fei and his party today at noon 
at the chancellor's office, where they held talks in a cordial 
and friendly atmosphere. Kohl inquired with great interest 
about developments in China and in Guangdong. Xie Fei replied 
to Kohl's questions one by one. 
  When touching on German-Chinese relations, Kohl said that in 
terms of both Chinese history and tradition and the two 
countries' cultures, it is of extremely important significance 
for Germany to develop its relations with China. Kohl also 
figuratively compared a politician to a "forest worker." Very 
often, the forest worker devotes his energy to tree-planting. 
But, when the trees grow to become a forest, he is no longer 
around. If no one plants trees, then there will never be a 
forest. Kohl said that he was willing to visit China again if 
he is given an opportunity to do so in the future. 
  Xie Fei said that Chancellor Kohl had made a very correct 
decision to develop cooperative relations with China. For 
Guangdong, developing relations with Germany will not only help 
develop Guangdong but also bring reasonable rewards for German 
businesses. The development of Sino-German economic relations 
may enhance friendship between the two countries. Economic 
relations will play an enduring role in enhancing the friendship 
between the two countries. 
  Xie Fei arrived in Bonn on 10 May to begin an eight-day 
visit 
to Germany at the invitation of Chancellor Kohl. The major 
purpose of his visit is to inspect Germany's new and high 
technology and to brief Germany on the major projects in 
Guangdong. Xie Fei also met in Bonn with representatives of 
German economic circles. 

