BFN 

<F P=106> [By Doreen Cheung in Beijing and Linda Choy] </F>
  [Text] China's jailing of MING PAO reporter Xi Yang came 
under attack yesterday from two Hong Kong affairs advisers. 
  Speaking at a ceremony in Beijing in which she and 48 other 
advisers were formally named, Chung Kei-wing pleaded for 
leniency towards Xi, who was jailed for 12 years for "stealing 
state secrets". 
  Miss Chung, vice-chancellor of Shue Yan College, urged 
Chinese officials to grant parole of between three and seven 
years to Xi if he behaved well in prison. To do so, it would 
not be necessary for China to change its verdict on Xi, Miss 
Chung told officials. 
  Another adviser, Shum Choi-sang, said he told officials the 
12-year sentence was too heavy. Mr Shum said Xi had merely done 
his duty by Hong Kong people. "Whether it is right or wrong for 
him to do that is another issue," said Mr Shum, adviser to the 
Newspaper Society of Hong Kong. 
  Beijing was also criticised by another affairs adviser, 
Tsang 
Shu-ki, who said he was unhappy with the way China had dealt 
with the removal as an adviser of Meeting Point chairman Anthony 
Cheung Bing-leung. While China said it had withdrawn Mr 
Cheung's invitation because he had insisted on being appointed 
as a representative of the Democratic Party rather than in his 
personal capacity, pro-China newspapers had given other reasons, 
Mr Tsang said. 
  "Although I can't say the left-wing newspapers represent 
China, it really gives the impression, there were political 
reasons behind Mr Cheung's sacking," he said. But another 
adviser, Chan Man-hung, who is a Meeting Point member, said Mr 
Cheung deserved his treatment. 
  "It is the price he should pay". "He wanted to be an adviser 
and he tried to cover up the merger" of Meeting Point and the 
United Democrats to form the Democratic Party, he said. In an 
open letter to Chinese leaders yesterday, Mr Cheung said Chinese 
policy towards Hong Kong had been wrong. He cited China's 
refusal to introduce direct elections in 1988 and said the Basic 
Law showed it had failed to incorporate the principle of "Hong 
Kong people ruling Hong Kong people". 
  Mr Cheung also lashed out at the mainland authorities for 
isolating the democratic forces in Hong Kong while trying to 
obtain support from the business sector. "By distancing itself 
from the democratic forces after the June 4 crackdown and 
isolating certain democratic figures, (China) has further 
separated itself from Hong Kong society," he said. 
  He urged that transitional matters be discussed through the 
Sino-British Joint Liaison Group, whose openness should be 
increased. 
  The franchise for the functional constituency elections 
should be expanded and the method of voting ought to be simple 
and fair. 

