BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by Ravindranath Mishra] </F>
  [Text] The golden jubilee session of the United Nations 
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, ESCAP, 
beginning in New Delhi today assumes significance as it is being 
held on the eve of signing of the GATT. The commission, one of 
the largest of the five regional commissions, provides an 
opportunity for the governments to meet every year to review and 
discuss economic and social issues to promote and strengthen 
regional cooperation. Its basic role is that of a think tank 
and a catalyst for regional ventures such as the Asian 
Development Bank and the Asian Highway Network. It executes a 
wide range of programs and projects to stimulate growth and 
improve socioeconomic conditions. The present forum has created 
an integrated communication infrastructure for the Asian region 
besides conceiving the trans-Asia railway system and the Asia 
Pacific telecommunity. The Asian Development Bank also set up 
at the initiative of the commission has a big impact on the 
region's development. 
  During its nine-day meeting, the 48 members and 10 associate 
members will discuss key issues like strengthening of 
infrastructure, fiscal reforms, population control and 
development, environment, poverty alleviation, and waste 
management. The commission will have a special discussion on 
the problems faced by the least developed countries and 
landlocked countries. India will try to impress upon the 
commission that unprecedented growth withnessed by the ASEAN 
countries should spill over to other members of the ESCAP 
family. New Delhi is also of the opinion that economic 
cooperation in the region must get precedence over political 
issues and more importantly neoprotectionism should not be 
allowed to cast its shadow on the new GATT. 
  When the 118 countries are preparing to sign the new GATT in 
about two weeks time, the third world countries are appalled by 
the reported move of the United States to include nontariff 
barriers for exports of the developing countries. The session 
will provide an invaluable opportunity to these countries to 
share their perceptions on the issue and work out a common stand. 

