BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Parliament Must Take Action on Drug Charges"] </F>
  [Text] If the reactions of the country's leaders were 
anything to go by, Tuesday's revelation that a Thai politician 
is wanted on drug smuggling charges in the United States doesn't 
really amount to much. 
  Prime Minister Chuan Likphai said the U.S. Drug Enforcement 
Agency had told him about the case in January 1993 and that he 
had passed the information along to the Justice Ministry. 
  Parliament President Marut Bunnak dismissed the allegations 
as "just a rumor" and said it was premature to start talking 
about setting up a parliamentary committee to investigate them. 
  Deputy Prime Minister Amnuai Wirawan, who oversees 
anti-narcotics agencies, said he thought the Americans had 
enough evidence to back up their charges. He also said the case 
only involved one individual and had done little damage to the 
country's reputation. 
  But Thanong Siriprichaphong is not just an individual. He is 
the honorable member of Parliament for Nakhon Phanom and a 
representative of the Thai people. 
  Earlier this year, as in so many previous years, Thailand 
was 
condemned in the U.S. State Department's annual narcotics report 
because of the "widespread" involvement of high ranking 
government and military officials in the drug trade. 
  Few people in Thailand dispute the accusations. 
  A senior Thai police officer recently told the Associated 
Press: "Who are the big drug people? Just look at the newspapers 
and you'll see some, giving money to charity and getting awards." 
  However, it wasn't until 1992 when Narong Wongwan was forced 
to withdraw as a prime ministerial nominee after the United 
States confirmed he was suspected of being involved in the drug 
trade that any politicians were named. 
  If Thai authorities agree to a seizure request, Thanong 
would 
be the first Thai MP to have assets frozen for involvement in a 
narcotics case. 
  At the moment, the U.S. charges against Thanong remain just 
that -- allegations that have yet to be proven in court. 
  Nevertheless they make interesting reading. 
  The first charge dates back to late 1977, when Thanong was 
said to have arranged for a shipment of two tonnes of marijuana 
to the US west coast. 
  Six years later, he was alleged to have sold 7 tonnes of 
marijuana to American dealers in Mexico. 
  At the beginning of 1986, it is charged he signed a deal to 
supply 18 tonnes of marijuana to American smugglers. Later that 
year, he allegedly agreed to arrange a further shipment of 15 
tonnes, the U.S. prosecutor's affidavit says. 
  Altogether, Thanong is alleged to have arranged for the 
smuggling of about 45 tonnes of marijuana for which he received 
$10.3 million in cash. 
  The affidavit makes for detailed reading. It lists locations 
of meetings, names of smuggling vessels, transaction values and 
more. 
  The evidence contained in the report was considered strong 
enough for a US district court to rule that Thanong's assets in 
the United States be seized. It is now 16 months since the DEA 
supplied the information to the Thai authorities. 
  But as of yesterday many leading law figures, including the 
secretary general of the Office of Narcotics Control Board 
Chawalit Yotmani, said they had yet to even be informed of the 
case by the government. 
  The failure of senior government officials to act on the 
case 
is at the very least another example of Chuan's aversion for 
controversy and at the worst, something much more sinister. 
  The long delay has also no doubt done considerable damage to 
Thailand's relationship with Washington, which is known to be 
increasingly critical of the country's inability to stem the 
drug tide. 
  Now that the charges are public knowledge, Chuan and 
parliament must act decisively. A parliamentary committee 
should be set up immediately and the accusations thoroughly 
investigated. 
  To do any less will only enhance the world's impression that 
the hallowed chambers of Thailand's parliament are a sanctuary 
for drug trafficking suspects. 

