BFN 

<F P=106> [News conference by Venezuelan President Rafael Caldera and </F>
Colombian President Cesar Gaviria Trujillo with domestic and 
foreign reporters, moderated by Guillermo Alvarez Bajares, chief 
of the Venezuelan Central Information Office, from the Ayacucho 
Room of Miraflores Palace in Caracas--live relay] 
  [Excerpts] [passage omitted] 
  [Alvarez] [passage omitted] William Parra, representing 
Colombian television. 
  [Parra] Colombia has stood out among the nations of the 
world, because it has paid the highest price in the 
antidrug-trafficking fight; unfortunately, there is news 
regarding Colombia's proud struggle. The Constitutional Court 
has decided to legalize a specific drug dose for personal 
consumption. What is the Colombian President's response to the 
Constitutional Court's decision, especially in light of the 
unanimous rejection expressed by Colombian sectors? There is 
even a letter by the business associations stating that if 
Colombia and the government want to hold a referendum to reject 
the court's decision, they are willing to pay for all the 
publicity. What is the Colombian President's response to this, 
and what kind of image does this create abroad of the country's 
antidrug-trafficking struggle? 
  [Gaviria] I gave a full response to that before I left this 
morning, but allow me to explain something quickly now. We will 
abide by the Constitutional Court's decision, but we do not 
agree with it. We do not agree because of the serious effects 
it could have on Colombian people's health. This can create 
violence. We do not agree with the rationale behind the 
decision, which says this is something concerning the 
development of one's personality. We are highly concerned with 
this, and we must still wait for the ruling itself to be handed 
down. The decision was made, but the ruling has not been issued 
yet. We hope the Colombian Congress will be able to issue a law 
establishing the limits for which such a decision calls. I am 
referring to the limits that should be established on 
consumption by children and teenagers, consumption in schools 
and public places, preventing drivers and pilots from using 
drugs, and all these other normal restrictions any community 
must impose when taking such a step as this. 
  There should be clear provisions for people to be able to 
appeal for and receive medical treatment for drug consumption. 
I do not believe the Colombian community or society can in any 
way accept drug consumption as something good or as something 
against which it cannot fight. The president has also said that 
in countries or in U.S. states where this decision has been 
adopted, this has been a decision citizens or their 
representatives made. This should not be a judicial decision 
but, rather, a decision of the Colombian parliament, the 
Colombian Congress, preceded by a public discussion on the 
implications of such a decision, such as health and family 
considerations; in fact, I have mentioned the possibility of a 
referendum, for which our Constitution provides. 
  [Alvarez] Miss Paola Badaraco, representing Venezuelan 
newspapers. 
  [Badaraco] Good afternoon, Mr. President. Together with the 
question asked by my colleague from your country, I would like 
to know or advise you that in Venezuela, a judge from the state 
of Tachira has just released 32 people implicated in the 
laundering of drug money. Do not both of you, the two 
presidents, fear that the struggle against drugs could founder 
in light of such decisions by the judicial branch? Thank you. 
  [Gaviria] It would seem to be a question for... [pauses] 
That 
is news to me. Well, yes. What Colombia's Constitutional Court 
decided in principle--I say in principle, because only an 
announcement on a decision has been made, not a ruling--is to 
eliminate sanctions or penalties for personal drug consumption. 
They invalidated the provision stating that personal drug use 
was a violation of Colombian legislation. 
  The president of Colombia's Constitutional Court clearly 
said 
that this does not mean that drug trafficking will now be legal. 
The sanctions set forth in our codes for drug trafficking and 
drug production remain unchanged. This only refers to the 
elimination of penalties for personal drug use. As far as I 
understand, the court invalidated the articles establishing 
arrest for this type of violation. 
  This in no way weakens the struggle against the drug cartels 
or drug traffickers. I am sure Colombian society would never 
take such a step, much less at the international level. [passage 
omitted] 

