BFN 

<F P=106> [By Terence White] </F>
  [Text] KABUL, June 26 (AFP) -- Afghan President 
Borhanoddin Rabbani's forces inflicted a massive military defeat 
on Prime Minister Golboddin Hekmatyar Sunday [26 June], 
overrunning his strategic strongholds in eastern Kabul and 
taking 700 prisoners, a battle commander said. 
  In the fiercest Kabul fighting for several months, the 
pro-Rabbani troops also captured 20 tanks and large quantities 
of munitions, senior military commander Gadoh (eds: one name) 
said, adding "We are now waiting orders for our next move." 
  In a devastating military blow to the coalition rival force 
of Hekmatyar and ex-communist Uzbek General Abdol Rashid Dostam, 
pro-Rabbani troops seized the strategic bases of Bala Hesar and 
Maranjan Hill in two days of fighting ending Sunday morning. 
  The pro-Rabbani forces -- a mixed ethnic bag of Tajiks, 
Pushtuns and Uzbeks from many different units -- are now 
consolidating on the new eastern Kabul frontlines. 
  The Karte Naw district below Maranjan Hill is still occupied 
by Hekmatyar's Hezb-e Eslami faction, but they face pro-Rabbani 
troops in the next-door Shah Shahid district which extends to 
the main gate of Bala Hesar, where the corpses of two Dostam 
soldiers still lay in the road. 
  The frontline on the main road running due east of Bala 
Hesar 
is about 2 to 3 kilometres distant, according to pro-Rabbani 
soldiers stationed in Dostam's former fortress. 
  "This fighting has shown the might of the state and we are 
fully confident that we can capture any position we want," said 
commander Gul Haider. 
  The main target for Rabbani's troops is now Hekmatyar's 
Charasiab headquarters, some 25 kilometres (15 miles) southeast 
of Bala Hesar. 
  To get there they have to first capture a strategic hill 
called Bini Hissar, from which sporadic small-arms fire 
harrasses the occupants of Bala Hesar. 
  Otherwise Kabul was very calm Sunday afternoon, the only 
activity being several large trucks visiting Maranjan Hill to 
collect the large stocks of ammunition left behind in 
underground bunkers by retreating Dostam troops, mujahedeen said. 
  The Hekmatyar-Dostam coalition force, which has been 
fighting 
Rabbani non-stop since it launched a failed coup attempt against 
the president in January, now faces a severe test of endurance. 
  With the loss of Bala Hesar and Maranjan, Hekmatyar, who has 
been demanding Rabbani's resignation by the end of June, may now 
have lost the clout to back his call. 
  Hekmatyar's military presence in Kabul ceased around 8.00 
a.m. (0330 GMT) when pro-Rabbani troops stormed Maranjan Hill, 
an AFP correspondent said. 
  An hour later under pressure from the advancing infantry 
backed up by tanks and armoured personnel carriers (APCs) Hezb-e 
Eslami and their Uzbek allies were pushed out of the old 
Microrayan housing complex below Maranjan. 
  An AFP correspondent crossed the Kabul River and joined the 
second wave of advancing pro-Rabbani troops racing under mortar 
fire up Maranjan Hill, the entrance to which was covered by an 
archway supporting a colour portrait of Dostam. 
  The group that claimed to be the first on Maranjan told AFP 
it had captured around 60 Uzbek prisoners. One APC was seen with 
its turret blown off and one Russain T-62 battle tank was 
captured intact. 
  Incoming mortar shells crashed into Maranjan as more 
pro-Rabbani tanks and men poured over the hill, although pockets 
of resistance were observed in Old Microrayan for a short time. 
  Inside the blue-domed mausoleum of former Afghan king Nadir 
Shah on Maranjan Hill, tanks and guerrillas fired down onto the 
far eastern outreaches of Kabul, where they could see fleeing 
Uzbeks and Hezb-e Eslami fighters. 
  More than a hint of hashish was in the air, which enhanced a 
comical drama as great lumps of ceiling fell on the machine 
gunners inside every time the tanks fired. 

