BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
articles in Seoul vernacular newspapers published on 23 March 
reacting to the U.S. and ROK decision to deploy Patriots 
missiles to the ROK. 
  The moderate KYONGHYANG SINMUN on page 3 carries a 900-word 
article by Washington-based correspondent Yi Chong-yon entitled: 
"The Background Behind the U.S. Decision To Deploy Patriots." 
The article notes that in the wake of the rupture of 
North-South contacts, the U.S. policy toward North Korea has 
shifted from "diplomatic negotiations" to "exercising pressure" 
and reports "the deployment of Patriots has brought up 
speculation that the United States will impose gradual pressure 
on North Korea by demonstrating its power." The article notes: 
"The deployment of Patriots is apparently aimed at grasping the 
initiative on the nuclear issue, rather than giving up dialogue 
with North Korea." 
  While noting that the United States is assuming a 
two-pronged 
stance toward North Korea -- demonstrating power while taking a 
cautious approach on North Korea -- the article reports the 
diplomatic goal of the United States is "not isolating North 
Korea from the international community, but inducing it to join 
in the international nuclear order." The article notes that the 
United States is not giving up its efforts for dialogue since it 
estimates that a UN resolution will have little effect on North 
Korea and that it is not in the interest of the United States to 
heighten the tension on the Korean peninsula. The article 
predicts "chances are high that the North Korean nuclear issue 
will be back on the negotiating table after a cooling-off 
period." 
  The moderate HANGUK ILBO on page 3 carries a 900-word 
article 
by Washington-based correspondent Yi Sang-sok entitled: "The 
United States is Taking a Cautious Approach on North Korea." 
The article writes: "It is ironic that the U.S. decision on 
the Patriots has a diplomatic meaning rather than a military 
one." Reporting that the Patriots will take more than a month 
to reach the ROK, the article notes "that leaves plenty of time 
for the U.S. Government to try diplomatic persuasion to pry open 
North Korea's nuclear facilities for international inspection. 
This shows that the United States wants to go the extra mile 
with diplomacy before considering military steps on the North." 
  Recalling that the U.S. Government announced its plan on the 
deployment earlier than expected, the article interprets this 
move as "U.S. efforts to maximize its firm stance on the North 
Korean nuclear issue by coordinating the timing with the UN 
Security Council's discussions on the issue." The article 
concludes: "The United States will not give up its efforts to 
peacefully resolve the nuclear issue." 
  The left-leaning HANGYORE SINMUN on page 2 carries a 
700-word 
article by O Tae-kyu from the "Fluoroscope" column. The article 
recalls the past commitments made by high-level ROK Government 
officials that they will not bring in the Patriots and then 
expresses regret that "with the North Korean chief delegate's 
remark on turning Seoul into a fireball, the deployment of 
Patriots has become a resolute issue inside the government." 
The article points out the deployment is "a by-product of a 
shrewd trick of U.S. arms dealers who are making the most of the 
current tense situation." Noting that the issue on deploying the 
Patriots was not included in the North Korean-U.S. agreement 
reached in New York, the article writes: "The U.S. and ROK 
Governments, however, decided to deploy the Patriots missiles as 
soon as the North-South contact ruptured, giving an impression 
that they were hoping for it," and maintains that an "immediate 
decision on the deployment, which was made under the pretext of 
the rupture of North-South contact, is a jump of logic." The 
article urges the government to clearly manifest the background 
behind such a decision to allay the people's suspicion on the 
deployment. 

