BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Armenian Foreign Minister Fahan Papazyan by </F>
Garo Khayrabedyan; place and date not given: "Armenia Has Done 
Its Bit To Normalize Relations with Turkey"] 
  [Excerpt] [Passage omitted] [Khayrabedyan] How do you 
view Armenia's place in the Black Sea Economic Zone [BSEZ]? 
  [Papazyan] Like Bulgaria, Armenia is a member country of the 
BSEZ. In our foreign policy we try as far as possible to react 
positively to all initiatives, and we have the same approach 
toward the BSEZ. However, the problem is that our expectations 
in this area have not been fully justified. One of the reasons 
is that this is a new organization that is only now creating its 
structures, and this process is not yet completed. In addition, 
some of the BSEZ member countries still have not established 
good relations with one another and smoothed out their 
difficulties. In particular, I would like to mention our 
relations with Turkey, which have not been settled as yet. It 
is strange that two countries that are members of the same 
organization still have not established diplomatic relations 
with one another, not to mention that our common border is 
closed. Turkey has its own explanations for this, and some of 
them are perhaps understandable, but in reality the relations 
between our two countries are such that there can be no question 
of cooperation between us at the moment. For its own part, 
Armenia has done everything possible to normalize relations with 
Turkey. We have done our bit, it now remains for the other side 
to meet us halfway. If Turkey is interested in developing and 
expanding its relations with Armenia, it should take the 
necessary steps. However, it is absolutely unacceptable to set 
conditions for this. We are often told that if we achieve a 
truce in Nagorno-Karabakh, if the self-defense units of the 
Karabakh Armenians pull out of some of the occupied regions, 
then everything will be settled. We find this approach 
unacceptable. I would like to stress that our country's foreign 
policy is based on the principle of equality with every state 
before the law. 
  [Khayrabedyan] Does Armenia intend to join the Partnership 
for Peace Program? 
  [Papazyan] It is my opinion as foreign minister that Armenia 
will join sooner or later. 
  [Khayrabedyan] Georgia has already joined, and Azerbaijan is 
about to do the same. Is Armenia not delaying things, and may 
this not have consequences for your country? 
  [Papazyan] I think there is no reason for alarm. We are not 
obliged to do everything that the Georgians, Azerbaijanis, or 
anyone else do. We have our own state policy and our own 
interests, and will join when we consider the time is most 
appropriate. 
  [Khayrabedyan] What is your view on solving the 
Nagorno-Karabakh conflict? Will the appointment of Swedish 
diplomat Jan Elliasson [name as transliterated] as chairman of 
the Minsk Group of the CSCE help toward an early settlement of 
the problem? 
  [Papazyan] It is increasingly difficult to say when and how 
this war will end. Everyone should realize that 
Nagorno-Karabakh is a party to the conflict, so it should take 
part in the negotiations. It is probable that Elliason is more 
effective, in comparison with this predecessor Rafaeli [name as 
transliterated]; he is trying to change things, but I cannot 
give an assessment at the moment. I know one thing for certain, 
namely that the conflict should be settled as soon as possible 
by peaceful means, through political talks with all interested 
parties. Until this happens, I am sure that the Armenian people 
will withstand the difficulties and wait for a just settlement. 

