Language: <F P=105> Ukrainian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Kiev, 21 Feb -- Members of the Supreme Council of 
Ukraine Presidium discussed the working agenda of the Supreme 
Council session on 22-26 February. The issues of an 
all-Ukrainian referendum, Ukraine's membership in the CIS 
countries' economic union, and the accession of Ukraine to the 
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty [NPT] were not included in the 
agenda. 
  Participants in the presidium sitting focused their 
attention 
mainly on debating the issue of the correspondence of the 
Republic of Crimea's legislative acts with the Constitution of 
Ukraine. Vasyl Kozarenko, people's deputy of Ukraine, said this 
issue virtually could not be settled now because of the lack of 
time and absence of a mechanism whereby Crimea's legislative 
acts could be brought in line with the Constitution of Ukraine. 
Legal acts of both the president and Ukraine's and Crimea's 
parliaments must be assessed, in Vasyl Kozarenko's opinion, by a 
constitutional court, which at present is nonexistent. 
  In all, Supreme Council Presidium members included around 50 
issues in next week's plenary agenda. The issue of introducing 
changes and amendments to some of Ukraine's legislative acts on 
privatization questions will primarily be tackled. Deputies are 
planning to address the question of mandatory social insurance 
contributions for 1994. 
  On 23 February, deputies are planning to discuss the Law on 
the Protection of Information in Automatic Systems in its second 
reading and elect a National Television Council [Natsionalna 
Rada po Telebachennyu]. The issue of resolving the payments 
crisis will also be looked at. 
  On Thursday, 24 February, the Supreme Council will examine 
the Law on Corruption in its second reading. Deputies are 
planning to introduce changes and amendments to the Law on the 
Elections of the President of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic. The law was adopted in May 1991 and is still 
unchanged. 

