Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Yesterday's mutinies by demobilized soldiers in 
Pemba, the capital of Cabo Delgado Province, are but the latest 
in a series of such mutinies in that province alone. Chiure, 
Namialo, Ancuabe, and Montepuez District have already 
experienced similar demonstrations in the latter part of last 
year. Emilio Manhique reports: 
  [Begin recording] Dialogue averted the worst in Montepuez 
last week. The provincial government was forced to [word 
indistinct] team headed by the provincial director of the 
Department for the Prevention and Control of Natural Disasters, 
DPCCN, so the demobilized soldiers could voice their grievances. 
Famine is the principal problem faced by the demobilized 
soldiers. The money they received when they demobilized is 
already gone. It is worth noting that they [word indistinct] 
pittance: A soldier receives a total of 150,000 meticals upon 
demobilization. That [words indistinct] 25,000 meticals per 
month. 
  The problem is that the majority of the demobilized troops 
know how to do nothing other than soldiering. Furthermore, they 
have become used to having the state look after them. Today 
they are faced with civilian life and they feel like castaways 
in a very turbulent sea. Obviously, they are again turning to 
the state for help because they see the state as their father. 
In fact, this was the expression I heard most from demobilized 
soldiers in Montepuez. They kept saying: The state is our 
father. 
  Pedro Seguro, the administrator for Montepuez, may never 
have 
thought he would have so many sons from a single delivery. On 
just one occasion, Seguro received 309 demobilized soldiers 
(?who had returned) from various parts of the country and who 
went to his office to ask for food. They informed him that when 
they were demobilized they were told that, in case of 
difficulties, they could approach the administrator for help. 
Those soldiers keep calling the administrator, quote, our 
father, unquote. 
  Dialogue may have prevailed initially, but then it slid down 
to threats. The demobilized soldiers went to the 
administrator's house on more than nine occasions. They placed 
the administration building under siege and prevented work from 
being done. Under pressure, the administrator ordered the DPCCN 
to open its storehouses and distribute corn, cooking, beans, and 
hoes. The nongovernmental German Agrarian Action organization 
also supported those moves. 
  Two months later, though, the demobilized soldiers came back 
for more food. When the administrator told them that the 
storehouses were empty, they demanded that he hand over the corn 
owned by Lomaco [Lonrho [London Rhodesia]-Mozambique 
Agroindustrial Company] and Agricultural Products Marketing 
Company, Agricom, among other companies. The administrator made 
it clear that he did not have the authority to do that, 
whereupon the demobilized soldiers threatened to go on mutiny if 
a provincial government team did not go to Montepuez to hear 
their complaints. This was precisely the atmosphere that we 
found in Montepuez last week, but that time, at least, dialogue 
prevailed. 
  Provincial DPCCN Director (Julai) invited the demobilized 
soldiers to visit the DPCCN's storehouses so they could see for 
themselves that there was no food. He promised that they would 
receive some as soon as there was some food. Good sense won the 
day on that occasion but we were left with the abiding 
impression that the matter had only been temporarily put off. 
  The problem of demobilized soldiers in Montepuez, as in many 
other parts of the country, is a powder keg waiting to blow up. 
Though UN Special Representative Aldo Ajello has proposed it, I 
fail to see how an increase in compensation pay, from the 
equivalent of six months to 24 months, can help solve the 
problem. It will be just another palliative measure. 
  Moreover, such mutinies only make it all the more pressing 
for the Reintegration Commission, Core, to start operating as 
soon as possible. Civilian society must also be given a say 
concerning this matter. Let the opposition political parties 
neither fold their arms nor seek gains from this situation just 
because they may think this is the Mozambique Liberation Front 
Party's problem alone. When the forecast 80,000 soldiers have 
been demobilized and they continue to face problems rejoining 
civilian life, then we see that today's mutinies are but child 
play. These desperate and forgotten men are capable of causing 
much worse trouble. [end recording] 

