Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Rafael Medina and Roberto Melendez] </F>
  [Text] Tijuana, Baja California, 27 Mar -- Maria del 
Socorro Lopez, Jesus Romero Magana, and Ali Reibel Arista 
Chavez, officials of the Federal Attorney General's Office, have 
been able to determine from the investigation they are 
conducting the motive behind the assassination of Luis Donaldo 
Colosio [Institutional Revolutionary Party, PRI, presidential 
candidate], that Mario Aburto Martinez belongs to the Cardenist 
Front for National Reconstruction Party [PFCRN], and that he 
traveled to Chiapas in early January. This is according to 
statements made by the alleged assassin's girlfriend, Graciela 
Gonzalez Diaz, age 16. 
  Meanwhile, in another booth on the third floor of the 
Attorney General's Office [PGR] in this city, another detainee 
had to testify after being fingered as the "heavy man," who 
opened up room in the crowd for Mario Aburto Martinez to fire 
his gun only a few centimeters from Colosio's head. According to 
our correspondents, his name is Tranquilino Sanchez Venegas, 
allegedly hired -- among many others -- by the Institutional 
Revolutionary Party to protect the candidate during the rally 
held at Lomas Taurinas neighborhood. 
  In giving further details to a representative of the Federal 
Attorney General's Office and without being pressured, Graciela 
Gonzalaz Diaz, who was accompanied by her uncle, Isidoro 
Gonzalez Reyes, said that Mario Aburto had proudly told her that 
he belonged to the PRD [Party of the Democratic Revolution], 
that he had been appointed "eagle knight," and that he had been 
given a special mission. Martinez, who was also her fellow 
worker, however, had never revealed the mission to her. 
Likewise, according to the documents drafted in triplicate 
containing the statements made by Graciela Gonzalez Diaz, she 
explained that Mario Aburto was very reserved about the 
activities he carried out within his party, and "to show off" he 
told her that he had traveled to Chiapas during the uprising. 
Gonzalez Diaz said: "He told me he had traveled to Chiapas on 
previous occasions." 
  After Sanchez Venegas was fully identified, the authorities 
played a videocassette which clearly shows how he opened up room 
for Mario Aburto Martinez so that he could shoot at the 
politician from Sonora State. Likewise, in photographs of the 
same rally prior to the attack, it can be seen that Sanchez 
Venegas never took his eyes off Mario Aburto, who was only a few 
meters away. 
  Based on photos and the videocassette, federal prosecutors 
asked Aburto Martinez's alleged collaborator about this 
participation, but, rejecting all charges despite the evidence, 
he just kept saying, "it is all a coincidence." The 
videocassette shows how, after the PRI candidate appeared, 
Tranquilino Sanchez Venegas draws near and pushes General Domiro 
Roberto Garcia Reyes to one side of Luis Donaldo Colosio, 
enabling Aburto to approach the candidate from the right side 
and shoot him. He is also observed to step back when the shot 
is fired. He then disappears. 
  The agents investigating the case have yet to determine who 
passed himself off as Aburto at Aburto's place of employment on 
the day of the attack. According to Gonzalez Diaz, this person 
drove a late model blue sports car with white license plates 
from the border area of the state. The place where Aburto spent 
the night prior to the attack has not been determined. He did 
not stay with his mother, Maria Luisa Martinez Pinones, at No. 
20150 Santa Rosalia Street, Block No. 54, Lot 7, Buenos Aires 
Sur neighborhood; or with his aunt at No. 20842 Mexicali Street, 
also in the Buenos Aires neighborhood. Neighbors of Aburto's 
mother, who refused to give their names, told reporters that he 
only visited his mother on rare occasions and that sometimes 
they "argued" loudly about money. Aburto's mother lives with her 
two daughters, Karina and Elizabeth. To earn extra money, they 
rent a room to two youths from Michoacan who were also arrested 
for questioning, but who were later released. Maria Luisa lives 
in a black two-story cement and brick building. A plastic Santa 
Claus face hangs from one of the windows on the second floor. 
  Adrian Carrera, director of the Federal Judicial Police, and 
Juan Alberto Carbajal, director of preliminary investigations, 
arrived in this city last night apparently to widen their 
investigations. Carbajal returned to Mexico City at 0700 today 
aboard a special PGR flight. Sanchez Venegas' legal situation is 
unknown, but it seems he will not be released until his role in 
the case is established. Federal agents sent from Mexico City 
and those stationed here are looking for the owner of the 
vehicle described by Gonzalez Diaz, who is also "a key figure" 
in solving this case. 

