Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Friends and family of the jailed pro-democracy 
activist Zhai Weimin are to travel to Henan province's Yeshugou 
jail today in an attempt to secure his release. 
  At least two Beijing-based dissidents and half a dozen 
family 
members met in Luoyang city last night and will set out for the 
prison, near Xinan city, this morning. They were hoping prison 
officials would allow them to see Zhai, who has reportedly been 
held in solitary confinement since being sent back to his home 
town under police escort on March 7. 
  They want to find out about Zhai's living conditions and why 
he was detained, sources said. "Only then will we make loud 
appeals for his release," one dissident said. Tomorrow, the 
group plan to go to the Luoyang public security office and may 
visit the provincial public security bureau in Zhengzhou. They 
will also request meetings with members of the provincial 
people's congress standing committee in Zhai's home town of Xian. 
  Beijing dissidents said they delivered a letter to the 
Minister of Public Security, Tao Siju, on Saturday protesting 
against Zhai's detention. Zhai, number six on the "list of 21 
most-wanted students" after the 1989 Tiananmen Square student 
movement, was detained without warning on March 6. 
  In a note smuggled out of Yeshugou jail by a primary school 
student last week, Zhai said: "I am being investigated by 
public security officers in Yeshugou. Estimate must wait at 
least three months until after June 4." 
  Beijing dissidents, who received the message, believe Zhai's 
detention is related to activities being planned to commemorate 
the upcoming fifth anniversary of the Tiananmen riots. Public 
security officials have already stepped up vigilance in the 
square. 
  His sister, Zhai Yujie, who reportedly saw him last Friday, 
could not confirm the reasons for his detainment. Zhai, 23, was 
released on September 13 after three-and-a-half years in jail 
for "counter- revolutionary propaganda and incitement". He was 
arrested-in 1990 for involvement in the underground Democratic 
Front for the Salvation of China. 
  Dissidents were surprised by the tough treatment meted out 
to 
Zhai, who was not on parole and had had his full political 
rights restored. 

