Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Telepress" newscast] </F>
  [Text] Fenasteg [National Federation of State Workers 
Unions] leaders today made their way into the National Palace 
and thus far have occupied the building's first and second 
floors. 
  President Ramiro De Leon Carpio, who was not in the palace 
at 
the time of the occupation, said he will take strong action 
against individuals who disrupt public order. In statements at 
the La Industria park, where he inaugurated the Catholic Fair, 
de Leon said that he may momentarily order the labor leaders' 
dislodgement from the palace. 
  [Begin recording] [De Leon] I will not tolerate illegal 
actions. This government has been characterized as weak and 
indecisive but I am going to prove now that it is a government 
that bases its actions on the law. If their actions are illegal 
I will request that they be legally dislodged from the National 
Palace, which is a public building, and I will take drastic 
action. This is not the way to resolve problems. 
  Take for example the case of Fenasep [National Federation of 
Public Employees Unions]; we are talking with them, reasonable 
proposals have been set forth, they have proposed creative 
solutions and we have made counterproposals. This is the 
civilized, orderly, intelligent, nonradical way of dealing with 
and resolving Guatemala's problems. It is illegal for them to 
occupy the National Palace and I am going to contact 
Chimaltenango immediately to ensure that legal actions are 
implemented. If the labor leaders are conducting themselves 
illegally, if they are perpetrating a crime, I will have no 
other choice but to take action. 
  I do not take action under pressure. I sit down and talk 
because I have always been a man with a democratic spirit and 
attitude and I am still proving this. However, I will not 
tolerate the perpetration of acts that are classified as crimes 
and if they are perpetrating a crime I will order the Attorney 
General's Office to use a legal order if necessary to dislodge 
the labor leaders. 
  [Unidentified reporter] What is your reaction to the charges 
of repression leveled against you and your government by Health 
Ministry employees today in response to yesterday's arrest of 
certain (?Health Ministry) employees? 
  [De Leon] Their arrest was not an act of repression. 
  The law states that anyone who commits a crime must be 
arrested. They flagrantly committed a crime yesterday and for 
this reason they were arrested. A judge released them later. 
This is as problem of another branch. We are going to continue 
filing charges and calling for administrative and criminal 
sanctions because it is unfair for the Guatemalan people to 
suffer as a result of illegal actions. 
  Public services are deficient and now more than ever because 
of the irresponsible attitude of persons who, instead of 
resorting to dialogue, as the government is doing, adopt illegal 
positions and carry out criminal actions such as those of 
yesterday. The National Police have been given orders and they 
have the legal responsibility of arresting and taking these 
persons to court. We will continue doing this until these 
persons realize that the government is not weak, that the 
government acts according to the law, and we will continue doing 
this. 
  [Reporter] What are you going to do now that Fenasteg and 
Fenasep have said that the workers do not accept the 
government's proposals? 
  [De Leon] We can continue talking with Fenasep and with 
whoever may want to continue talking. Fenasteg has never talked 
with us. Its radical attitude has existed from the beginning. 
We are just waiting for the strike to be declared illegal to 
take legal action on this. The government has the political 
will to resolve the problem but it does not have the money. 
They are demanding a 40 percent salary increase. There are 
150,000 or 200,000 public employees. Not all of them are 
backing this illegal strike, true. There are also 8 million 
Guatemalans who live in poverty. I am obligated to them. I 
cannot turn my back on those who live in extreme poverty, on 
those who do not even enjoy the privilege of holding a job. 
Approximately 50 percent of Guatemalans do not have jobs, do 
not have any kind of salary. Public employees have a salary 
that deserves to be increased, but under different conditions. 
  In the Health Ministry there is a 130-million-quetzals 
deficit. We are trying to pay that. We owe money to suppliers. 
We have a fiscal deficit of 900 million quetzals, and a 
floating debt of 1.2 billion quetzals. 
  I will continue working in accordance with the state's 
financial possibilities. In the face of that 50 percent of the 
population who live in misery, in extreme poverty because they 
do not have a job, bureaucrats want a 40-percent increase. This 
is impossible. 
  [Reporter] How will the Constitutionality Court resolution 
on 
a tax law affect the government's budget? 
  [De Leon] The ruling by that court has further deteriorated 
our financial situation. The ruling deprives the state of 600 
million quetzals. This has made the state's financial situation 
more difficult. We are adopting measures to recover the 600 
million, but while we do this, the deficit grows and it is 
impossible to yield to irrational demands. 
  If they want pandemonium, a crisis, more chaos, then I will 
adopt measures in line with such intentions for illegal actions 
and public disorder. [end recording] 

