Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Yearend commentary" by staff reporters: "Discussing in </F>
Breadth and Depth China's Economic Reform and Development in 
1993"] 
  [Text] Sustained Economic Construction, Rapid 
Growth, and Extensive and Profound Changes in Economic Life 
  In October 1993, NIHON KEIZAI SHIMBUN pointed out in a 
lengthy article: "The Chinese economy is 'expanding' in the 
middle of a world depression. This has not only produced 
crustal changes within China, but is beginning to produce a 
strong impact outside the country." 
  On 17 November, Chancellor Kohl told journalists before 
concluding his visit to China: "It is obviously a country that 
has awakened. Its economy is developing in a spectacular way." 
  In 1993, China's economic development has maintained its 
momentum of rapid growth. Statistics show that the Chinese 
economy has been growing at double-digit rates for 23 months 
running since Comrade Xiaoping made his remarks during his 
inspection tour of South China. The economic growth rate for the 
year 1993 is expected to be around 13.3 percent, and annual GNP 
is expected to exceed 3 trillion yuan. 
  At the end of the year, news from various parts of the 
Chinese countryside is that apart from cotton, major 
agricultural products such as grain and oil-bearing crops have 
all seen good results. 
  In 1993, our country's opening up to the outside world has 
continued to develop in depth, in diverse spheres and in all 
directions, and has exhibited even greater vigor. 
  At present, areas totaling nearly 500,000 square km have 
been 
opened up to the outside world. Some 320 million people live in 
these areas. A Public Security Bureau spokesman announced in 
Beijing on 12 November that the State Council had recently 
approved the opening up of a further 134 cities and counties to 
the outside world. This increases the number of open cities and 
counties to 1,053. Foreigners with valid documents are free to 
travel to these places without having to apply for separate 
travel permits. 
  On 15 November, customs sources said that effective 31 
December, China would reduce tariffs on another batch of 
products (in other words, China voluntarily announced tax cuts 
on imported goods). It is understood that this tariff 
readjustment involves 2,898 items of dutiable goods, including 
some raw materials in short supply in China and machinery and 
equipment that are in great demand. After this 8.8 percent cut, 
the "arithmetic average" of Chinese tariffs will drop to 36.4 
percent. Reportedly the State Council's aim in reducing tariffs 
of its own volition is to "promote the liberalization of world 
trade and promote the merging of the Chinese economy with the 
world economy." 
  On 22 November, the responsible person of the State 
Council's 
Special Economic Zones Office pointed out: The work of 
consolidating development zones has been brought to a temporary 
close. According to consolidated statistics of 26 provinces and 
municipalities, the number of unauthorized development zones 
established by local governments at and below the provincial 
level totaled 2,050. After consolidation, only 470 remain. 
These plus the 100-plus state-sponsored economic and 
technological development zones puts the total number of 
development zones at 600. He expressed this hope: True 
development zones should aim for top- notch world standards and 
truly "prosper." 
  According to the State Science and Technology Commission, 52 
high and new technology development zones have been established 
across the country. Their cumulative income over the past four 
years amounted to 42.9 billion yuan. Total output value was 
33.8 billion yuan, and profits and taxes amounted to 6.2 billion 
yuan. 
  Foreign investment in China has shown signs of rapid growth 
in 1993. Actual import of foreign capital amounted to $9.4 
billion in the first six months, with a further increase of $5.6 
billion in the third quarter. Import of funds for the year is 
estimated to be nearly double the 1992 figure. 
  The development of Shanghai in general and Pudong in 
particular attracted worldwide attention in 1993. It is 
understood that by the end of October 1993, foreign investors 
from 44 countries and regions had established 3,031 
foreign-funded enterprises and shareholding companies in 
Shanghai, with investment totaling $6.124 billion. The 
development of the economic belt along the Chang Jiang Basin 
subsequent to the economic takeoff of Shanghai and Pudong has 
also aroused universal attention. 
  In spring, the Eighth National People's Congress [NPC] and 
Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference met in 
Beijing and the "socialist market economy" affirmed by the 14th 
CPC National Congress was written into the Constitution. This 
provides a fundamental guarantee, in the form of state law, for 
China's economic structural reform. The target of establishing 
a socialist market economy has fueled the enthusiasm of the 
people in town and country, and has become a driving force for 
the development of production this year. 
  This year's economic construction involves two most 
spectacular capital construction projects. First, preparations 
for the Three Gorges Project -- the relocation of residents and 
the construction of preliminary cofferdams -- have been 
unleashed in an all-round way. Sources say that this huge 
project, which involves a static investment of 500 billion yuan, 
17 years of construction and a total installed capacity of 17.68 
million kw, will go full steam ahead next year. 
  Second, railroad construction will continue to be accorded 
top priority by the central authorities. Construction of the 
"Beijing-Kowloon Railway" is in full swing. It is reported that 
more than 120,000 workers from 16 engineering bureaus under the 
Ministry of Railways and from local railroad construction units 
are taking part in the construction of this 2,370-km project. 
By December, 88 km of bridges, 8 km of tunnels, 213 km of 
main-line single tracks and 40 km of side tracks had been 
completed. Construction of the whole project has seen swift and 
satisfactory progress. On the basis of a successful first 
battle, there should not be any problem realizing the goal of 
"completing the track- laying in three years and finishing up 
the project (and opening the railroad to traffic) one year 
afterward." 
  The development of production has brought about an 
improvement in the people's livelihood. Statistics for the 
third quarter show a further increase in the income of urban and 
rural inhabitants. After allowing for price rises, the living 
expenditure income of urban inhabitants was up 12 percent and 
that of rural inhabitants was up about 5 percent. 
  China's urban and rural markets have continued to "bloom" in 
1993. According to statistics, at the end of October, total 
retail sales were 968.7 billion yuan, up 22.4 percent (from the 
same period last year, and the same below), or 9.3 percent after 
allowing for price rises. 
  The living standards of urban inhabitants have seen steady 
improvement. According to the Economic Research Center under 
the State Planning Commission, food consumption by Chinese urban 
inhabitants has reached average international standards. Their 
consumption of clothing, articles of everyday use and durable 
consumer goods has also reached or surpassed the average for 
middle- income countries. The amount of durable consumer goods 
possessed by urban inhabitants has reached the level of Japan in 
the seventies, meaning that China has achieved a modest level of 
prosperity ahead of schedule. In Lhasa alone, 80 percent of 
households have color television sets. This percentage is 
higher than that in France. Total personal consumption of gold 
in China ranks first in the world. 
  Another indicator of the profound changes in economic life 
is 
that the word "market" has become one of the most oft-repeated 
words in China in 1993. The number of topics around the concept 
of "market" that have sprung up in China's economic construction 
and reform that has become a miracle in world economic history. 
  Comrade Deng Xiaoping told foreign guests back in 1979 that 
socialism can also operate a market economy. In present-day 
China, the scope of the "market" deployment of social resources 
is rapidly expanding, while the scope of "control" of the 
planned distribution of capital goods is steadily shrinking. 
The birth and gradual perfection of the rolled steel market, 
the coal market, the nonferrous metal market, the timber market 
and other markets have put an end to the situation where the 
state has highly centralized and unified control over 
everything. Small commodities markets and farm produce markets 
are developing like a prairie fire. Even the China National 
Nuclear Corporation has followed the footsteps of China's 
aerospace industry and started edging its way into the 
international market. While strictly adhering to international 
standards regarding "the peaceful utilization" of nuclear 
energy, China has begun exporting nuclear power technology to 
Pakistan and Iran, signed cooperation agreements on the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy with 12 countries, and established ties of 
exchange and cooperation with many countries and regions. 
  Reform promotes development, and development is conducive to 
the promotion of reform. Against the background of an ample 
supply of commodities and an increase in people's incomes, price 
reform that has a direct bearing on the public interest has also 
been making big strides forward in a peaceful atmosphere. Some 
economists point out that although the year 1993 has seen the 
expansion of investment and inflation, it has also seen the 
number of commodities controlled by the state slashed to less 
than 30 from 722 in the past. To them, it was "beyond one's 
wildest dreams" that the price reform could have succeeded in 
such a basically smooth manner. 
  According to a survey of 1,539 households in the three 
cities 
of Beijing, Tianjin and Shanghai between 15 August and 10 
September by the authorities concerned, 54.5 percent of 
residents have their own consumption plans and panic buying of 
the magnitude seen in 1988 would be unlikely even if prices were 
to go still higher. The reasons given by respondents are as 
follows: 1) Price hikes occur regularly. "Panic-buying works 
for a short time, but you cannot panic-buy all your life." 
Experts say that this is because "the tolerance level of the 
public has been greatly raised." 2) With ample supplies on the 
market, there is no need to panic-buy. 3) Some people say they 
have a small income and do not have the money to panic-buy. 4) 
People believe that the state will take measures to curb soaring 
prices. 5) People have basically purchased all major durable 
consumer goods and there is nothing more to panic-buy. 6) There 
are many other popular avenues of investment, such as shares and 
bonds. 
  The abolition of grain coupons can best illustrate the 
point. For more than 40 years, grain coupons were the most 
important of the various negotiable instruments next to the 
renminbi. However, in the past dozen years or so it seems that 
in an instant grain coupons have changed from certificates with 
no specific price to a "second renminbi" for exchanging for 
eggs, and then ceased being used. Since 1992, some provinces 
have declared grain coupons "invalid." In 1993, the Beijing 
People's Government also announced that grain coupons would no 
longer be used. The invalidation of grain coupons in Chinese 
cities, including Beijing, has not led to social unrest. 
Chinese grain coupons have been withdrawn from circulation into 
the hands of collectors. It is understood that coupons for 
grain, meat, cotton, cloth, eggs, sesame paste and other 
commodities have aroused the keen interest of collectors both at 
home and abroad. A set of seven grain coupons issued in 1982 is 
said to be fetching as much as 100 Hong Kong dollars in the Hong 
Kong negotiable instruments market. 
  There are also problems in the sphere of consumption. In the 
first half of the year, total investment in fixed assets showed 
an increase of 61 percent compared with the same period of last 
year, and of this, 40 percent has already been turned into 
consumption means. However, consumer services for urban 
inhabitants continue to be "lacking" in one way or another, 
primarily in housing, schooling and the installation of 
telephones. Some experts regard the unduly high level of 
spending by urban inhabitants on durable goods and gold 
ornaments as an abnormal phenomenon. 
  Another abnormal phenomenon of social consumption is: While 
education expenses have become an increasingly heavy "burden" on 
most parents, the so-called "elite schools" that charge 
exorbitant fees are flooded with enrollments. While more than 
4.4 million families have housing problems, "garden villas" have 
mushroomed and more than 50 million square meters of commercial 
housing are still waiting for buyers. According to some 
experts, the following description best epitomizes this kind of 
blind consumption: There is a 29-inch colour television in the 
middle of a room 10 square meters in size. "Skin renewal cream" 
costing nearly 100 yuan a bottle is selling like hot cakes, but 
what people get for their money may be a face full of pimples.... 
<H3>  The Positive Results Achieved by the Macrocontrol Measures 
Prove That Macroeconomic Control Is an Integral Part of the 
Market Economy </H3>
  In early 1993, economic "overheating" became a worrying 
phenomenon: The prices of "hot items" such as automobiles, 
rolled steel, aluminum and timber kept "escalating" and there 
was serious hoarding.... This signal reflects that the scales 
of investment and credit have exceeded the tolerance level of 
resources. This, coupled with the increasingly chaotic 
financial and real estate markets and the construction of 
development zones, has seriously threatened the healthy 
development of the Chinese economy. 
  In order to put an end to this abnormal situation, the State 
Council adopted emergency and necessary macrocontrol measures in 
June and appointed Vice Premier Zhu Rongji governor of the 
People's Bank of China. 
  This important personnel arrangement by the State Council 
and 
the "16-point decision" promulgated by the CPC Central Committee 
in June have been regarded at home and abroad as the starting 
point of the drive to consolidate the financial order and 
implement macrocontrol measures. 
  The strengthening and improvement of macroeconomic control 
has formed an important aspect of economic development in China 
in 1993. Facts have proved that the swift and decisive approach 
in consolidating the financial and economic order and the 
implementation of resolute, prudent and effective macrocontrol 
measures are essential in resolving some of the pressing 
problems that have cropped up in economic development. 
  This is best illustrated by the gradual "cooling" of the 
1993 
real estate and development zone craze. After the 1992 "boom," 
real estate and development zones finally entered a stage of 
sober and healthy development in the summer and fall of 1993. 
  We visited the Chang Jiang Delta in January 1993. There are 
so many "development zones" there that it is perhaps not too 
exaggerated to say that they are practically adjoining. The 
inland provinces also refuse to be seen lagging behind, and 
"development zones" have also been set up one next to the other 
in many places. In order to engage in property development and 
the construction of development zones, it is necessary to obtain 
land, build houses and attract investment. With cities and 
counties vying with one another to build houses and "attract 
investment," some local governments are competing to slash their 
land prices. In view of this situation, the State Land 
Administration had to appeal for greater foresight on the 
question of land prices. 
  As property development overheated, real estate agents also 
mushroomed. With the emergence of this "boom," many of the 
malpractices of the old economic structure again revealed 
themselves to the full: Leaders of some units who had nothing 
to do with property development were using public funds to buy 
land and property. 
  Huge amounts of funds rushed from the inland provinces to 
the 
property sector in the coastal areas, and the inflow of funds 
"forced up" land and property prices in these areas. Seeing the 
escalation of land and property prices, more units and people 
pumped money into the property sector. 
  What was particularly worrying was that many financial units 
also became heavily involved. Sources say that some local banks 
"allocated" funds entrusted to their care to their own "three- 
property (san chan 0005 3934)" enterprises, or directly engaged 
in the buying and selling of shares and property. Some engaged 
in inter-bank borrowing in violation of financial discipline.... 
  The "impulsive" development of real estate, development 
zones and capital construction is bound to "push" the prices of 
building materials up. In early 1993, the prices of rolled 
steel, cement and glass went up by 110 percent, 290 percent and 
100 percent respectively compared with early 1992. The sharp 
increase in the prices of building materials touched off a new 
round of hoarding. Since it was difficult to purchase rolled 
steel, cement and glass following the price hikes, inferior 
building materials flooded the market and foreign supplies 
brought in by huge freighters from across the miles were 
"queueing" at Chinese ports waiting to be unloaded. Many key 
state projects could not start work as scheduled because 
building materials were not to be had.... 
  The blind development of infrastructure and processing 
industries made all the more glaring the already irrational 
contradictions in China's existing economic structure; 
transport, energy and power supply were all hard pressed; 
foreign exchange reserves were on the decline; the value of the 
renminbi took a plunge on foreign exchange swap markets.... All 
these inevitably led to another sharp increase in the prices of 
consumer goods. In the first quarter of 1993, the rate of 
inflation was 11.1 percent for the whole nation and 15.7 percent 
in 35 big and medium-sized cities. 
  Because of this, alarms signals were rung in May and June 
1993 on the economic front, particularly the financial front: 
  The lack of cash for the purchase of summer grain meant that 
more "white slips" were likely to be issued; urban and rural 
savings registered a sharp fall; "green slips" involving huge 
amounts were issued in postal remittance; enterprises faced a 
shortage of circulating funds; the ratio of the provisional 
funds of banks (the ratio between surplus reserves and deposits) 
showed an obvious decline; the financial order was chaotic; 
unauthorized financing, inter-borrowing and appropriation of 
funds reached "a stage of insanity," with unauthorized interbank 
borrowing amounting to hundreds of billions of yuan.... 
  It was under such a pressing situation that macrocontrol 
measures were introduced. 
  Jiang Zemin had this to say when he relayed to the 
democratic 
parties the spirit of Document No. 6 of the CPC Central 
Committee on 30 June: The economic situation in the first half 
of this year has been excellent on the whole, but contradictions 
and problems have also emerged, and some of these are quite 
glaring. He emphasized that while the reasons for these 
contradictions and problems were manifold, the fundamental 
reason was that the economic structure had not been properly 
straightened out. 
  Jiang Zemin also pointed out in particular: "The market 
economy not only does not reject macroeconomic control, but must 
have a perfect and effective macrocontrol system." 
  On 1 July, General Secretary Jiang solemnly pointed out in 
his speech marking the founding of the CPC that efforts must be 
made to strengthen party discipline in economic work. "He who 
does not make plans for the whole situation will be unable to 
handle the problems of a single area; and he who does not make 
long-term plans will be unable to solve immediate problems." 
"Those who ignore the interests of the whole ... must be 
subject to strict disciplinary action." 
  The XINHUA NEWS AGENCY carried Vice Premier Zhu Rongji's 
speeches at the National Conference on Financial Work on 5 July 
and 9 July. The gist of his speeches is as follows: We must 
"seize the opportunity to speed up development while ensuring 
stability and avoiding losses, particularly huge losses. We 
must seize the opportunity, treasure the opportunity and make 
good use of the opportunity." "The strengthening of 
macroeconomic control does not mean all-round retrenchment. 
What it means is that we should carry out structural 
readjustment." "The present rapid development is healthy on the 
whole, and problems encountered in the course of advance can be 
resolved through the acceleration and deepening of reform." 
"Tackling the problems of 'bottlenecks' is a pressing task at 
present. The state will make readjustments in the use of funds 
in accordance with its industrial policies." "Finance is the 
economic lifeline of the state. The Central Committee has 
decided to proceed from the consolidation of the financial order 
in resolving the problems encountered in economic development." 
Zhu Rongji urged leaders in the financial sector to strictly 
enforce orders and prohibitions, and emphasized that those who 
failed to do so would be seriously dealt with. He also 
emphasized that this time the Central Committee was applying a 
"partial brake" rather than a "complete brake." 
  In July, Vice Premier Zou Jiahua also discussed, on two 
separate occasions in Beijing, the main problems of the loss of 
macrocontrol in property development. He said: Some localities 
have been overstepping their authority in granting land use 
rights or allowing different departments to grant land use 
rights. The illegal transactions in state-owned land have 
resulted in the abnormal development of real estate. Land has 
been leased out, but its development and use have been severely 
delayed (or, as it is colloquially put, the land which is marked 
out simply lies idle under the sun). The random pricing of land 
on lease has given property speculators opportunities to 
exploit, as a result of which huge proceeds from state-owned 
land have ended up in the hands of "speculators." There are too 
many real estate companies and insufficient means of control 
over them, which has led to loss of control over real estate 
enterprises. The irrational investment structure and the 
construction of excessive numbers of up-market hotels, office 
buildings and resort villas have also seriously affected the 
normal use and working of state funds. 
  The timely introduction of macroeconomic control has hit 
home on many major problems. With the local party committees 
and governments resolutely implementing the decisions of the 
Central Committee, the macrocontrol measures have quickly 
produced initial results. 
  On 30 August, Zhu Rongji announced at the Third Plenary 
Session of the Eighth NPC that initial success had been achieved 
in the consolidation of the financial order in line with the 
correct decision of the party Central Committee and the State 
Council. He also pointed out in particular that in resolving 
the contradictions in economic and financial work, the 
fundamental way out lay in deepening the reform and seizing the 
opportunity to carry out financial reform. 
  In the course of establishing a socialist market economy, 
people have gradually deepened their understanding of how to 
handle the relations between the market mechanism and 
macroeconomic control. 
  On 11 November, the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC 
National Congress opened in Beijing under the watchful eyes of 
people at home and abroad. During the session, General 
Secretary Jiang Zemin further summed up the work of 
macroeconomic control in 1993. 
  He pointed out: "Macroeconomic control by the state and the 
role of the market mechanism are both intrinsic requirements of 
the socialist market economy. The two are unified and 
complementary; they promote each other." "Facts have proved 
that the measures taken by the party Central Committee and the 
State Council to strengthen and improve macroeconomic control 
are entirely necessary and correct." 
  These remarks by General Secretary Jiang at once summed up 
the work of macroeconomic control carried out by the Central 
Committee this year and showed the enhancement of our party's 
understanding of the market economy. Macroeconomic control is 
an integral part of the market economy. 
<H3>  The "50-Point Decision" Adopted by the Third Plenary Session 
of the 14th CPC Central Committee Outlined Socialist Political 
Economy With Chinese Characteristics </H3>
  Like the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central 
Committee, the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee, which met from 11 to 14 November, was a "milestone" 
in China's course of reform. The session adopted a 50-point 
decision, fully endorsed the task of establishing the socialist 
market economy proposed by the 14th CPC National Congress, and 
set the basic framework of China's future course of 
market-oriented reform. 
  Under the personal direction of Comrade Deng Xiaoping and 
adhering to the ideological line of seeking truth from facts, 
the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central Committee 
broke through the confines of "taking class struggle as the key 
link" on the basis of the integration of theory and practice for 
the first time, shifted the focus of the work of the whole party 
and the whole nation onto the course of economic construction, 
and ushered in a new period of socialist construction. 
  Under the guidance of Comrade Xiaoping's theory of building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics, the 14th CPC National 
Congress, on the theoretical plane, for the first time broke 
free of the ideological fetters which had long seen the planned 
economy as an innate characteristic of socialism and put forward 
the great concept of establishing a socialist market economy. 
The Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee 
gave embodiment to the objectives and principles put forward at 
the 14th CPC National Congress, mapped out the overall plan for 
the socialist market economy, and proposed the program for the 
gradual transition from a planned economic structure to a 
socialist market economic structure. 
  In May this year, the Political Bureau of the Central 
Committee decided to establish a group for drafting the 
documents of the Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central 
Committee. With the Central Financial and Economic Leading 
Group (headed by Jiang Zemin) at the helm, 16 investigation 
groups comprising several hundred people from the Central 
Committee and some of the provinces and cities were dispatched 
to various parts of the country, where they conducted surveys on 
16 topics, such as the transformation of the operational 
mechanism in state-owned enterprises, and wrote investigation 
reports totaling several million characters. The Political 
Bureau also instructed the drafting group that they should take 
as their guidance Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on building 
socialism with Chinese characteristics, and pay attention to the 
following four principles: While having a fairly comprehensive 
overall plan, it is necessary to tightly grasp the prominent 
contradictions and problems confronting us in our reform and 
development and make breakthroughs in key areas. While 
embodying the general laws of market economy and absorbing and 
assimilating the successful experience of other countries, it is 
also necessary to reflect the essential characteristics of the 
socialist system, sum up our own practical experience and 
proceed from China's own national conditions. While reflecting 
the pressing need to seize the opportunity to speed up the 
establishment of the new system, it is also necessary to take 
into consideration the fact that the establishment and 
perfection of a new structure involves a development process and 
is progressive. While striving for a high ideological and 
theoretical standard, care must be taken to make sure that the 
document is able to guide practical work and is easy to 
implement. 
  The draft went through repeated revisions between May and 
September, and the fifth draft was completed on 28 September. 
This draft was sent to the various provinces, municipalities 
and autonomous regions and various central ministries and 
commissions for comments. Later, the opinions of the various 
democratic parties and the Central Party School were also 
sought. It is understood that more than 270 major changes were 
suggested by comrades. The document was formally submitted to 
the plenary session for deliberation on 11 November. During the 
four-day session, another 30-plus changes were made. 
  The 50-point decision adopted by the Third Plenary Session 
of the 14th CPC Central Committee was born against this general 
background after repeated deliberation and revision. It took us 
only a year between the 14th CPC National Congress and the Third 
Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee to come up 
with a framework and a specific program for establishing the 
socialist market economy. This was a major breakthrough both in 
theoretical and in practical terms. The decision adopted by 
this plenary session may be considered socialist political 
economy with Chinese characteristics, the continuation and 
development of scientific socialism and Marxist political 
economy, and another great contribution made by the Chinese 
Communists in exploring the socialist road. 
  Comrade Jiang Zemin delivered an important speech at this 
plenary session. He pointed out: We can all see that the 
market mechanism is playing an increasingly more important role 
in China's economic life. However, the fact that reform is 
lagging behind in certain spheres is affecting the establishment 
of the new structure and the healthy development of the national 
economy.... We cannot stick to the beaten track of extensive 
operation by blindly going after output value and expanding the 
scale of investment.... It is true that we have many 
difficulties before us, but these have to be resolved through 
the deepening of reform.... 
  Jiang Zemin emphatically pointed out: "Admittedly the basic 
framework for the socialist market economic structure outlined 
by the decision of this plenary session still needs to be tested 
and continuously perfected in the course of practice. 
Nonetheless, it can still help increase our foresight in 
guiding the work of reform and make reform more effective." 
  The decision of the plenary session has aroused the 
attention 
of the whole world. Some foreign dispatches commented: The 
Third Plenary Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee has 
mapped out a grand blueprint for turning the Chinese economy 
into a socialist market economy before the end of this 
century.... China with its 1.2 billion people has become the 
world's center of growth and is playing the role of locomotive 
in Asia. If all goes well, China may become one of the largest 
economies in the world in the next century. 
<H3>  Combine Package Reform With Breakthroughs in Key Areas, 
Seize the Opportunity To Push the Reform Into the "Stage of 
Final Assault" </H3>
  China achieved tremendous successes in its economic 
restructuring in 1993. The implementation of the macrocontrol 
measures of the Central Committee and, in particular, the 
promulgation of the "50- Point Decision" of the Third Plenary 
Session of the 14th CPC Central Committee, suggest that reform 
has entered a new stage when package reform will be combined 
with breakthroughs in key areas. 
  The year 1993 has seen a decisive step forward in the price 
reform: Beginning in May, 90 percent of counties (or cities) 
deregulated their selling prices for grain and oils. Also 
liberalized were the ex-factory prices of rolled steel and of 
coal under unified central planning. Partial readjustment was 
also made in the price of crude oil. Direct pricing by the 
state accounted for only 5 percent of total retail sales in 
society, 10 percent of farm produce sold by peasants, and 15 
percent of the sales of capital goods. The weighting of 
products subject to mandatory planning in industrial output 
value dropped to only about 5 percent. 
  China began practicing a new accounting system on 1 July 
this 
year. Foreign dispatches described this as an important 
milestone in China's drive to "close ranks" with the world 
economy. 
  In the reform of the housing system, China has also made a 
quiet but firm step forward in 1993. Although the reform seems 
more sluggish in Beijing (central units in the capital), many 
localities have seen the gradual sale of public housing to 
individuals. Sources said: Since the cost of maintenance, 
management and construction has been going up swiftly, the 
original reform program of "progressive raising of rents by 
small increments" had trouble putting an end to the "dilemma" of 
revenue not being able to cover expenditure. It is understood 
that proceeds from the sale of public housing have been 
reinvested in the construction of new units. In 1993, the sale 
of commercial housing has shown a 55.6 percent growth over 1992. 
However, informed sources also pointed out that in the sale of 
public housing, care must be taken to oppose corruption and 
guard against the emergence of power factors. 
  According to the party Central Committee and the State 
Council, China is now in a position to make breakthroughs in key 
areas while spurring the overall reform. 
  A gratifying situation has emerged in China's reform since 
the Third Plenary Session. At the National Conference on 
Economic Work which met in Beijing in December, Jiang Zemin 
emphasized the need to seize the opportunity to speed up the 
pace of reform, opening up and modernization in order to 
initially establish a socialist market economic structure before 
the end of this century. Centering around this theme, the 
National Work Conference on Economic Restructuring, the National 
Planning Conference, the National Financial Work Conference, the 
National Economic and Trade Work Conference, and the National 
Conference of Heads of Branches of the People's Bank of China 
were subsequently convened in Beijing to discuss reforms of the 
planning, economic, monetary, financial and other systems. The 
year 1994 is expected to be a year of all-round advance in 
China's reform program. 
  In the reform of the economic structure, the reform of 
state- 
owned enterprises is the focus of the focus. 
  The Decision of the Third Plenary Session of the 12th CPC 
Central Committee on the Reform of the Economic Structure points 
out that the reform should have as its focus the invigoration of 
enterprises. The invigoration of state-owned enterprises, 
particularly large and medium-sized state-owned enterprises, is 
of immense significance. State-owned enterprises occupy a 
dominant position in industrial production in China. They are 
the economic lifeline of our country, and are also a major 
source of revenue. They are also principal employers of 
workers, as well as the foundation of our market economy. Their 
condition naturally has a direct impact on economic development 
and the ultimate establishment of a market economy in our 
country. 
  However, the invigoration of large and medium-sized 
state-owned enterprises is easier said than done, as enterprise 
reform is a formidable process. From the time decisionmaking 
power was first delegated to the lower levels in the early stage 
of reform to the promulgation of the "Decision on Changing the 
Operating Mechanism of State-Owned Enterprises," the Central 
Committee, the local authorities and the large and medium-sized 
state-owned enterprises have all done a lot of exploratory work. 
However, these efforts have produced limited results and many 
enterprises have not been "invigorated." 
  The "50-Point Decision" adopted by the Third Plenary Session 
of the 14th CPC Central Committee pushed the reform of 
state-owned enterprises to a new stage. Its major measure, 
namely the "promotion of a modern enterprise system," involves 
the establishment of a modern enterprise system which caters to 
the needs of the market economy, a system based on scientific 
management where property rights, powers and responsibilities 
are clearly defined and where the government does not directly 
interfere with the managerial activities of enterprises. This 
will be the basis for the establishment of the socialist market 
economy. 
  The establishment of a modern enterprise system is a natural 
requirement in the development of socialized mass production and 
a market economy. It is the direction of China's enterprise 
reform, and covers three major aspects: First, the 
establishment of enterprises as legal entities; second, the 
establishment of a system of limited liability; and third, the 
establishment of a scientific enterprise organizational system. 
  This arduous and complicated undertaking requires the 
accumulation of experience and the creation of the necessary 
conditions, and should be conducted step by step. At present, 
it is necessary to continue to implement the Enterprise Law and 
the "Regulations" on changing the management mechanism of 
industrial enterprises owned by the whole people, and to extend 
to enterprises the various rights and responsibilities 
pertaining to their management. 
  For state-owned enterprises, it is useful to experiment with 
the corporate system. However, introduction of the corporate 
system does not simply mean a change of name. The important 
thing is the shifting of mechanism. Enterprises that do not 
have the necessary conditions cannot be arbitrarily turned into 
corporate entities. Only a small number of them can be turned 
into publicly listed limited-liability companies. 
  The specific tentative plan is as follows: The small number 
of large enterprises that are making good profits, are highly 
efficient in management and are in accord with the state's 
industrial policies should be directly reorganized into 
limited-liability shareholding companies with the state holding 
controlling or partial shares. The majority of competitive 
enterprises that are in accord with the state's industrial 
policies should be organized into limited- liability companies 
funded by the state and other legal entities. Companies that 
turn out special-category products should be turned into 
limited-liability companies solely funded by the state. Small 
state-owned enterprises in general may also be reorganized 
through such methods as leasing, contracting, sale, and 
lease-purchase, or turned into shareholding cooperatives. 
State-owned enterprises that have long been performing poorly 
and producing unmarketable goods, have more liabilities than 
assets and cannot be reorganized through other means must be 
declared bankrupt in accordance with law.... These measures 
represent a major breakthrough in both theoretical and practical 
terms. 
  At the end of 1993, the head of the State Economic and Trade 
Commission disclosed at the National Economic and Trade Work 
Conference the following plans for the shifting of mechanism in 
1994: Steps will be taken to implement to the letter the 14 
types of operational autonomy and responsibility in 10,000 large 
and medium-sized state-owned enterprises, and to complete the 
work of inventory-taking. "Monitoring committees" will be 
dispatched in groups and stages to 1,000 key enterprises with a 
vital bearing on the national economy and the people's 
livelihood to monitor their state-owned assets. Further, 100 
large and medium-sized state-owned enterprises of different 
categories will be selected for the trial implementation of the 
modern enterprise system. 
  At present, apart from planning to systematically reorganize 
the organizational and managerial structures of state-owned 
enterprises in accordance with the "corporate system," the state 
also plans to make a "major move" in the reform of the financial 
and taxation systems. It is understood that this will be "one 
of the tasks in the reform of the state macrocontrol system next 
year." This will include the following three tasks: First, 
replace the existing financial contract system with the 
revenue-sharing system; second, unify the income tax rate for 
all types of enterprises and introduce a system of turnover tax 
with value-added tax as the mainstay; and third, reform the 
taxation system. 
  It is learned that nine localities are currently 
experimenting with the "revenue-sharing system." 
  In the reform of the financial system, the main task is to 
establish as quickly as possible a central banking system which 
will independently implement state monetary policies under the 
leadership of the State Council, and strive to turn specialized 
banks into commercial banks through the organization of 
policy-lending banks, thus separating the policy-related and 
commercial businesses of the banking system. In the reform of 
the investment system, the main task is to define investment 
entities and their scope of responsibility in accordance with 
different spheres of investment, and gradually establish a risk 
responsibility system for corporate investment and bank credits. 
  In addition, the 1994 reform program will also involve the 
further improvement of the market system. The state will 
further push forward the price reform and try to eliminate the 
"dual-track pricing system" for capital goods. In market 
development, the state will put the emphasis on the financial, 
labor, property, technology and information markets. 
  In addition, the State Economic and Trade Commission has, in 
accordance with the Decision of the Third Plenary Session of the 
14th CPC Central Committee, drawn up a "program" for the 
strengthening of economic regulation and control in 1994. 
<H5>  There Are Numerous Difficulties, But the Future Is Bright </H5>
  China has achieved tremendous successes in economic 
restructuring and economic development in 1993, but there are 
still many problems that deserve our attention. 
  According to the State Statistical Bulletin published by the 
XINHUA News Agency, the following are the major problems in our 
economic life: First, investment in fixed assets is growing too 
swiftly. In the first three quarters, investment by state-owned 
units totaled 401.5 billion yuan, up 66.4 percent. Second, 
price levels have been soaring. Average price hikes were 
registered at 12 percent at the end of October, or 18.9 percent 
for 35 large and medium-sized cities. Third, enterprises are 
generally short of production and circulating funds. Some 
less-competitive enterprises have not been doing well in sales. 
These enterprises are confronted by growing inventories and 
mounting debts. Fourth, since little improvement has been made 
in the conditions of agricultural production, and since the 
income gap between urban and rural inhabitants is widening and 
the peasants are not very enthusiastic about farming, the 
problem of rural employment is becoming more and more serious. 
  Unfair distribution and development opportunities have 
worsened. Apart from the fact that the gap between town and 
country and between east and west is widening, the income gaps 
between different ownership systems and different industries 
within the same locality are also widening. This not only 
affects people's choice of jobs, but has also produced a huge 
"flow of personnel" who are solely motivated by prospects of a 
higher income. This has produced drastic changes in the 
original employment "hierarchy" (which is not an entirely bad 
thing). 
  Reform is also faced with some problems that are worthy of 
attention. Some economists pointed out that reform in 1994 
would be "the final assault." In order to avoid detours and 
costly lessons, it is necessary to maintain a good economic 
environment. Experts also pointed out that since some of the 
new reform measures introduced this year or next year were 
directed against administrative organs and key departments, 
whether or not the leading cadres of the organs concerned were 
willing to resolutely bid farewell to old traditions would have 
a vital bearing on the success of the reform. Some experts also 
believed that as China's reform had reached a great depth, even 
reformers themselves had to be highly aware of the need for 
reform. With major reform measures for 1994 about to be 
introduced, it is necessary to guard against conscious or 
unconscious attempts by vested interests to distort the reform. 
  The appeal made by these experts is: China's reform has 
entered the most arduous and challenging as well as the most 
promising stage of final assault. We must do well in this stage. 
  "Reform has its dangers and difficulties, but we can succeed 
if we work hard." 
  With Comrade Deng Xiaoping's theory on building socialism 
with Chinese characteristics providing the guidance, and with 
the people of the whole country unifying their thinking and 
actions, sharing weal and woe and working arduously around the 
party Central Committee headed by Comrade Jiang Zemin, China's 
reform and development will definitely have a bright future. 
  Having already written a brilliant history, we will 
definitely be able to create an even brighter future. 

