Language: <F P=105> Serbo-Croatian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Slavko Perovic, leader of the Liberal Union </F>
of Montenegro, by Dragan Ogurlic; place and date not given: "The 
State of the Montenegrins Has Been Stolen"] 
  [Text] Recently, the Croatian public also heard about 
Slavko Perovic, leader of the opposition Liberal Union of 
Montenegro [LSCG]. Perovic realized that ideas advocated by his 
party were best presented in numerous interviews for the media 
in the "seceded" part of Yugoslavia, which he does not recognize 
as a state anyway. The 38-year-old lawyer from Cetinje, a poet 
and a member of the Montenegro PEN [International Association of 
Poets, Playwrights, Editors, Essayists, and Novelists] center, 
one-time president of the Association of the Literary 
Municipality of Cetinje, who founded several magazines and radio 
stations, could write an interesting autobiography about the 
last ten years of his life. He experienced everything that an 
opposition leader would go through in a totalitarian regime: 
from arrests to tragic deaths of his family members caused by 
all kinds of attacks on Perovic and his party, whose members and 
followers are known by the symbol of the letter "L" made by 
separating the thumb and the index finger. 
  The LSCG was established as a political party on 26 January 
1990. It is different from other five valid parties in that, 
since its establishment, it has been advocating a Montenegro 
constituted as an independent state. Perovic considers the LSCG 
a party of political discontinuity in Montenegro. 
  [Perovic] We are very proud of the fact that, in our 
history, there was no party that we could use and add to. Our 
political project can be reduced to only one sentence, whose 
elements should be considered as they interact. Here is the 
sentence: Free individuals, free nation, independent 
Montenegro, liberal civic democracy, unlimited private property, 
and a free market. Therefore, we are a party that wants to shape 
the political public opinion of Montenegro. In that sense, we 
notice all assets of Montenegro: its enviable cultural and 
historical heritage, its extremely favorable geopolitical 
position, its exceptional nature, and potential natural 
resources. According to our estimates, if Montenegro functioned 
as an independent political and economic entity, all those 
potentials could make it one of the richer areas in the 
Mediterranean in three to five years. We consider ourselves 
privileged and thank God for having put us on such a divine 
land. We want to change the course of Montenegrin history, 
especially that of the post-World War II era, whose development 
concepts have been destroying Montenegro. 
<H5>  Friendship With Budisa </H5>
  [Ogurlic] There is a certain lack of clarity regarding the 
real political power of the LSCG. Some hold you are 
realistically the strongest opposition party, while others point 
at the Montenegrin parliament saying that you actually 
represented by only 13 deputies. 
  [Perovic] Let me tell you the truth. On 26 January 1990, we 
had 57 members, and today we have more than 19,000 members and 
that figure can best be appreciated in the light of the fact 
that, without refugees, Montenegro has about 620,000 
inhabitants. We mostly gather intellectuals, youth, modern 
people. We base our ideas on a sentence of our great ancestor 
Marko Miljanov, who said that he who defends himself from 
another man is a hero, and he who defends another man from the 
evil inherent within himself is a man. 
  Indeed, the Liberal Union today holds 13 out of the 85 
deputy 
seats in the Montenegrin parliament. Let me remind you that, in 
1990, on the basis of the elections held in December, we only 
had one deputy in the parliament, which then had 125 deputies, 
and that both the first and the second elections in Montenegro 
were undemocratic, a farce, for we mean much more for the 
political life of Montenegro then one can conclude from the 
number of seats we hold in the parliament. 
  [Ogurlic] Being a leader of the strongest opposition party 
in Montenegro, how familiar are you with the situation in 
Croatia and to what extent could you be compared with Budisa's 
HSLS Croatian Social Liberal Party [HSLS -- Croatia's leading 
opposition party]? 
  [Perovic] I think our program orientations are very close. 
Otherwise, we have very good contacts with the HSLS. We had 
contacts before the war as well, and to our great pleasure, we 
managed to preserve them regardless of all past and present 
conflicts. I can say that Mr. Budisa and I have a very friendly 
relationship. 

<H5>    We Do Not Recognize the FRY </H5>
  [Ogurlic] And what are your relations with the so-called 
FRY? Do you admit to living in Yugoslavia at all? 
  [Perovic] We simply do not recognize the FRY as a country. 
We did not go to the federal elections and we do not intend to 
in the future either. Let me explain why. The FRY is a result 
of an invalid referendum held here in Montenegro, and the 
quality of that referendum is best described by the fact that 
it, from passing the parliamentary decision of the voting 
apparatus of the Democratic Party of Socialists [DPS] on holding 
that referendum, to putting voting slips in ballot boxes, there 
were only seven days. Therefore, in just seven days, people had 
to decide on the state status of Montenegro, which is not a 
serious deadline in other states, not even regarding some 
municipal problems, let alone regarding those pertaining to the 
state. 
  We think that the referendum stole the country of the 
Montenegrins, and we did not want to take part in its work. I 
will tell you a story that describes the situation to people who 
are not very familiar with many Montenegrin qualities. This is 
the story: To recognize the FRY would be the same as when, for 
example, somebody steals 5 million dollars from you, opens his 
own bank with the money, appoints himself director, and offers 
you, whose money he stole, the position of a clerk in that bank. 
And you accept the offer, hoping that, using the internal legal 
organization of the bank, you will get hold of your money some 
day. The DPS, who promoted that theft, wants to convince us 
that the job of a bank clerk is great, they refer to it as being 
an equal in the FRY. We think that the position is 
unacceptable, we think the citizens and the international 
community must hear about that theft and try to achieve justice, 
i.e. to return what was stolen. 
<H5>  Milosevic Demands Acquiescence </H5>
  [Ogurlic] Does Montenegro have any state attributes at all 
in this situation? 
  [Perovic] No. It only has Minister Lekic, who thinks he is a 
minister, and a prime minister who thinks he is a prime 
minister, and the president of the Republic who thinks he is 
president. But we should look at it from a different angle. 
The ruling party, the DPS, does not exist at all. It is a 
small interest group that became very rich thanks to war 
profiteering and the black market. And they realized that 
Milosevic's iron grip is no longer in their interest. Now they 
are trying to distance themselves from Milosevic's regime, for 
he is no longer satisfied with the level of their sycophancy. 
Until now, they were kneeling before Milosevic, and now he 
demands acquiescence, i.e. for them to kneel and be down on 
their elbows. That is a little too much to demand, even from 
them. And they are trying to present to the world the fact that 
they are still on their knees as a kind of democratic effort, 
and so on. Consequently, by means of Minister Lekic and 
President of the Republic Bulatovic, who suddenly became a 
peacemaker although he organized war-time persecution in 
Montenegro, they are trying to present Montenegro as something 
different, which it really is, but not because they want that, 
but because civic opposition in Montenegro is an important 
factor. For foreign political representatives, Minister Lekic 
and President Bulatovic are the democratic face of an 
essentially antidemocratic power. 
  [Ogurlic] How do you interpret demands to abolish the 
Montenegrin Defense Ministry and Foreign Ministry? 
  [Perovic] The Defense Ministry was abolished at the request 
of the army and because local authorities did not seriously 
resist, and as to the Foreign Ministry, it will abolish itself 
anyway. I think that in the next couple of months Mr. Lekic 
will not be able to go anywhere from the airport in Tirana, for 
nobody will want to have him. The essence of antidemocratic 
authorities is most obvious in its relation to the opposition, 
where that space for the opposition is being persistently 
narrowed, as well as the space for the media; people are 
arrested for being members of certain parties, they are 
maltreated, followed by secret police, their telephones are 
tapped. That is all a reflection of those authorities that 
actually function in legal and political provisory situation, 
for Montenegro is definitely not a state. 

<H5>    We and the Serbs Are Not One </H5>
  [Ogurlic] You are probably bothered by the fact that Europe 
and the world think Serbia and Montenegro are one, for I suppose 
that Montenegro is not a recognizable separate entity? 
  [Perovic] Yes, that is a great injustice to Montenegro. 
Indeed, it is not done on purpose, for they seem to be 
interested in the real situation. When they consider 
Montenegro, they look at the statistics and the result of the 
elections; they do not want to hear our explanation that those 
were undemocratic elections. 
  [Ogurlic] Let us get back to the country you do not 
recognize. Does the Federal Assembly exist at all? 
  [Perovic] The Federal Assembly is a circus that entertains 
Slobodan Milosevic and his wife Mirjana Markovic, who writes 
homework for POLITIKA and DUGA. That body makes no decisions 
whatsoever; all decisions were made in Milosevic's study or in 
some other room. The Federal Assembly was destroyed the moment 
Seselj joined that body. Belgrade journalist Stojan Cerovic 
recently wrote a wonderful sentence describing the situation in 
the parliament; he said that ever since Mr. Seselj appeared in 
the federal parliament, that body looks like a cellar with a 
broken sewage pipe. It looks no better today. 
  [Ogurlic] Is it a coincidence that, lately, one hears the 
Montenegrins demanding their own church, news agency, airline 
company...? 
  [Perovic] That is not a coincidence. Regarding the 
Montenegrin Autocephalous Church, justice prevailed that day at 
Cetinje; the Montenegrin Orthodox Church has again become 
autocephalous, which it was for 300 years, and it became obvious 
that the Serbian Orthodox Church has been an intruder in 
Montenegro since 1920, when the then-regent of Yugoslavia, and 
later King Aleksandar Karadjordjevic, abolished the Montenegrin 
Orthodox Church against canon-law and annexed Montenegro to 
Serbia. Since that time, the territory of Montenegro has been 
exposed to the assimilation processes of Belgrade. 
<H5>  Elections? No, the People Have Not Yet Suffered Enough </H5>
  The process of imposing greater Serbian ideas on the 
territory of Montenegro gained momentum after Risto Radovic 
became the metropolitan bishop, for that man is telling the 
Montenegrins every day that they are the result of communist 
Balkan-Broz [Josip Broz Tito] fabrication, that they do not 
exist as a nation, and so forth. When people realized that they 
could not baptize their children in any of 660 Montenegrin 
churches -- if they want to baptize them as Montenegrins -- but 
that they can only register them as Serbs of Serbian religion, 
that was the final straw. The same holds for marriages. 
  [Ogurlic] You live under sanctions. I have been here only 
four days. Tell me how do you manage at all? 
  [Perovic] People still have some supplies left, many 
families have somebody working abroad, but the fact is that you 
cannot do much even if you have German marks, for there is 
nothing to buy. Shops in Montenegro have nothing on their 
shelves, except for perhaps two or three items. Until just a 
couple of months ago, street dealers would exchange German 
marks; today, that does not help, because prices are sky-high. 
One kilogram of something that costs 5 or 10 German marks [DM] 
in the West, costs DM30 in Montenegro. That is horrible. 
  [Ogurlic] Do you want parliamentary and presidential 
elections in Montenegro now? 
  [Perovic] No. People have not suffered enough yet. Given 
some time, the Montenegrins will have to decide which way to 
take: the road to total destruction, which is imminent in this 
situation, or they will realize that it would be best if they 
themselves decided about their destiny. We think that the only 
way out of this situation is to demand political sovereignty for 
Montenegro. For, Montenegro is suffering under sanctions for 
one reason only: because the political authorities were so close 
to Milosevic's regime. There are some signs from the West that, 
if Montenegro became independent, sanctions would be lifted from 
it. After lifting sanctions, we would be a little below zero 
and I am convinced that, due to the comparative advantages of 
Montenegro and the fact that it could be saved by a relatively 
small amount of money, Montenegro could recover, even with the 
present destroyed infrastructure. 
  [Ogurlic] You are accused of wanting to sell Montenegro to 
the Italians very cheaply? 
  [Perovic] Well, those imputations come from Belgrade and go 
to Belgrade. We definitely do not want to sell ourselves to 
anyone, but we would like to communicate with the world, if that 
were in our interest. Why can we not say that we will see who 
offers more? We know what Belgrade has given us and what it 
offers. 
<H5>  "A Fairy Brings Joy From Lovcen...." </H5>
  [Ogurlic] Tell us you opinion of an event that happened two 
years ago, when Dubrovnik was fiercely shelled. What do you 
think about that hundred-kilometers-long black spot on the 
conscience of the Montenegrins? 
  [Perovic] I will tell you what I think: The entire 
Dubrovnik operation, except for some goals revealed by General 
Kadijevic in his book "The War as I See It," had a much deeper 
meaning for Montenegro, and the idea behind that operation was 
to discredit Montenegro on a global level. And the operation 
managed to do that. Consequently, for one year, the entire 
planet was abuzz with rumors that the Montenegrins were shelling 
Dubrovnik, destroying it and plundering, and so forth. That is 
true, but, on the other hand, it is also true that several 
statements and interviews that Slobodan Milosevic gave to the 
world press confirm what I have said. Asked what he thought 
about the events in Dubrovnik, he always replied he had nothing 
to do with that, that they should ask the authorities in 
Podgorica. Indeed, the authorities in Podgorica were not 
responsible for the mobilization, but they did nothing to stop 
that campaign. 
  And then, in an interview, I told Mr. Bulatovic he should 
realize that those who aimed their guns and cannons at Dubrovnik 
are madmen and that was insane politics, and that, as the 
president of Montenegro he had to commit himself and choose 
between the glory of Dubrovnik and what it stands for in a 
Slavic world, and the glory of Kadijevic's epaulettes. So, if 
he should decide on Dubrovnik, and that would not be a dilemma 
for any normal man, I told him he should kneel before those 
people who were badly manipulated and try to get them back to 
the borders of Montenegro. However, he opted for the glory of 
Kadijevic's epaulettes, for the role of a pawn; he went to the 
battlefield, they took his picture while Vojislav Seselj 
personally reviewed some troops. The final result of that 
campaign was that the traditional Montenegro, all the stories of 
courage, bravery, morals, and so forth, were lost on that 
Dubrovnik battlefield and they can never be told again. 
  We feel very badly about those horrible events, not only 
because of the suffering of the inhabitants of Dubrovnik and 
Konavli. In Montenegro, we organized a vigorous anti-war 
campaign, which, unfortunately, was not broadcasted. We staged 
several rallies, and the one in Cetinje was the biggest of all 
with 15,000 people. 
  I realized that the Montenegro in my heart was saved the 
moment those 15,000 people started singing "A fairy brings joy 
from Lovcen, Dubrovnik, forgive us." The result of that antiwar 
campaign was that not a single attempt at mobilization in 
Montenegro succeeded, and if it were not for us, the 
consequences would have probably been much worse. Dozens of 
people returned from the battlefield, threw their weapons away, 
and accepted the political messages of the Liberal Union, so 
that, in a way, Dubrovnik became a catharsis of our movement. 
  On the other hand, we must do everything to apologize to the 
Croats and to Croatia, and especially to Dubrovnik and Konavli, 
and that, God willing, one day, the Montenegro I have in mind 
will do its best to help Dubrovnik heal its physical and 
spiritual wounds and that our two nations can start 
communicating again. 

<H5>    Not an Inch More, Not an Inch Less </H5>
  [Ogurlic] What borders do you want for Montenegro as a 
country? 
  [Perovic] The present ones. Our postulate is that the 
present borders of Montenegro are the borders of Montenegro as a 
state, and we consider them a realistic expression of 
Montenegrin political, military, and diplomatic power or 
impotence throughout history. Our motto is: Not an inch of our 
territory more, not an inch less. 
  [Ogurlic] And what about Prevlaka? 
  [Perovic] We know to whom Prevlaka belongs. Today, it 
obviously belongs to the Republic of Croatia, under UNPROFOR 
[United Nations Protection Force] command, and we have always 
said that those two and a half kilometers of rocky land are not 
worth the death of any Montenegrin, let alone those 200 
unfortunate young men who died in vain for someone's 
unreasonable goals. Prevlaka would be worth fighting for if 
this were 1852, but that became complete nonsense when fighter 
airplanes were invented. However, you must understand that 
propaganda in Montenegro was such that Goebbels was a real 
amateur in comparison. The entire historical milieu was 
reconstructed; everything Croatian was pronounced Ustashi, 
people were totally mislead, and it was all added to a very 
incomplete and bad education system in which history lessons 
boiled down to events from 1941 onward, and people had no idea 
about the deeper strata of their history. 
  [Ogurlic] In a way, the Croatian public is interested in the 
destiny of the Croats in Boka Kotorska.... 
  [Perovic] The Croats in Boka Kotorska, especially in Tivat, 
were under enormous pressure, we must say that, and we are 
informed that some of them left in the meantime, which we, in 
the Liberal Union, frown upon. We are trying to do everything 
to protect their human rights in Montenegro. Let me tell you, 
because we supported the Croats, we were accused of wanting to 
see Boka Kotorska belong to a greater Croatia. Due to the fact 
that our members are also Albanians and we protect the 
Albanians, we are accused of wanting a greater Albania. For 
defending the Muslims, we were accused of being a part of "the 
Teheran plot against the heavenly nation," and for being 
Montenegrins, it is obvious we are anti-Serbs, and so forth. 
However, exactly because our party is this open, things are 
turning to our political advantage. We must not be satisfied 
with that, for, today, Montenegro is facing destruction. 

