BFN 

  [Text] Seoul, June 14 (YONHAP) -- North Korean lumberjacks 
at Pyongyang-run logging camps in Siberia toil up to 22 hours a 
day under sub-human working and living conditions, it was 
revealed Tuesday. 
  Six North Korean loggers, who earlier fled the camps and 
then 
resettled in South Korea last month, told a joint news 
conference at the Press Center that camp working hours usually 
run about 16 hours and sometimes up to 22 hours a day. 
  In addition to the long hours, most of the lumberjacks are 
not fed properly and many cannot work because of extreme hunger, 
they added. 
  The six are Choe Chong-nam, 36, Kim Sung-chol, 33, Kim 
Tong-un, 35, Paek Ho-chol, 28, Won Yu-nam, 25, and Chang Il-un, 
30. They have resettled in the South after arriving in Seoul 
May 18 from a third country. 
  "Food was not supplied properly and there were cases where 
some lumberjacks had to catch rats or frogs and eat them," said 
Kim Tong-un. 
  "But they could not complain about the inhuman conditions 
because, if they did, they would be prosecuted as political 
criminals," he said. 
  A lumberjack can make up to 100 won to 130 won (50 to 65 
U.S. 
dollars) a month. But workers receive such maximum pay only 
about two months out of the year, Kim Sung-chol said. Wages 
come to much less during the rest of the year. 
  Pay is halved by the time it reaches the individual worker's 
pocket when deductions are made for such necessities as meals 
and equipment, he said. 
  Nevertheless, jobs at Siberian logging camps are difficult 
to 
land in North Korea because there are too many people who want 
to work there despite the harsh conditions, Won Yu-nam said. 
  Won said North Korea sent only convicted criminals to 
Siberian logging camps before the collapse of communism in the 
Soviet Union and East European countries in 1989. 
  Since then, however, Pyongyang has sent only workers with 
clean personal backgrounds, he said. 
  Commenting on their motive for escaping from the camps, Choe 
Chong-nam said that since he did not have enough money on which 
to live in Russia, he traded in Chinese and South Korean goods 
to make money on the side. 
  "But a party functionary found out and demanded a payoff 
from 
me," he said, explaining that was the direct reason for his 
escape. 
  Choe said he lived with an ethnic Korean family for a while 
but decided to resettle in South Korea as North Korean agents 
were doggedly pursuing him. 
  He said he did not know much about South Korea but in the 
process of selling South Korean goods, he found out about life 
in the South bit by bit. 
  Choe explained that he also listened to South Korean radio 
broadcasts and realized that South Koreans have much higher 
living standards than people in the North. 
  Kim Tong-un said that after fleeing, he hesitated for some 
time before deciding to resettle in the South. He said he was 
worried that his family would have to suffer because of him. 
  The former loggers said they could not disclose the details 
of how they escaped from the camps and wandered across vast 
areas of Russia because there are still many other fleeing North 
Korean lumberjacks hoping to resettle in the South. 

