BFN 

<F P=106> ["Beijing political situation" column by Jen Hui-wen (0117 </F>
1979 2419) on 22 June 1994 in Beijing: "Inside Story About 
China Briefing DPRK on How To Act"] 
  [Text] The situation on the Korean peninsula has been 
relaxed and tense intermittently over the past year or so due to 
the dispute concerning the nuclear issue in the DPRK. However, 
since mid-June, when former U.S. President Jimmy Carter went to 
Pyongyang on invitation to hold talks with DPRK President Kim 
Il-song, the situation has eased. U.S. President Bill Clinton 
has said that there are signs of a solution to the dispute over 
the DPRK, the U.S. representative to the UN has also suspended a 
plan to propose sanctions against the DPRK in the UN and has 
begun to study the credibility of Carter's report, and the ROK 
has suggested to the DPRK that a South-North preparatory meeting 
be held on 28 June in Panmunjom. In view of this, the 
international community generally thinks that Carter has been 
successful in his role as a "peace envoy." 
<H5>  Kim Il-Song Changes and Adopts a Softer Stance </H5>
  Then what has been the change in the DPRK's position after 
Carter and Kim Il-song held talks? According to information, 
Kim Il-song expressed three basic points on behalf of the DPRK: 
First, the DPRK is willing to solve the dispute through talks 
with the United States, and if the DPRK can obtain diplomatic 
recognition from the United States, as well as assistance with 
light-water reactors from the United States or other countries, 
then the DPRK may freeze its current 200,000 kw atomic energy 
program; second, the DPRK is very pragmatic and realizes that it 
is no longer possible to promote communism in the ROK, so the 
DPRK will not launch an attack against ROK, however, if some 
people bring war to the DPRK, then the DPRK can only accept the 
challenge; and third, the DPRK does not want to be a victim of 
power politics and pressure and it cannot accept being a country 
with no military secrets, nor can it accept inspections of 
everything by international organizations as this is an issue of 
an independent country's sovereignty which cannot be violated. 
The first two points in the DPRK's position show a softer 
stance. Precisely because of this, the United States is no 
longer asking the DPRK to explain the 1989 incident (in 1989, 
the DPRK removed used nuclear fuel from its reactor at Yongbyon. 
The United States thought the DPRK might have used the nuclear 
fuel to make plutonium, which is required for a nuclear bomb, so 
it has been demanding an explanation from the DPRK), but has 
stressed the current action. Of course, while the United States 
is adopting a more moderate attitude toward the DPRK, this is a 
step taken by it to redevelop [its relations] with Asia. 
  Regarding the third point of the DPRK's position, an expert 
on international problems in Beijing has said that this is the 
minimum demand of a sovereign country and is no cause for 
criticism, and the United States and the IAEA should not push 
excess demands over nuclear inspections in the DPRK. 
Furthermore, not long ago, the DPRK complained to the IAEA that 
it had acted favorably toward other countries but unfavorably 
toward DPRK. The DPRK had doubts and asked the IAEA: Japan now 
has a stock of plutonium which is enough for 100 nuclear bombs 
(the DPRK's plutonium is only enough to make a single nuclear 
bomb at most), both India and Pakistan have nuclear weapons, 
while Taiwan and South Africa are carrying out nuclear 
cooperation, while the United States is shipping many nuclear 
weapons to the ROK, but you do not say a word and just stare at 
DPRK. Is this fair? What the DPRK has said is not 
unreasonable. To put it bluntly, the United States wants to use 
this chance to topple the DPRK, and this is a component of U.S. 
strategy to carry out peaceful evolution in the socialist 
countries, therefore, it can hardly avoid evoking a strong 
reaction from the DPRK. In fact, the DPRK also wants to join 
the international community, but it cannot tolerate a change in 
its current system. If the United States looks only at the 
latter point, the consequence will be serious. Now, after 
Carter's mediation, the situation has temporarily eased, but the 
problem has not been completely solved. 
<H5>  Liu Huaqing Discusses Strategy With Choe Kwang </H5>
  The easing of the situation on the Korean peninsula is also 
inseparable from China's role. Regarding a solution to the 
nuclear crisis in the DPRK, the United States has always wanted 
China to influence the DPRK. Although China has said publicly 
that it "has a limited role to play" and "not much to do," in 
fact, it has done a great deal of work regarding the DPRK. 
  Informed sources in Beijing disclosed that on 9 June, CPC 
General Secretary Jiang Zemin attended a forum held by the Army; 
when he talked about the nuclear dispute in the DPRK, he pointed 
out that China's steadfast position is to promote a nuclear-free 
Korean peninsula and safeguard peace and stability on the Korean 
peninsula. He disclosed that China had sent a party, government, 
and military delegation to the DPRK led by Ding Guangen, a 
member of the Political Bureau; Wen Jiabao, an alternate member 
of the Political Bureau; Wang Ruilin, a director of Deng's 
office; and Li Desheng, an old general. 
  The delegation 
explained China's abovementioned position to Kim Il-sung and 
indicated in concrete terms that if the DPRK pursued 
construction, China would do what it could to support it; if the 
DPRK developed nuclear weapons, China would be opposed to this; 
and if the DPRK was attacked by war, China would fulfill [lu 
xing 1462 5887] the Sino-DPRK Treaty. The delegation also 
invited Kim Il-sung to visit China in October to participate in 
China's 45th National Day celebration. 
  In mid-June, a DPRK military delegation led by Choe Kwang, 
chief of the general staff of the Korean People's Army, visited 
China. Liu Huaqing, vice chairman of the CPC Central Military 
Commission, talked sincerely with the delegation and hoped that 
the DPRK could fight on just grounds to its advantage and with 
restraint to win sympathy and support from the international 
community. In concrete terms, first, it should never take the 
initiative in causing trouble; second, its reaction to pressure 
from the international community should not be stronger than the 
pressure itself; third, in order to avoid friction, the armed 
forces at the demarcation line should be moved further from the 
contact line; and fifth, a political solution is the best 
strategy, stalling is the second best strategy, conflict is a 
bad strategy, and taking the initiative to launch an attack is 
the worst strategy. It should not emphasize the word 
"fighting," it should emphasize the word "talking." 
  The expert on international problems in Beijing pointed out 
that, out of the consideration for peace and stability on the 
Korean peninsula, the Asian region, and even the world, China 
has constantly upheld the principle of not exporting nuclear 
weapons technology, and for this reason China has been 
criticized by the DPRK. However, on the matter of how the 
nuclear crisis can be solved, China still sincerely suggested to 
the DPRK that this is the strategy it should take. Judged from 
the position stated by Kim Il-song when he held talks with 
Carter, the effects of this strategy can be seen. 
  According to informed sources, China has always been very 
concerned about the situation on the Korean peninsula. When the 
situation became tense, China's State Council held a special 
meeting on 30 May to discuss the situation on the Korean 
peninsula. The meeting was presided over by Premier Li Peng and 
Qian Qichen, vice premier and foreign minister, gave a report. 
<H5>  DPRK Has Yet To Understand the Way To Build a Strong Country </H5>
  Qian Qichen said at the meeting: "Promoting a nuclear-free 
Korean peninsula and safeguarding peace and stability on the 
Korean peninsula are basic goals persistently upheld by the 
Chinese Government regarding the nuclear issue on the Korean 
peninsula. These two goals conform to the basic interests of all 
countries in the East Asia region and should become a basic 
starting point in seeking a proper solution to the current 
problem." 
  Qian Qichen pointed out: "When faced with difficulties, the 
relevant sides must all the more stay calm and exercise 
restraint, must not rashly close the door to talks, and must try 
their best to allow room for and the possibility of talks to 
solve this problem. Sanctions are not helpful in solving the 
problem, could intensify the conflict, and may lead to 
consequences which no one wants to see." 
  He stressed that patient talks participated in by four 
parties and three sides (the DPRK, the ROK, the IAEA, and the 
United States) will have more practical effects than a solution 
sponsored by the UN. 
  Li Peng said that the DPRK should devote itself to 
developing 
its economy, then it would have more room for maneuver and 
greater influence. 
  The expert on international issues in Beijing thought that 
when China disapproves of the pursuit of nuclear weapons by the 
DPRK but supports its economic reform, it is in fact pointing 
out the way for the DPRK to build a strong country and bring 
affluence to its people. Obviously, so long as the economy is 
developed and comprehensive national strength is increased, 
foreign pressure will naturally decrease. However, it has been 
alleged that whenever senior DPRK officials hear China chanting 
the economic gospel, they become impatient. They still do not 
think; what a pity! 

