Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Commentary by News Research and Commentaries Group] </F>
  [Text] The 30th session of the UN Commission on Narcotic 
Drugs opened in Damascus yesterday. The Tehran Declaration, 
which was approved in 1371 [year beginning 21 March 1992] by all 
members, is the most important focus of the session. During the 
Damascus conference, the latest developments concerning drug 
smuggling in the Middle East and the way to confront poppy 
cultivation and the laundering of money obtained from drug 
trafficking will be discussed. 
  During the past decade the Middle East has witnessed an 
increase in drug production, so much so that some countries in 
the area have become major heroin and opium exporters. Pakistan 
and Afghanistan are among the countries facing increasing 
difficulties from an increase in poppy cultivation despite the 
struggles by their police forces. In areas in Pakistan that are 
far from the central government and outside the control of the 
police force, drug smugglers are manufacturing and refining 
narcotics in large laboratories. The existence of remote 
mountainous regions in Pakistan and civil wars and conflicts in 
Afghanistan for many years have paved the grounds for the growth 
of drug trafficking groups and the conversion of wheat fields 
into fields for the cultivation of narcotics. 
  Unfortunately, because of its location on the international 
drug transit route from the Golden Crescent to Europe, Iran has 
gained special importance in the Middle East for large drug 
trafficking groups. Thus, the major problem that the Islamic 
Republic of Iran is facing in its fight against the big drug 
networks is, more than anything else, the problem of regional 
smuggling that is carried out from outside its borders. 
Smugglers enter the country primarily through the 1,400-km long 
eastern border and attempt to transfer narcotics to Europe. 
  On this basis, in our country special programs have been 
introduced, including the establishment of border observation 
posts and roving and stationary bases, the creation of a 
prohibitive zone in part of the border region, and ambush and 
destruction operations, all of which have helped to destroy many 
networks. 
  During recent years, because of more control on the eastern 
border and increased field operations, large narcotics bands 
have decided to alter their transit routes. Some from the 
southern route have chosen Persian Gulf countries, while others 
from the northern route have chosen Central Asian countries. 
However, Iran continues to be considered the major route. 
  On this basis, efforts by law-enforcement forces have 
intensified and the number of narcotic finds are increasing each 
year. For example, the quantity of narcotics found during the 
past 11 months increased 25 tonnes from the same period last 
year. 
  On the regional level, as a pivotal country in the Economic 
Cooperation Organization [ECO], the Islamic Republic of Iran has 
started new operations within its framework. In the future, a 
memorandum of understanding is to be signed between Iran and 
Pakistan, with UN cooperation, under which the control of drugs 
in the region will be further facilitated and coordinated. 
  The Islamic Republic's efforts in the Middle East have led 
to 
praise by the UN secretary general's executive deputy in charge 
of narcotics control and by the Interpol secretary general. 
Iran is trying--through regional cooperation and by 
intensifying the struggle at home--to create a healthier and 
better society for the younger generation. Within this context, 
the continuation of the struggle and a more serious approach in 
implementing the law-enforcement forces' programs are of great 
importance. 

