CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Martina Lanzrath: "Batteries Are the Achilles </F>
Heel of Electric Cars" 
  [Text] In the seclusion of the Baltic island of Ruegen, the 
softly humming electric car prototypes are making their first 
test runs. Yet the vagaries of battery technology, above 
everything else, delayed the still uncertain steps of the newly 
constructed E-car and dragged the bearer of hopes for doing away 
with exhaust fumes through the turmoil of [newspaper] headlines. 
The familiar words "Ruegen [(or "reprimands" in English)] on 
Ruegen" made the rounds, and a cool breeze of skepticism hit the 
[producers and drivers of non-polluting cars]. A little annoyed 
and looking suitably injured, the Ministry of Research and 
Technology along with representatives from the automobile 
industry, battery producers and electric companies are now doing 
an interim evaluation of the field tests on Germany's largest 
island. Difficulties with the high-performance batteries and 
their integration into the current concept of the [electric car] 
were in fact, as Research Minister Paul Krueger conceded, more 
serious than was at first suspected. In the meantime, however, 
the 36 electric cars carried out their humming work quite 
reliably and all together already have around 185,000 km of 
local exhaust-free [driving] behind them. The electric fleet is 
supposed to be increased to 60 vehicles by August, all outfitted 
with automatic measurement units which until 1996 will provide a 
unique data bank. 
  The Ruegen cars get energy from four different storage 
media. 
In addition to the older lead-gel battery, the sodium-sulphur, 
the nickel-cadmium and the sodium-nickel chloride batteries are 
also being put to the test of everyday use. Since freedom of 
travel is still limited for the electric cars, one pilot fuel 
station in Zirkow is currently testing a quick-charge technique. 
This would make it possible to "tank up" the batteries in less 
than a hour. Minister Krueger and the industry are promising 
[travel] distances of a full 400 km only from the third 
generation of propulsion batteries based on lithium, whose 
development is still in its infancy. The Research Minister 
remains decisively loyal to the local emission-free clean 
driver, even for the future. In addition to the major test being 
supported on Ruegen with 22 million German marks, 60 million 
more will be made available for the development of fuel cells. 
This technique electrochemically transforms combustible liquids 
or gases directly into electricity--and practically without 
producing any pollution. Even with the market introduction of 
economical, mass produced vehicles, the federal government will 
stand beside the car makers. An inter-ministerial working group 
made up of representatives from the ministries of 
Transportation, the Environment, Financial Affairs and Research 
as well as the office of the Chancellor have since the end of 
March been preparing appropriate guidelines. 
  For Volkswagen Director Ulrich Seiffert, exemption from the 
automotive tax, harmonizing the competitive conditions and tax 
advantages are basic requirements for giving the electric cars 
any chance at all on the automobile market. At the same time, 
the German industry's technical lead may not be thoughtlessly 
gambled away to thus leave the way open for the Japanese 
producers. "There is a danger that we are becoming a country 
hostile to innovation." With these words the industry 
representatives demonstrated--with a side glance at the Ruegen 
critics--the auto makers' new sensitivity to things concerning 
the electric car. 


