Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by diplomatic correspondents Dmitriy Voskoboynikov, </F>
Igor Porshnev, Vitaliy Trubetskoy and other from the "Diplomatic 
Panorama" feature] 
  [Text] Next summer's summit of the G-7 group in Naples will 
see another important step towards Russia's involvement in the 
activities of the G-7, notably in the political sphere, British 
ambassador to Russia Brian Fall said in response to an INTERFAX 
question. 
  He said that this decision could only be made jointly by all 
members of the group, and that he was fairly certain that this 
step would be taken. 
  He said, however, that the contribution Russia was making to 
the world economy was much below that of most advanced 
countries. He was confident, however, that once the dust 
settles and the reforms were complete, Russia would start 
getting rich. Its wealth was in its highly educated and skilled 
workforce. 
  Fall did not think that Western aid could solve all Russian 
problems. The West is sometimes criticized for helping Russia 
too little too late. There are reasons for that, however. 
Numerous entrepreneurs think that Russia is not predictable or 
stable enough and demand safety guarantees for their capital, he 
said. Russia has to create a more favorable environment for 
western private investments. He said that numerous Russian 
businessmen preferred to keep their capital in foreign banks. 
If Russian money flees Russia, why should the West invest in 
it, he asked. 
  Fall emphasized that the West continued to support President 
Boris Yeltsin, not as an individual but as the leader of Russian 
reforms. Meanwhile the West understood that Russia had come 
across numerous internal problems. This was probably the reason 
of the "painful reaction" to contacts between foreign political 
figures and the Russian opposition. British Premier John Major 
had recently visited the U.S. where he had meetings with 
representatives of various political movements. Nobody asked 
him why he had spent so much time with George Bush or Ross 
Perrot or accused him of pursuing a wrong line, Fall said. 
  He emphasized that a fully-fledged European security system 
was out of the question without Russia. He thought that the 
geostrategic environment was favorable for a system which 
sidelined neither Russia nor East European countries. A 
security system must be set up as soon and as broadly as 
possible. 

