Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Public Letter by General Humberto Ortega Saavedra" -- EL </F>
NUEVO DIARIO headline] 
  [Text] 1. The Genie case merits enough concern for me to 
make public my position in this regard, particularly taking into 
consideration the serious situation prevailing over the entire 
national territory. This is the result of the economic, 
political, and social crisis which Nicaraguan society is 
desperately experiencing. 
  2. The Genie case is a clear demonstration of how political 
revenge and hate have made possible the use of a tragic and 
painful incident -- not yet cleared up -- as a shameless weapon 
to heighten the campaigns that attempt to destroy the Army that 
I command with honor. This is also an attempt to damage my image 
formed in the 1960's during the revolutionary struggle for a 
worthy and better nation for all Nicaraguans. 
  3. The Genie case demonstrates how far the radical minority 
can go with its lies and appalling maneuvers aimed at crushing 
the EPS [Sandinist People's Army] by judging and then destroying 
it. That vengeful minority has attempted in vain to make 
innocent persons into guilty persons. They have resorted to 
using the family of young Jean Paul Genie as an instrument 
without really caring about the terrible pain that the tragic 
death of a loved one causes. 
  4. The vengeful minority has irresponsibly attempted to 
convert the innocent figure of Jean Paul into a political weapon 
against the EPS, lacking respect for the memory of a youth whom 
I am totally certain never would have agreed to be a pawn of 
those petty politicians. 
  5. The Genie case has also stirred up those in the United 
States who have pretended during more than a century to have at 
their whims Nicaraguans' dignity and national pride. They, the 
Helmses and the like who insolently dismissed the ruling of the 
International Court of Justice at The Hague, attempt to put us 
on the international stand. This is to humiliate us and to 
serve as a warning to the people throughout Latin America who 
firmly wave the Bolivar flag for independence, 
self-determination, democracy, and economic development with 
social justice. 
  6. The Genie case has opened the way to violate the human 
rights of EPS officers. Although innocent, they have been 
submitted to systematic pressures by lies and false accusations 
-- that also adversely affect our families -- through the 
diverse media in our nation attempting to make us relinquish our 
indomitable moral. 
  7. The Genie case is added to the campaign that the radical 
minority is waging through the well-known Tripartite Commission 
and the alleged defense of human rights. The goal is to 
politically and morally bring discredit to the officers and the 
rank and file of the Nicaraguan military institution. 
  8. The Genie case unfolds at a time when the EPS, for the 
sake of reconciliation and total peace, has been the key 
instrument used by those who have laid down their weapons to 
move towards demobilization and to become integrated into the 
nation's normal life by pardoning serious crimes they have 
committed. Meanwhile, the vengeful minority pretends that 
innocent persons should be condemned within the framework of the 
Genie case and the Tripartite Commission. 
  9. As those seeking revenge continue to manipulate the 
Genie case, Nicaragua, for basic national security 
reasons, must face the grave situation the country is 
experiencing and avoid a widespread collapse that could immerse 
Nicaragua in anarchy and abject poverty. Stability will 
undoubtedly enable Nicaragua to create the wealth needed to 
gradually defeat poverty and the underdevelopment accumulated 
during a century of misunderstanding, war, and all kinds of 
conflict. 
  10. The extremist minority manipulating the Genie case 
opposes the Nicaraguan majority that wants total peace, 
security, and order within the framework of a 
disciplined de jure state. These things are 
necessary to jumpstart the economy -- and, in particular, to 
encourage agricultural production -- as well as to attract 
much-needed foreign investments, because financial cooperation 
is scarce and is quickly tending to disappear. 
  11. This same vindictive minority, which is manipulating the 
heartfelt passions that surround the Genie case, also is 
hindering production, which is crucial to combat the nation's 
very serious unemployment. Moreover, how can there be 
sufficient basic production to stabilize the nation if 
reconciliation and socioeconomic consensus are not achieved 
among the main sectors of the nation, including the political, 
socioeconomic, labor, and institutional sectors? 
  How can we engender production without resolving the 
property 
issue or, moreover, without resolving the situation of thousands 
of peasants, repatriated people, former Army members, and former 
RN [Nicaraguan Resistance] members who are demanding urgent 
solutions to issues involving property titles, loans, and other 
economic matters? 
  How can there be production if a few wealthy people take 
advantage of the crisis to accumulate land and capital at the 
expense of wrecking the work of producers and large and 
mid-sized businesses? 
  What will happen to the tens of thousands of citizens whose 
livelihoods depend on their small businesses, shops, and farms? 
What will happen to salaried workers? 
  12. Everybody must overcome the Genie case's 
exploitation by the enemies of peace and unite to preserve 
Nicaragua. May the bloodshed of today be used as an irrevocable 
commitment to ensure that this same blood, instead of dividing 
us, brings us together, thereby enabling the children of those 
of us who have fought to the death to never have to do such a 
thing again. All of us must accept one another in a new 
Nicaragua -- a new Nicaragua we all must begin forging today. 
  I end this public letter hoping that the memory of Jean Paul 
will not continue to be manipulated in a vindictive manner. 
  [Signed] Sincerely, Humberto Ortega Saavedra 
  [Dated] 21 March 1994 

