Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Irina Petrovskaya: "Premiere. NTV Begins </F>
and...Something About the Attitude Toward Traditions"] 
  [Text] The independent company NTV went on the air on 
Channel 4 on 17 January. And a week later, on 25 January, Andrey 
Karaulov, was speaking on "Moments of Truth" with Mikhail 
Poltoranin. 
  Mikhail Nikiforovich was in a very good mood and this mood 
changed only a couple of times--when the conversation turned to 
NTV. Karaulov was even surprised--why has your expression 
changed? What, actually, is so bad about Mr. Gusinskiy, with 
whose money Malashenko, Dobrodeyev, and Kiselev created NTV? 
  "I have no complaints against either Malashenko or 
Gusinskiy," answered Poltoranin. "If I had extra money I, too, 
would indulge in acquiring mass media." But the main danger, in 
Poltoranin's opinion, in the appearance of nonstate mass media 
is that "in this bacchanalia" a new language of the press is 
being introduced into practice--"camp Hebrew: a combustible 
mixture of Russophobia, hatred for traditions, lies, and 
contempt for human dignity...." 
  We shall leave on the conscience of the interviewee the vile 
nationalistic odor that emanates from his statements. 
Russophobia, from all appearances, means hatred for Mr. 
Poltoranin personally, which is not concealed by NTV (and not 
only NTV) journalists. And hatred for traditions--this is 
obviously the aspiration of Messrs. Gusinskiy, Malashenko, and 
people like them to crush the traditional, many-year state 
monopoly on the mass media and above all on the most powerful 
ones--electronic, that is, television. 
  Now that this tradition is finally if not destroyed at least 
violated, one can understand the monstrous resistance that had 
to be overcome against the people who were encroaching on the 
"holy," who intended to create a television company that is 
independent of the state. 
  Sagalayev's Channel 6 does not count. He did not present any 
special threat to the powers that be because for a long time he 
was, and essentially still is today, a kind of broadcast booth 
delivering films and foreign news to our screens. 
  NTV is another matter. Its initiators openly declared the 
need for the presence on the television screen of information 
that is politically neutral and free of state supervision. And, 
naturally, they promised to create this since the state was 
generous enough to give them one of its channels. 
  The wave of articles written against the "power of the 
moneybags who want to take state TV into their dirty hands" 
flooded the newspapers last autumn. Television is costly, the 
defenders of NTV said in response. If the state does not have 
the possibility of supporting its own TV, why not turn part of 
it over (sell) to those who do have these possibilities? The 
"opponents" of nonstate TV accused its "defenders" of selling 
out to "Most." That is why they are supporting those who want to 
subvert statehood. 
  NTV's debut on the St. Petersburg channel confirmed the 
worst 
fears of the "enemies": Journalists of the NTV information 
programs did not agitate, did not propagandize, but efficiently 
informed the viewers about what had happened in the country and 
the world. 
  It was the simplest thing in the world to silence the 
uncontrolled television company--refuse to give it air time. An 
attempt was made to do this: Even before the final version of 
the president's edict on transferring Channel 4 to NTV took 
effect, NTV leaders received a fax from St. Petersburg. A 
certain Petrenko (Kurkova's deputy) informed his colleagues: The 
Ministry of Information and the Press is cutting budget 
allocations for the St. Petersburg channel because a commercial 
television company is broadcasting on its frequencies and 
therefore the channel's leaders are dissolving the agreement 
with NTV effective 1 April 1994. 
  Thank God the situation changed. Every cloud has a silver 
lining. State TV made a complete mess of the elections. The 
fools stayed with the fools. Apparently there was somebody 
intelligent who was able to convince the president to sign the 
edict that had been canceled. 
  The most influential opponent of destatized TV, Mr. 
Poltoranin, was disgraced and dismissed, but not defeated. The 
fight with the "independents" could be continued at any moment. 
The president's edict, incidentally, left a convenient loophole 
that makes it possible to restore the status quo if he 
wishes--Channel 4 is granted to NTV "as an experiment." Who will 
decide whether the experiment was successful or not? 
  We would like very much to believe that the viewers, who are 
questioned by sociologists, will decide. 
  Sociological data obtained by V. Vilchek's Service during 
the 
course of the first week of NTV broadcasting on Channel 4 show: 
The debut took place--and it was successful. All the films and 
programs presented to the court of the viewers without exception 
immediately gained a steady audience. So far there has been no 
stunning triumph. The viewers have not rushed en masse to 
Channel 4 and the other channels still have their usual 
audience. But there are not the kinds of fluctuations that are 
typical of other channels: For instance, "Field of Miracles" was 
viewed on Ostankino by 51 percent of the viewers, and the 
nightly "Press-Express" on that same day received only 2 
percent. Practically all the NTV night programs under the rubric 
"Retro TV" ("Tavern, 13 Chairs," "Around Laughter," "What? 
Where? When?") were seen by up to 12 percent of the viewers 
during the first week. This means that the viewers' demand was 
calculated quite precisely. The ratings of the NTV information 
programs increased from 5 to 16 percent during the week. At the 
same time the program "Today" is retaining its audience on the 
St. Petersburg channel, which shows the force of habit. The 
audience for Leonid Parfenov's program of nonpolitical news, 
"The Other Day," increased sharply: While on the St. Petersburg 
channel during all the time of its existence it never exceeded 5 
percent, last Saturday it exactly doubled. And another 5 percent 
watched "The Other Day" on Channel 5. The program "Results" on 
Sundays garnered a total of 25 percent of the audience (17 
percent on Channel 4 and 8 percent on Channel 5), which 
approaches their former Ostankino indicator. The rating of the 
program "Vremechko" (which NTV is now buying from Avtorskoye TV) 
increased 1.5-fold and on certain days it even doubled. This can 
be explained by the fact that the usual audience for this 
extremely specific program was augmented by the audience for the 
artistic films shown by NTV before "Vremechko." The viewers gave 
a good reception to practically all the documentaries, cartoons, 
and game films without exception--their audience ranged from 10 
to 19 percent. 
  On the whole, from the results of the week one can say that 
no other company that started from scratch has had such a sure 
start. According to the data from a telephone poll of readers 
last Monday, at the end of the week 40 percent of those 
questioned were watching NTV programs at one time or another. 
Sociologists have never seen this kind of "full use" of Channel 
4 before. 
  According to eyewitness testimony a slight panic reigned at 
the Ostankino briefing two days after NTV's debut. The terrible 
word was pronounced--"competitor." A strategic task was set--"we 
must do something." 
  Well anyway--everything is normal. We have lived to see 
competition on the airwaves. Now, whether we like it or not, it 
will be necessary to fight for the viewers. This is something 
new not only for TV itself, but also for the viewer--he is not 
used to having anybody fight over him. My girlfriend's father 
joked to me about NTV: "They have taken my life away." In the 
sense that now all you have to do is sit and watch. It is 
possible, of course, not to watch but it is a shame to pass up 
something interesting. This feeling--"it is a shame to pass it 
up"--has not been with our viewers for very long. Something else 
is more typical and traditional--"again nothing to watch." Here 
Poltoranin is undoubtedly right: Nonstate TV demonstrates an 
overt hatred for tradition not by ignoring the viewer but by 
showing an unusual concern for him. 
  In general the devil of nonstate TV did not turn out to be 
as 
terrible as certain "traditionalists" tried to depict him. On 
the contrary, he is fairly attractive. Television oriented 
toward the viewer--such is the traditional "mark" of normal TV 
throughout the world. If anybody tries to prove to me that this 
is bad I will listen with interest but I will hardly agree. TV 
oriented only toward the authorities is much worse. TV oriented 
only toward commerce is much much worse. 

