BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Viktor Yadukha from Sevastopol under the </F>
"Neighbors" rubric with the general heading: "Ukraine Has 
Decided To Play War With the Black Sea Fleet. Meanwhile, 
Yeltsin and Kravchuk Have Decided To Split the Fleet"] 
  [Text] SEGODNYA correspondents at the Black Sea Fleet's 
press center have reported that on the morning of 15 April, 12 
Black Sea Fleet ships left Sevastopol "to practice combat 
training missions. This is a planned departure, and it has no 
bearing on the events going on in Odessa," the official 
statement says. 
  Meanwhile, the Ukrainian Navy Command has offered its 
assistance in evacuating by air or by ship officers and warrant 
officers of the maintenance division ships seized in Odessa. 
The sailors declined the offer, saying that they do not trust 
people who have treated them like that, adding that they will 
wait for help from the Black Sea Fleet. 
  Captain Second Rank Aleksandr Zelenko, chief of staff of the 
Odessa division, who arrived in Sevastopol to report on the 
situation, has said that by the time of the attack, a total of 
18 officers, 37 warrant officers, and 33 sailors were in the 
division. Of them, four officers and another 32 people -- 
warrant officers and servicewomen -- took the Ukrainian loyalty 
oath. 
  According to Captain Second Rank Zelenko, the Ukrainian 
servicemen plan to seize this way another two Black Sea Fleet 
units located in the northwestern part of the Black Sea -- a 
ship division in Ochakov and a brigade of ships under 
construction and repair in Nikolayev. When asked what these 
people could do to defend themselves, the officer said: A 
serviceman has only one answer to weapons, which is weapons. In 
Aleksandr Zelenko's view, the paratrooper brigade whose 200 or 
so servicemen occupied his division is subordinated directly to 
the Ukrainian president and could do it only on his order. The 
officer thinks that the sailors in Ochakov and Nikolayev are 
also ready to use arms in case of a possible attack. 
  Your SEGODNYA correspondent has learned that before noon on 
15 April, having secured the backing of the Ukrainian 
president's representative in Izmail, eight representatives of 
the Ukrainian Navy under Captain First Rank Dmitriy Ukrainets, 
chief of the Ukrainian Navy Water Area Protection's western 
sector, came to the premises of the Black Sea Fleet river boat 
brigade, which is deployed in the city. At the meeting with the 
boat brigade command, they read them the Ukrainian Defense 
Ministry's directive No. 115/1/0237 of 10 April 1994 on 
disbanding the river boat brigade and setting up the 3d brigade 
of the Ukrainian Navy Water Area Protection on its basis. The 
officers were introduced to the unit's new commander, Captain 
First Rank Yaroslav Fedorishin. All who would take a Ukraine 
oath of allegiance were promised a salary raise. According to 
reports from the Black Sea Fleet staff, having encountered stiff 
resistance on the part of the brigade's officers, the Ukrainian 
Navy representatives asked them not to use arms. What the boat 
brigade officers' response will be is anyone's guess. 

