BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, June 23 (XINHUA) -- China will toe the line 
of the five principles of peaceful co-existence in handling 
foreign relations, stressed Vice-President Rong Yiren when 
meeting with a delegation led by A.S. Dostiev, first 
vice-chairman of the Supreme Soviet of Tajikistan [name and 
title as received] here today. 
  Rong said that most friends on the delegation had come to 
China for the first time and hoped that the visit could improve 
mutual understanding. 
  He said the delegation's visit indicated that bilateral 
links 
had developed smoothly since China and Tajikistan set up 
diplomatic ties. 
  He said that China will develop relations and conduct 
friendly cooperation with foreign countries in accordance with 
the five principles of peaceful co-existence. 
  Strengthening exchanges and collaboration is beneficial for 
China and Tajikistan, both developing countries with the 
responsibilities of pushing the economies forward and raising 
people's living standards, Rong said. 
  On China's reform and opening drive, Rong said: "Though 
China's economy is growing quickly, the Chinese people's living 
standards, which have risen steadily, lag far behind those in 
developed countries. 
  "We will continue our efforts to catch up with the 
moderately-developed countries by the middle of the next 
century," he said. 
  Appreciating China's warm and friendly welcome, Dostiev said 
it embodied the friendship of China and the Chinese people 
toward Tajikistan and her people. 
  Dostiev said his current visit was aimed at furthering 
existing bilateral friendly cooperation, at getting a better 
understanding of China's 15 years of reform, and at learning 
successful experience suitable to Tajikistan's conditions. 
  Praising China's foreign and domestic policies, Dostiev said 
it is right for China to adhere to the five principles of 
peaceful co-existence in the world arena and stick to the 
construction of the socialist market economy within its 
territory. 

