Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Standpoint" column: "Iran and Export of Anarchy" by 'Isa </F>
Isma'il al-'Abbadi] 
  [Text] The Iranian regime continues to interfere in the 
internal affairs of Arabs and Muslims instead of paying 
attention to its aggravating problems resulting from its 
haphazard policies and inability to find solutions to the 
difficulties of the peoples of Iran, the majority of whom are 
living below the poverty line. The Iraqis taught this regime a 
hard lesson when it attempted to meddle in their affairs. The 
Iraqis waged the second al-Qadisiyah battle [the 1980-1988 
Iraq-Iran war] and inflicted on the Tehran regime a 
comprehensive defeat. And when the Iranian regime attempted to 
interfere in Iraqi affairs through the chapter of treason and 
treachery [the 1991 pro-Iran shiite rebellion in southern Iraq] 
it faced the same fate despite the fact that it tried to confuse 
the situation and enter under the broken wings of the 30-state 
aggression. 
  From the Arab east to the Arab west, Arabs and Muslims are 
aware that the Iranian regime is trying to interfere in their 
internal affairs and is working to foment seditions and anarchy 
under false slogans. 
  In a statement, the Jordanian Government announced that 
Jordan wants to make the size of the Iranian diplomatic mission 
in Amman equal to the size of the Jordanian diplomatic mission 
in Tehran. However, diplomats in the Jordanian capital say that 
Jordan adopted this position after its security organs became 
certain that Iran tried to interfere in last November's 
parliamentary elections. It has also been revealed that Iran 
had continuous contacts with groups bent on creating anarchy in 
Jordan. 
  In Algiers, the newspaper AL-SHA'B has strongly condemned 
Iran's blatant interference in Algeria's internal affairs and 
its attempt to cast doubt on the appointment of Liamine Zeroual 
as the new president of the country. The newspaper said that 
Algeria will not accept any claims by the regime controlled 
Iranian media under any circumstances or justification and will 
vehemently refuse to take lessons from a regime that has failed 
to manage its internal affairs and led its people to the brink 
of bankruptcy and collapse. 
  The Algerian paper noted that Iran is forgetting its 
isolation, suffering, and support for terrorism, and that it has 
exported destructive ideology to make Algeria a den of 
extremism. Iran, the paper said, has unleashed its media to 
spit venom against Algeria and its unity. 
  These facts extend across the Arab world from the east to 
the 
west. When will the Iranian regime stop its attempts to play 
the role of an untrusted trustee over Arab and Muslim affairs? 
Undoubtedly, the Iranian regime, which is being disturbed by 
armed popular resistance in many big cities and in hundreds of 
villages and districts, is incapable of playing any positive and 
constructive role in the region. Its unceasing interference in 
Arab and Islamic affairs will only increase its regional and 
international isolation. 

