BFN 

<F P=106> ["Special report" by staff reporter: "A Clear Picture of </F>
the Qiandaohu Case"] 
  [Text] Hangzhou, 21 Apr (WEN WEI PO)--According to 
informed sources on the Qiandao Lake incident, Wu Lihong and Hu 
Zhihan, the two suspects arrested so far, used to be classmates 
in middle school and, upon graduation, returned to the 
countryside as peasants. They started plotting to rob a 
pleasure boat as early as last August. Because the lake abounds 
with overseas tourists, they made a target of those from Taiwan, 
thinking that they had more money. 
  After the Spring Festival this year, Wu and Hu stepped up 
their planning and preparation for the robbery. They bought a 
motorboat and then cruised on the lake many times to make 
observations. They discovered that between 1800 and 1900 every 
evening, there were about three tour boats traveling from Anhui 
to Chunan County Town. 
  Yu Aijun was drawn into the gang by these two a little 
later. 
After repeated observation and plotting, they decided to rob the 
last tour boat because, they thought, if they robbed the first 
or second boat, the boat in distress might call for help from 
the others. They also scheduled their action for late March and 
early April, the season of misty spring rain which would shroud 
the lake and cover their actions. 
  On 31 March, it happened to be raining and the lake was 
covered with the misty rain. At the hour which they had tested 
many times beforehand, the culprits drove their motorboat into 
the area where they were to take action. When the pleasure boat 
"Hairui" came into sight, they trailed close behind it, watching 
for their chance. Because there were a few fishing boats passing 
by or working in the vicinity, the three suspects kept putting 
off their action. As "Hairui" approached a narrow islet in the 
middle of the lake, the suspects decided to intercept it once it 
came away from the islet. 
  After they intercepted "Hairui," Wu and Hu, carrying a 
shotgun, adagger, and an axe, went aboard, while Yu stayed 
behind to control the motorboat. Wu and Hu quickly subdued the 
chief mate with their weapons. One of them took the chief 
mate's place and piloted the pleasure boat to an open area of 
the lake. When the suspects boarded the pleasure boat, a tour 
guide came over to ask what they were doing but was quickly 
subdued with the weapons. 
  As soon as the pleasure boat reached the open space, looting 
began. Weapons in hand, they forced each and every tourist to 
put all their belongings on a tea table. There was no 
resistance from the tourists. After the looting, the two 
suspects brandished the shotgun and the other weapons and herded 
the 32 tourists, tour guides, and crew members into the Hairui's 
lower crew cabin was only 17 square m in size. They then 
removed the staircase and closed the iron door to the cabin, 
locking it with twisted wire. After that, they set fire to the 
boat. Up to this point, the suspects had not fired once. 
  When the fire flared up under the influence of the wind, the 
tourists started screaming and trying desperately to break down 
the door and force their way out. Thereupon, Wu and Hu started 
firing but they did not hit anyone. Then Wu and Hu fetched the 
petroleum which they had prepared and poured it over the boat, 
aggravating the blaze. When the conflagration was devouring the 
Hairui, the frenzied suspects dived under water to look for a 
water inlet, hoping to unplug it and sink the boat but they 
could not find one. After this failed, the suspects carried 37 
kg of explosive, which they had bought beforehand, onto the 
boat, trying to blast the whole boat into splinters. However, 
they failed to detonate the explosive, so they ran away with 
their loot on their motorboat. That evening, the Chunan County 
Travel Bureau personnel waited for the Hairui on the pier till 
very late but it never came, so they informed the relevant 
authorities. The local government analyzed the situation and 
suspected that the pleasure boat might have had a breakdown on 
the lake, so they immediately appealed to the local army for 
help. The army at once sent a helicopter to search this body of 
water, which is 500 square km in area and has over 1,000 islets. 
The helicopter found the Hairui and a boat was immediately sent 
to the spot. When the rescue boat arrived at the scene, they 
found that the hull of the boat was very hot. Fearful of an 
explosion, they did not board the boat right away. Instead, 
they hosed down the Hairui to lower its temperature. Up to this 
point, because they had not seen a single body, they thought 
that at least some tourists had escaped. It was not until about 
1700 on 1 April when the Hairui was towed alongside for 
examination that the shocking scene of a corpse-packed lower 
cabin was revealed and this enormous case of robbery, arson, and 
homicide exposed. 
  It is learned that the preliminary investigation results of 
the enormous case of arson, robbery, and homicide on the Hairui 
will be publicized to the whole country by the Central 
Television Station shortly. 

