Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Radio Slavyanka" program of the Russian Defense </F>
Ministry] 
  [Excerpt] And now I would like to dwell on the problems of 
nuclear weapons in the near abroad. The leadership of the 
Ukrainian Defense Ministry is forcing the servicemen of the 
strategic missile units to take the Ukrainian military oath of 
allegiance. Aleksandr Znamenskiy is at our microphone with the 
details. 
  [Znamenskiy] Specifically what is being referred to is the 
43d Army. This army stationed on the territory of the Ukrainian 
Republic is armed with over 170 intercontinental missiles of the 
former Soviet Union. Their nuclear charges, together with other 
nuclear warheads situated on Ukraine's territory -- and there 
are some 2,000 units of them -- are to be taken to Russia and 
salvaged there in as short a time as possible. This was agreed 
by the presidents of Russia, the United States and Ukraine at a 
recent meeting in Moscow. It would seem that there would no 
longer be any problems as regards nuclear missile weapons in 
Ukraine. However, at the sitting of the collegium of Ukraine's 
Defense Ministry which took place the other day the commander of 
the 43rd Army and his subordinate, the commander of one of the 
divisions, were compelled to take the Ukrainian oath of 
allegiance. And today all servicemen of the strategic missile 
units are also being instructed to take the oath of allegiance 
to Ukraine. The Russian military believe that all these 
unilateral steps by Kiev are a gross violation of the 
American-Russian-Ukrainian nuclear accords reached in Moscow . 
They are not in line either with the agreement on the status of 
strategic nuclear forces signed by the heads of CIS as far back 
as February 1992. 
  Describing Ukraine's military leaders who take such 
decisions, head of the chief directorate of Russia's Defense 
Ministry Colonel General Yevgeniy Maslin said that they are 
people who want to remain in the seats of the new structures for 
the exploitation of nuclear weapons and to this end they need 
assistants in the form of a dedicated officer corps. And it is 
for this reason that the Ukrainisation of the officer corps is 
proceeding artifically in Ukraine. 
  Meanwhile the number of officers wishing to serve in 
Ukraine's missile units is steadily dropping. Today almost 
every second servicemen is seeking to continue his service in 
Russia. What is more, while previously the missilemen in Russia 
and Ukraine, united by one oath of allegiance, in the face of 
all difficulties, ensured the required level of nuclear safety, 
now all this is out of the question . With the adoption of the 
Ukrainian oath of allegiance, the command of the Russian 
strategic missile troops is completely losing the possibility of 
running the 43d Army. The set aim of Ukraine's military to 
completely control the nuclear forces on the republic's 
territory is being carried out in practice. The situation that 
has arisen calls into doubt the reality of the fulfilment of the 
Ukrainian side of its nuclear obligations and without 
exaggeration could lead to a disaster worse than the Chernobyl 
one. [passage omitted] 

