Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By ITAR-TASS correspondents Pavel Vanichkin and Vitaliy </F>
Chukseyev] 
  [Text] Washington March 10 TASS -- Russian speaker Ivan 
Rybkin believes that the State Duma (lower chamber of the 
Russian parliament) is the major reformer in the country and 
that it is impossible to promote reforms without civil accord. 
  "I regard the Duma as the most reforming arm of government 
in 
Russia," the speaker said. "It includes three-quarters of the 
former government. Many came to it from the Russian president's 
office and occupy key positions in parliament," he continued. 
  "If you look at parliamentary groups, many of them changed 
their names. They were joined by bankers, businessmen, lawyers 
and farmers. 
  "Therefore, when we start adopting basic laws which will 
clear up roadblocks in the way of reforms, it will be easier for 
us than for the former parliament. However, we should 
understand: we shall not advance further without civil accord 
and cooperation between the executive and legislative arms of 
government. 
  "Therefore, we even do not think about a rollback and 
reversal of reforms," said Rybkin at a news conference on 
Wednesday on the results of his parliamentary delegation's visit 
to Washington. 
  "Intervals in relations between the legislatures of such big 
countries as the United States and Russia are inadmissible, and 
our visit to Washington has shown that this conviction is shared 
by Russian and U.S. parliamentarians," he added. 
  "We also discussed the importance of cooperation between the 
leaders of executive and legislative powers in the United States 
and Russia as well as judicial authorities, since it is 
necessary to have a constant contact in the present 
kaleidoscopically changing world. 
  "In the near future, U.S. Congress delegations will visit 
Russia, and the inter-government commission co-chaired by Albert 
Gore and Viktor Chernomyrdin will hold a very important 
meeting," the speaker noted. 
  "The U.S.-Russian constant is partnership and cooperation 
for 
the sake of peace and accord on earth, for the sake of difficult 
reforms in Russia. 
  "We agreed on many problems, mapped out cooperation 
programmes and decided that mutual information should be 
complete and frank to prevent misunderstandings in relations, 
which arise due to the lack of reliable information." 

