Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Occupied Jerusalem--Quds Press--The Palestinian 
Hamas Movement inside the occupied territories has called for 
challenging the Israeli authorities' decision and go tomorrow, 
Friday, [as published] to the Ibrahimi Mosque in Hebron 
tomorrow, Friday, to perform their prayers. 
  The movement distributed a statement at the start of a new 
month for the Palestinian intifadah. The statement says: We 
call on our kinsfolk and beloved ones in Hebron to challenge the 
occupation authorities and perform Friday prayers at the holy 
Ibrahimi Mosque on 4 March, stage a mammoth march after prayers, 
and throw stones and Molotov cocktails at the occupation 
authorities' cars, because the Israeli occupation forces have 
announced the closure of the Ibrahimi Mosque following the 
massacre and said they will prevent the worshipers from entering 
the mosque until new security arrangements are taken. 
  In its statement Hamas said: This statement is a warning to 
the people. The statement starts with the Koranic verse: "And 
they ill-treated them for no other reason than that they 
believed in God, exalted in power, worthy of all praise." SAWT 
AL-SHA'B publishes the text of the statement: 
  O brave men of Hebron. O the lions of Gaza. O the heroes of 
Nabulus. O the guardians of al-Aqsa Mosque. O the knights of 
Ramallah and Bethlehem. O the enduring masses in all our towns, 
villages and camps. O the men, women, youth, and children. 
Declare it a fresh revolution against the occupation. Cry out 
Allah Akbar [God is great] and let these cries tear out the 
hearts of the criminal Zionist occupiers. Let the hearts of the 
malicious settlers tremble. Pursue the occupation soldiers and 
attack the gangs of settlers and slay them wherever you catch 
them for things have come to a head and all the deception has 
been uncovered. The massacre is evidence as clear as the sun 
that our Zionist enemy does not respect ties of kinship or 
covenant. It wants to multiply our wounds so we will surrender 
and so it will keep anyone it wants and evict anyone it wants. 
It is doing so under the umbrella of peace, the love of peace, 
and the headlines of the Oslo and Cairo agreements. 
  The collaboration of the government of terrorist Rabin with 
the malicious criminal settlers in this barbaric massacre, after 
the signing of the treasonous Cairo agreement is a definite 
indication that all Zionists are the same and that they all 
harbor hatred against our Muslim people, civilization, and 
nation. 
  Let the veil drop from the eyes of those who have illusions 
about peace with the enemy. Let the symbols of capitulation -- 
those of Madrid, Oslo, Washington, and Cairo, who are crouching 
in Tunis watching the wounds of our people and nation -- fall. 
  O masses of our garrisoned people. Let the abhorrent 
barbaric massacre be the start of a new stage in our people's 
struggle and for the escalation of our national revolution 
against the wicked occupation, including all its tools and 
symbols. 
  Let the land burn under the feet of the occupiers. Let the 
cries of Allah Akbar be raised. Let the confrontations of our 
masses with the pillars of occupation continue. Let us foil the 
policy of capitulation and let the blood of our martyrs and 
injured ones and the sufferings of our men and women turn into a 
curse that pursues the occupiers day and night so our national 
rank will be pure and united on the road of struggle toward 
victory and liberation. 
  Masses of our glorious people: The vicious Zionist 
massacre is a test to our dignity, pride, and vengeance. It may 
be followed by various other massacres. By God, it is our 
destiny to be standing on the frontline in our nation's conflict 
against the criminal Zionists; and, by God, it is inevitable 
that God will grant us victory over our enemies as long as we 
embrace the means to achieve victory and rely on God almighty, 
conqueror of tyrants and infidels. 
  It was due from us to aid those who believed. 
  God will certainly aid those who aid his cause; for verily 
God is full of strength, exalted in might, and able to enforce 
his will. [Koranic verses] 
  Be united and do not allow any traitor or people with weak 
spirits to join your ranks. Censure the capitulationists and 
defeatists, force them to abide by your hopes and aspirations, 
and block the road between them and the enemy. Let the 
demonstrations and mass rallies take to the streets. Engage 
with the soldiers and the herds of settlers. Let the heroes 
pursue the settlers and turn their settlements into jails and 
let them shed the blood of the rancorous Zionists in the streets 
of the settlements. 
  We, in Hamas, call for the following: 
  1. Friday 4 March: We urge our kinsfolk and beloved ones in 
Hebron to defy the occupation authorities and to perform the 
Friday prayer in the Holy Ibrahimi Mosque. We also urge them to 
go out in a massive rally after the prayer to deafen the enemy 
with the cries of Allahu Akbar and throw stones and Molotov 
cocktails on their cars. 
  2. Friday 4 March: We call on our people to go out in 
massive rallies after the Friday prayer from all mosques in 
Palestine to cry Allahu Akbar, denounce the ugly crime, and call 
on the PLO and the Arab states to withdraw from the negotiations. 
  3. From 5 to 7 March, three days for escalating the 
confrontations and the qualitative operations against the 
occupation soldiers and the herds of settlers. 
  4. Celebrating the al-Qadr Night on 27 Ramadan [9 March] in 
mosques, and to pray to God to grant us victory and defeat the 
occupiers. We also call for crying Allah Akbar in loudspeakers 
from the rooftops of buildings. 
  5. Observing a day of general strike on 9 March on the 
start of the intifadah's 76th month to denounce the signing of 
the treacherous Cairo security agreement. 
  6. On 11 March, the last Friday in Ramadan, we urge all our 
people to travel to holy Jerusalem to perform the Friday prayer 
at the al-Aqsa Mosque. We urge them to defy the occupation 
authorities and the siege and curfew, and to perform the prayer, 
even on the walls of the al-Aqsa Mosque if necessary. 
  7. On 'Id al-Fitr day, we urge the people to perform the 'Id 
prayer outside mosques in open yards, in accordance with the 
Prophet's teachings. We also urge them to visit the families of 
the martyrs, wounded, and detainees and the patients, and to 
help the poor and the needy. 
  8. On 14 March, we call for staging mass rallies, to be 
attended in particular by the families of the martyrs, wounded, 
and detainees. We also urge the demonstrations to proceed to 
the homes of the members of the negotiating team to urge them to 
withdraw completely from the negotiations and to join the 
resistance against occupation. 
  Allah Akbar. Victory to our mujahid people. 

