BFN 

<F P=106> [By Sun Shangwu: "Fixed-Asset Funding Needs Firm Cap"] </F>
  [Text] The Chinese Government must keep a tighter lid on 
fixed assets investment to maintain stable economic growth, an 
economist said. 
  Investment in fixed assets last year shot up 50.6 percent, 
while the gross domestic product (GDP) increased by 30.6 percent. 
  An official report shows that the State fixed asset 
investment in the first quarter of this year reached 81.5 
billion yuan ($9.4 billion), up 36.2 percent from the same 
period last year. 
  However, due to governmental macro economic control, the 
growth rate of the investment actually dropped 34.5 percentage 
points in the same period, the report said. 
  The sharp investment increase last year greatly boosted the 
need for currency, which is regarded as an important factor 
pushing the nation's economy to the brink of dangerous 
overheating, said Liu Rixin, a researcher with the Economic 
Research Centre of the State Planning Commission. 
  Although 115.8 billion yuan (about $21 billion according to 
foreign exchange rate in 1992) was issued in 1992, the central 
bank last year still poured some 152.9 billion yuan ($17.5 
billion) into the market to meet urgent credit demands, which 
was the same as that issued over several years between 1985-89. 
  This inevitably led to double-digit inflation last year. 
  The central government adopted many measures early this year 
to curb the scale of investment. A circular was issued to ban 
new investment projects and the State Development Bank was 
established last month to make policy-related loan decisions. 
Inspection teams were sent nationwide last month to examine 
local investment projects. 
  Besides these moves, other important steps are required, 
according to Liu. 
  He noted that about 80 percent of fixed asset investment 
came 
from bank loans and funds raised by enterprises and local 
governments. 
  The central bank should strictly implement the State-set 
fixed assets investment plans and should not overstep these 
plans arbitrarily. 
  The National People's Congress (NPC), China's legislature, 
approved this year's investment plan for fixed assets of 1.3 
trillion yuan ($149 billion) at the Eighth NPC session in March, 
an increase of about 10 percent from last year. 
  Liu complained that in the past, the actual investment 
always 
exceeded the limits set by the central government. 
  The investment plan last year was set at 800 billion yuan 
($91.9 billion), while the actual investment stood at 1.18 
trillion yuan ($135.6 billion). 
  Meanwhile, Liu pointed out that the development funds raised 
by enterprises themselves must come from their profits instead 
of other financial sources. 
  However, many enterprises raised development funds by 
borrowing money from banks, issuing bonds and shares. The 
fundraising practice will eventually result in investment, he 
said. 
  He said that many enterprises and local government 
departments are eager to embrace shareholding systems or issue 
bonds for raising development funds. 
  According to macro-economic control policies, such a 
practice 
is inadvisable because it will inevitably disturb the credit 
plans of banks by soaking up too much of society's "idle" money. 
  Liu argued that "idle" money doesn't really exist in China. 
  Though many deposits are held by individuals, they have been 
taken into the credit arrangements of banks. 
  The government allows only some pilot enterprises to adopt 
the shareholding system, but some economic researchers encourage 
most enterprises to do so, according to Liu. 
  The number of listed enterprises should also be strictly 
limited at the present time. 
  Now, besides being interested in the shareholding system, 
many enterprises and local governments also aim to attract 
foreign capital. 
  But Liu said that the central government must take pertinent 
steps to guide such practice. 
  When foreign capital comes into China it should be 
supplemented by some domestic capital. 
  Before introducing foreign investment, the government should 
make some provision to guarantee domestic accessory funding for 
the projects. Otherwise, the limited domestic capital will 
restrict the introduction of foreign money. 
  Statistics show that last year, more than 10 per cent of 
fixed asset investment came from foreign capital. 
  In addition to stemming the financial source of investment, 
the central government should map out specific industrial 
policies to guide investment both from home and abroad. 
  Investors should be encouraged to pour funding into the 
country's energy and transportation sectors, its pillar 
industries and infrastructure projects. 
  Liu revealed that China improved the investment climate last 
year in the bottle-necked telecommunication and transportation 
sectors. 
  The official report said that 20 per cent of the State 
investment last year went into transportation, up 5.5 percent 
over the previous year. 
  But compared with 1992, last year's State investment in the 
energy, machinery, cultural and educational sectors dropped by 
3.3, 1.6 and 0.8 per cent respectively. 
  Market factors or prices should play an important role in 
allocating the resources, Liu pointed out. 
  With the rapid development of investment in recent years, 
the 
present investment statistics cannot reflect the actual 
conditions in the country, cautioned Liu. 
  Groups in search of investments are now diversified. They 
not only include State-owned enterprises and collectively-owned 
enterprises, but also privately-run and township firms, 
joint-ventures and foreign-invested enterprises. 
  But the current statistical methods include only the State, 
collective investment and part of the individual investment 
groups. Several groups have been excluded from the statistics. 
  He suggested the government reform the statistical methods 
to 
reflect actual practice. 
  "Complete statistics will help the government to make good 
management decisions relating to investment " he added. 

