CSO 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "The Serbian Gibraltar"] </F>
  [Text] Brcko is located at the exit from AVNOJ [Antifascist 
Council of the National Liberation of Yugoslavia] Serbia, but at 
the entrance to Great Serbia. Before the war, according to the 
1991 Census, Brcko had a population consisting of 20.8 percent 
Serbs, 44.4 percent Muslims, and 25.4 percent Croats. Forget the 
census, as Karadzic and his gang would say. Today, Brcko is a 
Serbian city and must remain as such. If the Serbs do not manage 
to hold Brcko, nothing will be left of the state of united Serbs 
even by the third congress of Serbian intellectuals. If they do 
hold it, the question is whether there will ever be peace. 
  Brcko, then, is not only a geostrategic symbol of a war 
effort, but also the greatest political test for the entire 
international community. It must decide whether to stop the 
Serbs once and for all--as Baroness Thatcher proposes--or to go 
for a political solution that will incorporate an awareness of 
the mistakes and responsibility of all the interested parties. 
  Brcko, that is, the corridor at Brcko, represents the 
exposed 
essence of Serbian war aims. However true it may be that the 
world has not approved those goals from the outset, it is still 
more accurate that it never seriously and resolutely opposed the 
previous phases of their realization. 
  Those who followed with concern the liberation of Vukovar to 
the foundations or the two-year war in Bosnia waged under the 
slogan that people of differing nationalities no longer desire 
or are able to live together there really do not have much right 
to present ultimatums to Karadzic and his Belgrade mentors 
concerning Brcko. Just as our socialist youth built the 
Brcko-Banovici railroad after the war, and along the way also 
built themselves, so the followers of the antibureaucratic 
revolution, from the left and from the right, today want to 
build the Brcko-Belgrade corridor. That railroad was the symbol 
of totalitarian self-sacrifice and enthusiastic effort, while 
this corridor is a geostrategic symbol of new Serbian 
expansionism being presented as the supreme national interest. 
  If the Bosnian Serbs are denied the corridor, after 
everything they have been allowed to do in two years, it is not 
just expanded Serbia that is called into question, but also 
lasting peace in Bosnia. It does not seem likely that the side 
which was so superior militarily will consent to a political 
solution which inevitably destroys its military superiority, not 
to mention its victory. 
  Those who fear the project of Great Serbia must realize that 
realization of that project would yield a weak, powerless state 
divided and atrophied from within that would constitute a danger 
most of all to its own citizens. Incidentally, even Svetozar 
Markovic knew in his time that it would have to be a police 
state, but the so-called world observers and analysts educating 
themselves from the columns of Mira Markovic do not know that. 
As a matter of fact, quite a bit can be learned from those 
columns about nature and society, about life at court and around 
the court, but not about the real consequences of life inspired 
by the great ideals of the antibureaucratic revolution: Serbian 
concord, territories, and a state for all Serbs. 
  The point is, that is, that no political solution adopted 
outside has prospects of being received, of taking hold, as the 
soldiers of the antibureaucratic revolution would put it. Not 
because the Serbs are a dignified people, but because they 
simply will not allow help from outside until they themselves 
realize that their interest does not lie in the Belgrade-Brcko 
corridor, but the Belgrade-Brussels transverse communication 
route, and beyond that, if God allows, underneath the water, 
rather than over. 
  Certainly, the corridor at Brcko should be peacefully left 
to 
the Bosnian Serbs, but all the weapons they possess should be 
taken away from them, and also the Muslims and Croats, by force. 
There is no political solution in Bosnia so long as all three 
are under arms. As long as there are arms, there will also be 
ethnic cleansing to a greater or lesser degree, open or 
concealed. Only a disarmed Bosnia can be a peaceful Bosnia. 
  A peace plan that would proceed from those premises would 
not 
only be a first step in the direction of rebuilding devastated 
Bosnia, because it would prevent its further destruction, it 
would also be a solid prerequisite for a generally accepted 
political solution. A corridor not used for logistical support 
of war efforts, but to intensify business cooperation would be 
not only possible, but even desirable. Used in that way, it 
would quickly cease to have significance as a semisecret passage 
and channel for advancement of weapons and other essentials for 
the army made up of the entire population. 
  The Brcko-Belgrade corridor would cease to have any meaning 
as soon as the focus of the international community's activity 
is moved from observation and supervision of military operations 
to their unconditional cessation. Placing arms under control and 
their systematic destruction should extend to all sides in the 
war. This is the higher justice for which the Serbs should 
strive and which they should be allowed to experience. The only 
other thing is the UNPROFOR [UN Protection Forces]. 

