BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, April 12 KYODO -- Opposition leader Yohei 
Kono vowed Tuesday [12 April] to run in a prime ministerial 
election in the Diet that will pick a successor to Prime 
Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, who announced his resignation last 
Friday, party officials said. Kono, president of the Liberal 
Democratic Party (LDP), made the comment during a meeting of 
senior executive officials of the party, which was ousted from 
power last August following 38 years of uninterrupted rule. 
  Kono was quoted as saying, "(I) will fulfill duties as party 
president and run in the prime ministerial election." 
  "I think I should perform to the last (my) duties as head of 
a party with its membership totaling 220 members (in the House 
of Representatives)," he said. 
  "The party must act in unison," said Kono, in an apparent 
reference aimed at thwarting moves among the LDP to put up 
former Prime Minister Michio Watanabe as a prime ministerial 
candidate. "There are emerging political circumstances for the 
LDP to take the position of assuming responsibility," Kono said. 
  Kono accused the ruling coalition of failing to show a 
political perspective, spending time playing power games and 
lacking the qualifications to hold power. 
  LDP Secretary General Yoshiro Mori told the same session 
that 
the party may hammer out a policy accord with other parties 
before the Diet's prime ministerial election. 
  Watanabe's key ally present at the party meeting, Taku 
Yamasaki, opposed Kono's likely election bid, saying the party 
president need not be its candidate automatically. 
  It is not known when the prime ministerial election in both 
houses of the Diet will be called. 
  The seven-party coalition, which controls a majority in the 
two houses, is on the verge of a breakup because of sharp 
differences between two groups in the eight-month-old alliance. 
  The LDP, whose membership in the lower house stands at 219, 
is the largest single party in the Diet. The coalition 
controls 260 members in the powerful 511-seat lower chamber. 

