BFN 

<F P=106> [Address by President Nelson Mandela to the crowd at Botha </F>
Pawn at the Union Buildings in Pretoria -- live] 
  [Text] To the millions of South Africans of all colors who 
fought and destroyed the social system which has been condemned 
by entire world as a crime against humanity, the millions who 
brought down on their knees [word indistinct] in our country; to 
the millions of Africans, coloreds, Indians, and whites who 
turned up recently to elect a government of their own choice, 
today is a wonderful day indeed. [applause] It is the 
realization of our dreams for which we have prayed so hard and 
long. It has been costly in human lives, but let us forget the 
past. What is past is past. [preceding 10 words in Afrikaans] 
  I stand next to two deputy presidents. One who came from the 
ruling class but today who has engraved a niche for himself in 
South African history, because he has turned out to be one of 
the greatest reformers, one of the greatest sons of our soil -- 
Mr. de Klerk. [applause] 
  We have on our left another deputy president who has never 
known his youth, the joys of youth, who plunged himself into the 
struggle the moment he realized what was happening in this 
country. The three of us are going to work together in order to 
build South Africa, to promote a spirit of reconciliation and to 
engage in nation-building. 
  Let us forget the past. Let us now work together to make 
this country a great country, and if you give us your support 
there is no doubt whatsoever in my mind that we have a country 
that is going to play its role, not only in regard to our 
region, but throughout the continent and, indeed, throughout the 
world. 
  I ask you to pray for us because we need your prayers. I ask 
you to give us your whole-hearted support because we need you. 
We ask you to give us your good wishes because we need them. 
That is all we need in order to secure a better life for all of 
you. 
  The three of us have committed ourselves on various 
occasions, that this is what we are fighting this election for. 
Now we are one. We have forgotten our differences. We are now 
busy healing the wounds of the past, and it is for you to 
support us in that task. I thank you. [applause] 

