BFN 

<F P=106> [Speech by President Yeltsin to graduates of Russia's </F>
military academies in the Kremlin on 28 June -- recorded] 
  [Text] [Yeltsin] The hope of the Russian Army is here in 
this splendid hall. You represent those on whom its might and 
combat capability will be based. On the whole, Russia's Armed 
Forces match up to contemporary requirements for safeguarding 
the country's military security. The young Russian Army confirms 
this not just in major maneuvers and training exercises at 
strategic level. Its units and formations are successfully 
carrying out peacekeeping functions in accordance with our 
country's international commitments. 
  The main area of our military policy is reformation of the 
armed forces. They should meet the actual requirements needed 
for sufficient national defense. Gradually, and I stress here, 
gradually, the strength of the army will be reduced and brought 
down to 1.5 million servicemen. The mechanism for building the 
army up to its required strength will also undergo gradual 
changes. There is talk of increasing the share of servicemen 
undergoing military service on contracts. 
  We will continue to devote much attention to developing the 
new military infrastructure in Russia and providing it with 
everything necessary as quickly as possible. We need to learn 
how to implement a balanced military-technical policy. The root 
of the problem is that tasks we tackle should correspond to the 
actual possibilities of the country's economy. 
  It is no secret that today our funds are limited and that 
this is sharply reflected on the army. This is why it is even 
more important to allocate these funds wisely. We will have to 
reduce the number of various types of weapons and their 
modifications, material support for them, the range of 
ammunition, supplies, and spare parts. 
  Multiplicity is an unacceptable luxury right now. We need 
unification. At the same time, it is also categorically 
unacceptable to waste in the name of arms reduction a unique 
scientific and technical potential created by the armed forces. 
There are international treaties and agreements, and we will 
honestly fulfill the responsibilities which we have taken upon 
ourselves. But any so-called over-doing on our part is totally 
out of question. This is a clear position taken by the 
president, and the supreme commander in chief, and this is a 
demand of principle to the leadership of the armed forces. 
  The majority of those in this hall will soon return to the 
troops. I hope that you have mastered one of the main lessons 
of the science of winning, and this is that the power of the 
army is not only in the combat training of personnel; not only 
in commanders and military leaders mastering the art of war -- 
although there is no army without this. Its strength is not only 
in military discipline -- although there is no army without this 
either. The Russian Army was invincible when humanity got the 
upper hand over callousness within it, when a commander saw in 
each of his subordinates not a robot, not a blind piece of 
ordnance, but a human being. 
  Humanity does not mean everything goes, and it is not 
mollycoddling. In the army it means persistently teaching each 
serviceman to fulfill combat tasks and to survive in any 
situation. 
  The main thing here is not to forget the dignity of one's 
subordinates, always to feel one's personal responsibility for 
their lives. This is the testament of our best military leaders. 
This is borne out by the military experience of our best field 
commanders, and I believe that you too will not only continue, 
but will strengthen this glorious tradition. One must honestly 
acknowledge, that both previously and now, we have far from 
always been or remain true to it. 
  In a democratic state, the rights and duties of servicemen 
should be determined only by the law. The whole legal basis for 
the organization and activity of the armed forces should be 
brought into line with the Constitution and the main tenets of 
military doctrine. 
  In order to improve the overall system for the management of 
the armed forces and to strengthen their links with society, we 
shall gradually introduce and strengthen elements of civil 
control of the process of military organization. 
  At the reception in honor of the graduates of military 
academies one must not omit to mention the system of training of 
military cadres. We have a plan for the development of a system 
of military education. The training schedules and curricula of 
higher educational establishments have been detailed. The 
training of officers in many specializations lacking in the 
Russian Army has been organized. This work has to be continued. 
  A course aimed at the rational enlargement and integration 
of 
military educational institutions should become a main 
direction. By reducing quantity, the quality of training is to 
be increased. We shall continue to pay particular attention to 
issues of the social provision for armed forces personnel and 
members of their families, and also for servicemen in reserve, 
for those who gave the best years of their lives serving the 
motherland. 
  A program of providing housing for servicemen and 
demobilized 
individuals in 1994 and 1995 is being implemented. Money 
allowances and pensions, and also the salaries of blue-collar 
and white-collar workers in the Russian Army have been 
increased. To this end, despite all the difficulties, additional 
sources to finance military needs are being sought. 
  It is possible that the Ministry of Social Welfare will be 
required to create a special department for dealing with those 
discharged to the reserve, military invalids, pensioners, and 
veterans. 
  Making use of this occasion I shall dwell on matters 
concerning the foreign activity of the armed forces. Primarily, 
this means formations in the CIS collective security system. No 
one and nothing can free Russia from the political and moral 
responsibility for the fate of the countries and peoples which 
have accompanied the Russian state for centuries. Furthermore, 
the creation of a long-term system of European security -- we 
are in favor of such a system being all-embracing. It should 
include not only a bloc-structure such as NATO. What is needed 
is a broader system of partnership which would unite and 
strengthen all the currently functioning mechanisms -- the CSCE, 
the European and the Western European Unions, the Council for 
North Atlantic Cooperation, and so on. It will hardly be 
possible to construct a new edifice of European security if its 
architects seek to exclude Russia from their plans, but we too 
have to take an active part in the existing institutions of 
cooperation and not isolate ourselves from them but rather exert 
a stronger influence on their work from within. 
  Proceeding from Russia's special strategic position in 
Eurasia, we have to see the creation of an effective system of 
security in the Asian and Pacific region as a main direction in 
our military policy. We shall continue to take an active part in 
peacekeeping operations, in work to control arms and the 
proliferation of nuclear technologies, and on the whole, in 
ensuring strategic stability in the world. 
  Russian foreign policy is paying off. Our country recently 
joined the military and technical process of Partnership for 
Peace. Russia concluded an agreement on partnership and 
cooperation with the European Union. For the first time this 
century, we have entered Europe as an equal with all the other 
states of Europe. Ahead lies involvement in the conference of 
the seven most developed states in the world, and in political 
matters, fully-fledged involvement, that is G-8 [vosmerka]. For 
the present it is a political and not an economic G-8, that is 
starting to work. Each such step opens up new prospects before 
our country. 
  Tomorrow you will again return to your units and will set 
about new and greater duties. I am sure that the personnel of 
the units, vessels, formations under your leadership will 
succesfully tackle the tasks of defending the state interests of 
Russia. I wish success to you all in your difficult and 
honourable task on behalf of Russia and to the glory of the 
fatherland. 

