BFN 

    [Editorial Report] The following is a compilation of 
reports on drug seizures and arrests related to drug trafficking 
monitored through 21 April. 
<H5>  Argentina </H5>
  Police personnel have arrested Ruben Pintas and Yolanda 
Sorez 
de Pintas and seized 2.3 kg of cocaine on Magallanes Street, 
Villa Fiorito District, Buenos Aires. They also arrested 
Roberto Gusso and Nestor Melde who carried several packets of 
cocaine. (Buenos Aires NOTICIAS ARGENTINAS in Spanish 1544 GMT 
14 Apr 94) 
  Customs Dangerous Drug Department agents on 16 April 
arrested 
at the Ezeiza International Airport a Polish citizen and seized 
13 kg of cocaine hidden in the stuffing of a pillow. On 17 
April they arrested an Argentine citizen who carried 4 kg of 
cocaine in a false-bottomed bag. (Buenos Aires NOTICIAS 
ARGENTINAS in Spanish 1856 GMT 19 Apr 94) 
<H5>  Bolivia </H5>
  The Special Antinarcotics Force, FELCN, seized 26 kg of 
cocaine sulfate in Villazon, Potosi Department. The traffickers 
tried to introduce it into Argentina hidden in three wooden 
doors. (La Paz LA RAZON in Spanish 6 Apr 94 p A15) 
  FELCN personnel seized 17.4 kg of cocaine sulfate, and 5 kg 
of cocaine hydrochloride during two separate operations in 
Puerto Suarez. They arrested Gladys Zambrana de Castro and 
Cirilo Quispe. (Santa Cruz EL MUNDO in Spanish 10 Apr 94 p 10) 
  FELCN agents on 19 April seized 28 kg of cocaine base in the 
bus station of (Lallasta), Cochabamba Department. The drug was 
found in two suitcases that were to have been taken to Santa 
Cruz. Two people were arrested but their identities were not 
disclosed. (La Paz Radio Fides Network in Spanish 1100 GMT 20 
Apr 94) 
<H5>  Chile </H5>
  Investigative Police arrested Colombian citizen Gustavo 
Patino, 30, and seized 2 kg of cocaine at the Arturo Merino 
Benitez airport. Patino was about to contact Chilean drug 
trafficker Pedro Perez, 50, who was planning to take the drug to 
Spain. (Santiago EL MERCURIO in Spanish 31 Mar 94 p C11) 
  OS-7 Carabineros personnel arrested Miguel Ravanal, 25, 
Washington Albornoz, 40, and Joaquin Tapia, 30, and seized 3 kg 
of cocaine hydrochloride and 25 kg of cocaine paste in Arica. 
Investigative Police agents seized 20 kg of cocaine paste and 
arrested Delia Choque, 29, Luis Galvez, 52, and his son Marco 
Galvez in Santiago. They were members of a most active ring of 
cocaine paste traffickers. (Santiago EL MERCURIO in Spanish 3 
Apr 94 p C8) 
  OS-7 Carabineros seized 40 kg of cocaine and arrested 
Bolivian citizens Walter Vilca Ortiz, 34, and Freddy Vilca 
Ortiz, 28, who introduced the drug in the port of Iquique 
through Colchane. This is the biggest antidrug operation ever 
carried out by the police. (Santiago LA TERCERA in Spanish 4 Apr 
94 p 21) 
  Investigative Police Antinarcotics Department personnel 
arrested Peruvian citizens Cristian Echegaray and Ricardo 
Alcazar who were planning to establish a ring of drug 
traffickers in Chile, Argentina, the United States, and Europe. 
(Santiago LA TERCERA in Spanish 5 Apr 94 p 31) 
  OS-7 Carabineros arrested Mara Poblete and Pedro Correa and 
seized 1.7 kg of cocaine past during a check on a bus at the 
Norte bus terminal in Santiago. The drug was in a suitcase, 
hidden in four plastic bags wrapped with clothes. (Santiago LA 
TERCERA in Spanish 6 Apr 94 p 34) 
  Antinarcotics Brigade agents seized more than 14 kg of 
cocaine base and arrested a 15-year old minor in Iquique. So 
far this year the Civilian Police have seized 75 kg of cocaine 
paste and cocaine hydrochloride. OS-7 Carabineros arrested 
Venezuelan drug trafficker Yerko Marcos Chacon Barrientos, 25, 
who had been providing very pure cocaine to a special group of 
citizens in Iquique. (Santiago EL MERCURIO in Spanish 9 Apr 94 p 
C13) 
  Investigative Police arrested Bolivian retired Lieutenant 
Colonel Justino Torres Valdez, 63, who was carrying nearly 2 kg 
of cocaine in the border area of Arica this past weekend. He 
had been arrested on charges of drug trafficking in 1987. 
Police also arrested Bolivian citizen (Walter Cratalluv), and 
Chileans (Cruz Caceres), and (Alejandro Lavados) and seized 
nearly 1 kg of cocaine. (Santiago Television Nacional de Chile 
Imagen Internacional in Spanish 1800 GMT 18 Apr 94) 
<H5>  Peru </H5>
  Army and National Police forces found three hectares of 
poppy 
plantation in a coca growing area in La Mar Province, Ayacucho 
Department. An undetermined number of people were arrested. 
(Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 13 Apr 94 p 1) 
  Police seized 23 jerry cans containing 50 kg of sulphuric 
acid each and arrested Arcadio Cotrina Orillo, Alfredo Cotrina 
Orillo, and Nicolas Olano Silva during an inspection of a truck 
in Chiclayo. The chemical was bound for cocaine processing 
laboratories in Upper Huallaga. (Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 13 
Apr 94 p A11) 
  Antidrug Division personnel arrested 29 drug traffickers in 
Madre de Dios Department. They also seized 201 kg of washed 
cocaine paste during an operation on 24-25 March in Inapari, 
Tahuamano Province, Puerto Maldonado. (Lima EL COMERCIO in 
Spanish 8 Apr 94 p A14) 
  Army and National Police forces on 7 April raided a cocaine 
processing laboratory in Pucara, Monzon District, Huanuco 
Department. They seized 100 kg of acetone and six jerry cans 
with 12 kg of ammonia. (Lima EL COMERCIO in Spanish 9 Apr 94 p 
A12) 
  Mantaro Front Political-Military Command personnel 
discovered 
a clandestine airstrip and arrested five drug traffickers in the 
Palcazu District, Pichis Valley, 480 km northeast of Cerro de 
Pasco. The detainees are Tito Sanchez Berna, Hebert Perez 
Mendoza, Armando Arcos Huamani, Berlino Sanchez Cervantes, and a 
minor. They also arrested Isabel Velasquez Vasquez, Franco 
Huaman Lusa, Elmer Alvarado Quinto, and Moises Ponce Gonzales in 
the township of Quimpirari and found a cocaine processing 
laboratory in Lorencillo. (Lima LA REPUBLICA in Spanish 10 Apr 
94 p 26) 
  Police seized 8 kg of cocaine paste and arrested Julian 
Quintana Giraldos, Gloria Galindo Cardenas, and Segundina Perez 
Castro during an inspection of a bus heading from Huanuco to 
Lima. (Lima EXPRESO in Spanish 13 Apr 94 p A14) 
  The Armed Forces Joint Command reported that so far this 
year 
they have destroyed 13 clandestine airstrips, 18 maceration 
pits, 11 cocaine paste processing laboratories, 6,006 kg of 
drugs, and 37,646 kg of chemicals in the Peruvian jungle. (Lima 
EL PERUANO in Spanish 14 Apr 94 Political Section p A4) 
  The Peruvian and Chilean Governments signed a joint 
agreement 
on drug enforcement along the Peruvian-Chilean border. They 
also agreed to implement modern mechanisms for a more efficient 
control of drug trafficking and the entry of people, 
merchandise, and vehicles. (Lima EL PERUANO in Spanish 14 Apr 94 
Political Section p A4) 
  An Interior Ministry intelligence source on 13 April 
reported 
that small poppy plantations have been repeatedly discovered in 
many parts of the Peruvian mountain range and jungle. This shows 
that drug traffickers with the support of Colombian cartels are 
testing the climate in various regions to begin poppy 
plantations en masse. Small plantations were recently discovered 
in Tabalosos, Roque, Nueva Cajamarca, Sauce, Soritor, San 
Ignacio, and Bambamarca. (Lima EXPRESO in Spanish 14 Apr 94 p 
A17) 
  Police arrested members of a gang of drug traffickers and 
forgers who operated in Bolivia, Chile and Peru, and seized 3 kg 
of cocaine paste during a raid in the Ciudad Nueva district in 
northeast Tacna. The detainees are brothers Ignacio and Juan 
Aurelio Choquegonza, Julian Pilco, and Vidal Torres, and 
Bolivians Aurelio Challco and Cesar Condori. (Madrid EFE in 
Spanish 1536 GMT 20 Apr 94) 
  Peasant Felix Gebel Labajos located the wreckage of a small 
plane that crashed last week and the remains of two alleged drug 
traffickers in an Amazonas Department township. Police found 
cocaine paste in the plane. The Peruvian Army seized a small 
airplane and arrested four drug traffickers about to bribe a 
native community chief to allow the construction of a 
clandestine airstrip in Puerto Galilea, Amazonas Department. The 
detainees are Luis Gatica, Pedro Aguirre, Wilder Valdivia, and 
David Pizarro. (Madrid EFE in Spanish 1732 GMT 20 Apr 94) 
  Customs police on 21 April arrested Jaime Ruando Viscarraga 
and his wife, Luz Griceno Munoz, with 6 kg of cocaine paste at 
Jorge Chavez international airport. They were about to board a 
plane for the United States. (Lima Radio Programas del Peru 
Network in Spanish 1800 GMT 21 Apr 94) 

