BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, June 2 (XINHUA) -- Chinese Government 
attaches great importance to providing legal protection for 
females and women in China enjoy equal legal status with men. 
  This is the statement explicitly laid down in the white 
paper 
on the situation of Chinese women issued here today by the 
Information Office of China's State Council. 
  The white paper says that a comprehensive legal system has 
come into being in China to protect the rights and interests of 
women and promote sexual equality. The system takes the 
Constitution as the basis and the Law on the Protection of 
Rights and Interests of Women as the core, and encompasses 
various specific state laws and regulations, administrative 
decrees and regulations enacted by various government 
departments as well as local legislation. 
  According to the white paper, the basic principles in 
China's 
legislative work concerning women are equal rights for men and 
women, protection of the special rights and interests of women, 
and the banning of any discrimination, maltreatment and 
persecution directed at women. 
  The state Constitution clearly stipulates, "Women enjoy 
equal 
rights with men in all spheres of life, including political, 
economic, cultural and social aspects as well as in family life." 
  Moreover, "the state applies the principle of equal pay for 
equal work for men and women alike and trains and selects cadres 
from among women", according the Constitution. 
  The white paper informs that since the founding of the 
People's Republic of China in 1949, the government has 
promulgated over 10 fundamental laws, including the Marriage 
Law, Electoral Law, Law of Inheritance, Civil Law and Criminal 
Law. The State Council and various ministries and commissions 
under it have enacted over 40 administrative decrees and 
regulation. Besides, various local governments have devised 
more than 80 local regulations and rules. 
  The white paper stresses that all these legislations include 
clear provisions on the protection of the rights and interests 
of women. No law in China contains clauses that discriminate 
against women. 
  More significantly, the Chinese Law on the Protection of the 
Rights and Interests on Women promulgated in 1992 has provided 
an effective legal weapon for further enhancing the social 
status of women and guaranteeing their basic rights and 
interests. 
  The white paper says that under Chinese law, the legitimate 
rights of women can be summed up into the following six aspects: 
  -- Women enjoy equal political rights with men. Women have 
the right, through various channels and in various ways, to 
administer state and social affairs, and enjoy equal rights to 
vote and stand for election. 
  -- Women enjoy equal rights with men with respect to culture 
and education. 
  -- Women are granted equal working rights with men. 
  -- Women enjoy equal property rights with men. The law 
stipulates that with regard to marriage and family property, 
women enjoy equal ownership and inheritance rights with men. 
  -- Women enjoy equal rights with men relating to their 
persons. 
  -- Women enjoy equal rights with men in marriage and the 
family. The law states that women enjoy equal freedom in 
marriage and divorce, and the relations between husband and wife 
are equal. Women are subject to special protection with regard 
to divorce. 
  The white paper says that at present, China is still at the 
primary stage of socialism and remains comparatively 
underdeveloped in economic and cultural development. Therefore, 
certain provisions on the legal rights of women and guarantee 
mechanisms need to be further improved. 
  However, the white paper makes it clear that along with the 
in- depth development of China's modernization drive, the 
country's legal system on the promotion of women's rights and 
interests will be perfected. 

