BFN 

<F P=106> [By JORDAN TIMES staff reporter] </F>
  [Text] Amman--Prices took a beating and trading also shrank 
at the Amman Financial Market (AFM) last week mainly as a result 
of a sudden focus on the uncertainties of the economic agreement 
between Jordan and the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO), 
brokers said Friday [13 May]. 
  Figures released by the AFM said the weekly turnover was 
JD8.9 million [Jordanian dinars] in five days of trading ending 
on Wednesday, reflecting a 5.3 per cent decline from last week's 
JD9.4 million in four days of trading, but a sharper dip of the 
average daily trading from JD2.4 million to JD1.8 million. 
  The general price index based on 60 major companies listed 
at 
the AFM dropped by 4.4 points to 156.4 points, reversing a trend 
that saw the index shooting up by more than six points during 
the week ending May 4 and several weeks of decline. The drop 
this week represented an overall 2.7 per cent plunge in prices. 
  The industrial sector accounted for JD5.3 million, or 61.8 
per cent of the week's turnover, followed by commercial banks 
with JD2.5 million, or 28.1 per cent, the services sector with 
JD800,000, or nine per cent, and insurance stock with JD100,000 
or 1.1 per cent. The separate sectoral indices showed that 
commercial bank stocks declined by 4.5 points, or 2.6 per cent, 
industrial stock by 4.5 points, or 3.1 per cent, services by 4.1 
points, or 2.7 per cent and insurance stock by 0.6 points, 0.4 
per cent. 
  Stocks of 92 companies were traded during the week, which 
saw 
3.5 million shares changing hands under 5,027 contracts, the AFM 
report said. As trading ended Wednesday, 10 of the companies 
showed gains, 75 losses and seven remained stable. 
  The market lists nearly 115 companies with a total market 
value equity of JD3.5 billion. 
  The regression in the market last week was mainly due to 
reports that the PLO wanted to "renegotiate" the Jan. 7 economic 
accord it signed with Jordan, brokers said. 
  Although PLO officials denied a new agreement was what they 
were after during the talks here that began on Tuesday, "the 
report nonetheless had its effect on the market psyche and the 
damage was done," said a broker. 
  Senior officials from [both] sides said last Wednesday that 
the meetings had led to agreement on mechanisms for implementing 
the Jan. 7 accord and there was no question of "replacing" the 
original accord. 
  "Now everyone is waiting to hear of the mechanisms and which 
sector of the economy is going to benefit," said the broker. 
"Industrial and construction companies with opportunities in the 
West Bank could be the main beneficiaries," added the broker, 
who preferred anonymity in line with standing AFM guidelines. 
  Analysts noted that investor spirit was high when the PLO 
and 
Jordan signed the agreement on Jan. 7, whose provisions could be 
interpreted as clearing the way for a strong Jordanian say in 
the banking and monetary affairs of the occupied territories in 
the interim autonomy envisaged under the Sept. 13 Israel-PLO 
declaration of principles. 
  However, the expectations were scrambled when the PLO and 
Israel signed an agreement in Paris last month, detailing a 
series of measures and actions to streamline the economic aspect 
of relations between the autonomous areas and Israel. 
  Some of the stipulations in that accord are seen as imposing 
severe restrictions on the scope of economic cooperation between 
Jordan and the autonomous areas. 
  "Public assurances by PLO officials that the spirit and 
principles of the Amman (Jordan-PLO) agreement remain very much 
valid have calmed nerves, but investors need tangible moves in 
realisation of those assurances," said the broker. 
  Furthermore, the five-day delay in Palestinian police 
entering autonomous Jericho was also influential in depressing 
prices and turnover at the AFM, brokers said. Some 400 
Palestinian policemen finally entered the occupied territories 
on Friday, with he rest of them poised to go in soon. 
  Another reason for the dip in turnover, brokers said, was 
the 
shift of capital away from the secondary market to the so-called 
parallel market where shares of new companies are subscribed to. 
  Such subscriptions need blocking of capital for a month, and 
as such funds available on he floor for trading in the 
established stocks have gone down since early this year, brokers 
said. 
  In general terms, brokers said, the market has suffered from 
investor hesitancy since the Jordanian-American standoff over 
the siege of al-'Aqabah since late March, when His majesty King 
Husayn said the Kingdom's return to the peace talks with Israel 
was contingent on an end to the damaging inspections of all 
Jordan-bound cargo in the Red Sea. 
  "That situation appears to be on its way to be resolved, but 
the ambiguity of the Jordan-PLO accord has replaced it in the 
market as one of the main negative considerations," said one 
broker. 
  Brokers generally shared an opinion that if the Jordan-PLO 
economic accord is clarified in all its aspects, then investors 
would be in a better position to judge for themselves which 
sector they could focus on and expect to reap gains. 
  "Prices and trading could shoot up in a matter of 24 to 48 
hours once investors shed their inhibitions," said the broker. 
"On the other hand, if the details of the accord are unclear, 
then there will [be] more uncertainties where the bulls will be 
at work." 

