BFN 

  [Text] Johannesburg March 31 SAPA -- President F W de 
Klerk's declaration of a state of emergency in kwaZulu/Natal 
meant the start of civil war in South Africa, Inkatha Freedom 
Party Transvaal Deputy Chairman Humphrey Ndlovu said on Thursday 
[31 March]. 
  If Mr de Klerk could refuse to allow the African National 
Congress' [ANC] headquarters to be searched for weapons which 
were allegedly used to kill 53 Zulus in Johannesburg on Monday, 
and then in the same week make this declaration, "then he can 
forget it", said Mr Ndlovu. 
  South African democracy at present meant rule by the barrel 
of a gun, he told media at a conference at the IFP's 
Johannesburg offices. "This declaration is the start of the 
civil war in South Africa. We are not going to tolerate this 
state of emergency." 
  Mr Ndlovu said this meant that IFP supporters would continue 
to go about their daily lives and would ignore curfews or 
prohibitions on meetings. 
  If the security forces attempted to stop them, "they will 
get 
what they are looking for". Did this mean IFP supporters would 
fight? "Of course," said Mr Ndlovu. "If we have to, of course." 
  Asked if the forecast civil war would only take place in 
kwaZulu/Natal, the IFP leader said he was not going anywhere. 
"You will see it here with your own eyes." 
  In what he described as a continuation of Monday's massacre 
in Johannesburg, Mr Ndlovu said seven IFP members were executed 
in the kweSine area in Soweto, on Wednesday night. The 
attackers, some of who were dressed in traffic police uniforms, 
had waved down a taxi before opening fire on the occupants. 
Eight people had been seriously injured. 
  Several of the victims were local IFP leaders, including the 
Youth Brigade leader in Katlehong. Names had been withheld 
until families had been notified, said an IFP statement. 
  The incident was reported earlier by police, but with less 
detail and no political affiliations supplied. 
  The failure of the police -- apparently after political 
intervention -- to raid the ANC's Shell House headquarters after 
Monday's massacre supplied the go-ahead to the ANC to kill 
pzople with weapons they had stocked in the building, said Mr 
Ndlovu. 
  IFP members travelling down to kwaZulu/Natal this weekend 
had 
been warned about information that more attacks by people 
disguised as traffic police were planned. 

