BFN 

  [Text] Intense battles have taken place between Loimaw 
opium smugglers led by drug kingpin Khun Sa and our military 
columns in the Mongchut area in Mong Ton Township, Mong Hsat 
District, Eastern Shan State since 11 May. 
  On 24 April, 2000 members of the Loimaw opium smuggling 
group 
led by Khun Sa left (Homay) Camp on the Thai border and entered 
the Mongchut area in Mong Ton Township on 11 May and attacked 
our military bases at Points 3686 and 4436 in full force. The 
Loimaw group attacked and captured these camps. Intense battles 
took place in the north, northeast, and south of Mongchut Camp 
from 11 to 15 May between our military columns and the smugglers 
when they infiltrated near the Mongchut Camp. 
  On 16 May, the Loimaw group retreated with heavy casualties 
and later formed strongholds on Points 3686, 4436, and 4527 
which are situated about seven miles southwest of Mongchut Camp, 
and in the hills and mountain ranges in the vicinity of these 
points. 
  Major General Saw Tun, commander of the Eastern Military 
Command, and Brigadier General Kyaw Win, commander of the Keng 
Tung Regional Command, reorganized and enforced our troops and 
pursued and attacked the retreating Loimaw group and recaptured 
Points 4436 and 3686, and Kyauktaung Camp on 21 May and 11 June 
respectively. Our troops confined the Loimaw smugglers who were 
strongly entrenched in the remaining hills and attacked them at 
close range. 
  On 13 June, about 100 members of the Loimaw opium smuggling 
group, who were strongly entrenched at Point 4410, penetrated 
and attacked our troops who were controlling the area. Due to 
our military assault, they suffered heavy causalities and only a 
few escaped. 
  On 23 June, a combined force of military columns from the 
regiment and the Air Force staged a brave and simultaneous 
attack on the Loimaw group which was strongly entrenched at 
Kagyigon, Khagwegon, and Gangwegon on Kyaukchuntaung, or Point 
4410; and Point 4527 which is situated behind these areas. Our 
military columns captured all enemy camps by 1730. The Khun 
Sa-led group sustained heavy casualties and retreated in 
disarray. 
  A total of 111 major battles and skirmishes took place 
between the Loimaw opium smuggling groups and our military 
columns from the regiment in the Mongchut area in Mong Ton 
Township from 11 May to 24 June. During those encounters, 250 
corpses from the Loimaw group were collected and 163 assorted 
weapons, 21,350 assorted ammunition rounds, 560 assorted mines, 
340 assorted rockets, two viss [3.26 kg] of marijuana, and 3 kg 
of heroin were confiscated by our military columns. 
  Some enemy corpses were handcuffed to poles in the trenches, 
while some were tied up with rope. There is evidence that the 
Loimaw smugglers used force to either handcuff or tie their 
troops in the trenches to prevent them from running away. 
Similarly, it has been learned from prisoners that their troops 
were given stimulants to fight. 
  During these encounters, 196 member of the Defense Services, 
including seven officers, gave their lives for the country, 
while 357 were wounded. 
  The Defense Services' attacks against the Loimaw opium 
smuggling group led by Khun Sa is part of Myanmar's [Burma] 
suppression drive against the danger of narcotic drugs. The 
Defense Services has sacrificed its sweat and blood to suppress 
the danger of narcotic drugs. 

