CSO 

  [Text] 
<H5>  1. Institute for Transfer of Industrial Technology (ITIT) </H5>
  The Institute for Transfer Industrial Technology Program 
(ITIT Program) is a series of programs involving AIST 
laboratories that is designed to promote cooperative 
international research in the mining and manufacturing 
industries which have received numerous requests from developing 
countries for technical assistance. The program is also designed 
to contribute to the economic growth of those countries (est. 
1973). The aim is to assist developing countries in determining 
research projects and improving their research capability which 
involves sending researchers from Japan or accepting researchers 
from developing countries for the purpose of assisting those 
countries in establishing their own research base. 
<H5>  2. Specific Programs </H5>
  (1) Cooperative International Research Program 
  This is a joint research program that is conducted between 
AIST research laboratories and research institutes in developing 
countries. 
  1 -- Special Research 
  These are joint research projects that are carried out 
between an AIST laboratory and an overseas research institute in 
which the research topic matches the field of research 
represented by an AIST laboratory and, at the same time, 
responds to the social needs of the developing country. 
  2 -- Transfer Research 
  It is often very difficult for technologies that have been 
developed in Japan to take root elsewhere even when a technology 
has been transplanted in fact to another country. Therefore, in 
order to promote effective technology transfers and have a 
particular technology take root, this type of research is 
designed to facilitate the technology transfer process by 
determining such things as whether improvements or further work 
is required of a given technology. 
  3 -- Developmental Research 
  In order to try to make more effective use of the industrial 
products produced by a developing country, this research program 
provides the future seeds for both special and transfer research 
by conducting a systematic analysis on the makeup of a country's 
industrial base, and examining the possibilities of expanding 
that base. 
  (2) Overseas Research Program To Investigate Technologies 
  This program involves conducting on-site surveys in order to 
identify areas of research and future cooperative research 
topics that are needed in developing countries. 
  (3) Mobile Researcher Programs 
  1 -- Trainee Acceptance Program 
  This program is designed to introduce and train technical 
specialists from developing countries at AIST research 
laboratories at the request of the Japan International 
Cooperation Agency. 
  2 -- Mobile Researcher Program (costs covered by Cooperative 
Research Program) 
  The following five programs have been assigned to the New 
Energy Development Organization which will try to beef up and 
strengthen the programs. 
  a. Fellow Researcher Invitation Program 
  This program is designed to promote effective research 
cooperation by inviting researchers from fellow research 
institutes to take part in joint research. 
  b. Specific Investigative Research Program 
  In this program, a comprehensive survey is done of the needs 
of industry in a given developing country and surrounding 
countries so that the research of the program contributes to 
effective economic growth of the developing country. 
  c. Research Management Invitation Program 
  This program will try to promote more effective research 
cooperation with developing countries by deepening mutual 
understanding and involves inviting six research managers to 
Japan and providing them with the opportunity to discuss the 
current status of research laboratories, research 
implementation, and R&amp;D. 
  d. Special Researcher Invitation Program 
  This program is designed to elevate the research level of 
developing countries by inviting up to seven researchers from 
developing countries who have produced extraordinary 
achievements in R&amp;D-related fields to take part in long-term 
joint research important to those countries. 
  e. International Symposium Program 
  This program will invite up to 12 researchers from 
developing 
countries, as well as researchers from advanced countries who 
share the same problems as developing countries, to attend an 
international symposium to exchange opinions in the form of 
lectures presented at the symposium on the status of research 
and problem areas in their respective countries. 
  (4) International Joint Research Cooperation Program 
  This program concerns research problems that cannot be dealt 
with merely by AIST laboratories in response to requests from 
developing countries. This program aims to make effective use of 
the R&amp;D potential of certain advanced countries to conduct 
joint 
research with developing countries on topics that have been 
mutually agreed upon by a government research institute in an 
advanced country and an AIST laboratory. 
  (5) Global Environmental Technologies Program 
  In this program, AIST research laboratories conduct joint 
R&amp;D 
with research institutes of developing countries in order to 
solve environmental problems on a global scale such as 
desertification, destruction of forests, and acid rain. 
  (6) Specific Key Research Cooperation Projects 
  In response to requests made by developing countries for 
advanced technical research cooperation, this program involves 
the use of advanced laboratories (experimental equipment) in 
joint research conducted between AIST research labs and overseas 
research institutes. In 1993, research cooperation will be 
extended to supporting industries in developing countries which 
have shown a certain urgency in terms of achieving economic 
independence. 



  FY93 Research Projects of International Research Cooperation Program 

(1) Special Research 

Research                 AIST Lab       Overseas Lab         Term 

1. Research to tackle    NIRE           China: Baitan        1990-93 
the problem of gas and                  Scientific 
coal dust ignition in                   Research Institute 
mines 

2. Research to develop   NIBH           Thailand: Asia       1991-93 
simple treatment                        University of 
methods for highly                      Engineering 
concentrated organic 
effluent 

3. Research on           GSJ            Mongolia: National   1991-94 
exploration and                         Geological Center 
development of                          - Geological 
underground resources                   Resources Research 
in Mongolia                             Institute 

4. Research on           NIMC           Costa Rica:          1991-94 
lignocellulose                          National 
polyurethane                            University 

5. Research on surface   MEL            South Korea:         1992-95 
processing and                          Industrial 
reforming technologies                  Technology 
                                        Research 
                                        Institute, 
                                        Mechanical 
                                        Research Lab 

6. Research on           NIMC           China: National      1992-94 
development of                          Industrial 
advanced polymer                        Technology 
composites                              Research Institute 


7. Research on coal      GSJ            Indonesia: Coal      1992-94 
field and coal                          Gas Technology 
property                                R&amp;D Center; 
characteristics                         Malaysia: 
                                        Geological Survey 
                                        Institute 

8. Research on weather   NIMC           Indonesia: Science   1993-96 
resistance of polymer                   Institute, Applied 
materials in low                        Physics R&amp;D 
latitude areas                          Center 

9. Research on methods   GIRI, Nag      Malaysia:            1993-95 
of designing and                        Industrial 
manufacturing                           Standards Research 
high-quality founded                    Lab, Foundry 
products                                Technology Unit 

10. Research on          GSJ            China: Geology and   1993-96 
characteristics of                      Mining Dept., 
moist environments in                   Geological 
arid and semi-arid                      Moisture Research 
parts of Chinese                        Lab 
continent 

11. Research on          ETL            Fiji: South          1993-96 
multifunctional system                  Pacific University 
that uses temperature 
differences in atoll 
regions of oceans to 
produce energy 

12. Research on          NIRE           Indonesia: Agency    1993-96 
effective uses of                       of Industrial 
unused tropical                         Development 
biomass                                 Cellulose Research 
                                        Lab 

13. Research on          GIRI, Hok      Thailand: Science    1993-96 
preventing pollution                    and Technology 
through use of                          Research Institute 
advanced adsorbents 

(2) Transfer Research 

Research                 AIST Lab       Overseas Lab         Term 

1. Research on           NRLM           South Korea:         1991-93 
standard substances                     National 
and means of measuring                  Industrial 
heat properties of                      Technology 
solid materials                         Research 
                                        Institute, 
                                        Scientific 
                                        Standards Research 
                                        Lab 

2. Research on raw       NIMC           Malaysia: Palm Oil   1991-93 
materials for chemical                  Research Lab 
industry from natural 
oils 

3. Research on           NRLM           Indonesia:           1993-95 
calibrating radiation                   Scientific 
thermometers in                         Research 
mid-to-high                             Institute, 
temperature range                       Metrology R&amp;D 
                                        Center 

(3) Developmental Research 

Research                 AIST Lab       Overseas Lab         Term 

1. Research to develop   NIMC           (not relevant)       1991-93 
paper with advanced 
features 


<H5>  Research Projects Profiled </H5>
  (1) Special Research 
  Research to tackle problem of gas and coal dust 
ignition in mines (1990-93) (NIRE) 
  Most of the energy needs in the People's Republic of China 
are supplied in the form of coal. At slightly less than 11 
metric tons, China boasts the world's largest annual output of 
coal. In recent years, most of the drilling for coal has been 
done in mines, and in view of the fact that work conditions have 
deteriorated as drilling has reached deeper levels, and the fact 
that there has been an upsurge in both the percentage of 
accidents and number of major mine disasters, government-related 
organizations have shown great concern over these matters and 
have given high priority to promoting R&amp;D on mine safety and 
security. 
  This project is meant to tackle the more serious accidents 
that are caused by the ignition of gas and coal dust in the 
mines, and look into the mechanism by which ignition is caused 
by metal sparks in mines and look for ways to prevent this from 
occurring based on studies with coal mine explosives. 
  This is the final year of this research project, so an 
effort 
will be made to put together a comprehensive study that includes 
the ignition characteristics of coal mined in China, the 
characteristics of gas and coal dust ignition caused by sparks 
produced in the collision of metals or by the heat generated by 
mechanical friction, and the characteristics of gas and coal 
dust ignition that is caused by abnormal blasting, all of which 
have been items carried out so far by experimental research. 
  Research to develop process for simple treatment of 
highly concentrated organic effluent (1991-93) (NIBH) 
  Effluent treatment has become a serious problem in Southeast 
Asian countries which are undergoing rapid industrialization. 
  However, it is almost impossible to introduce much of the 
effluent treatment equipment developed in Japan to these 
countries because the running costs are quite high and a great 
deal of expertise is needed for maintenance and upkeep of the 
equipment. 
  That being the case, this research will try to perfect a 
simple treatment method for highly concentrated effluent that is 
suitable for Southeast Asian countries by introducing techniques 
such as microorganism immobilization in a low-cost treatment of 
methane gas and by developing an "easy-to-maintain" method of 
treatment. 
  Research on exploration and development of underground 
resources in Mongolia (1991-94) (GSJ) 
  This is a basic research project carried out in cooperation 
with a research partner in Mongolia that is designed to promote 
a more modern and efficient means of exploring and developing 
the rich mineral and energy resources deposited in the 
mountainous plateaus of Mongolia. 
  This research will be divided into the following two 
segments 
according to objective and means: 
  (1) Research on mineral resource distribution and means of 
exploration 
  This segment will involve research on the interrelationship 
between magma activity and those base metals such as copper, 
lead, and zinc, as well as rare metals such as tungsten, tin, 
molybdenum, niobium, tantalum, and rare earth, and bring to 
light the distribution of those resources and appropriate 
methods of exploration. 
  (2) Research on coal and oil shells 
  This segment will have to do with geological research on the 
rich Mongolian coal beds and accompanying oil shells. 
  Research on lignocellulose polyurethane (1991-94) 
(NIMC) 
  In the coffee and sugar cane producing countries, such as 
Costa Rica and those located in the tropical and subtropical 
areas of the world, there are now no effective uses for the 
large quantities of secondary products such as coffee bean 
shells or bagasse produced from these products. More often than 
not these products are either used as fuel or left to stand 
alone. If coffee bean shells and bagasse were, however, to be 
converted to polyurethane by an appropriate means, quite 
valuable uses might be found for these products in buffers, heat 
insulation materials, and paints. That being the case, this 
research project will attempt to convert the secondary products 
described above that are produced in Costa Rica to a raw 
polyurethane material and try to find effective uses as a 
resource material for various industries. 
  Research so far has examined the constituent makeup of 
coffee 
bean shells and bagasse and examined these in solution form. A 
chemical and thermal analysis has also been done of 
lignocellulose solutions. 
  The research to be done in 1993 will involve a study on the 
process of making polyurethane from Costa Rican coffee bean 
shells and bagasse in solution, and a chemical analysis of the 
polyurethane obtained. 
  Research on surface processing and reforming technology 
(1992-95) (MEL) 
  As industrial technologies have become more 
internationalized, it is important that R&amp;D be conducted 
jointly 
with other countries including South Korea, one of the 
industrial powers of Asia, as it pertains to developing 
machining and other core industrial technologies and upgrading 
other technologies having to do with surface reforming, wear 
resistance, and lubrication. This project will be carried out 
jointly with the Industrial Technology Research Institute of 
Korea (KAITECH) and the Korean Institute of Machinery (KIMM) and 
will seek to upgrade cutting technology and improve the methods 
used to reform mechanical elements and wear-resistant surfaces, 
and along with that try to perfect a standard, recognized method 
of evaluating the performance of those technologies. 
  The details of the project will include developing a sensor 
signaling process for detecting machining states, which has been 
lacking in advanced cutting work and a control technology for 
optimum machining condition and tool locus, doing a study to 
optimize surface reforming involving plasma, etc., and 
perfecting a method of evaluating surface reforming film from a 
tribological perspective. In 1993, research will involve 
prototyping a tool with a sensor function that will be used to 
measure temperature characteristics and frequency response 
properties. Further research will include evaluating the 
tribological characteristics of surface reforming film in 
various types of gas atmospheres. 
  Research on development of advanced polymer composites 
(1992-94) (NIMC) 
  With the remarkable progress that various industries have 
made in South Korea, we believe that one of the next areas of 
importance will be advanced polymer composites. That would lead 
to the need to perfect a composite technology that would include 
a method of molding and evaluating the performance of 
composites, and to establish a base with respect to its 
commercialization. Meanwhile, consideration has to be given to 
the fact that thermoplastic resin composites are attracting a 
lot of attention because they are more easily recycled than 
conventional thermohardened resin composites. To deal with this, 
joint research will be conducted to develop an advanced 
fiber-reinforced thermoplastic composite and an advanced polymer 
alloy, and to try to upgrade composite technology and establish 
a base for commercialization. 
  Research so far has looked into the development and 
commercialization of a fiber array control and molding method, 
and investigated the interrelationship between the morphology of 
polymer alloys and impact resistance. 
  What will be done next is to study methods of arraying fiber 
reinforcement with the aim of improving impact resistance and, 
along with that, evaluating the method of molding composites and 
the dynamic characteristics of the material. A study will also 
be done on the interrelationship between the compatibility and 
morphology of the polymer alloy and between compatibility and 
dynamic characteristics. 
  Research on coal field and coal property 
characteristics (1992-94) (GSJ) 
  This is a research project that will contribute to the 
exploration and development of coal fields in Southeast Asia by 
shedding some light on the history of how sediment basins were 
formed in the coal fields of Sumatra, East Kalimantan, and 
Sarawak in Indonesia, and by elucidating the coal properties of 
each of those coal fields. 
  The project also involves the transfer of some Japanese 
technology to Indonesia concerning the analysis of sediment 
basins and the evaluation of coal properties. It also takes up 
the development of new technologies for evaluating coal 
properties and heat formation. 
  The research has been divided into two areas: 
  (1) Research on analyzing sediment basins 
  This will involve using techniques such as computer 
simulation and relative sediment analysis based on existing 
geographical data to shed light on the formation of the sediment 
basins. 
  (2) Research on coal properties 
  This will involve doing various types of analyses including 
a 
technical analysis on specimens of coal taken from actual sites 
in order to understand coal properties, and will also involve 
developing new technologies on the use of CO-MS in analyzing 
coal properties. The various data collected on coal properties 
will provide a better understanding of the formation of coal 
fields. 
  Research on weather resistance of polymer materials in 
low latitude areas (1992-96) (NIMC) 
  We are seeing more and more products being manufactured 
around the world in which polymer materials are being used in 
the making of that product, but the specifications of that 
material are best suited to mid-latitude areas, and very little 
data has been collected on material characteristics for 
low-latitude areas where the temperature and humidity are high 
and the sunlight is intense. Polymer materials do not hold up 
very well in low latitude areas, so it has become somewhat of an 
urgent matter to find materials having good durability and to 
perfect a technology for evaluating weather resistance, which 
would give some insight into material design. In this research, 
researchers will try to perfect a means of evaluating the 
weather resistance of poly-propylene, which is one of the main 
polymers being produced in Indonesia, giving special 
consideration to the high temperature and humidity found in low 
latitude areas. 
  The research this year will include measuring the radiation 
of the sun in the ultraviolet, visible, and infrared regions, 
and using a standard test piece for measuring energy (JIS K 
7200), identifying those factors which cause the breakdown of 
material in low latitudes by collecting data affecting the 
weather resistance of polymer materials. The research will also 
submit polypropylene test pieces in Indonesia and Japan to 
exposure and compare the breakdown behavior of each. 
  Research on methods of designing and manufacturing 
high-quality founded products (1993-95) (GIRI, Nag) 
  This research project is intended to promote the growth of 
both the mining and foundry industries in Malaysia, which play a 
role in supplying the essential goods and materials needed to 
improve the standard of living in Malaysia (machine parts and 
consumer goods). This will be a joint research project conducted 
with the Standards and Industrial Research Institute of Malaysia 
(SIRIM) and the Foundry Group (FG) and will involve research on 
effective uses of local raw materials and on foundry 
technologies that meet local product requirements. 
  The project will first include a local fact-finding survey 
and research on material design and systems in order to develop 
a foundry technology that is compatible with local materials, 
products, and the economic environment. The research then looks 
into the melting process inside an actual foundry for the 
purpose of trying to eliminate possible defects and improve 
product quality. Research will also be done on a molding process 
suited to product shape and material used. 
  The research this year will include a survey of locally 
produced raw materials such as palm oil and silica, which is 
obtained as a byproduct when mining tin, and also survey the 
market needs and supply status of locally made founded products. 
The results will then be used to develop a software package for 
analyzing material designs of founded products by personal 
computer. Further research will be done to commercialize the 
material design technology into a local manufacturing system for 
founded goods. 
  Research on characteristics of moist environments in 
arid and semi-arid parts of the Chinese continent (1993-1996) 
(GSJ) 
  In this project, research will be done to elucidate the 
characteristics of moist environments in dry desert areas. A 
particular effort will be made to gain a true understanding of 
the mechanism by which underground water flows and forms in 
areas populated by multiple rivers. Based on this research, the 
goal of the project is to help formulate policies for developing 
and preserving effective water resources in arid areas. 
  The research will mainly focus on the Gobi Desert in the 
autonomous southern region of Inner Mongolia in inland China 
where a local joint research survey will be conducted regarding 
the geology and moisture of the region and calculations will be 
made based on remote sensing devices as to the different 
lithofacies and levels of moisture in the soil. 
  The research concerning inland rivers will measure the flow 
rate and water quality changes through time for several rivers 
and then collect data on the origin and distribution of the 
underground water. In conjunction with this, a geological survey 
will be taken of river basins to determine the location of 
former rivers within the desert that were covered over by sand. 
The area is quite wide and difficult to access, so research will 
also be conducted using remote sensing data (JERS-1). 
  Research on multifunctional system that uses 
temperature differences in atoll regions of oceans to produce 
energy (1993-96) (ETL) 
  This is a research project in which researchers from both 
countries will jointly study the relationship between the living 
and social conditions in the unique atoll regions of the oceans 
which include the island of Fiji and the products that are 
produced from a multifunctional energy utilization system based 
on the temperature differential of the ocean (electric power, 
fresh water, heat and coldness, fishery products, and seaweeds). 
With the goal as perfecting a means of designing and evaluating 
such a system adapted to the atoll region, the following 
research will be conducted in order to elucidate the effects 
that a multifunctional energy utilization system, making use of 
the low-temperature and eutrophic properties and purity of 
deep-sea water, has on the living and social environment of Fiji 
based on actual on-site atoll conditions. 
  (1) Data will be collected in Fiji on social conditions 
related to the unique products and natural environment of the 
atoll region. 
  (2) Researchers from Fiji will be invited to Japan to deepen 
their knowledge of said technologies through hands-on research 
using a scaled down version of an ocean temperature differential 
power generation system, and ascertain what the system 
characteristics are for conditions on Fiji. 
  (3) Working jointly, the two research organizations will do 
a 
systematic study in order to refine the image of the 
multifunctional energy utilization system. 
  Research on effective uses of unused tropical biomass 
(1993-96) (NIRE) 
  In the tropical parts of Indonesia, there is an abundance of 
fast growing trees such as the eucalyptus as well as a poorly 
underused herbaceous biomass. There is also an enormous amount 
of agricultural wastes found in tropical regions, organic wastes 
from agricultural and forestry processing industries such as 
rice straw, bagasse, palm oil wastes, pulp wastes, and wood 
scraps and so forth that are left behind from the plywood 
industry. Most of these organic wastes are just discarded 
without being recycled and become a source of pollution. 
  Biomass, however, being a recyclable organic resource, has a 
major role to play in preserving the global environment by 
fixing CO[.sub]2[/] gas and preventing destruction of the 
CO[.sub]2[/] gas balance in the atmosphere. The aim of this 
research will be to examine the potential of biomass in the 
laboratory in terms of oil technology and to try to come up with 
new and more effective uses for biomass in which the rich supply 
of unused tropical biomass and agricultural wastes can be used 
as resources for manufacturing high value-added liquid fuel or 
as raw materials for the chemical industry. 
  The research this year will be to conduct a survey in 
Indonesia on the variety and availability of unused tropical 
trees and herbaceous biomass as well as agricultural wastes and 
organic wastes from the agricultural and forestry processing 
industries. Research will also examine the chemical composition, 
properties, and thermodynamic characteristics of each form of 
biomass and then study the suitability of each as liquid fuel or 
as raw material for chemicals. 
  Research on preventing pollution through use of 
sophisticated adsorbents (1993-96) (GIRI, Hok) 
  Developing effective uses for peat and lignite, which are 
deposited under the earth in large quantities in Thailand, has 
become an issue of national importance. Moreover, in Thailand, 
it is urgent that something be done about the spread of 
pollution in the air and water caused by the rapid 
industrialization of the country. 
  The aim of this research will be to develop a means of 
preventing pollution using sophisticated adsorbents based on 
joint ITIT research conducted from 1990 to 1992 on an active 
treatment technology for peat and lignite coal. 
  The work to be done this year will take place in Thailand 
and 
will involve holding discussions on research particulars, 
concluding a research agreement, conducting on-site surveys, and 
acquiring raw materials. Following that, researchers will 
investigate ways of improving performance and developing optimal 
adsorbent conditions based on a detailed characterization of the 
raw materials, and then will determine whether they can be used 
as resource materials in preventing pollution by testing gas 
adsorptivity and water treatment capability. 
  (2) Transfer Research 
  Research on standard substances and means of measuring 
heat properties of solid materials (1991-93) (NRLM) 
  South Korean industries are rapidly growing, and the raw 
material and energy industries, in particular, are in immediate 
need of a way of evaluating the thermal properties of materials, 
so the leadership of national research institutes in South Korea 
is demanding that a highly accurate means be developed for 
measuring heat properties. That being the case, this research 
will push to standardize and commercialize the laser flash 
method and other high-precision heat property measurement 
methods owned by the National Research Laboratory of Metrology 
and then transfer those technologies to the National Research 
Institute of Korea and the National Scientific Standards 
Research Institute of Korea. At the same time, research will 
verify the technology transfer by developing standard heat 
property substances as well as measure the heat properties of 
various materials needed for the growth of Korea's main 
industries. 
  In research this year, scientists will select standard 
substances from graphite, glassy carbon, and ceramics, which are 
candidate materials for standard thermal diffusivity substances 
based on results of high-temperature stability tests, and 
measure the thermal diffusivity of those materials. Researchers 
will then compare those measurements with the values obtained at 
the National Research Lab of Metrology for thermal diffusivity 
measurements of standard substances by equipment perfected for 
that purpose, and then verify that the technology transfer for 
the laser flash method of measuring thermal diffusivity has been 
completed. 
  Research on raw materials for chemical industry from 
natural oils (1991-93) (NIMC) 
  The aim of this research is to develop a technology for 
converting high-grade fatty acids, which are easily obtained 
from natural oils and secondary products, to high value-added 
industrial raw materials by means of hydrogenation and other 
types of reactions. The palm oil of Malaysia, which is a product 
of the tropical rain forest, is harvested six times a year, and 
contains a higher content of oil than any other type of 
oil-producing plant. Thus, one of the main features of palm oil 
is its stable supply as a raw material for the chemical 
industry. In this research, scientists will perform 
hydrogenolysis using a ruthenium-based catalyst based on a new 
sol gel method developed at this laboratory, and will try to 
convert the main components of palm oil, oleic acid and lauric 
acid, to a high-grade alcohol under mild conditions by 
conventional methods. In order to commercialize this research, 
however, the manufacturing cost of the catalysts must be reduced 
and the plant designs must be resolved based on high-pressure 
gas. 
  The work to be done this year in terms of commercializing 
this research will be to develop a low-cost catalyst to replace 
the rare metal ruthenium catalyst, and to conduct two studies on 
the design of a pilot plant, one on identifying potential 
problems and the other on economic calculations. 
  Research on calibrating radiation thermometers in the 
mid-to-high temperature range (1993-95) (NRLM) 
  A survey conducted as part of the ITIT research cooperation 
program found that there was a need to develop a domestic 
technology for measuring high temperatures and thermal radiation 
in the steel industry of Indonesia. 
  The Indonesian Scientific Research Institute and R&amp;D 
Center 
of Metrology employ four fixed temperature points as temperature 
standards and provide calibration services for thermocouples and 
high-temperature photothermometers, but they have a short 
history as far as research on measuring radiation temperature is 
concerned, and not much progress has been made either in 
equipment calibration. 
  Accordingly, there is need to perfect a means of measuring 
and calibrating temperatures in new radiation thermometers, and 
to do this, Japan's cooperation in research is essential. 
  That being the case, this research will include transferring 
a technology for calibrating radiation thermometers in the 
mid-to-high temperature range, perfecting a system for setting, 
maintaining, and managing high-temperature standards in Malaysia 
and maintaining a measurement control system, improving 
calibration technology in the mid-to-high temperature range 
while trying to upgrade industrial standards, and developing a 
commercial calibration system. 
  The research this year will attempt to develop the ideas for 
a high-temperature standards system having the requisite 
precision and to draw up a plan for a calibration system. 
  (3) Developmental Research 
  Research to develop paper with advanced features 
(1991-93) (NIMC) 
  This project will attempt to make use of pulp and active 
carbon which can be manufactured from scarcely used resources, 
such as agricultural wastes and peat found in abundant 
quantities in developing countries in Asia, Africa, and South 
and Central America as raw materials, in developing a paper 
having sophisticated features such as the ability to maintain 
freshness, be non-odorous, and be non-fading. This project will 
use the findings of this research to promote the growth of the 
packaging- and construction-related industries in those 
developing countries. 
  The research done so far includes a study of how active 
carbon is made from raw materials such as the fine dust attached 
to the fiber of the coconut shell, bagasse, and peat, and the 
conditions under which paper is made with active carbon. A test 
was also done on the adsorptive separation of ethylene, 
CO[.sub]2[/] gas, and amine gas by active carbon and paper 
containing active carbon. 
  The research this year will be to continue studying methods 
of chemically treating paper containing active carbon, zeolite 
powder, or a mixture of those powders for the purpose of further 
improving the characteristics of the paper for adsorptive 
separation of ethylene and amine gas which are significant 
factors in terms of maintaining freshness and being odor-free. 
In specific terms, scientists will use the reaction of ethylene 
in a halogen acid and acid solution to chemically treat an 
active carbon and zeolite powder, and an active carbon and 
zeolite paper with those chemicals and develop a powder and 
paper having high ethylene adsorptivity. Researchers will also 
conduct a study on chemical treatment methods with the aim of 
further improving the adsorptive separation properties of the 
that powder and active carbon paper with respect to 
CO[.sub]2[/] gas, amine gas, and sour gas. 



  1993 Research Projects from International Joint Research Cooperation 
Program 

Research             AIST Lab       Overseas Lab            Term 

1. Research to       GSJ            Great Britain:          1992-95 
explore mineral                     University of London 
resources of ocean                  Geological Survey 
plate fragments                     Institute; Indonesia: 
                                    National Tectonic 
                                    Engineering R&amp;D 
                                    Center 

2. Research on                      U.S.: Environmental     1993-95 
chemical                            Protection Agency, 
pollutants in                       Environmental 
Kuwait and Egypt                    Research Institute; 
                                    Kuwait: Kuwait 
                                    National Research 
                                    Institute; Egypt: 
                                    Mansura University 


  Research to explore the mineral resources of ocean 
plate fragments (1992-95) (GSJ) 
  The aim of this research project will be to develop a 
technology for exploring mineral resources, such as rare metals 
that are concentrated in ultrabasic rocks in the ocean plate of 
Indonesia, and to improve the joint research capability of 
Indonesia by working jointly with them to merge the structural 
analysis technology developed by the University of London with 
the mineral deposit exploration technology developed by the 
Geological Survey of Japan. 
  The research this year will concentrate on a study of the 
petrographic properties and geological age of the ultrabasic 
rocks and basalt, and on shedding some light on the distribution 
of lineaments and faults. 
  Research on chemical pollutants in Kuwait and Egypt 
(1993-95) (NIMC) 
  In Kuwait, there is a great deal of concern over the effects 
that pollution is having on the soil, groundwater, and coastline 
areas due to the encroachment of crude oil from oil drilling and 
the effects of the Persian Gulf War, and the same concern is 
also present in the delta region of the Nile River in Egypt over 
the pollution caused by the use of large amounts of agricultural 
chemicals. In those areas, it is necessary to study the 
environment and living organisms to get some idea of the degree 
of pollution, assess the danger for people to pollution, and 
then develop appropriate strategies to deal with those 
situations. 
  Japan has a long history of investigating environmental 
pollution, and the United States has enormous research 
capabilities to show the dangers of pollution. That being the 
case, the aim of this research project will be to survey the 
surface water, bottom sedimentation, groundwater, soil, and 
living organisms in both Kuwait and Egypt with respect to 
pollution caused by oil derivatives and chlorine compounds and 
to forecast the direction that pollution is taking in the 
future, along with evaluating the danger to human health, and to 
help both countries come up with some chemical means of dealing 
with those problems. 
  The research to be done this year in Kuwait will include 
joint research with the Kuwait Scientific Research Institute and 
will involve taking samples of the soil in the oil field areas 
and samples of the groundwater below the soil and ascertaining 
the degree of pollution caused by oil-related substances. The 
research in Egypt will be conducted jointly with Mansura 
University and will involve taking samples of the water, bottom 
sediment, fish, and other organic life from Lake Manzara at the 
mouth of the Nile River to get an idea of the actual status of 
organic chlorine-based chemical pollutants. Research will also 
be conducted jointly with the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency's Environmental Research Institute to do a study on what 
basic data is needed to evaluate the danger that chemical 
environmental pollution poses to human health. 



  1993 Research Projects from Global Environmental Research Cooperation 
Program 

Research               AIST Lab       Overseas Lab           Term 

1. Research on         NIMC, GIRI,    India: Central Arid    1990-93 
methods of greening    Hok            Zone Research 
using functional                      Institute; 
soil restoration                      Philippines: 
agents                                Industrial 
                                      Development Research 
                                      Institute 

2. Research on means   NIRE           Brazil: Bureau of      1990-93 
of preventing                         Mining 
widespread pollution 
in tropical rain 
forests brought on 
by mining 
development 

3. Research on means   NIRE, GIRI,    China: Baitan          1991-93 
of preventing acid     Hok            Scientific Research 
rain caused by                        Institute, Tohoku 
burning of coal                       Institute of 
                                      Engineering 

4. Research on water   GIRI, Osa      Philippines: Forest    1992-94 
purification using                    Product Research Lab 
simple activated 
charcoal 

5. Research on ways    NIRE           India: India           1992-94 
of predicting air                     University of 
pollution as it                       Science, India 
pertains to                           University of 
industrial sites                      Engineering 

6. Research on         NIMC           China: Sinkiang        1993-95 
treatment of wastes                   Industrial Design 
and recovery of                       Research Institute 
resources in leather 
industry 

7. Research on         GIRI, Chu      Brazil: Sao Paolo      1993-96 
assessing the                         University, Sao 
environmental impact                  Paolo Environmental 
of industrial wastes                  Improvement Research 
on tropical                           Institute 
coastlines 


  Research on methods of greening using functional soil 
restoration agent (1990-93) (NIMC, GIRI, Hok) 
  In southern Asian countries which have had rapid population 
growth, there is a noticeable increase in the level of 
deforestation and desertification due to human encroachment. The 
aim of this research will be to help preserve the global 
environment by restoring conditions in those areas so that the 
barren soil will grow plant life again, and to develop, in joint 
research with the Central Arid Zone Research Institute of India, 
an arid wasteland restoration agent having a water retention 
capability, a fertilizer retention capability, and be 
biocompatible. 
  The research this year will be to elucidate the retention 
and 
migration behavior of moisture and phosphates with respect to 
treating the barren soil with a restoration agent developed the 
year before to demonstrate the effectiveness of arid wasteland 
soil restoration agents. Further research will be done to 
elucidate the decomposition and dissolution of clay minerals and 
hydrophilic organic matter in order to study the stability of 
the arid wasteland soil restoration agent in the environment. 
(NIMC) 
  Making the earth green once again in areas that have been 
turned to desert by indiscriminate deforestation of tropical 
rain forests and expansion of farmlands is one of the important 
areas of work to preserve the global environment. 
  This will be a four-year research project conducted jointly 
with the Philippines, a country undergoing deforestation, whose 
main aim will be to develop a greening technology using a 
functional microcapsule that contains essential substances 
having soil regenerative properties. 
  The research this year will be done in Japan and will be to 
test manufacture the microcapsule by the spray-coating method 
and then to perform dissolution tests. The research done outside 
Japan will include a study of the manufacturing process as 
adapted to the Philippines based on research findings, and a 
microcapsule dissolution test on local soil. (GIRI, Hok) 
  Research on means of preventing widespread pollution in 
tropical forests that are brought on by mining developments 
(1990-93) (NIRE) 
  Due to the unique environment of the tropical forests, there 
are no technologies available at present to prevent pollution, 
brought on by mining developments, from taking place. For that 
reason, the ecosystem of plants and other living creatures in 
the tropical forests, which is necessary to maintaining the 
global environment, is in the process of being destroyed. In 
Brazil, companies employ a gold smelting method and mercury 
amalgam method. There is a great deal of concern in Brazil over 
the large quantities of mercury being used and the effects that 
the poor management of mercury have on the surrounding 
environment. For that reason, an appropriate solution must be 
found very quickly to prevent this type of pollution from 
spreading. 
  The aim of this project will be to develop a method of 
surveying local conditions based on previous surveys conducted 
on pollution by parties inside and outside the country, and to 
conduct a local survey on the Brazilian Amazon River region. The 
next step will be to conduct a joint analysis of that data and 
to try to find ways to prevent pollution. Research will also 
include as one of the pollution prevention measures a study on 
how to create a non-polluting smelting process. 
  The research this year will focus on studying local survey 
data on the effects mercury pollution has on the Tapajos River 
basin that branches off the Brazil-to-Paraguay Amazon River and 
analyze the results taken from that survey. Research will also 
include a study on the possibility of commercializing an 
alternative non-polluting smelting process. 
  Research on means of preventing acid rain caused by 
burning of coal (1991-93) (NIRE, GIRI, Hok) 
  Acid rain is becoming a serious problem in countries such as 
China. The main cause of acid rain is SO[.sub]x[/] and 
NO[.sub]x[/], which is produced by the burning of coal. With 
the expected increased use of coal in the future, it has become 
a matter of urgency that a technology be developed to prevent 
the production of those types of atmospheric pollutants. 
  That being the case, the purpose of this research will be to 
develop a method adapted to conditions in China that will remove 
the smoke emitted from the burning of coal, develop a clean 
preprocessing treatment for coal, and find a way of reducing 
SO[.sub]x[/] and NO[.sub]x[/] by switching to circulating 
fluidized bed combustion. 
  Specifically, researchers will try to keep production of the 
main culprits of acid rain, SO[.sub]x[/] and NO[.sub]x[/], 
to a minimum by using a typical type of Chinese coal, which 
researchers studied last year, and by following through on the 
research described below. 
  (1) Research on clean preprocessing treatment of coal 
  (a) Research in Japan 
  This research will involve trying to perfect a clean 
preprocessing treatment for coal by removing the inorganic 
sulfur by oil agglomeration of the carbon containing organic 
sulfur, the carbon containing inorganic sulfur, and the high ash 
content carbon, and by removing heteroelements of organic sulfur 
by treatment in a mild reducing atmosphere and hot water 
treatments. 
  (b) Research done outside Japan 
  This research will attempt to optimize the preprocessing 
treatment by conducting combustion tests on clean-burning coal 
to elucidate the optimum conditions for combustion. 
  (2) Research on reduction of SO[.sub]x[/]/NO[.sub]x[/] 
by circulating fluidized bed combustion 
  (a) Research in Japan 
  This research will attempt to perfect a method for 
across-the-board reduction of SO[.sub]x[/] and 
NO[.sub]x[/] by trying to find an optimum desulfurization and 
low NO[.sub]x[/] combustion method in circulating fluidized 
bed combustion of high-calorie Chinese coal. 
  (b) Research done outside Japan 
  This research will involve a study to find the optimum 
desulfurization and low NO[.sub]x[/] combustion method with 
respect to low-calorie Chinese coal with high sulfur content in 
order to elucidate the optimum conditions for combustion in a 
circulating fluidized bed boiler. 
  Research on water purification using simplified 
activated charcoal (1992-94) (GIRI, Osa) 
  The degradation of water quality in Southeast Asian 
countries, such as the Philippines, due to indiscriminate 
deforestation, generally unregulated discharge of effluent, and 
the discharge of untreated industrial effluent is becoming a 
source of great concern. Accordingly, Japan has been asked to 
provide the technical support in developing and building a 
simple and inexpensive water purification system for the 
Philippines that would be used to guard against the pollution 
described above and to provide a safe high-quality and 
intermediate-quality water supply. That being the case, 
researchers have started work developing and building a 
charcoal-based water purification system of the kind that has 
been popular in Japan. 
  More specifically, this research will attempt to perfect 
effective uses for simplified activated charcoal (sophisticated 
charcoal with activated carbon features) with the aim of 
protecting the water supply in the Philippines. Researchers will 
strive to develop a simple and inexpensive water purification 
system that uses activated charcoal to improve the quality of 
river water, waste water, and industrial effluent. Along with 
that, researchers will also try to find more effective uses for 
unused timber resources in the Philippines and improve the local 
technologies for global environmental preservation. 
<H5>  Specific Research </H5>
  Researchers will try to develop a manufacturing process for 
simplified activated charcoal by trying catalytic carbonization 
of various types of wood and investigating the relationship 
between the internal structure and function (decomposition of 
organic matter, and adsorption/desorption of heavy metals) of 
the simplified activated charcoal obtained. Meanwhile, research 
will also be done in the Philippines to assess the features of 
carbon as simplified activated charcoal by performing 
carbonization tests on locally obtained wood and using data 
obtained in Japan. 
  Research on ways of predicting air pollution as it 
pertains to industrial sites (1992-94) (NIRE) 
  There is some concern over the possible global effects of 
industrial activities taking place due to the industrialization 
of South Asian countries such as India. Moreover, the noticeable 
lack of any pollution prevention policies and the degree of air 
pollution caused by toxic industrial emissions makes it 
incumbent that a quick solution be found. This research will 
attempt to develop ways of predicting air pollution for the 
specific meteorological conditions of India and Southern Asia 
based on methods developed earlier in Japan for preventing 
atmospheric pollution brought on by industrial pollution. 
Moreover, it is essential that this method of predicting air 
pollution be able to deal with various meteorological conditions 
and emission sources so that it can be used for other developing 
countries. 
  Researchers will investigate the behavior and sources of 
acidic air contaminants in southern Asia such as sulfur dioxide 
gas and nitrous oxide. As part of that research, scientists will 
perform a diffusion test using local emission sources to 
elucidate the characteristics of air pollution in southern Asia, 
and using that data develop a method of predicting air pollution. 
  In 1993, researchers will continue the diffusion experiment 
from the previous year using local emission sources in an 
attempt to gather more data, and along with that will 
investigate the relationship between parameters and 
meteorological conditions in an atmospheric diffusion model for 
the dry season of India by elucidating the accumulated 
meteorological data from the diffusion tests done in the 
previous year. 
  Research on treatment of waste and recovery of 
resources in leather industry (1993-95) (NIMC) 
  Raising cattle is the main business in Sinkiang Province in 
China, thus the leather industry plays a very important role in 
that area. In recent years, however, China has complained of 
serious environmental problems, and one of the most serious 
problems is finding a way to treat the effluent from the leather 
industry. The effluent from the leather industry contains 
chrome, surface acting agents, lipids, proteins, and calcium 
salts, and cannot be purified simply by biological means. For 
that reason, the Sinkiang Industrial Design Research Institute 
has asked the National Institute for Materials and Chemicals to 
participate in joint research for the purpose of introducing a 
new waste water treatment technology. 
  The most difficult problem to deal with in the effluent 
being 
discharged by the leather industry is the chromium ions. 
Chromium ions are by no means the only toxic substances 
contained in the waste water, but they themselves are almost 
impossible to treat biologically when present in effluent. The 
aim of this project will be to study methods of treating the 
surface acting agents, oil components, and sulfur, which are the 
other toxic materials contained in the effluent, with the idea 
of removing the chromium ions in the effluent. In order to 
remove chromium ions, there is a question of cost that must be 
answered with regard to the precipitation treatment based on pH 
regulation, but it will be almost impossible to remove all the 
chromium ions, particularly when there are proteins in the 
effluent. The research in this project will primarily concern 
the adsorptive removal of chromium ions by a low-cost inorganic 
ion exchanger. 
  The research this year will include the adsorptive removal 
of 
chromium ions by titanium oxide and synthetic materials in 
particular and perfecting a way of synthesizing an optimum 
titanium oxide. Researchers will also conduct the same research 
on silicon oxide and make a comparison between commercial and 
synthetic products. A study will also be done on precipitation 
treatments in order to elucidate the problem areas in 
precipitation of actual effluent and to try to improve that 
method. 
  Research on assessing the environmental impact of 
industrial wastes on tropical coastlines (1993-93) (GIRI, 
Chu) 
  As industry has grown in Brazil, the quality of water along 
the coastlines of the country has been seriously affected by the 
increase in industrial effluent. The aim of this research will 
be to elucidate the marine structures that are characteristic of 
tropical coastlines from a physical, chemical, and biological 
perspective, and then show the effects that industrial effluent 
have on water quality. By doing that, researchers will try to 
perfect a method of evaluating the effects that industrial 
effluent have on water quality along tropical coastlines, 
thereby contributing to healthy industrial growth while 
maintaining good environmental conditions. 
  In Japan, a highly accurate method of evaluating the effects 
that industrial effluent have on the coastlines of temperate 
Japan has already been developed, but that method is not 
appropriate for the shoreline areas of Brazil. That being the 
case, researchers will try to ascertain what types of chemical 
substances and biological life exist within the currents and 
ocean waters considered part of the tropical coastline of 
Brazil, and then determine what modifications have to be made to 
the method developed in Japan for measuring biological effects 
so that it can be used for the coastline environment of Brazil. 
Additional research will include a study on ways of making 
improvements to the coastline environment in Brazil. 
  The research this year will focus on elucidating the water 
quality and current characteristics along the Brazilian coast. 



  1993 Specific Key Research Cooperation Program 

Research                AIST Lab       Overseas Lab          Term 

1. Research on          MEL            Singapore: South      1993-97 
sophisticated                          Sea Engineering 
metal-based                            School 
composites 


  Research on highly functional metal-based composites 
(1993-77) (MEL) 
  The industrial fields that deal with automotive mechanical 
elements and precision parts for electrical and electronic 
machinery are making a lot of progress in developing highly 
sophisticated metal-based composites that are used to make 
things lighter. 
  Singapore is a country trying to develop many of its own 
industries and has a growing need for composite materials. 
  The aim of this project will be to jointly develop a 
technology for manufacturing highly sophisticated metal-based 
composites and a technology for molding complex composite forms 
and microforms. 
  The research this year will include using a powder 
metallurgical method to design a metal-based composite 
exhibiting high relative strength and stiffness. 
  Using extrusion molding, HIP molding, and solidification 
molding processes such as impact molding, researchers will try 
to identify what the optimum conditions are for molding 
metal-based composites of high relative strength and stiffness. 
Researchers will also study heat treatment conditions in which 
metal-based composite of high relative stiffness exhibit 
superplasticity. 
  Using a powdered metal injection molding method that molds 
metal-based composite into complex forms and microforms, 
scientists will then do moldings tests to study the 
solidification molding process and molding conditions for a 
matrix made of metal-based composites. 
  Using the same method, scientists will then perform molding 
tests to study the solidification molding process and molding 
conditions for an abrasion-resistant metal-based composite. 
<H5>  (25) Research Cooperation Project Promotion Program </H5>
  This is a program that is basically designed to solve many 
of 
the basic problems shared by developing countries, which include 
the economic and social problems that developing countries face, 
by marshalling together the expertise of the national research 
laboratories in Japan with that of academic institutes and 
industrial research labs for the purpose of implementing 
comprehensive joint research with developing countries from the 
basic to the applied levels of research. 



  1993 Research Cooperation Program Research Projects 

Research             AIST Lab             Overseas Lab         Term 

1. Research on       ETL, International   China: Nanken        1987-94 
machine              Center for           Technology Center; 
translation system   Information          Thailand: NECTEC; 
to handle            Cooperation          Malaysia: Malaysia 
translation                               School of 
between                                   Engineering; 
neighboring                               Indonesia: 
countries [machine                        University of 
translation]                              Indonesia 

2. Research on       GIRI, Shikoku, New   China: China         1989-94 
technologies for     Energy &amp;         Institute of 
recovering           Industrial           Science, Marine 
valuable resources   Technology           Research 
from brackish        Development          Institute; Mexico: 
water [brackish      Organization         Bureau of Mines 
water]                                    and Resources 

3. Collaborative     NIBH, New Energy     Thailand: Science    1993-98 
research on          &amp; Industrial     and Technology 
sustaining and       Technology           Research 
preserving           Development          Institute, 
biological           Organization         Biotechnology and 
diversity                                 Genetic 
[biological                               Engineering 
diversity]                                Research Lab, et 
                                          al.; Indonesia: 
                                          Bandong University 
                                          of Engineering, 
                                          Bogoul University 
                                          of Engineering 


  Research on machine translation system to handle 
translation between neighboring countries (ETL) 
<H5>  Objective </H5>
  One of the major impediments in the way of transferring 
technologies from Japan to neighboring countries is the almost 
impossible task of mastering the Japanese language. That being 
the case, the aim of this project will be to develop a machine 
translation system to facilitate technical and cultural exchange 
between Japan and its neighboring countries and effectively 
transfer computer technologies. 
<H5>  Particulars </H5>
  This will be a national research project and involve the use 
of the world's first intermediate language system as a means of 
translating multiple languages. This system will be designed to 
handle Japanese, Chinese, Thai, Malaysian, and Indonesian. Using 
an intermediate language, it will analyze what has been said and 
translate this from the intermediate language to any of the 
languages mentioned above. 
  The work to be done in 1993 will be to make language 
descriptions more specific in terms of operative concepts. The 
research will try to expand and improve basic concepts, do a 
detailed analysis of the relationship with objects based on 
expanded usages and try to make the concepts even more specific. 
Researchers will also try to make the look-up system on usages 
even more specific, and design the system for general use. The 
project will also include a performance evaluation of the 
environment in which the prototype machine translation system is 
being developed as well as an evaluation of the intermediate 
stage system. 
  The research with other participating countries will involve 
continuing the cooperative research on an intermediate language 
by transferring researchers back and forth between countries, 
improving operative concepts in the intermediate language, and 
doing evaluations on each of the languages. 
  Research on technologies for recovering valuable 
resources from brackish water (GIRI, Shikoku) 
  The aim of this research cooperation project will be to 
assist Mexico and China in developing natural resources by 
conducting R&amp;D on a comprehensive system for systematically 
recovering valuable resources such as lithium, barium, bromine, 
and boron that can be found in the brackish salt manufacturing 
waters along the coast of Mexico and in the brackish natural gas 
waters and salt lakes of China. 
<H5>  Objective </H5>
  Research the following items in 1993. 
  (1) Research done in Japan 
  Do a study of column adsorption and desorption methods using 
an anionic adsorbent 
  Do a study of high-purity methods of separating and refining 
lithium as an element technology of lithium adsorptive 
extraction system. 
  (2) Research done outside Japan 
  Do a local survey on the factors needed to make an economic 
assessment of a recovery system for valuable resources 
  Collaborative research on sustaining and preserving 
biological diversity (NIBH) 
<H5>  Objective </H5>
  A great variety of living plants and animals inhabit the 
tropical areas of the earth, but those areas have been losing a 
major portion of their biological diversity in recent years due 
to tropical forests being cut down. The genetic resources found 
in the biological life forms of tropical areas is considered 
extremely important in the field of biotechnology. The aim of 
this project will be to conduct collaborative research on a 
technology for segregating, breeding, and preserving 
microorganisms and on ways to evaluate useful functions in order 
to enable the developing countries themselves to gather, 
preserve, and sustain the bioresources of those tropical areas. 
<H5>  Particulars </H5>
  Researchers will survey the current status of research in 
those countries on the diversity of biological life in tropical 
areas, and will discuss the specifics of research collaboration. 
Moreover, in Japan, researchers will try to segregate, breed, 
and assess the characteristics of useful microorganisms using 
specimens of microorganisms taken from tropical areas. 

