BFN 

<F P=106> [Statement issued by Prime Minister Tansu Ciller; place and </F>
date not specified -- read by announcer] 
  [Text] I am issuing the following statement in order to 
correct certain erroneous information that has appeared in the 
press regarding the assets owned by me and my family. 
  I disclosed all my family's assets to the public in a 
declaration before I became state minister. I was the 
initiator. I wanted everyone to behave in the same manner, 
because I believe those who serve the public should have no 
secrets. I submitted the declaration of assets, organized 
according to Article 22 of Law No. 3628 and in line with 
regulations, to the Turkish Grand National Assembly in the wake 
of my election as deputy. Our assets, which were also announced 
to the press, have not increased during my term as deputy, 
minister, or prime minister. 
  The press items on our family wealth state that we have real 
estate in the United States and that we did not include it in 
our declaration of assets, thus accusing us of keeping them 
secret. The truth of the matter is that these properties were 
purchased GCD, a firm in the United States. Marsan Holding 
Joint-Stock Company is a partner in this firm. We own shares in 
Marsan Holding Joint-Stock Company and we declared this in our 
declaration of assets. For this reason, claims that we are 
hiding our wealth or that we are secretly accumulating wealth 
are false. 
  It is legally impossible to include securities and real 
estate in the possession of GCD -- a company in which Marsan 
Holding owns shares -- in our personal declaration of assets. 
We do not have any shares which we have kept secret from our 
declaration of assets. Our holding shares were declared as they 
are. In addition, in order to acquire shares in GCD, Marsan 
Holding applied to the Treasury and Foreign Trade Under 
Secretariat and informed the concerned authorities during the 
allocated time period. For this reason, it is out of question 
to claim that this information -- already in the state archives 
-- has been kept secret while I was leader of my party or while 
I was prime minister. 
  The following items are significant in the declaration of 
assets submitted in accordance with the statute: Article 8 of 
the statue states that the value of the assets declared should 
be based on their actual value at the time of the declaration. 
As a family, we have declared our assets in accordance with 
their value at the time of our declaration. These are estimated 
values. The declarations were based on the approximate values 
of the assets as though buying or selling were involved. The 
regulations also require this kind of approach. There is no 
difference in my assets from the time I was minister and now, 
apart from the sale of my shares in (Marsow) and 7-11. 
  As for the source of the money sent abroad with the 
participation of GCD: This money was acquired from the sale of 
our shares in (Marsow) and 7-11. Marsan Holding's financial 
assets were acquired from the sale of personal real estate and 
shares which we disposed of before going into politics. In 
addition, when the True Path Party was in the opposition, all 
our companies and personal assets were inspected and nothing 
illegal was found. 
  I have shown great sensitivity regarding my political power 
being exploited during the time I served as minister and now as 
prime minister. For this reason, my husband ended his business 
ventures in order not to give leeway to misunderstandings 
regarding my position. He closed his credit relations with the 
public and private banks in Turkey. I am in politics in order 
to serve. I have no material expectations. God has granted me 
the greatest wealth -- the opportunity to serve the lofty 
Turkish nation. I have consecrated myself to my nation. I am 
here to serve my nation and I am going to work to that end with 
all my force. Undoubtedly, there will be those who would like 
to put obstacles in our way but they will not deter me from the 
road which I deem right. My conscience is clear and I do not 
have any accounts to give to anybody. History shows that those 
who serve their people have been harassed. What can we do? We 
are having our share of this treatment. It is up to our lofty 
nation to judge the situation. 

