CSO 

<F P=106> [Decree No 490 of the Russian Federation Government on </F>
Special Features for Determining the Taxable Base for the 
Payment of the Profits Tax by Banks and Other Credit 
Institutions, 16 May 94] 
  [Text] In fulfillment of Edict No 2270 of the Russian 
Federation [RF] President of 22 December 1993 on Certain Changes 
in Taxation and in the Mutual Relations of the Various Levels' 
Budgets, the RF Government decrees that: 
  1. The proposed Statute on Special Features for Determining 
the Taxable Base for the Payment of the Profits Tax by Banks and 
Other Credit Institutions (hereinafter referred to as the 
Statute), submitted by the RF Ministry of Finance and the RF 
State Tax Service on the recommendation of the RF Central Bank, 
is approved. 
  2. The RF Ministry of Finance and the RF State Tax Service 
shall, within a week's time, determine the procedure for 
applying the Statute in 1994. 
  3. This decree shall go into effect as of the day of its 
publication. 
  [Signed] RF Government Chairman V. Chernomyrdin. 
<H5>  Statute on Special Features for Determining the Taxable Base </H5>
for the Payment of the Profits Tax by Banks and Other Credit 
Institutions 
  This statute, in conformity with Item 1 of Edict No 2270 of 
the RF President of 22 December 1993 on Certain Changes in 
Taxation and in the Mutual Relations of the Various Levels' 
Budgets, establishes the special features for determining the 
taxable base for the payment of the profits tax by banks and 
other credit institutions (hereinafter referred to as banks), as 
well as the procedure for forming the financial results taken 
into consideration during the taxing of banks and other credit 
institutions using the procedure and under the terms stipulated 
by the RF Law on the Profits Tax for Enterprises and 
Organizations. 
  All banks licensed by the RF Central Bank to conduct banking 
transactions shall estimate the taxable base for calculating the 
profits tax by reducing the overall revenue amount determined in 
accordance with the statute (without consideration of the 
value-added tax [VAT] and the special tax for the financial 
support of the national economy's most important sectors) by the 
amount of expenditures included in accordance with the statute 
in the cost of the services rendered by them and by refining the 
obtained difference by the amount of revenues and expenditures 
directly related to the financial results of their activities. 
<H5>  I. Composition of the Banks' Revenues Taken into Account </H5>
During Calculation of the Taxable Base for Payment of the 
Profits Tax 
  The composition of the banks' revenues taken into account 
during the calculation of the taxable base for the payment of 
the profits tax shall include: 
  1. The amounts of interest calculated and received for 
credit 
resources distributed by a bank, including revenues received by 
a bank from an increase by three percentage points (the margin) 
for centralized credits granted through the bank to enterprises 
and organizations by the RF Central Bank. 
  2. Commissions and other fees (payments) for transfer, 
collection, letter-of-credit and other banking transactions, 
including for services for implementing correspondent relations. 
  3. Payments for services rendered by a bank to clients for 
opening and managing their clearing, current, currency, loan and 
other accounts and for issuing (receiving) cash funds, as well 
as for rendering information, consultation, expert and other 
services. 
  4. Revenues received by a bank from the conducting of 
forfeiting, factoring and trust transactions. 
  5. Revenues received by a bank for guarantee and acceptance 
transactions. 
  6. Payments for services rendered by a bank to the public. 
  7. Payments for collection and for shipping of monetary 
assets, securities, other valuables and banking documents. 
  8. Revenues received by a bank for work on placing state 
securities and reserves of the RF federal treasury and its 
territorial organs. 
  9. Revenues received by a bank for securities transactions, 
including transactions for their placement and management, and 
for other transactions in the stock market. 
  10. Revenues from transactions conducted by a bank involving 
foreign currency, precious metals and other currency assets, 
including commission fees for transactions associated with the 
buying and selling of currency on behalf of and on the 
instructions of clients. 
  Revenues received by a bank in a foreign currency are 
subject 
to taxation, along with revenues received in rubles. At the same 
time, the revenues received in a foreign currency shall be 
converted into rubles at the RF Central Bank exchange rate in 
effect on the date of receipt of the revenues. 
  Payments received by banks from commodity exporters for 
performing the function of currency control agents. 
  11. Revenues from the leasing of property belonging to a 
bank, including revenues from the conducting of leasing 
transactions. 
  12. The difference between the selling value and the face 
value of shares issued by a bank (with the exception of the 
selling of shares during the raising of the bank's charter 
capital, when the amount of this difference shall be viewed as a 
bank's supplementary capital). 
  13. The difference between the price for selling and the 
price for acquiring securities belonging to the bank, including 
state securities. 
  14. Monetary assets, fixed capital and tangible and 
intangible assets transferred to a bank without compensation by 
legal and natural persons. 
  15. Revenues from brokerage seats on the exchanges, acquired 
or leased by a bank. 
  16. Amounts transferred to a bank by clients as compensation 
for telegraph, mail and other communications services. 
  17. Interest and commission fees received by a bank for 
transactions over past years, as well as the claimed interest 
and commission fees unnecessarily paid by the bank to clients in 
past years. 
  18. A bank's cash surpluses. 
  19. Other revenues included by a bank in the taxable profits 
in accordance with legislation, as well as revenues received as 
a result of the conducting of other activities. 
<H5>  II. Composition of the Expenditures Included in the Cost of </H5>
Services Rendered by the Banks and Other Expenditures Taken into 
Account During Calculation of the Taxable Base for Payment of 
the Profits Tax 
  The expenditures included in the cost of services rendered 
by 
the banks and other expenditures taken into account during the 
calculation of the taxable base for the payment of the profits 
tax shall include: 
  20. Amounts due to be paid by a bank to the appropriate 
budget in the form of a tax on the bank's property, a land tax, 
a transportation tax, a highway user tax, a tax on the 
acquisition of means of transportation and a tax from the owners 
of the means of transportation, a fee for the needs of 
educational institutions and customs duties, as well as other 
taxes, fees and payments included in accordance with legislation 
in the production cost of products (work or services) or paid 
for expenses. 
  21. A bank's obligatory allotments to the RF Pension Fund, 
the RF Compulsory Medical Insurance Fund, the RF State Public 
Employment Fund and the RF Social Security Fund, paid in 
accordance with legislation. 
  22. Payments for compulsory insurance for a bank's property 
and individual groups of bank workers in accordance with 
legislation. 
  23. Interest calculated and paid on demand deposits 
(clearing, current, correspondent and other accounts) and time 
deposits. 
  24. Interest calculated and paid on a bank's debt 
obligations 
(bonds, deposit and savings certificates, promissory notes and 
others), including the amounts of the negative difference 
(discount) between the price for selling the indicated debt 
securities and their face value. 
  25. Interest calculated and paid on interbank credits, 
including special-purpose centralized credits and overdrafts, 
and on redistributed credit resources between a main bank and 
its branches, as well as between the branches of a single bank. 
  26. Interest calculated and paid on refinancing credits 
acquired by a bank, including credits acquired at auction using 
the procedure established by the RF Central Bank. 
  27. Interest calculated and paid on deferred (extended) 
interbank credits, as well as on credits deferred at the 
decision of the RF Government. 
  The expenditures indicated in Items 25 and 27 of this 
statute 
shall be included in the composition of the expenditures taken 
into account during the calculation of the taxable base for the 
profits tax, within the limits of the RF Central Bank rate for 
centralized credit resources, increased by three points. 
  28. Commission fees paid by a bank for services and 
correspondent relations, including expenditures for clearing 
operations for clients, for the opening of clearing, current and 
other accounts by them, for payment to other banks for clearing 
operations and for other similar expenditures. 
  29. Commission fees (payments) paid by a bank for the buying 
(selling) of foreign currency. Expenditures for management and 
protection from currency risks, as well as other expenditures 
for currency transactions conducted by the bank. 
  Outlays made by a bank in a foreign currency shall be 
converted into rubles at the RF Central Bank exchange rate in 
effect on the date of the completion of the transactions. 
  30. Interest and commission fees paid by a bank for past 
years (with respect to the reporting year) and the repayment by 
the bank of interest and commission fees unnecessarily collected 
from clients in past years (with respect to the reporting year). 
  31. Depreciation of a bank's capital stock used to carry out 
banking activities in the form of depreciation allotments for 
the complete replacement of the capital stock over the course of 
the taxable period, based on the norms approved using the 
established procedure, including accelerated depreciation of its 
active part (operating and computer equipment, high-speed 
information exchange system and the like), carried out using the 
procedure established in accordance with legislation. 
  32. Depreciation of low-cost and rapidly depreciating items 
belonging to a bank in the amount of their total value while 
such items are placed into use. 
  33. Depreciation for intangible assets belonging to a bank. 
  The specific composition of and the procedure for relating 
the depreciation of intangible assets to the cost shall be 
determined by the Statute on the Composition of Outlays for the 
Production and Sale of Products (Work or Services) and on the 
Procedure for Forming the Financial Results Taken into 
Consideration During the Taxing of Profit approved by Decree No 
552 of the RF Government of 5 August 1992. 
  34. A bank's expenditures for leasing capital stock, 
including their individual parts, used to carry out banking 
activities, including motor transportation for the collection 
and delivery of receipts and special motor transportion for the 
shipment of banking documents and valuables, and intangible 
assets, including brokerage seats. 
  35. Expenditures for conducting all types of repair and 
maintenance of capital stock belonging to a bank or leased by 
it, if this is stipulated by the leasing agreement. 
  In order to ensure the uniform relating of outlays for the 
conducting of all types of repair and maintenance of capital 
stock to a bank's expenditures, the formation of a repair and 
maintenance fund shall be permitted. Allotments to the repair 
and maintenance fund shall be made based on standards approved 
using the established procedure by the bank itself from the book 
value of the capital stock used to carry out banking activities. 
  36. Outlays in accordance with the estimates approved 
annually by a bank's board, within the limits established in 
accordance with norms and standards legislation: 
  a) representation expenditures, including expenditures for 
holding stockholder (shareholder) meetings and meetings of a 
bank's board and auditing commission, with the supporting 
documents; 
  b) advertising expenditures; 
  c) travel expenditures associated with banking activities; 
  d) and compensation payments for the use of personal 
vehicles 
by a bank's workers for business trips. 
  37. Amounts for payments for education on the basis of 
agreements with educational institutions and for services 
rendered for the training, skill enhancement and retraining of 
bank workers, proceeding on the basis of the standards 
established in accordance with legislation. 
  The indicated outlays shall be related to a bank's 
expenditures excluded during the calculation of the taxable base 
for the profits tax, provided agreements are concluded and the 
educational services are performed by appropriately licensed 
Russian educational institutions and appropriate-type foreign 
vocational educational institutions, as well as in accordance 
with the estimates approved by the bank's board annually. 
  38. Payments for consulting and informational services, as 
well as auditing services, provided to a bank on a contract 
basis for the purpose of corroborating the annual accounting 
report, as well as payment for audits conducted in accordance 
with banking legislation requirements. 
  39. Payments for marketing and other similar services in 
instances when a bank's management structure lacks the 
corresponding functional services or officials entrusted with 
the carrying out of the corresponding functional duties. 
  40. A bank's expenditures for payments for office, postal, 
telegraph, telephone and other communications services, 
including payments for the use of facsimile and satellite 
communications, for a bank's transactions and for serving 
clients. 
  41. Expenditures for the acquisition of special literature 
and standards and guideline documents, as well as for 
subscribing to special publications (newspapers, magazines and 
the like) necessary for carrying out banking activities. 
  42. Amounts of payments for collection and delivery of 
banknotes, coins, checks and other clearing and payment 
documents, as well as expenditures for the packaging of 
valuables, including the supplying of cash money, and for 
transporting, sending and delivering valuables belonging to a 
bank and its clients. 
  43. Expenditures for the repair and restoration of 
collection 
bags and sacks for transporting and storing valuables and for 
the acquisition of new ones and the replacement of worn-out ones. 
  44. Expenditures for payments for the services of clearing 
and computer centers. 
  45. A bank's expenditures for the manufacture, acquisition 
and sending of forms, magnetic media, punch cards, diskettes and 
other banking information media, as well as strict reporting 
forms, check, receipt, deposit and other books and wrappers for 
banknotes and coins. 
  46. A bank's expenditures for transferring pensions and 
benefits. 
  47. Expenditures associated with the manufacture and 
introduction of means of payment (plastic cards, traveller's 
checks and others) necessary to support a bank's activities. 
  48. Expenditures associated with the organization and 
issuing 
by a bank of shares, bonds, deposit and savings certificates, 
other debt obligations and other securities which circulate in 
the financial market (expenditures for preparing a prospectus 
and acquiring forms for securities, printing expenditures, the 
payment of commissions for the popularization of securities and 
the like). 
  49. Expenditures for the conducting of forfeiting, factoring 
and trust transactions by a bank. 
  50. Amounts for allotments for reserves for possible losses 
on loans and due to the depreciation of securities, which are 
subject to regulation in accordance with the procedure 
established by the RF Central Bank. 
  51. Outlays stipulated by legislation, which are associated 
with the recruitment of workers, including payments to young 
specialists who have finished a higher or middle special 
educational institution for travel to the work site, as well as 
for leave before the start of work. 
  52. Outlays for workers' wages, including people not on a 
bank's staff, for work performed in accordance with agreements 
concluded with them of a civil and legal nature in accordance 
with the list of such outlays stipulated by the Statute on the 
Composition of Outlays for the Production and Sale of Products 
(Work or Services) Included in the Cost of the Products (Work or 
Services) and on the Procedure for Forming the Financial Results 
Taken into Account During the Taxing of Profits, approved by 
Decree No 552 of the RF Government of 5 August 1992. 
  In addition to the outlays for wages stipulated by the 
indicated statute, included in the cost for the determination of 
the taxable profits shall be the expenditures for payments for 
the travel of a bank's workers once in 2 years to a vacation 
site in the RF and back by any means of transportation (except 
taxis) and the cost of transporting their baggage (up to 30 
kilograms per person) for persons working in the regions of the 
Far North and localities comparable to it. 
  53. Operating expenditures for maintaining buildings, 
equipment, inventory and official motor transport (including 
expenditures for replacing vehicle tires) both belonging to a 
bank and leased by it. 
  54. A bank's expenditures for maintaining fire and security 
protection, including payments for security services in 
accordance with agreements concluded by a bank with the RF 
Ministry of Internal Affairs' extra-departmental security 
service and other specialized organizations licensed to engage 
in security activities. 
  55. Expenditures for acquiring special clothing and special 
footwear with respect to the norms established in accordance 
with existing legislation for security workers and the computer 
centers' associates. 
  56. The excess of amounts for the VAT and the special tax 
for 
the financial support of the most important sectors of the 
Russian Federation's national economy on material resources, 
work and services, the cost of which has actually been related 
during the reporting period to expenses, above the amounts of 
these taxes, received by a bank from selling property, 
performing work and rendering services and subject to the 
indicated taxes in accordance with existing legislation. 
<H5>  III. Revenues and Expenditures Related to the Financial </H5>
Results of the Banks' Activities 
  57. The following revenues shall be directly related to the 
financial results of a bank's activities: 
  dividends and interest received on stocks, bonds and other 
securities issued in the RF belonging to the bank, as well as 
revenues received from shared participation in the activities of 
other banks, enterprises and organizations. 
  The indicated revenues shall be taxed at their payment 
sources: 
  positive exchange rate differences for a bank's transactions 
in a foreign currency, including unrealized positive exchange 
rate differences for an open currency position; 
  penalties conferred or acknowledged by a debtor, fines, 
forfeits and other types of sanctions for violations of 
agreement terms, as well as revenues from compensation for 
losses caused to a bank, including payments associated with 
credit risk insurance; 
  amounts received from a bank's workers as compensation for 
losses and expenditures incurred by the bank through their fault; 
  a bank's profits from past years, which are disclosed during 
the reporting year; 
  revenues from a bank's sale, using the procedure established 
by legislation, of security and pledge items (tangible and 
intangible assets, consumer goods and other property); 
  loans previously written off as losses by a bank, which are 
repaid by clients; 
  other revenues from transactions not directly associated 
with 
banking activities, including revenues from the sale of capital 
stock and other property belonging to a bank. 
  58. The following expenditures and losses shall be directly 
related to the financial results of the banks' activities: 
  local taxes and fees related to the financial results of a 
bank's activities in accordance with legislation; 
  conferred or acknowledged penalties, fines, forfeits and 
other types of sanctions for a bank's violations of agreement 
terms (except amounts submitted to a budget in the form of 
sanctions in accordance with legislation), as well as 
expenditures for compensation to clients for losses caused by 
the bank; 
  losses, not compensated through the reserve for possible 
loan 
losses, from writing off unpaid debts of individual borrowers, 
for which the period of legal recourse has expired, and other 
debts, the recovery of which is impractical; 
  losses for previous years' transactions, which are disclosed 
during the reporting year; 
  uncompensated losses from natural calamities, fires, 
accidents and other emergency situations, caused by extreme 
conditions, including outlays associated with the prevention or 
cleanup of the consequences of natural calamities and accidents; 
  negative exchange rate differences for a bank's transactions 
in a foreign currency, including unrealized negative exchange 
rate differences for an open currency position; 
  losses incurred by a bank due to bad advice; 
  court costs and arbitration expenditures for matters 
associated with a bank's activities; 
  losses from embezzlements, the perpetrators of which have 
not 
been established by court rulings, including: 
  errors and shortfalls in cash transactions (except currency 
transactions); 
  embezzlement and squandering in cash transactions (except 
currency assets); 
  losses for foreign transactions and currency assets; 
  accepted unredeemable and counterfeit bills and coins; 
  embezzlement, squandering and other abuses in the collection 
and shipping of valuables; 
  embezzlement, squandering and other abuses in a bank's other 
transactions (except cash transactions and in the collection and 
shipping of valuables); 
  the loss of valuables during sending; 
  and amounts paid on clients' claims. 
<H5>  IV. Expenditures, Which Cannot Be Related to Expenditures </H5>
Included in the Cost of Services Rendered by Banks and to Other 
Expenditures Taken into Account During Calculation of the 
Taxable Base for Payment of the Profits Tax 
  The following expenditures cannot be related to expenditures 
included in the cost of services rendered by the banks and to 
other expenditures taken into account during the calculation of 
the taxable base for payment of the profits tax and can be 
carried out only by using the profits remaining at the banks' 
disposal after the payment of taxes and other obligatory 
payments: 
  59. Cash and in-kind payments of individual types of 
bonuses, 
material assistance, other rewards and supplements to a bank's 
workers, as well as outlays associated with their maintenance in 
accordance with the list of such expenditures stipulated by the 
Statute on the Composition of Outlays for the Production and 
Sale of Products (Work or Services), Included in the Cost of 
Products (Work or Services) and on the Procedure for Forming the 
Financial Results Taken into Account During the Taxing of 
Profits, approved by Decree No 552 of the RF Government of 5 
August 1992. 
  60. Capital-type outlays, including ones for the 
construction 
of new facilities and for the modernization, expansion, 
renovation and renewal of existing capital stock and a bank's 
acquisition of various equipment and other fixed capital. 
  61. Expenditures for non-production facilities (housing and 
municipal services, training centers, children's pre-school, 
medical, health-improvement and other institutions), including 
ones for the conducting of all types of repair and maintenance 
of such facilities to he extent that this is not covered by 
their operating revenues (apartment payments, parents' payments 
for a child's maintenance in a kindergarten, payments for the 
cost of travel and the like). Lease payments for the indicated 
facilities in instances when they are used under the terms of a 
lease. 
  62. Capital-type expenditures for installing security and 
fire-alarm systems and lines for communications equipment. 
Expenditures for maintaining a bank's own security service, 
including outlays for equipment and the acquisition of firearms 
and other special protection equipment. 
  63. Obligatory allotments made by a bank to state 
extra-budgetary funds, as part of the expenditures for the 
workers' wages, paid for through the profits remaining at the 
bank's disposal. 
  64. Allotments made by a bank to non-state pension funds for 
voluntary medical insurance and other types of voluntary 
insurance. A bank's outlays associated with the voluntary 
insuring of banking transactions and services. 
  65. A bank's expenditures for advertising, business-trip and 
representation expenditures and for compensation for 
expenditures for the use of personal automobiles for official 
trips, as well as for training personnel and enhancing the 
skills of the bank's workers, which exceed those established in 
accordance with existing norms and standards legislation. 
  66. Outlays associated with the conducting of checks of a 
bank's activities, carried out on the initiative of one or 
several of the bank's founders (stockholders and shareholders). 
  67. Outlays for implementing measures for protecting the 
health of a bank's workers and organizing their time off 
(payments for travel for treatment and rest, excursions and 
trips, sports activities, attendance at cultural performances 
and sports events, expenditures for organizing and maintaining 
rest accommodations, water-carbonation plants and other similar 
expenditures). Outlays for holding presentations and anniversary 
and holiday festivities. Payments to workers for subscriptions 
to newspapers and magazines (with the exception of special ones) 
and travel tickets, the acquisition of goods for their personal 
use and other similar payments and expenditures. 
  68. Outlays for work (services), performed by a bank or paid 
for by it, not associated with banking activities (civic 
improvements for cities and settlements, rendering assistance to 
agriculture and law-enforcement agencies and other similar 
expenditures). Expenditures for charity, for rendering 
assistance to public organizations and funds, health-care, 
cultural, educational and sports institutions and for other 
charitable purposes. 
  The expenditures indicated in Items 60, 61 and 68 of this 
statute shall be paid using the profits remaining at a bank's 
disposal, with the exception of that portion of them which is 
subject to preferential treatment in accordance with the RF Law 
on the Profits Tax for Enterprises and Organizations. 
  69. Expenditures for covering price differences for goods 
(work or services) given by a bank to workers, including those 
associated with the organization of nourishment for the bank's 
workers. 
  70. Compensation for the difference in interest for loans 
given to a bank's workers in instances when the level of the 
interest rates for such loans is lower than that used by the 
bank for outside clients. Compensation for the difference during 
the selling of cash foreign currency, including the sale of 
currency to the bank's workers, at an exchange rate much lower 
than that established on this day for outside buyers. 
  This does not pertain to loans issued using the net profits 
and a foreign currency acquired using the net profits and sold 
to associates at a favorable exchange rate. 
  71. Dividend payments to a bank's stockholders 
(shareholders). 
  72. Expenditures associated with a bank's organization of 
branches and representation offices, including ones abroad. 
  73. Tax payments for transactions involving securities 
acquired as a bank's property and other taxes and fees paid in 
accordance with legislation using funds remaining at the bank's 
disposal after payment of the profits tax. 
  74. Interest paid on overdue interbank credits, including 
centralized credits and overdrafts. 
  75. Payments to enterprises, organizations and institutions, 
including trade enterprises, for cash money turned in by them to 
the banks. 
  76. Amounts submitted to a budget in the form of sanctions 
in 
accordance with legislation. 
  77. Other expenditures not indicated in Section II of this 
statute. 

