Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with 'Abd-al-Malil al-Mikhlafi, secretary general </F>
of Unified Nasirite Organization [UNO], by 'Adnan al-Sahili, in 
Yemen; date not given: "The Conflict Is About Building the State 
and Not About Unity"] 
  [Text] Tripoli--Delegations representing various political 
powers in Yemen participated in the business of the meeting of 
the Arab Democratic Revolutionary Dialogue in the Libyan capital 
last month. The most prominent delegation was that of the 
Unified People's Nasirite Organization, which is headed by the 
secretary general of the Organization, 'Abd-al-Malik 
al-Mikhlafi, whom the general conference of the Organization 
elected during its convening last month. 
  AL-SAFIR met with al-Mikhlafi and interviewed him about 
organizational issues and about the imminent dangers for Yemen: 
  [AL-SAFIR] Recently, your organization held its general 
conference and elected new leadership. In what context did this 
change take place? 
  [Al-Mikhlafi] The Unified People's Nasirite Organization is 
an organization deeply rooted in Yemen. It is more than 28 years 
old. The last conference that talked about it was the Eighth 
National General Conference of the Organization. It was held in 
Sanaa from the 23-27 of last November. It was a Nasirite, 
national, patriotic rally attended by a large number of 
representatives of parties, Yemeni political organizations, and 
representatives of Nasirite organizations and parties in the 
Arab Homeland. 
  The conference was considered a democratic rally, and a 
unified rally, because it was held in the atmosphere of the 
political crisis and, therefore, the Nasirites assured 
throughout it their adherence to Yemeni unity. It was also 
considered a democratic rally because it reflected democracy in 
the Organization through the conference taking place across the 
domestic elections, which began in the basic units in the 
villages, and are interconnected at the governorates level. The 
National General Conference concluded with the elections of the 
Central Committee of the Organization and the secretariat 
general through the Central Committee. 
  In this conference, a central committee of 91 members that 
combined branches of the Organization in the governorates and 
abroad was elected. And, for the first time, Nasirite women in 
the Central Committee participated in it, where four Nasirite 
women were elected as basic members, in addition to five elected 
as candidate members. The conference reflected the 
organizational and popular weight of the Organization and 
assured the place of the Nasirite organization as one of four 
main organizations in the country and as a fourth party, in 
addition to the three parties in the government. It is 
absolutely the most prominent Yemeni opposition party. 
  [AL-SAFIR] Is the conference considered a stopping place in 
the ending of the differences between the Nasirites in Yemen on 
the course towards unification of their ranks, or are the 
previous differences still continuing? 
  [Al-Mikhlafi] It is certain that what you are referring to 
in 
terms of differences was the remainder of the period of 
repression that the Nasirites faced, i.e., the period of 
bisection, since the two previous bisected systems with a 
unionist mentality tried to beat down and fragment the Nasirites 
and tried to fabricate Nasirite names on the periphery of the 
Unified People's Nasirite Organization. But, by the testimony of 
the press in Yemen, including the official press, the conference 
was a plebiscite to the fact that this organization represents 
the Nasirites in Yemen, that it was the end to all the naming 
that the governing parties fabricated with the goal of 
fragmenting the Nasirite movement and beating it down, and 
especially that the conference reflected the reality of the 
Nasirite organization's unity in Yemen. 
  [AL-SAFIR] Is it possible for your success in Yemen to be 
reflected by the Nasirite position on the general Arab level? 
  [Al-Mikhlafi] It is certain if the Nasirites in the whole 
Arab homeland arrived at rebuilding their position, as happened 
in Yemen, with a new spirit and new methods in organizational 
and political action, it is possible that this conference, which 
representatives of a number of Nasirite parties attended, would 
be a beginning of the awakening of Nasirite action in general. 
  We were aiming in Yemen at presenting a new Nasirite model 
that is dependent upon wide political action, people's action, 
and open action and also on the forming of democratic methods in 
political action that guarantee the solidifying of 
organizational Nasirite action. We presented this model to all 
the political powers and to our Nasirite brothers in the rest of 
the Arab homeland. We believe that the Nasirite participation 
from the Arab homeland in the conference represents a special 
state of awakening and that the statement that was issued about 
the Nasirite organizations participating in the conference 
entitled "A Call to the Nation" was expressing this state. These 
various private Nasirite organizations that are now working 
publicly and legally, along with the other Nasirite 
organizations that are still working under the shadow of 
repression, agreed on more ordering of the advancement of 
Nasirite work and the creation of national Nasirite institutions 
arranging Nasirite work on the basis of public, democratic, and 
legal action. 
  [AL-SAFIR] These days Yemen is witnessing a fierce conflict 
between its governing parties. So, are the fears about the unity 
of Yemen and about the democracy in Yemen real fears? 
  [Al-Mikhlafi] The conflicts present in Yemen stir up some 
internal anxiety, but they arouse more fears abroad. Maybe it's 
that most people don't realize the nature of the political 
conditions in Yemen. 
  It is true that the present political crisis is deep, and it 
is deeper than any crisis that the country has gone through 
since unity. But, in my estimation, the fears about Yemeni unity 
don't reach the degree that is presented abroad in view of the 
fact that the conflict taking place in Yemen concerns the 
building of the state, and not unity. All the political powers 
agree on the difference of their orientations no matter what 
their position in the conflict. However, unity is from the 
constants, which are not allowed to be violated, just as the 
political movement in the country is a united movement and there 
is not a northern party and another southern that can be said to 
be representing this or that part of the country. But, maybe 
because the sides of the conflict become stronger with old 
devices, bisecting devices, it appears sometimes that the 
conflict has a direct relationship to unity. But, it is my 
estimation that the conflict revolves around the building of the 
state. Maybe this is where there is agreement among the various 
Yemenis on the multiplicity of their intellectual and political 
memberships, namely that whatever happens can lead to a better 
way out on the issue of building the single state and on the 
issue of consolidating democracy. This doesn't create real 
dangers to unity, but rather the dangers would come if the 
conflict didn't enter into a far-reaching stage in the dialogue 
that is prevailing now. Yemenis agree that dialogue and peaceful 
methods are the tools of management of the conflict. If this 
dialogue deviates from its course, and is substituted by 
violence and non-dialogue methods, it is possible that dangers 
will form, not dangers to Yemeni unity in the old sense, but to 
all of Yemen. 
  In my estimation, Yemen, if it doesn't close the dialogue 
and 
put an end to this crisis, may enter into a whirlpool of civil 
war and violence which may not lead to redividing into two parts 
as before, but will lead to the fragementation of Yemen more 
than it was fragmented before unity. Likewise, the various 
political powers including the National Block for the Opposition 
that forms the spine of the Unified Nasirite Organization, are 
exerting great efforts to keep the conflict in the sphere of 
peaceful and democratic dialogue. If it remains in this 
framework, as is happening today, the differences circulating in 
Yemen now could form a positive turning point for the good of 
building a modern Yemeni state, a state of order and law, as 
most of the political powers in the country are demanding now. 
It could also strengthen the journey of democracy, especially 
through the demands, on which there is partial agreement, for 
the strengthening of local government and election of directors 
of the provinces and the chief officers of the governorates and 
the encouragement of democracy in the country. 
  [AL-SAFIR] Are there certain general rules for the 
preservation of the unity of Yemen? 
  [Al-Mikhlafi] In my estimation, the unity of the political 
movement and the presence of political action along all of Yemen 
forms a measure of the control. Furthermore, the state of 
popular, national, and political agreement with regard to unity 
is one of the fundamental invariables, violation of which is not 
permitted. 
  Here I point out that some of the papers that were presented 
concerning the subject of establishing a federalist state in 
Yemen were confronted by strong rejection from all the political 
powers whatever movement they belong to, which confirms the 
adherence of all Yemenis to unity. 
  [AL-SAFIR] Is there a possibility available to the hostile 
powers for arousing certain considerations in order to provoke 
sedition in Yemen? 
  [Al-Mikhlafi] It is certain that the powers hostile to 
Yemeni 
unity and the adjacent reactionary powers played [a role] 
throughout the last period and exploited the atmosphere of the 
crisis for the sake of stirring up ailing struggles. So, they 
presented issues like the North and the South, the oppression of 
the Northern minority by the Southern majority, and the 
Zaidites, Shafiitics, and the Bedouin subdivisions. However, in 
my estimation, there is a popular consciousness that rejects 
ailing presentations such as this. 
  There is a conviction of those who raise these slogans, and 
all the political organizations and all the conferences and the 
festivals confirm the adherence to Yemeni unity and the 
rejection of ailing struggles, and especially the Yemeni people, 
among whom, practically speaking, sectarian conflicts are not 
found, but rather, political ones. There is an attempt to raise 
these slogans with the goal of creating a state of division in 
Yemeni society, but they are judged and rejected and the 
political and partisan movement and the elite that represents 
the Yemeni people are unified on the sectarian and regional 
level, and sectarian or regional or Bedouin movements are not 
found existing in independent entities. In my estimation, these 
designs will continue to provoke and incite ailing struggles and 
will exploit some of their minor men present in Yemen. However, 
there is a trust in the existence of a popular consciousness 
that rejects suggestions like this. 
  [AL-SAFIR] Do you see that this conflict is related to 
developments that the Arab region is witnessing, where the 
creation of a problem for every Arab country is taking place? 
  [Al-Mikhlafi] Yemeni unity has been targeted since its 
establishment, especially from Saudi Arabia and the Gulf States. 
This targeting was strengthened by the Gulf Crisis and the 
Yemeni popular position that rejected foreign interference in 
the crisis and, therefore, what resulted from this situation in 
terms of the expulsion of one andone-half million Yemenis from 
the Gulf States and Saudi Arabia, defining what formed the 
wearing economic crisis in Yemen. It was also reflected in the 
framework of the political crisis, in addition to the presence 
of a number of centers of power and influential people and 
elements linked to the neighboring countries in the region that 
play a role in starting the crisis and increasing the sharpness 
of the conflict in Yemen. Thus, what is happening in the region 
is not far from what is happening in Yemen also, in terms of a 
crisis having the goal of shattering this unity and making the 
countries enter into a whirlpool that will no doubt be reflected 
in the whole peninsula region and the Gulf considering that 
Yemen is the largest country of the region and the most densely 
populated, which could make the Arab region in all of the 
peninsula and the Gulf enter into a whirlpool. There is no doubt 
that it serves the plans that want to rearrange the situation of 
the Arab nation for the good of the Zionist project or what is 
called the Middle Eastern order. 
  [AL-SAFIR] What is your opinion of the stopping points that 
the Arab-Israeli negotiations have arrived at and the current 
peace projects? 
  [Al-Mikhlafi] The position of the Unified People's Nasirite 
Organization does not differ from the position of the Nasirite 
trend in all the Arab countries. It is the position that has 
refused the settlement path from the beginning and the position 
that judged and assessed properly the Gaza-Jericho agreement as 
an agreement that abandons the Palestinian issue, strengthens 
the Zionist project, supports the setting up of what is called 
Greater Israel, and sends out the American call for the 
establishment of the Middle East order. 
  Second, ai the level of action, the Unified People's 
Nasirite 
Organization was the first and the most prominent of the 
organizations that was moved in the Yemeni arena to express its 
rejection to the Gaza-Jericho agreement and the settlement path. 
It mobilized the widest popular support for its position. This 
position of the Yemeni people, who expressed their rejection of 
the agreement, agitated the sides of the settlement and 
especially the influential leadership in the PLO. 
  Third, the Eighth National General Conference of the 
Organization consisted of a national rally for the conviction of 
the Gaza-Jericho agreement. Was it because of the attendance, 
which was limited to all those rejecting the agreement, or 
because of the slogans of the conference and the calls that were 
sent out in it? Thus, we consider that the settlement paths, 
whose most prominent last stopping place was the Gaza-Jericho 
agreement, are targeting the [Arab] nation and its awakening and 
cultural project. There is no choice before any Arab except the 
fighting of this project, which aims at the [Arab] nation and 
its existence, the fighting of all the normalization plans and 
whatever calls for a Middle Eastern order, the overthrowing of 
this despicable and humiliating agreement, the strengthening of 
the Palestinian intifadah by every nationalistic means, and the 
success of the Arab cultural project. 

