Language: <F P=105> Persian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Mashhad, ABRAR Correspondent -- Hojjat ol-Eslam 
Sobhani-Niya, member of the Speaker's Council and Majles deputy 
from Nishabur, discussed His Holiness Ayatollah Khamene'i's 
guidance concerning the policies of the Second Five-Year Plan 
yesterday morning before a gathering of reporters after a 
meeting of the Khorasan Province Administrative Council. 
  Our correspondent reports that he said: In this plan, 
emphasis has been given to social justice, strengthening the 
values of the revolution, transferring economic institutions to 
the people and sound management. 
  The full text of the exalted leader's views, which was given 
to reporters by Hojjat ol-Eslam Sobhani-Niya, is as follows: 
  1. Observing social justice-- 
  A. Best division of public resources. 
  B. Collecting taxes based on income. 
  J. Legal and serious support for society's oppressed 
classes in areas that pertain to services from the government 
and the judiciary. [sentence as published] 
  D. Giving more attention and aid to the deprived and rural 
areas in various areas, especially the creation of health care 
employment and expanding classroom and educational space. 
  R. Adopting measures suitable for preventing the 
accumulation of inflated wealth and creating employment 
observing regional talents and priorities. [sentence as 
published] 
  S. Expanding and improving the social security system. 
[sentence as published] 
  2. Reinforcing and promoting the values of the revolution in 
providing financial and government resources by giving priority 
to those who use these resources to develop the country and 
promote growth of the revolutionary and Islamic values, and to 
those who have made great effort to strengthen the revolution 
and the Islamic government, such as those who have sacrificed, 
combatants and basijis. 
  3. Expanding domestic production, especially in the area of 
agriculture, meeting society's basic needs and decreasing 
imports of consumer and unnecessary goods, along with increasing 
the quality of the nation's products and expanding nonoil 
exports. 
  4. Correcting and reforming the administrative and judicial 
system until a situation is reached where the Five-Year Plan is 
implemented properly to reach its goals by (a) reducing volume, 
(b) increasing activity and efficiency, (c) employing worthy, 
religious and committed managers, (d) preparing the needed laws, 
and (r) preparing a system of supervision and reducing ethical 
shortcomings such as working too little, taking bribes, 
indifference in the performance of duties and shuffling paper. 
  5. Giving the necessary attention to the social sectors and 
expanding their share in the Five-Year Plan. 
  6. Directing all executive and propaganda activities towards 
spiritual growth and ethical excellence in society by (a) 
deepening and expanding sensitivities and religious belief, (b) 
spreading revolutionary values, (c) preserving human dignity, 
(d) creating law and order and a spirit of work, effort and 
self-sufficiency, (r) concern for and prevention of waste, 
consumerism and excess. 
  7. Observing priorities in infrastructure and 
noninfrastructure investment with the goal of completing the 
chain of production for domestic consumption and exports and 
eliminating the nation's need for foreign countries in major 
consumer goods and basic needs, completing semicompleted 
projects, meeting the nation's minimum defense needs, preventing 
investment in areas that are not compatible with these goals and 
cause the waste of capital or the loss of resources. 
  8. Attention to and serious concern for public participation 
in the nation's construction and observing the following points 
in affairs pertaining to the transfer of economic institutions 
to the people-- 
  A. Transferring assets to meet the goals of the plan and 
not for personal goals. 
  B. Working within the framework of the Constitution. 
  J. It must not threaten national security or undermine the 
rule of Islamic and revolutionary values. [sentence as published] 
  D. It must not undermine the system of government, undercut 
the rights of the people or create monopolies. 
  R. Attention must be given to sound management. [sentence 
as published] 
  9. The necessary measures must be taken for worthy and 
continuous supervision of the implementation of the Five-Year 
Plan and preventing the implementation of personal taste. 
  10. Strengthening the nation's defense foundation to the 
extent needed and limiting the policies that are announced. 
  11. Observing the following points in monetary and banking 
policy-- 
  A. The gradual elimination of domestic borrowing. 
  B. Taking the necessary measures to revive the tradition of 
interest-free loans in the nation's banking system. 
  J. Facilitating access to credit for those who have the 
working, intellectual, and technical abilities. [sentence as 
published] 
  D. Taking the measures necessary to keep the country from 
taking foreign loans and making efforts for gradual release from 
current commitments. 
  12. Observing the Islamic Republic's announced principles in 
foreign policy and emphatic attention to honor, wisdom and our 
interests. 

