Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Chris Patten, governor of Hong Kong: "The </F>
Letter and the Spirit"] 
  [Text] Hong Kong -- A few months ago, one of Hong Kong's 
pro- China newspapers published a series of supplements which 
purported to chronicle Britain's departure from Empire. The 
authorised Beijing version told a story of imperial cunning, in 
which Britain's whole conspiratorial purpose had been to prolong 
her influence through delayed-action detonation of chaos 
wherever the Queen's writ had once run. Now, allegedly, we are 
doing the same in Hong Kong. 
  It's a bizarre view of our colonial history: a history in 
which we laid down the imperial burden with so little fuss and 
such genial intentions to install and safeguard the institutions 
of a plural society. 
  In Hong Kong, we are bringing the story almost to an end. 
Hong Kong, of course, is unlike our other colonies. Though no 
one could doubt the capacity of this great city, it has never 
enjoyed the prospect of independence. History and geography 
have spelt out another future, the assumption of Chinese 
sovereignty in 1997. This has determined and constrained 
political and institutional development in the territory. While 
it has been governed under the eyes of Parliament at 
Westminster, its own democratic evolution has been limited by 
its historic destination. In the 1940s and 1950s, proposals 
that would have given Hong Kong similar democratic institutions 
to those being established elsewhere in our Empire were rudely 
halted by noises from the north which warned against any 
political course of action which might encourage the community 
to think that it could determine its own future. 
  So democracy was never really on the agenda until we came to 
negotiate the terms of the transfer of sovereignty. At the 
heart of those negotiations was the promise that, while China's 
flag would be run up over Hong Kong on 1 July 1997, the 
community itself would enjoy a high degree of autonomy and would 
keep its way of life. 'One country, two systems' was Deng 
Xiaoping's vision--a goal which Hong Kong and Britain could 
readily share. 
  The Joint Declaration -- the treaty signed by Britain and 
China -- spelt out Hong Kong's freedoms and values and the way 
to secure them. It promised an executive answerable to the 
legislature, and a legislature wholly composed through election. 
Admittedly, it did not say those elections should be open and 
fair. Could anyone at the negotiating table have thought 
otherwise? Nor did it spell out how these elections should be 
conducted. 
  Here lies the nub of our present argument with China. Some 
people--including almost every directly elected legislator 
here-- think we should be arguing with China about quickening 
the pace of democracy in Hong Kong. I understand why they think 
this, but do not believe that this would have been a possible 
option so late in the day. The principle of a growing degree of 
democracy is already agreed with China, and set out in the Basic 
Law--China's mini- constitution for Hong Kong after 1997. What 
we are in effect debating is whether or not the agreed process 
of democratisation should be credible and fair. It was with 
that aim that we put forward in October 1992 very modest 
proposais (which we were always willing to discuss with China) 
on the detailed electoral arrangements for Hong Kong in 1994 and 
1995. 
  Let me summarise where we are, just over a year after we 
first put forward these ideas. We did not dream up this issue 
at the last moment. By mid-1992, the precise voting 
arrangements for the last elections under British sovereignty 
had not been agreed, presumably because they were extremely 
difficult. According to independent legal advisers giving 
evidence to the Commons Foreign Affairs Select Committee, our 
plans are wholly consistent with Britain's agreements and 
understandings with China. In over 160 hours of talks with 
Beijing, we have offered conditionally to change our proposals 
but have seen no similar offer of concession or accommodation 
from the other side of the table. Now, with time running out 
and the first of a three-part series of elections less than a 
year away, we have introduced legislation to deal with the least 
contentious parts of our plan. Despite Chinese hostility to a 
course of action which they know is necessary to meet the 
legislative timetable, we still want to continue negotiating 
about the more awkward items of the electoral arrange ments on 
which, alas, no progress has been made in seven months of 
negotiation. 
  Through a year of harsh statements from Beijing, the 
majority 
of people in Hong Kong have remained calm and supportive of our 
approach. And opinion in Britain -- in Parliament and outside 
it -- has remained largely supportive, too. But some criticisms 
have been raised--as you would expect in an open and free 
society--both in Britain and Hong Kong. 
  First, there are those who argue that somehow our 
difficulties with China all coincided with the arrival of the 
author as Governor of Hong Kong. I acknowledge that I have a 
vested interest here, but have to beg to differ. It is no 
criticism at all of my predecessor to point out that the log-jam 
of issues in the Joint Liaison Group, and the difficulties over 
Hong Kong's new airport, pre-dated my hatless disembarkation. 
Indeed, most would say that the current uneasy relationship 
with China goes back to Tiananmen Square and the reaction of 
Hong Kong people to that event. 
  Second, some contend that we should not imperil the wider 
Sino-British relationship -- particularly the trade relationship 
--by disagreements with China over Hong Kong. But Hong Kong is 
the largest single component in that relationship, and the most 
important one. Our responsibilities to Hong Kong's citizens 
must come first. In the longer term, our standing in China and 
Asia is likely to be strongly affected by how decently we 
undertake our responsibilities in Hong Kong. There is no 
reason, in any case, why disagreements over Hong Kong should 
affect the wider relationship. China would be foolish indeed if, 
as she seeks to enter the Gatt, she were to choose to 
discriminate against British trade. China's President Jiang 
Zemin rightly argued to President Clinton at their recent summit 
that politics and trade should be kept separate; what's true in 
Seattle is just as true in Beijing. 
  Nor should we think that there is an arithmetical 
relationship between diplomatic harmony and economic benefits, 
desirable as both may be. From the mid-Eighties until last 
year, we actually saw a steady fall in our exports to China and 
a rise in China's exports to Britain. A surplus for Britain has 
turned into a two-to-one surplus for China. In 1993, at last, 
our exports actually started to rise sharply again. 
  Third, some people suggest (a touch undiplomatically) that 
China is capable of behaving thuggishly if she doesn't get her 
own way; and that we should therefore do whatever she wants 
after a suitably decorous effort to put our own point of view. 
If necessary, we can always mask retreat on a matter of 
substance with some gracefully opaque form of words. You don't 
have to summon from history craven examples of this attitude to 
reject it. We have responsibilities to Hong Kong. They are 
incorporated in the Joint Declaration. When ministers signed 
the Joint Declaratio n-- and Parliament endorsed it -- they took 
the view, reasonably enough, that it meant what it so eloquently 
said. The gradual development of democracy in Hong Kong has 
been a consistent aim of the British Government since 1984. As 
Richard Luce put it in the House of Commons in December that 
year: `We all fully accept that we should build up a firmly 
based democratic administration in Hong Kong in the years 
between now and 1997.' Or as Geoffrey Howe expressed it in 
1989: `We have always sought to develop representative 
government in line with the wishes of the community as a whole 
and to ensure that what is achieved under British administration 
is firm and durable.' I take that view too, and am trying to 
make sure this treaty, to which Britain put her name, is 
implemented--to the letter and in the spirit. 
  Fourth, it is argued that if only we weren't having today's 
argument with China, all in Hong Kong would be peace and 
harmony. But how much stability would we have earned ourselves 
through a rotten deal which compromised Hong Kong's electoral 
arrangements? We could have spent our last years of sovereignty 
defending the indefensible against every pro-democracy 
politician in Hong Kong and against critical or cynical opinion 
at Westminster and world-wide. Events between now and 1997 would 
have made life increasingly uncomfortable for a government which 
would have lost its authority. 
  Fifth, there is the patronising argument that people in Hong 
Kong are only interested in money; that they don't care about 
democracy; and that clean elections are irrelevant to Hong 
Kong's long-term prosperity as her economy converges with that 
of the Chinese hinterland. 
  Naturally, Hong Kong families want peace and quiet, like 
families everywhere else. But whenever they have been given the 
chance they have voted for more democracy, not less. Their 
aspirations are modest and they are moderately expressed, yet 
they clearly recognise that what makes Hong Kong special, what 
makes it unique, is the rule of law and the freedoms of a plural 
society. A decently elected legislature is a part of that 
fabric. If there is no level playing- field for the 
legislature, what chance of a level playing-field elsewhere -- 
in business, for example? The promise that Hong Kong people 
will run Hong Kong after 1997, with a substantial degree of 
autonomy, hardly squares with efforts to install an electoral 
system which would give Beijing tight control. 
  We hear one other argument against behaving decently. It 
tends to come from those who used to urge Britain to stand 
taller for democracy, until, that is, China started to shout the 
odds. What matters, we are told, is freedom not democracy -- 
freedom of speech, freedom of economic choice, freedom under the 
law. Standing up for fair elections may risk these freedoms. 
  But what sort of freedom would Hong Kong have if its 
citizens 
didn't have the freedom to make a real choice in the 
polling-booth? What fair economic choice is there when there is 
no fearless legislative opponent of corruption? Can we really 
expect freedom of speech and of the press to survive long if 
there is no freedom to express political views in a fairly 
elected legislature? It is not the argument for democracy which 
these critics regard as a step too far, but the determination to 
stand up for Hong Kong. 
  We will continue to try to persuade the Chinese to return to 
the negotiating table. If we fail, we shall have to work out 
with the people of Hong Kong, through the Legislative Council, 
the best arrangements for securing limited democracy. We won't 
be able to go further than they are prepared to go, but nor 
should we go less far. Of course, it is true that we could put 
in place arrangements for the 1994 and 1995 elections and see 
them cast aside by China after 1997 in its first act of 
sovereignty. Beijing officials last month once again threatened 
to do precisely this--in blatant contradiction of their own 
post-1997 constitution for Hong Kong. But the argument that 
China may act against Hong Kong's interests (and its own) in the 
future cannot be a persuasive argument for us to do the same 
today. Moreover, if we have a credible system, why should China 
want to remove from elected office in 1997 men and women who 
will have been elected by their fellow citizens? This is hardly 
the best way of winning hearts and minds. 
  Hong Kong has been a spectacular success story--largely the 
result of Shanghainese and Cantonese entrepreneurialism combined 
with the values of a plural society. Provided this combination 
survives the transition through 1997, Hong Kong should be 
uniquely placed to contribute further to China's successful 
opening up to the world. Hong Kong should be able to play a 
similar role for China at the beginning of the next century to 
that played by New York for the United States at the opening of 
this one. It is set to be the merchant bank and the business 
centre for the region; if, that is, China learns to trust Hong 
Kong and not to treat it with truculent suspicion. 
  In the next three and a half years, we still have to try to 
dispel that cloud of suspicion while China itself is going 
through a period of accelerating change. That task will not be 
easy. I believe we can do it, so long as we are prepared when 
necessary to stand up for Hong Kong and not assume that its 
interests in either the short or long term are best served by 
bending to every wind from the north. 

