Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Defense Minister Imrich Andrejcak by Martin </F>
Hric; place and date not given: "Concerning Information In and 
Out of Uniform"] 
  [Text] The government approved a long-awaited 
document--the Slovak Defense Doctrine--last week. We asked 
Defense Minister Imrich Andrejcak for an interview on not only 
this document, but also some of the allegations that have been 
made recently. 
  [Hric] Mr. Minister, the six-page text of the doctrine and 
its characteristic features suggest that this is more of a 
political document than a military-strategic one. Is this in 
order? 
  [Andrejcak] It is, after all, an exclusively political 
document. It expresses our aims and objectives. I think that 
the world accepts these principles and that Central Europe will 
be a region of peace. 
  [Hric] Have other states also drafted a defense doctrine in 
such a form? For instance, as far as we are aware, the 
Hungarian doctrine is of a more specific nature from which the 
structure and deployment of the Army evolve. 
  [Andrejcak] It is impossible to assume a direct link between 
the published text of the Defense Doctrine and the specific 
activity of the Army. Military experts react to this political 
manifestation of the state's will by adopting specific technical 
and organizational measures and by creating the financial and 
material resources necessary for peace time and a possible 
conflict. 
  [Hric] The fact of the matter is, we are drafting a defense 
doctrine in Slovakia for the first time. Until now, we have 
always accepted them from our powerful patrons--the French, the 
Germans, and the Soviets. 
  [Andrejcak] Such a comprehensively formulated military 
doctrine is unique in the postcommunist states and is also rare 
in the rest of the world. As a rule, to me, this doctrine 
outlines the ideas, views, and activities--their 
declarations--of the state's political and military 
representatives. 
  [Hric] Is it at all practical to devise a military doctrine 
without formulating the possible risks and dangers? Although we 
can imagine the diplomatic fireworks, what would happen then? 
  [Andrejcak] We have defined precisely the internal and 
external risks in the Principles for the Slovak Republic's 
National Security. However, no states are mentioned there 
because we declare our interest in friendship with all states on 
the basis of equality. For this reason, I do not think it is 
necessary, even in this document, to identify the cardinal 
points. Soldiers have to be able to react to any potential 
threat to the state, regardless of the direction from which it 
comes. However, this is a question of military strategy and of 
military craft, which is not promulgated in public documents. 
  [Hric] A too strong army, as well as a weak one, is also a 
source of instability. The former arouses anxiety, while the 
latter arouses the ambitions of neighbors. Do you think our 
Army has reached the exact level of so-called reasonable 
sufficiency? 
  [Andrejcak] The concept of "reasonable sufficiency" evolved 
during the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact when the treaty on 
conventional armed forces was being drafted. A means of 
reducing the disproportionally high number of weapons in Europe 
and of maintaining the certitude of equal security for states 
was being sought. The number of troops and weapon systems 
proceeds from the extent of the territory and size of the 
population of this or that state. This principle and term were 
also used during the division of the former Czechoslovak Army. 
The 2:1 ratio corresponds to the size of our population and the 
extent of our territory. However, the treaty allows us to have 
slightly higher numbers than a proportional NATO member would 
have. We have a permitted ceiling of 46,000 officers and men; 
if we were to reach the level of the Netherlands or Belgium, we 
could reduced the number of personnel to 35,000. If Central 
Europe reduces the number of personnel to below the level set by 
the treaty on conventional weapons, we will also reduce our 
numbers. 
  You are right. A weak army is, on the whole, a pointless 
waste of money--as is too strong an army. The principle of 
sufficiency proceeds from the certitude of a potential adversary 
that, in an assault, he would suffer such major losses that, 
compared with the possible gains, it would not be worth starting 
one at all. However, it is not necessary to have a 1:1 ratio 
for this; it is also possible to defend oneself with smaller 
forces. 
  [Hric] One of the reservations of Mr. Slota was that, during 
the division of the Federal Army, we did not immediately proceed 
with restructuring the division system into the more efficient 
brigade system. Was this realistic? What is the situation in 
other states? 
  [Andrejcak] Some people see the brigade system as a 
condition for our entry into NATO. This is not true. Countries 
coexist within NATO with either system. The future of the Army 
lies in the brigade system for completely different reasons. 
These include the geopolitical position of our state, the 
possibilities for the troops' combat function, and the need for 
forces in individual directions. That is, smaller units than 
today's divisions are necessary but functional separately to 
conduct combat activity for several days. We could transfer to 
a brigade system today. However, we would be responsible for 
reducing Slovakia's defense capability. For instance, a brigade 
needs a communications system virtually at the level of a 
division. Until we resolve this issue, we can only form 
specialist brigades--which is not a transition to a brigade 
system. 
  [Hric] The issue of the home guard is brought up 
repeatedly; people here note that, in the United States, the 
National Guard almost copies the structure of the Army, 
including being equipped with pursuit aircraft. Could you 
reiterate the Defense Ministry's point of view? 
  [Andrejcak] No home guard unit is formed in peace time. In 
the event of a threat, it will be formed from the same caliber 
of people that complement the field army. The planned units are 
called territorial army units, but, if people desire the name 
"home guard," they can be renamed. The aims are the same, 
regardless of the name. However, it would make no sense at all 
to form such units in peace time, within the framework of the 
permitted numbers, to the detriment of the units that have far 
more complex equipment and training. 
  [Hric] Did Mr. Klepac not have something else in mind when 
he made this demand? 
  [Andrejcak] Certainly not. He made it at the time of the 
joint Federal Army so that the units on our territory would have 
a Slovak command. There is no reason now to create a new 
ministry or other command for the "home guard." Two systems 
cannot protect the same territory without cooperating with each 
other; that would be nonsense. 
  [Hric] Although Prime Minister Meciar repeatedly emphasized 
his satisfaction with the division of the Federal Army (as 
opposed to the division of the fleet, the airline, CEDOK, and so 
on), Mr. Slota has publicly aired his misgivings that you have 
filled Slovakia with military scrap. 
  [Andrejcak] I suggested to the two prime ministers before 
the division of the Army that they appoint commissioners. The 
governments then appointed commissioners for individual sectors. 
They supervised the calculations of the group attached to the 
General Staff, for which I was responsible. The commissioners 
approved the fundamental principle of division and the 
correctness of the calculations. This is a matter of the level 
of information. I warned the commissioners in advance that they 
will sign documents on the division, and, in the event that 
doubts are expressed, they have to be prepared to thoroughly 
defend them. I am convinced that these hundreds of people did a 
perfect job. It is necessary to identify a problem and then 
express an opinion on it. 
  [Hric] The Association of Slovak Soldiers repeatedly 
reproaches you for making alleged cuts of 400 million korunas, 
despite the shortage of apartments or resources for training. 
  [Andrejcak] This is another old wives' tale that I have to 
keep on explaining ad infinitum: We adhered to the rules set by 
the government; we did not keep even a heller for ourselves. 
The accounting term leaked out and was misinterpreted. After 
all, we could not keep any money in our account because, on the 
contrary, we had to borrow for the apartments. 
  [Hric] And, finally, according to opinion polls, as far as 
Slovakia's defense is concerned, 31 percent of the citizens 
trust the president, 17 percent trust your ministry, and only 3 
percent trust the government. Just 2.2 percent trust us 
journalists, so we have nothing to sneer about. 
  [Andrejcak] According to the periodic polls conducted by the 
Statistical Office, the Army as a whole is repeatedly in first 
or second place. We have our internal problems. These include, 
for example, bullying. However, when an 18-year-old youth has 
been getting away with it for years, he does not believe the 
commanders that this is punishable in the Army. We need to 
increase the feeling of patriotism and to get our commanders to 
be more exacting. Many commanders have jumped a couple of grades 
of management and have to learn. However, these are the Army's 
internal problems, and we will deal with them. 
  [Hric] Thank you. We will keep our fingers crossed for you. 

