Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial: "Drug Enforcement and International </F>
Cooperation"] 
  [Text] An important piece of news connected with drug 
enforcement has recently been revealed by our investigative 
unit, which has patiently matched information coming from the 
Attorney General's Office and the Foreign Ministry. 
  It is about the presence in Lima last December of three 
prosecutors from Naples, who came to our country to investigate 
alleged links between Peruvian drug trafficking gangs and 
criminals belonging to the sadly renowned "Camorra" of Naples. 
  Italian prosecutors Salvatore Sbrizzi, Guglielmo Palmieri, 
and Paolo Mancuso came to Peru exclusively to carry out an 
investigation that has no relation to other events of public 
domain [alleged bribes accepted by former President Alan Garcia 
from Italian companies to build a subway line in Lima] that also 
are being investigated by Peruvian and Italian courts. 
  The Italian attorneys, who are confronting an age-old 
criminal organization, are prosecuting a hundred criminals in 
Naples for crimes like "vendettas," murders, and, of course, 
drug trafficking committed on an international scale between 
1983 and 1990. 
  According to the information obtained by our newspaper, 
these 
criminal Italian organizations have contacted their Peruvian 
counterparts, which apparently include the gang headed by drug 
trafficker Reynaldo Rodriguez Lopez, known by police as "El 
Padrino." 
  The visiting prosecutors also are interested in the 
mysterious death some years ago of some Italian citizens in 
Lima. The local investigations have not found out their identity 
yet, the reason for their presence in Peru, the reason they were 
killed, or who killed them. 
  As is known, nothing concrete was found out in the official 
investigation. However, it is a well-known rumor that the 
murders were the result of a "settling of accounts" among drug 
traffickers; a rumor that no longer seems to be groundless. 
  An important detail that cannot be left out about these 
Italian prosecutors' trip to Peru is that they are here because 
they have never received a reply to rogatory letters they sent 
at the beginning of November requesting specific information 
about the crimes they are investigating. 
  Fortunately, the Peruvian Attorney General's Office seems to 
be more willing to help in the case. The Peruvian prosecutor 
assigned to the case not only accompanied them during their 
investigation but she also has prepared a long report with all 
the information requested by the visiting prosecutors. 
  It is significant to point out this aspect because 
determined 
cooperation among the police and judicial officials of the 
several countries involved in drug trafficking is an 
indispensable condition so that the struggle against these 
powerful criminal organizations that move vast resources with a 
major power of corruption will have positive and permanent 
results. 
  Our country, which for well-known reasons is assailed by 
that 
scourge in all its aspects, must be exemplary in helping and 
using this kind of cooperation. 

