Language: <F P=105>Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] The seventh working-level delegates contact for the 
exchange of top-level special envoys of the North and South was 
held on 16 March behind closed doors at Tongilgak in our side's 
area of Panmunjom. 
  After the end of the contact, our side's head delegate 
briefed domestic and foreign reporters on the contact on the 
spot. 
  In the contact, our side first of all talked about the 
justness of our broad-minded measure and proposal on announcing 
a joint communique at the sixth working-level delegates contact, 
and pointed out as follows on the South side's unreasonable 
position on rejecting the demand to announce the joint 
communique. 
  As already known, at the sixth working-level delegates 
contact, from the position to realize as soon as possible the 
exchange of special envoys of the North and South in whatever 
way and amid a good atmosphere, our side took a broad-minded and 
epoch-making measure by paying attention to the South side's 
expression on several occasions that it (?understands) the 
validity regarding the four just demands which we already put 
forth, even though it is insufficient. 
  Thus, a firm prospect was opened between the North and South 
for the exchange of special envoys. Henceforth, at the last 
contact our side put forth a constructive proposal to announce 
at home and abroad a joint communique that both sides 
reconfirmed the intention to exchange special envoys, and agreed 
to realize the exchange of special envoys as soon as possible. 
  Nevertheless, at that time, rather than showing a positive 
response to our sincere proposal, the South side assumed a 
self-complacent [toksonjogin] attitude and persistently opposed 
our proposal. Therefore, in today's contact, our side insisted 
that the South side return to the position of reconciliation and 
unity to accept our side's just proposal to announce the joint 
communique, tie the knot [maedup chitgo] on the discussion of 
the working procedures based on the agreement on the exchange of 
top-level special envoys of the North and South, which we put 
forth, and sign the agreement. 
  However, the South side again objected to our side's 
proposal repeating trite [kutae uiyonhan] words. Without any 
reason, the South side objected to our side's proposal to issue 
a joint communique stating that the two sides reconfirmed their 
will to exchange special envoys and decided to exchange special 
envoys at an earliest date, and to our suggestion that the 
questions of observing the principle of national independence, 
finalizing the method of national reunification, and of seeking 
after the great unity of the whole nation be stipulated in the 
draft agreement regarding the mission of the special envoys. 
  In connection with the South side's insincere attitude, our 
side expressed deep regret and disappointment, urged that if the 
South side has no intention to exchange special envoys or if it 
wants to give up it should say so, and strongly demanded a clear 
attitude without no further delay. 
  Drawing attention to the fact that the South side's minister 
of the National Unification Board [NUB] yesterday said that the 
working-level contact would end in failure, our side also 
pointed out that this remark itself shows a very dangerous 
position. Our side stressed that this is why we became more 
suspicious [uisim] over the South side's position on the special 
envoy exchange, and demanded the South side to show its clear 
attitude. 
  The South side avoided answering our side's reasonable 
assertion [sarijongyonhan chujang] and demands which are based 
on principle. 
  After the opening remarks, the two sides began discussions 
on 
the working procedures. Here, our side again refuted the fact 
that the South side is not accepting our side's just demand 
regarding the mission of special envoys. Asserting that 
independence is the life of the nation, our side questioned why 
the South side insists on objecting to defining the question of 
observing the principle of national independence as one of the 
missions of the special envoys, while the South side is far off 
the track [molli talsonhae innunde] of keeping an independent 
position. 
  Our side also questioned why the South side is afraid of 
the great unity of the nation and why it objects to this while 
it is necessary to seek after the great unity of the whole 
nation in order to achieve the nation's reunification, and 
demanded to define the missions of the special envoys in 
accordance with the nation's interest and the reality of 
North-South relations. 
  However, the South side arbitrarily [topo notko] took an 
attitude to object to this again without being able to give an 
acceptable reason. 
  Our side questioned why the South side asks [chongtak] the 
outside force to make the exchange of special envoys of the 
North and the South a precondition for the third round of 
DPRK-U.S. talks and why it uses the issue of the exchange of 
special envoys as a means to put a brake on and interfere with 
the DPRK-U.S. talks--shouldn't the South side live on its own 
decision in its right mind by now?--and urged it to answer the 
questions. 
  The South side kept avoiding answering the questions and 
insisted on working out the working procedures only in 
conformity with its proposal. 
  Our side pointed out that the South side's attitude in 
today's contact well proves that the hasty remark made by the 
South side's NUB minister that the working-level delegates 
contact will result in a failure is by no means a coincidence 
under the condition that it did not show sincerity in our 
broadminded and tolerant [taebomhagodo aryangitnun] position. 
Our side once again insisted that so as not to give any more 
disappointment to the nation, we should announce the fact in the 
form of a joint communique that both sides agreed to exchange 
special envoys as soon as possible, which is to give happiness 
to the nation. 
  Nevertheless, the South side made excuses regarding the 
remark by its side's NUB minister as a false report by 
reporters. It rejected to the end our proposal to announce a 
joint communique. 
  It was clearly proven in the process of the contact that if 
our side's position is to realize as soon as possible the 
exchange of special envoys in accordance with the nation's 
desire, the South side's position is to put the brakes on the 
third round of DPRK-U.S. talks by creating an artificial barrier 
in the discussion of the working procedures for the exchange of 
special envoys. 
  It was agreed that the eighth working-level delegates 
contact 
will be held on 19 March in the South side area of Panmunjom. 

