BFN 

  [Text] On Sunday [12 June] evening a Vietnamese Government 
delegation arrived on an official visit to Almaty led by Prime 
Minister Vo Van Kiet. At the airport, the delegation was 
welcomed by Prime Minister Tereshchenko and other officials. 
This morning, at the residence of the president of Kazakhstan, 
intimate talks were held between Nazarbayev and Vo Van Kiet. 
During the meeting it was noted that today the task is of not 
only restoring, but significantly broadening on a mutually 
beneficial basis of earlier existing ties between the two 
countries. The transition to a market economy is not simple, 
said the head of our state, and Kazakhstanis are interested in 
the experience of Vietnam in the restructuring of their economy. 
  Exchange of opinions showed that the stance of the sides 
coincides on many foreign political issues. In particular, the 
leadership of Vietnam absolutely supports the initiative of the 
president of Kazakhstan on the convocation of a conference on 
interaction and confidence-building measures in Asia, and is 
contributing to its implementation. No obstacles exist for 
development of bilateral relations, Vo Van Kiet said. They will 
facilitate a more successful overcoming of hardships that both 
states have. 
  On behalf of the president of Vietnam, Prime Minister Vo Van 
Kiet invited Nazarbayev to visit Vietnam on an official visit at 
his convenience. The head of Kazakhstan expressed his 
gratitude. Prime Minister Tereshchenko, his deputies Syzdyk 
Abishev and Galym Abilseitov, Foreign Minister Saudabayev, and 
other officials participated in the talks. 
  This afternoon, Prime Minister Tereshchenko held talks with 
Vo Van Kiet. He discussed those fields of cooperation that 
promise the best mutual benefit. The head of the Kazakh 
Government stressed the necessity of attracting foreign 
investors, taking into account interests of a third party. 
Investing foreign capitals in Kazakh industry, Kazakhstan could 
take care of Vietnam's interests, and Vietnam could take care of 
Kazakh interests. The Vietnamese prime minister put forward a 
proposal to set up an intergovernmental commission on economic 
cooperation. The Kazakh side received this proposal with 
interest. 
  As result of the talks a joint intergovernmental communique 
was signed. The outcome of the first working day of the visit 
of the Vietnamese delegation was summed up at a news conference 
held by Vietnamese Foreign Minister Nguyen Manh Cam. Within the 
framework of the visit to Kazakhstan of Vo Van Kiet, the prime 
minister of Vietnam, the Kazakh-Vietnamese consultations were 
held at the Foreign Ministry. The ministers agreed to develop a 
constant dialogue in order to maintain Kazakh-Vietnamese 
relations on a proper level. 

