BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by George Jones and Richard Savill: "Major Gives </F>
Sinn Fein Two-Week Deadline"] 
  [Text] Mr John Major and Mr Albert Reynolds, the Irish 
Prime Minister, last night told Sinn Fein that they were not 
"waiting around" for a response to the Downing Street 
declaration. The warning followed the first public signs of 
dissension within the republican movement over the peace process. 
  After 90 minutes of talks at No 10, the leaders appealed for 
an end to sectarian killings by the IRA and loyalist 
paramilitaries. They said Sinn Fein could have a "couple more 
weeks" to debate its response, provided there was a cessation of 
violence. 
  But they stressed the two Governments would not delay their 
own efforts to draw up a framework for political progress in 
Northern Ireland which is likely to be considered at an 
Anglo-Irish summit in London in July. 
  Mr Reynolds said: "We are not waiting around for any more 
prevarication on either side to stop the violence. We continue 
with our own business." 
  Earlier, Mr Gerry Adams, President of Sinn Fein, had 
promised 
a response to the Downing Street clarification after the 
European elections on June 9, raising hopes that progress was 
being made towards a settlement. 
  "I am quite convinced that what is going to come out of this 
process is a peace settlement," Mr Adams told BBC Radio 4's 
Today programme. 
  But the first signs of a potential rift within Sinn Fein 
emerged yesterday when the IRISH TIMES quoted a senior 
republican source in west Belfast as saying there was no 
possibility of Sinn Fein accepting the declaration, nor of the 
IRA calling a permanent cease-fire on the basis of the 
clarification provided by the Government. 
  Mr Richard McAuley, Sinn Fein's senior press officer, later 
acknowledged that some republicans were saying things that were 
harmful and "clearly at odds with the leadership". But he 
dismissed suggestions of a split: "We are only talking about a 
small number who do not represent the views of thousands of 
members of the party." 
  However, his comments were seen as an acknowledgement that a 
fierce debate is raging within the IRA leadership over the 
declaration, with some influential figures refusing to agree to 
an end to the 25-year terrorist campaign. 
  Ulster Unionists yesterday attacked Mr Adams for 
prevaricating over the declaration while the IRA's campaign of 
violence continued. 
  Mr Ken Maginnis, the Ulster Unionist security spokesman, 
said 
that Mr Adams might be preparing "a further cynical and very 
temporary cease-fire" in order to maximise the Sinn Fein vote in 
the European elections. 
  The British Government also remains sceptical about his 
remarks, believing they are little more than "politicking" 
before the elections. 
  Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Northern Ireland Secretary, told the 
Cabinet yesterday that Mr Adams had not advanced the peace 
process, nor had he answered the only question concerning 
people: When would the violence end? 
  At their meeting, Mr Major and Mr Reynolds discussed closer 
co-operation on cross-border security following last week's 
loyalist attack in Dublin. 
  They said progress was being made on a framework document 
grounded in the declaration and on talks with the constitutional 
parties-and would proceed with or without Sinn Fein. 

