Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Diplomatic Panorama" feature] </F>
  [Text] Leader of the Agrarian Party [AP] of Russia Mikhail 
Lapshin says Russian troops must continue to guard the 
Tajik-Afghan border. "If not, our external borders will soon lie 
just outside Moscow," he told Interfax. 
  While hailing Russia's peacemaking role in what Russian 
diplomats describe as "near abroad" countries (meaning former 
Soviet republics), the AP leader is skeptical about Russia's 
involvement in similar operations elsewhere. In his view, 
Russia should have stayed away from the UN peace mission in the 
former Yugoslavia after betraying its fellow Slavs, notably 
Serbs there. 
  Nor does Lapshin share the foreign ministry's position on 
Iraq. "Supporting US police actions is not Russia's business," 
he said, adding: "I have a vague idea of the ruling regime in 
Iraq, but regimes come and go while people stay on." 
  The electoral platform of the Agrarian Party, which consults 
on foreign policy issues with former Soviet Foreign Minister 
Aleksandr Bessmertnykh, did not contain a section on 
international affairs. There are two reasons to explain this, 
Lapshin said. One is the brevity of the election campaign. The 
other -- foreign policy issues as applied to the strategy and 
tactics of the Agrarian Party, place the need for independent 
but competent experts. In our view, should the AP find itself 
to be a tiny party in the new parliament, it ought to focus on 
the farming sector's problems alone, he said, but with broader 
representation, the party would elaborate its own approach to 
foreign policy issues. 
  Judging from Lapshin's interview, the AP's approaches appear 
to be shaping up. Our party, he said, sets great store by 
Russia's economic and political independence. On foreign policy 
matters, Lapshin said the AP would stick to the concept of the 
country's self reliance for food, which among other things, 
provides for government regulation of food imports. 

