Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by staff reporter Qin Jingwu (4440 0079 0582): </F>
"Rapidly Growing Maritime Industry in China"] 
  [Text] The vast oceans account for 71 percent of the 
earth's surface. The UN General Assembly once proposed that all 
nations take the development and utilization of the seas and 
oceans as a strategy for human society's economic development. 
  China has 18,000 kilometers of mainland coastline and 14,000 
kilometers of island coastline. The area of China's territorial 
seas is as large as one-third of its land territory. In the 
history of China's civilization of several thousand years, only 
such traditional industries as fishing, salt making, and 
maritime transportation were related to the seas and oceans. 
However, people with lofty ideals in China have made continuous 
explorations in the development of maritime resources. When 
history came to the beginning of reform and opening, in 1979, 
the output value of China's maritime industries was only 7.4 
billion yuan. Since then, however, the coastal and maritime 
areas' geographical and resource advantages have been gradually 
perceived by the Chinese people. In recent years, there has 
been substantial development of China's maritime industries, and 
great efforts have been made to intensively build the framework 
of maritime industries. 
<H5>  Opening--Coastal Areas Take the Lead </H5>
  In the early stage of reform and opening, people first found 
that the seas and oceans had the geographic advantage of facing 
the world. China first set up four special economic zones in 
coastal areas, and then opened up 14 coastal cities and set up a 
special economic zone on Hainan Island and developed a large 
number of coastal economic and technological development zones. 
Great efforts were made to build ports, develop foreign trade, 
attract foreign investment, and adopt advanced foreign 
technology.... 
  In the 1990's, China set up more than 10 bonded areas along 
the coastline, from Dalian to Hainan, in order to converge with 
international practice and promote the further development of 
the coastal economies. Now, the coastal provinces and 
municipalities, which account for 13 percent of the country's 
territory, produce 60 percent of the gross national product and 
feed 40 percent of the nation's comparatively wealthier 
population. The economy there is full of vigor and dynamism. 
<H5>  Development--Acquiring Wealth From the Seas and Oceans </H5>
  When making use of the coastal geographical advantages, many 
other areas have also further developed their marine resource 
advantages. From the mouth of the Yalu Jiang in Liaoning to the 
mouth of the Beilun He in Guangxi, the State Oceanography Bureau 
has carried out large-scale comprehensive coastal surveys and 
island resources surveys, and this has further broadened 
people's vision. The development of new and high-tech maritime 
technologies in China has provided the means to develop new 
maritime industries. With the development of such new 
industries as aquaculture, offshore oil and gas exploration, 
maritime tourism, maritime minerals and chemicals, seawater 
utilization, and maritime services, China's maritime industrial 
output value (not including the shipbuilding industry) increased 
by an average of 19 percent each year between 1980 and 1990 and 
reached 43.8 billion yuan in 1990, 53.1 billion yuan in 1991, 
and 75.5 billion yuan in 1992. 
  In this period of high-speed economic growth in China, which 
has attracted the world's attention, China's maritime industries 
increased production by 28 percent annually in these three 
years. It is expected that this year's output value will top 90 
billion yuan. The area of sea surface used for aquaculture has 
reached 500,000 hectares, and output has reached 2.42 million 
tonnes, first in the world. The annual volume of freight 
handled in coastal ports throughout the country has reached 600 
million tonnes, and the total tonnage of cargo ships ranks 
eighth in the world. Annual freight transportation has reached 
1,190.8 billion kilometer tons. Output of offshore oil and gas 
has reached 3.8 million tonnes. Output of maritime salt has 
reached 19.78 million tonnes. Coastal and maritime tourism has 
received 9.16 million people and an income of over 11.6 billion 
yuan. At present, a large number of foreign oil companies have 
invested billions of U.S. dollars of capital to explore for 
offshore oil and gas resources in China's territorial seas. 
China has also built power plants to using tidal energy in 
Shandong and Zhejiang. A maritime chemical industry, a maritime 
biochemical industry, industry directly using seawater, and a 
maritime mining industry have all been started. In our country, 
the maritime industries have been changed from a pattern of 
mainly being composed of traditional industries into a new 
pattern of being composed of both traditional and new industries. 
  The maritime industries, especially the new industries 
related to the seas and oceans, have the characteristics of 
possessing high technology, requiring high investment, facing 
high risks, and bringing about high economic efficiency. 
Maritime industrial development must rely on new and high 
technologies. Through many years of development, China now has 
more than 100 maritime scientific education and research 
institutes of all types and has set up maritime scientific and 
technological development zones and estates in Qingdao, Dalian, 
Dandong, and Tianjin for developing new maritime technologies 
and products. In addition, China has established cooperative 
and exchange relations in the field of maritime scientific 
research with more than 40 countries and regions in the world. 
<H5>  Breaking New Ground--Taking the Seas and Oceans as the Base </H5>
  The maritime development zones have brought considerable 
economic benefit to the coastal areas. In recent years, all 
coastal provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities have 
formulated their own maritime development strategies and have 
found new economic growth points. Shandong's maritime 
industrial output value accounts for one-third of the national 
total. On the basis of "sea farming and aquaculture" in the 
past, the province has worked out its maritime economic 
development program and has planned to further develop new 
maritime industries. Hainan Province, the smallest province in 
the country, set forth the guideline of "using the seas to serve 
the province's development and building Hainan into a major 
maritime province." Guangxi has formulated its "Blue Plan," 
which has decided to turn Guangxi into a major maritime outlet 
for southwest China as a whole by speeding up maritime 
development. Guangdong has worked out a plan for developing 
maritime industries, especially the development of maritime 
mineral resources and island resources. Fujian Province has 
decided to develop an integrated maritime economy. Zhejiang has 
pointed out that hope for the province's economic growth is 
pinned on the seas and oceans and has worked out a comprehensive 
maritime development program. Shanghai, Hebei, Liaoning, and 
Jiangsu have all decided to advance their maritime industries. 
Jilin Province has no coastline, but it has decided to use the 
Tumen Jiang to seek maritime development. Beijing Municipality 
also has no coastline, but through making joint investments in 
harbor construction with Tangshan City, it will also gain access 
to the seas for its economic development. In conclusion, 
China's coastal areas are all vigorously developing their 
maritime industries. 
  The formation of new industries has provided a new driving 
force for socioeconomic growth, and this has been proved by the 
successful experience of many countries and regions in the 
1980's. China's rate of economic growth in recent years is 
attracting the world's attention, while the rate of growth of 
China's maritime industries has been more than double its rate 
of overall economic growth. In marching to the 21st century, 
China will also march into its "maritime century." 

