BFN 

  [Text] Jakarta, June 9 (XINHUA) -- Chen Muhua, vice 
chairman of the Chinese National People's Congress and chairman 
of the All- China Women's Federation, has stated that the women 
in the Asia Pacific region have played important role in 
political, economic and social affairs. 
  Chen Muhua made the remarks here today when she called on 
Wahono, speaker of the Indonesian House of Representatives. 
  She wished that the second Asian and Pacific ministerial 
conference on women in development will adopt a good, acceptable 
program of action which will make preparations for the 4th World 
Woman's Conference hosted by China in Beijing September next 
year. 
  Chen Muhua told Wahono that she would like to use this 
opportunity to learn from and exchange experiences with the host 
country, Indonesia, on making preparations, organizing and 
convening this kind of international conference. 
  Chen Muhua said that she would like to exchange experiences 
on women's affairs with the Indonesian side. China wished that 
women of the two countries would further strengthen cooperation 
on various fields. 
  Speaker Wahono also briefed the Chinese guests on Indonesian 
women's positive role in the country's national development. 
  He said in the just-concluded 25-year long-term development 
ending on March 1994, Indonesian women shared same status and 
opportunities with men in the country's economic development. 
  Wahono acknowledged that there are women's parliamentarians 
in the House of Representatives. And women also occupy many 
important leading roles in the government, local governments and 
ministries. 
  Present on the occasion were Xu Zhijian, deputy head of the 
Chinese delegation and deputy secretary-general of the State 
Council, and Wang Shuxian, vice chairman of the All-China Women 
Federation. 
  Earlier on June 7, Chen Muhua also called on Mien Sugandhi, 
Indonesian minister for women's role. 
  The 38-member Chinese delegation led by Chen Muhua arrived 
here on June 5 to attend the conference with more than 600 
delegates from 47 countries and regions in the Asia Pacific. 
  The ministerial meeting will be held on June 13 and 14. 
Indonesian President Suharto is scheduled to chair the opening 
ceremony at the presidential palace on June 13. 

