Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Editorial by Werner Adam: "Russia as Partner"] </F>
  [Text] The new world order just does not seem to be 
working. The hopes fed three years ago by the unprecedented 
cooperation to expel the Iraqi aggressors from Kuwait has turned 
out to be false. At that time the motto that aggression must 
never again pay seemed for the first time to have been 
convincingly confirmed under the roof of the United Nations and 
under American leadership. Yet, a little later it was harshly 
refuted in the Balkans. Although the Soviet Union had meanwhile 
disintegrated and the so-called balance of power undergone 
drastic changes, Western reaction to the Serbian aggression was 
a very sorry affair. 
  Europe's failure in Europe itself has considerably 
contributed to the revival of an old order, as conceived under 
Nixon and Kissinger and consolidated under Reagan and Bush: 
American-Soviet efforts to solve regional conflicts guided by a 
global accommodation of interests. It was particularly in 
Gorbachev that Washington thought it had found its ideal 
partner. The man who then ruled in the Kremlin, and who -- 
unexpectedly for everybody -- was to go down in history as the 
last president of the Soviet Union, agreed on comprehensive 
disarmament programs with the leading Western power; gave in to 
American pressure to withdraw the Soviet forces from 
Afghanistan; and, after the invasion of the Soviet Union's ally, 
Iraq, in Kuwait, more or less supported the West's policy; and 
subsequently, together with Bush, restarted the Middle East 
peace process in Madrid. 
  After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia, without 
having to make the least effort, was recognized by the West as 
the natural successor to the Soviet Union with a permanent seat 
in the UN Security Council and the sole claim to the nuclear 
heritage. This was bound to hurt other former Soviet republics, 
notably Ukraine. Yet, for the West it was obvious to continue to 
concentrate on Moscow in its dealings with the East, which 
suddenly got hit by irritating revolutionary changes. 
  Comparable with Gorbachev before, Yeltsin, by a marked 
pro-Western foreign policy, encouraged the United States and its 
European allies in this decision. In Clinton, he found an 
American President who was even more understanding toward him 
and his country than predecessor Bush. This was vividly 
reflected earlier this year, when Clinton and Yeltsin almost 
enthusiastically said about the relations between their 
countries that now finally a "mature strategic partnership" had 
been created that is based on "equality, mutual advantage, and 
the recognition of national interests of the other side." 
  Yet, at that time a change in Russian foreign policy began 
to 
emerge that could hardly have been overlooked. Partly 
encouraged, partly urged by the election success of right-wing 
extremist Zhirinovskiy and the by no means less 
nationalistically acting old Bolsheviks, Yeltsin and Foreign 
Minister Kozyrev began to use language that increasingly brought 
back memories of practices under the Soviet superpower. Moscow 
claimed to have a right of veto against its former satellites in 
East and Central Europe, which are now seeking NATO membership, 
and -- accompanied by overt threats toward the remaining Soviet 
successor republics -- proclaimed itself the protector of all 
Russians in the "near neighborhood" and, finally, indicated -- 
typically during a Kozyrev visit to Beijing -- that in the 
future Russia would no longer put up with the West telling it 
what to do. Since then, this Russia has been trying almost on a 
daily basis to act again as a superpower, and, as such, it has 
returned to the stage both in the Balkans and the Middle East. 
  There is, actually, not much one could say against it, as 
long as Moscow reactivates its former influence in the various 
areas of the world for their pacification, and not for 
undermining similar efforts by the West. Utmost caution is, 
however, advised when it comes to integrating Russia into the 
Partnership for Peace as offered by NATO, even though it can be 
in nobody's interest to encourage Russia in its age-old 
obsession of being isolated. Still, one should distinguish 
between the usefulness and advantage of close political and 
economic cooperation with Russia and the claim raised by Moscow 
to a special role within the partnership with the West. The 
latter would not only be tantamount to a confirmation of fears 
for security in East and Central Europe, it might even weaken 
the Western alliance as such. 
  Such reservations have nothing to do with digging up old 
enemy images. If no new world order is to be had, the revival 
of the old should by no means tempt anybody to encourage Russia 
in its obvious drive to acquire a dominant position regarding 
the "near abroad," or to apply Western pressure on those former 
Soviet republics that are opposed to such ambitions. One 
condition for a strategic partnership is that Russia 
acknowledges the decline of its former empire once and for all. 
Otherwise it will not be possible to have what U.S. policy on 
Russia envisages as a "benign bipolarity": mutual friendly 
cooperation between the Kremlin and the White House that is 
beneficial for all. 

