BFN 

<F P=106> [Article signed NI: "State Visit by Polish President Lech </F>
Walesa: `I Have Not Come To Beg, We Want To Do Business With 
You'"] 
  [Text] Bern, 25 May (ATS) -- Polish President Lech Walesa 
was welcomed with all due honors to Bern on Wednesday [25 May]. 
At a news conference with Otto Stich, the president of the 
Confederation, Mr. Walesa thanked Switzerland for its financial 
assistance. However, most of all, he wants to convince the Swiss 
businessmen to invest in Poland: "We want to do business with 
you and we can do it." 
  "We are close to you and we get along," said Lech Walesa, 
referring to the relationship between Poland and Switzerland. 
"We could cooperate in almost any field of activity. Poland is 
a market with 40 million people; Swiss investors with their 
skills, can only benefit from it," he added. 
  He also called on the Swiss banks to set up branches in 
Poland. The former trade unionist wants to seize the opportunity 
of a roundtable meeting with the Swiss economic circles in 
Zurich on Friday "to convince them of their interest" in working 
with his country. His arguments are also of a political nature: 
"Poland's economic success is a prerequisite for its political 
stability," he stated. In this respect, he stressed the fact 
that the West also had to invest in Russia in order to secure 
its own security. 
  On the issue of the European Union (EU), President Walesa 
thinks that Poland as well as Switzerland have to define their 
position regarding the European integration process. He 
declared that his country had applied for membership to the EU. 
"But there has to be an interest on both sides. For the time 
being, Poland is more interested in joining than Brussels is. 
It is up to us to convince them that it is in their interest," 
he said. 
<H5>  Otto Stich's Warning </H5>
  "You are here among Poland's old friends," said Mr. Stich. 
The president of the Confederation praised Mr. Walesa for being 
"the head of a state which was the first to break away from the 
economic and social order of communism in the former East Bloc." 
On the economic issue, he too thinks that private investments 
in Poland should replace the assistance from the Confederation 
in the long term. 
  Mr. Stich underlined that the substantial assistance from 
Switzerland to this country aimed at reinforcing the nascent 
democracy and he gave a warning: "In East Europe, democracy 
seems to be mixed up with market economy, or even with rapid 
enrichment. And some people -- not only in the East -- are 
dangerously inclined to temporarily restrict democratic rights 
to accelerate the economic reforms." 
  Poland receives a total of 311 million [currency not 
specified], and is by far the largest beneficiary of the 
financial assistance and the technical cooperation from 
Switzerland. In Mr. Stich's opinion, the deficit in the federal 
finances should not hinder continued assistance. 
  On Thursday Mr. and Mrs. Walesa will travel to the Canton of 
Soleure, home of President Stich. They will visit the Tadeusz 
Kosciusko Museum -- the hero of Polish liberation who spent the 
final years of his life in Soleure. The president will leave 
Switzerland on Friday after attending a roundtable meeting with 
the Swiss economic circles. 

