93 pp 50-51 
<F P=103> 944K0532A </F>
<F P=104>  Tallinn aRIPaEV </F>
 Language: <F P=105>Estonian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Margus Mets: "Estonia's Business Landscape 1993"] </F>
  [Text] 
  The 1993 economic year is drawing to a close. Estonia's 
economy has indisputably made some progress, and those in the 
lead have, generally speaking, fared well in their `journey into 
the market economy.' Several groupings sharing common interests 
are being formed in the world of business, and one can also pick 
up rumbles of their mutual conflicts. 
  "Judging by the size of the Domestic Gross Product (DGP) per 
capita, Estonia should be one of the poorest states. Actually, 
people in Estonia are living much better," admitted Aarne 
Tihamets, director of macro-economic services at the Bureau of 
Statistics, to aRIPaEV in October. This statement 
can 
also be used to characterize of Estonia's economy in 1993. 
<H5>  Cynics and Altruists </H5>
  A major bone of contention among politicians and economists 
was the suitability of Toomas Sildmae for the post of 
economic minister, which he assumed in February of 1993. As one 
of the outstanding figures among Estonia's new generation of 
businessmen, Sildmae owns about one tenth of the 
successful 
company known as The Finest Hotel Group. In early May 
Sildmae promised aRIPaEV that, if no one 
else will, 
he will be the one to show that it is possible for a civil 
servant in Estonia to remain honest. "We should not be as 
cynical as to think that everybody is out to rip off the state, 
and build his own business on it. We can assume that there are 
altruists among businessmen, as there are in politics. Over the 
past year, there has been a lot of talk about ethics in 
business, and about business based on ethics. The scandalous car 
and house purchases of Illar Hallaste, member of parliament and 
a former (current?) leading politician of the Pro Patria party 
also made us delve into the problems of altruism and personal 
profit. "Within a few months, I hope to take out a new bank loan 
that will wipe out the previous one, and give me a lower 
interest rate for the future," Hallaste boasted in the fall. 
And, since nothing has been heard about the new loan, should 
aRIPaEV be the one to call for a new limited 
bidding 
between the banks to support the man of God who is trying to 
have his paradise on earth. 
  Or maybe it was with his colleague in mind, that another Pro 
Patria leader Indrek Kannik declared in September that "we 
should not prevent a 10 to 20 percent segment of the population 
from becoming super-rich by our standards, since these are the 
people who will be investing in our economy." 
  "High level politics should be conducted by people who are 
well off financially and who, as a rule, are not susceptible to 
corruption," said Olari Taal, board chairman of the Bank of 
Savings, and by no means one of the poorest. Both Taal and 
Kannik have been in the forefront of the financial oligarchy and 
patriotic politicians for the second half of this year. The 
lines separating idealists and pragmatists are a bit hazy, and 
there may be surprises in the near future. As Indrek Tarand, the 
new advisor to prime minister, once said: "One should invest in 
ideals when young, so there is something to sell out later!" 
<H5>  Banking--Passions Around Kroons </H5>
  Experts consider banking one of the most profitable areas of 
business in Estonia. The year about to end has been no exception 
as, according to mid-year figures, for example, the Hanseatic 
Bank's ratio of profit to the average equity of the period was 
401 percent, computed on an annual basis. Prominent economists 
Sildmae, Taal, Tamjarv and other shareholders of 
the 
bank can easily figure how good a return they are getting on the 
few thousand kroons each of them invested in Rebaco, the 
corporation started by the Hanseatic Bank in 1991. After all, 
the bank's dividends for 1992 that were reinvested in full, 
according to board chairman Hannes Tamjarv, represented a 
yield of 467 percent. 
  The smell of money attracts many fortune hunters, and many 
of 
them have tried to get a money moving license from the Council 
of Bank of Estonia. In February, the central bank's council 
refused to approve the plan to form the Bank of the Three Lions, 
as submitted by Peeter Luik and Sulo Muldia, key shareholders of 
the former United Baltic Bank. The new bank would have been 
formed as a joint venture by Luik, Muldia and shareholders of 
the Viimsi Bank that had lost its operating license. In 
mid-March, these people made a second and the only successful 
attempt, and the resulting Raepank [Guild Bank] has, within nine 
months, become a bank whose successful real estate transaction 
with ETK has caused it to be regarded as one of the most 
successful banks in Estonia. 
  Since a moratorium was placed on issuing banking licenses 
until the end of the stabilization period, competition over 
existing banks and over dividing the market shares has become 
more intense. Also contributing to the tensions is the 
government's plan to specify the extent of the state's 
participation in several of the commercial banks that left a 
nervous tick on the face of many a banker this fall. 
  The real declaration of war on the central bank came from 
justice minister Kaido Kama in October, when he questioned the 
legality of selling shares of the Bank for Savings. While prime 
minister Laar and Bank of Estonia leaders were visiting abroad, 
Kama raised the issue of the sales contract concluded this 
spring between Bank of Estonia and the Hanseatic Bank with 
utmost resoluteness, and demanded that it be cancelled within 
two weeks. Needless to say, the Bank of Estonia did not cave in 
that fast, and certainly not in response to a mere threat, and 
now lawyers on both sides are making a pretty penny trying to 
resolve this complicated case. This court action between the 
government and the central bank, unprecedented in the rest of 
the world, certainly detracts from Estonia's image as `by far 
the most successful of the former socialist countries' and rates 
as one of the biggest joint blunders committed by politicians 
and men of money. 
  The attitude of many Estonian businessmen about their moral 
and legal obligations toward their partners was expressed this 
April in an open letter from Leonid Apananski, director of the 
Revalia bank that was facing bankruptcy at the time and later 
subjected to mandatory liquidation by Bank of Estonia. 
Apananski, who had scuttled the bank with loans extended to his 
own companies, and who took the limelight with setting up the 
weapons transaction between Estonia and Israel, was cynically 
candid with aRIPaEV: "Of course, the bank's owners 
are 
morally responsible for the condition of the bank, but that does 
not mean anything!" 
  As far back as June, Uno Mereste, Council chairman of Bank 
of 
Estonia, had to tone down Apananski's exuberance. "Apananski is 
operating with concepts such as the `ability to pay' and 
`liquidity' in a situation where the bank has loans totaling 13 
million. This amounts to fooling, if not deceiving simple folk," 
said Mereste, commenting on Apananski's attempts to paint white 
over black. The Revalia Bank is currently engaged in court 
battles not only with Bank of Estonia but also with 
aRIPaEV. 
<H5>  Fuel Business on the East-West Trade Route </H5>
  Almost any Estonian businessman of note has at some time 
tried his hand at trading in fuels. This lucrative area of 
enterprise has also brought along several scandals starting from 
the tangled web connecting Klaus, Estonian Fuel and Tartu's Bank 
of Commerce, and the heating oil millions lost in Tartoil, to 
the theft of Sweden's fuel assistance at the beginning of this 
year. 
  In February, the Laar government scored a victory in getting 
rid of Riho Sild, who was heading Estonian Fuel. Sild, who had 
been a convenient scapegoat for Laar for some time, used his 
fall from grace with the government at home to win the hearts of 
our neighbors, and became Estonia's representative to Finland's 
state-owned fuel company Neste. Also abandoned were the 
government's grandiose plans for reforming the state-owned fuel 
company, selling the fuel tank storage park, and coming out with 
the `big is beautiful' slogans. Estonian Fuel was 
also deprived of its new name Eesti Nafta [Estonian Naphtha] 
proposed by Arvo Niitenberg, minister of energetics. 
  The ups and downs of dealing with the financial obligations 
of fuel companies have probably developed into a full time 
activity for some civil servant. On several occasions, at the 
urging of different interest groups, we have heard over and over 
again how the loan guarantees to the Klaus company resulted in 
an indebtedness to TKP [Tartu's Bank of Commerce] which, 
together with late fees, were up to one billion at the time of 
the trial this spring. 
  "Estonian Fuel is an enterprise vital to the state," 
executive director Toomas Saks told BNS in August, after missing 
another deadline for payment. He added that his company is not 
going to be scuttled for the 90 million kroons owing to Tartu's 
Bank of Commerce. "Estonian Fuel is not just some hotel in 
Tallinn," Saks added. 
  In one of its news bulletins, the Bank of Estonia has stated 
that the 90 million kroons in question would make it possible to 
pay the creditors of Tartu's Bank of Commerce roughly 50 percent 
of their claims immediately. Right now, however, the case is 
dragging on, and quite a few unhappy creditors were disturbed by 
the mocking words of the bank's former director Rein Kaarepere, 
as they reached the media around the middle of September. When 
asked: "Last week you were seen in public again. What brought 
that about?" Kaarepere's reply was: "Actually, I have not been 
hiding out at all. In the theater, you can see me even more 
frequently than before." 
  Among the best clients of almost every Estonian bank there 
is 
some successful fuel dealer, whose cash flow and loans bring 
more than an average return for the bank, too. In some cases one 
can even see people with close ties to banking making a smooth 
transition into the fuel business. Examples of this would 
certainly be Andres Ausman, the former head of the credit 
department at the Bank of Tallinn, who joined the leadership 
team of N-Terminaal, Estonia's biggest fuel company; or the move 
made by Mart Kutsar, director of the Bangalo real estate firm 
affiliated with the Bank of Tallinn, to head the Estonian Oil 
Alliance. 
<H5>  Big Investments in the Hotel Business </H5>
  Grandiose hotel projects have been doing well during 
Estonia's period of proprietary capitalism. But the games of big 
shots with big money have also caused a lot of confusion. 
  Accusations of corruption stemming from the 150 million 
kroon 
loan guarantee given to economic minister Toomas Sildmae's 
company The Finest Hotel Group by prime minister Mart Laar are 
only the tip of an iceberg that surfaced late in the fall to 
bring attention to Estonia's hotel business. Sildmae owns 
two thirds of Silfin corporation's 16.3 percent in The Finest 
Hotel Group and, in Estonia's circumstances, this is quite 
sufficient to suspect a person of having committed some sins 
`within the limits of his corruptibility.' 
  The same percentage of shares in the company that has been 
running Tallinn's number one hotel is held by SRV International 
I, that was also one of the chief contenders in the 
privatization battle for hotel Viru. Viru's initial asking price 
of 130 million did not scare off the Finns who have already 
invested in Estonia's enterprises like SRV Eesti Ehitus [RSV 
Estonian Construction] headed by taxpayer Toomas Luman, or in 
the diversified Abe International. 
  The other party coveting Viru, and still in the running, is 
the French hotel chain Accore. Intriguing, in this context, is 
the information received from the French ambassador in Estonia 
maintaining that Accore is planning to build another hotel in 
Tallinn, even if it becomes the owner of Viru. 
  Making waves during the second half of the year was 
Estonia's 
biggest privatization transaction todate--the sale of hotel 
Tallinn for 80 million kroons to its director Tauno Laigo, who 
had been managing it as state property. The Privatization Agency 
has not received any money so far, besides the 900,000 kroons 
for auction participation, and many of Estonia's privatization 
leaders have predicted that the transaction will have to be 
cancelled because of the buyer's inability to pay. As it often 
happens in privatization cases, the matter has been taken to 
court. Laigo himself has been saying, as late as mid-December, 
that the money is forthcoming shortly. 
  Also unrealized, so far, are plans for the hotel Sheraton 
Tallinn, preparations for which were started as far back as 
1989. Construction on the five-star hotel was supposed to begin 
toward the end of March of this year, according to Rein Kuusmik, 
director of AS Amerest Hotels. In February, Kuusmik told 
aRIPaEV that a loan in the amount of 100 German 
marks 
was forthcoming from Germany and Austria to get the project 
going. A handling fee of `only' 12 million DEM had to be raised 
locally. Kuusmik promised further that the hotel being built in 
Tallinn would already be listed in the 1994 edition of the 
worldwide listing of Sheraton hotels. Haven't checked the 
listing yet, but the hotel is nowhere to be seen. 
<H5>  Taxpayers Association </H5>
  When Triinu Rohtla, executive director of the Tallinn 
Taxation Office, reviewed the 1992 tax year in April of this 
year, she said that the record income amount among returns 
processed up that that point was 480,000 kroons. The Taxpayers' 
Association had not been founded, which explains a sum `so low' 
by today's standards. 
  The first to come out as an organized elitiest group of 13 
lawyers, civil servants and educators (Igor Grazin, Siim 
Kallas, Peeter Kilomann, Rein Lang, Toomas Luman, Meelis Milder, 
Juri Raidla, Mart Rask, Andres Sarri, Toomas 
Sildmae, Olari Taal, Hannes Tamjarv and Priit 
Vilba) 
have had their names linked to the most convoluted line of 
reasoning. Indisputably, not much can go on in Estonia's economy 
without these men knowing it. It could also be predicted that, 
over the years to come, we will be hearing more about those 
members of the association not too well known to the public yet. 
Like Peeter Kilomann, who founded the Primex company in June of 
1991 which, by now, has grown into an operation with a sales 
volume of 40 million kroons a month, as its owner told 
aRIPaEV in February. The up-and-coming People's 
Bank 
[Rahvapank] of southern Estonia is also reputedly controlled by 
Kilomann. 
  Rumor has it that Bank of Estonia is planning to take out of 
circulation the one and two-kroon bills that have lost much of 
their value since the monetary reform, and replace them with 
coins. Estonia's business world is also keeping up with renewal 
and, by next year, one can probably start talking about bigger 
business plans, bigger companies and bigger profits. Inevitably, 
the failures, deceptions, scandals and losses will also be 
bigger. Estonia's business landscape is still in the state of 
formation. 

