Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] The Nuclear Power Generation Technology 
Organization, a foundation, recently began three new projects: 
  (1) demonstration testing of fluid excitation vibration, 
which caused the rupture of steam generator heat transfer pipes 
in the Mihama Nuclear Power Plant of the Kansai Electric Power 
Company; 
  (2) research using a supercomputer to analyze nuclear power 
plant safety during accidents; 
  (3) installation of a full scope simulator to support safe 
operation of nuclear power plants in Russia. These will be 
carried out, along with continuation of projects such as 
earthquake-proofing reliability testing, with a budget of 
&yen;25.9 billion, a 14.6% increase from the previous 
fiscal 
year. 
  In the case of Kansai Electric's Mihama Number 2 power plant 
accident, the flow speed of the water-steam two-phase flow 
around the heat transfer pipe exceeded the critical velocity 
that excites flow strength elastic vibration, and that vibration 
caused fretting fatigue which ruptured the pipe. Due to this 
accident, it was proposed that methods for evaluating flow 
excitation vibration and hydrothermal behavior be upgraded 
through experiments. This research will be carried out as a 
4-year project starting this fiscal year as ``demonstration 
tests concerning steam generator flow excitation vibration.'' 
  The research will reveal the mechanism that creates flow 
excitation vibration in the steam generator under conditions 
(dimensions and heat flow) close to that of the actual 
equipment, and will upgrade evaluation methods to clearly show 
degree of reliability of the steam generator during operation. 
The project calls for designing and manufacturing the testing 
equipment by FY95, conducting tests for about a year from 
mid-FY95, and finishing up in FY96. 
  The ``testing to demonstrate reliability of accident 
escalation prevention functions using margin of safety'' will 
demonstrate, through simulation analysis, that there is an 
adequate safety margin in the safety functions of existing 
equipment even if accidents occur at nuclear power plants and 
that comprehensive application of these functions will ensure 
safety. These accidents are composite phenomena, in which 
various types of elements interact in a complex manner, and 
analysis of such composite phenomena requires upgrading of 
analytical technology to enable simultaneous consideration of 
complex elements. Computer technology will be applied to link up 
all the elements of the composite phenomena, provide a 
simulation, and do analysis of the composite phenomena that 
could only have been done through large-scale demonstration 
tests in the past. The project also will make it possible to 
confirm results visually; for example, the status of fuel will 
be displayed in color (showing temperature) and shapes so that 
anyone can visually comprehend its status. During this fiscal 
year, a super-high speed large-scale computer will be used for 
surveys of severe accident analysis codes that are needed to 
demonstrate safety margin, and specific development themes will 
be set for the next fiscal year and thereafter. 
  The content of ``nuclear power plant operational technology 
center maintenance project (aid to improve safe operation of 
Russian nuclear power plants)'' will provide cooperation on two 
points: 
  (1) a full scope simulator targeting the VVER-1000 type 
reactor will be built in the operational training center in 
Novovolonej [phonetic], Russia; 
  (2) the new full scope simulator will be used to improve 
educational programs concerning nuclear power plant operational 
safety. 

