BFN 

<F P=106> [By Sofia Wu] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, March 25 (CNA) -- Premier Lien Chan Friday 
[25 March] expressed regret over a preliminary decision by a 
United Nations wildlife conservation organization suggesting its 
members adopt stricter measures against Taiwan for failing to 
eliminate illegal trade in endangered species. 
  Commenting on reports from Geneva saying the UN's Convention 
on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) has accused 
Taiwan of failing to crack down on illicit wildlife trade in an 
expedient manner, Lien said the allegation was unfair. 
  "Taiwan has not fallen behind world wildlife conservation 
standards," Lien said. "We hope major world wildlife 
conservation organizations can recognize our efforts in this 
regard." 
  The CITES Secretariat Thursday unveiled a package of 14 
suggestions on how to eliminate rhino horn and tiger bone trade 
in Taiwan, Hong Kong, South Korea, Mainland China and Vietnam. 
  The package generally gave positive, lenient assessments of 
wildlife conservation efforts in Hong Kong, South Korea, 
Mainland China and Vietnam, but took a harsher attitude toward 
Taiwan. 
  It said Taiwan has so far failed to update its conservation 
law, complete consolidation of rhino horn and tiger bone 
stockpiles and totally eliminate rhino horn trade. It thus 
recommended that "all CITES parties implement stricter domestic 
measures against Taiwan, including prohibition of trade in 
wildlife species." 
  The CITES Standing Committee, which is meeting in Geneva, 
will continue to discuss the package Friday afternoon and will 
decide whether to formally recommend trade sanctions on Taiwan 
over conservation issues. 
  Local trade officials said if CITES does call on its members 
to ban wildlife trade with Taiwan, the impact would be minimal. 
  Taiwan's wildlife product trade totals about US $20 million 
annually, according to statistics compiled by the Board of 
Foreign Trade. 
  However, the board pointed out that if the United States 
decides to impose trade sanctions on Taiwan in line with the 
CITES recommendation, the effect would be much greater. 
  The U.S., Taiwan's largest export outlet, could first ban 
wildlife product trade with Taiwan and if Taiwan fails to 
improve crackdowns on illicit wildlife trade within six months, 
the U.S. then could ban imports of other Taiwan products, the 
board said. 
  Meanwhile, Chairman Sun Ming-hsien of the Council of 
Agriculture said Taiwan has made enormous efforts in wildlife 
conservation in recent years. "We'll step up publicity to help 
the world understand our progress in this regard," Sun noted. 

