Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Exclusive" interview with Bolivian President Gonzalo </F>
Sanchez de Lozada by an unidentified EL PAIS reporter during his 
visit to Colonia del Sacramento, Uruguay for the Common Market 
of the South, Mercosur, summit on 17 January] 
  [Text] [EL PAIS] You have often said that Bolivia is trying 
to be like "Dona Flor and her two husbands" [reference to novel 
by Brazilian writer Jorge Amado]. What exactly does that mean? 
  [Sanchez de Lozada] Well, I said that because, above all, 
Bolivia has three destinies: one linked to the River Plate 
region, another to the Amazon River region, and the third to the 
Pacific Ocean. I think that beyond this remark, our presence 
here in Uruguay is the result of our belief that our destiny 
linked to the River Plate region is the strongest one. Our 
immediate and future realities are closely linked to the 
Parana-Paraguay River Waterway. We hope that, based on 
agreements reached between Uruguay and Argentina, these two 
countries can establish with the others that will join them in 
this waterway an organization that can integrate them all. For 
Bolivia, this waterway represents an outlet to the sea. It will 
protect the eastern region of our country, where there is great 
potential in the exploitation of iron, gas, and soybeans. In 
this regard river transportation is really decisive. Our 
presence and closeness with Mercosur becomes, therefore, a 
priority. Just like Dona Flor, we would like to have two 
husbands (Mercosur and the Andean Pact). It seems, however, 
that our priority is Mercosur. This is why we want to hold 
bold, but prudent, talks. We want to become part of the 
locomotive instead of waiting to be run over by it. We believe 
that the locomotive is here, that it is the critical argument 
that will allow us to negotiate with the other economic blocs. 
In addition to that, our destiny is closely linked to this 
river basin that permits everything to become a unity instead of 
a diversity. 
  [EL PAIS] Why do you link the waterway to the River Plate? 
Institutionally, they are two different things. 
  [Sanchez de Lozada] It is very hard to separate a tree from 
its roots. The whole thing begins here. We can separate the 
two things, but we believe that our concept of fresh water and 
cheap, effective transportation is a way of reaching the other 
parts of the world. It is the destiny of all countries, 
particularly the landlocked ones, to find a sea outlet. This 
cannot be done unless we join the River Plate system. This is 
not an imposition, but it seems to apply. In addition, 
Argentina and Uruguay had to overcome several difficulties, and 
needed a lot of time before achieving the experience they now 
have. A joint administration is the first step toward achieving 
an administrative system similar to those prevailing in several 
other international river systems. It would be an 
administrative support to this exceedingly complex system. 
  [EL PAIS] Does Paraguay agree to this position? 
  [Sanchez de Lozada] Yes, I believe it does. We are very 
close to Paraguay. Our relations have changed very much after 
decades of susceptibilities and clashes resulting from the Chaco 
War. In this radical change, the Bolivian and Paraguayan 
leaders are reaching a level of relations that had already been 
achieved by our peoples. I also believe that our landlocked 
situation strongly unites us as a result of our geographical and 
socioeconomic realities. 
  [EL PAIS] You talked about the possibility of seeking a way 
of integration between Bolivia and Mercosur through a free trade 
zone. In this regard what could be obtained, taking into account 
that for five years Bolivia cannot become a Mercosur member? 
  [Sanchez de Lozada] ...No, in 1996... but if there is the 
political will, we could become a member tomorrow. If there is 
consensus, an exception could be made. This is what we seek: 
By being an observer, we are linked to Mercosur; it is a bit 
uncomfortable, but we are linked to it. Seeking a free trade 
zone is like supporting Mercosur; although it is still not a 
common market, it has no tariff. Therefore, it is a bit like 
getting to the point where the other countries already are. And 
as an observer, it is watching the negotiations for a free trade 
agreement, trying to find the political, juridical, and economic 
conditions to become a full member. But we must move with great 
prudence and care, because we have other relations and 
commitments. I came here above all seeking the political will of 
the four countries to make Bolivia become a Mercosur member, 
seeking a greater commitment. I believe there is a will; 
otherwise I would have not been invited. But there is still a 
long way to go. It is a way to open the path. 
  [EL PAIS] Is your visit to Uruguay next March related to 
this 
issue? 
  [Sanchez de Lozada] It has to do with this issue, but also 
with the relations with Argentina, Paraguay, and Uruguay, which 
are very important to us. 
  [EL PAIS] Another issue proposed by Bolivia is the revival 
of Urupabol [Permanent Joint Commission of Uruguay, Paraguay, 
and Bolivia]. What use would you have for this group, which in 
some ways already failed during the decade of the sixties? 
  [Sanchez de Lozada] Yes, it failed because that was another 
time. I see the time as being very appropriate now, because it 
involves three small countries. Uruguay is in another stage of 
its socioeconomic development, just like Paraguay and Bolivia. 
But if these countries unite, they can make a greater impact 
under current conditions. I believe this is like a hand with 
five fingers. And the three of us have to face the pressures 
from Brazil and Argentina. Although the situation has changed, 
the relative size of our countries make us feel united in many 
ways, and there is also a lot of affinity and closeness on 
international issues. There are historical interests, and 
therefore it is a great advantage to have a common area. This 
is something very informal, thank God, it is a wish, but 
sometimes that is the most effective. Sometimes a friendship is 
more valuable than an event. 
  [EL PAIS] Your country has in the Andean Pact a special 
treatment on tariffs. Would Bolivia be willing to accept 
integration into a group like Mercosur, in which high tariffs 
are proposed for some products to protect an industry? Would 
your country be willing to join even when it has always enjoyed 
low tariffs? Would it pay that price? 
  [Sanchez de Lozada] We will see about paying the price. What 
we want is to participate, and to convince the large nations 
that high tariffs are a way of guaranteeing that their 
industries will never be competitive. We are not dogmatic, but 
a very poor country like Bolivia has come to the conclusion that 
protectionism stops the absorption of advanced technology. 
Because it is only human nature -- when a businessman is 
protected, he will not seek competition. And one of the reasons 
why we want to participate is because we believe that sometimes 
logic, explanation, and experience have a great deal of 
influence, especially in countries which are facing very 
powerful sectors. It is like the case of an angel speaking in 
one ear and the devil speaking in the other, but one must 
listen. The exchange of experience is obviously important; if 
one wants something valuable an effort must be made to get it. 
But I believe one of the reasons why we want to participate 
fully in Mercosur is because this process could stop. Bolivia 
cannot force anybody, but it may have ideas for the future to 
help this process come to a happy conclusion. 
  [EL PAIS] From your point of view as Bolivian president, 
what 
is the future of the Andean Pact? Apparently there is a bloc 
that functions well; Venezuela and Colombia, and the rest were 
left behind. 
  [Sanchez de Lozada] Yes, this is a complex situation. 
Remember that for various reasons our activities and attention 
have been especially dedicated to Chile and to Mercosur. We are 
planning to start in the next few months to look at the real 
situation of the Andean market. What happened is that the 
domestic political struggle is so intense that I am only now 
beginning to look at the world and the context in which the 
country is living since I was inaugurated. Based on the 
activities in which we are involved, we know there is a long way 
to get there. But we are trying to get closer to Mercosur 
because we believe it is more valid and hopeful. 
  [EL PAIS] And how do you see the "Amazon Initiative" started 
by Brazil? 
  [Sanchez de Lozada] Brazil believes that this should be 
enlarged, and that impulse should be given to a Latin American 
free trade common market. But we believe this will not occur 
until a locomotive exists. And the locomotive is Mercosur. 
  [EL PAIS] How are current relations between your country and 
Chile? 
  [Sanchez de Lozada] I believe substantial changes have 
occurred. My visit to Santiago, Chile, last October was very 
important. Bolivia and Chile are changing a lot, and we do not 
know what that means. But they are no longer the countries they 
were. It is an irony, but sometimes countries change more 
quickly than their leaders. We are carrying out polls in 
Bolivia and Chile, and it seems that our people have left us 
behind. We continue to look at the past, and they are looking 
at the future. But sometimes deep inside people there are still 
attitudes that only time will change. But we see changes among 
people, such as Frei's election, and my election, representing 
countries that are changing. Perhaps this means that problems 
that had no solution will have one now, but I cannot guarantee 
anything. One should be careful. 
  [EL PAIS] Are there still talks on the issue of diplomatic 
relations between Bolivia and Chile? 
  [Sanchez de Lozada] I would say not. Some people in Chile 
and Bolivia believe that the best of relations is not to have 
relations, and there are other people who believe it is very 
difficult to fight with someone if no relations exist. I 
believe relations could be established very soon, or they could 
be delayed. We want the steps to be taken to be not only 
symbolic, but truly effective. We are not putting forward 
conditions or demands, but want to move with boldness, but at 
the same time prudence. 

