Language: <F P=105> Vietnamese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Tran Anh Tuan in QUAN DOI NHAN DAN: "The </F>
Scourge of Drug Addiction in Cao Bang Is Still Difficult To 
Resolve"--date not given] 
  [Summary] We felt happy to see the local people welcoming 
the New Year upon our arrival in Gao Bang. Incidently, we also 
felt sad as the people of Cao Bang were still languishing in 
poverty. 
  The local people still "live quietly in thatch-roofed and 
dirt-walled houses made from bamboo on various hill sides. All 
the local roads are in rundown condition because they have had 
no repairs at all since they were built several decades ago. 
Cao Bang has also been troubled with many social evils such as 
superstition, drug addiction, prostitution, and so forth. These 
prominent issues have been given attention by various 
responsible organs of Cao Bang. Yet, not much has been done to 
resolve this situation." 
  Mr. Do Quang Son, deputy director of the provincial War 
Invalids and Social Welfare Office and also director of the 
provincial Drug Rehabilitation Center, told us: "Cao Bang 
started growing poppy long before 1985 to get opium for smoking 
and for sales to China. After 1985, Vietnam adopted a policy to 
grow poppy to get opium for export to the Soviet Union for uses 
in processing medicine. Cao Bang, therefore, became one of the 
provinces that participated in opium production. Difficulties 
arose in the course of production and marketing and are also 
responsible for the present scourge of drug addiction. The 
inflow of opium to Cao Bang has increased through various 
smuggling routes from Hanoi, Lang Son, and China, thus worsening 
the scourge of drug addiction. According to statistics provided 
by the War Invalids and Social Welfare Office, the poppy growing 
area in Cao Bang totalled 2,500 hectares in 1990. Incomplete 
statistics also show that the number of drug addicts in the 
province at the time was 13,000. Of them 4,000 were heavily 
addicted. They ranged in age from 16-35." 
  During 1989-90, in compliance with the government's 
Directive 
No. 6 on fighting drug addiction and carrying out drug 
rehabilitation, "the provincial People's Committee set up a 
steering committee for drug control and prevention headed by 
Trieu Dinh Vuong, deputy chairman of the Province People's 
Committee. The province used mass media to spread anti-drug 
propaganda down to every village and hamlet, resulting in 
various poppy growing areas destroyed. In October 1993, the 
province destroyed its last 135 hectares of poppy and spent 
hundreds of millions of dong buying substitution crop seeds for 
poppy growers in return for the destruction of their poppy 
crops. In 1993, the Steering Committee for Drug Prevention and 
Control seized over 100 kilos of raw opium for destruction." 
  Along with anti-drug propaganda, the province has built a 
drug rehabilitation center in the Cao Bang provincial city. "In 
1993, the center gave drug rehabilitation treatment to 390 drug 
addicts before returning them to their normal lives. At 
present, the center is providing drug rehabilitation treatment 
for 540 drug addicts." 
  Each drug addict patient spent some 10,000-20,000 dong for a 
15-day drug rehabilitation course. They receive 300,000 dong as 
a subsidy provided by the state to cover the cost for each 
patient. After they are cured, they have to stay over at the 
center for three months to undergo vocational training. 
  "In 1994, the province plans to provide drug rehabilitation 
for 2,000 drug addicts. Cao Bang Province has striven hard to 
improve its socioeconomic situation, but the results obtained 
are still very limited. Seventy percent of those who received 
drug rehabilitation in 1993 have become addicted again. Some of 
them have had to undergo drug rehabilitation at the center three 
times." 

