Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, March 11 KYODO -- Cambodia's mine-clearing 
authority made an appeal Friday [11 March] for millions of 
dollars in funding from international donors gathered at a 
meeting on Cambodian reconstruction. 
  Ieng Muli, minister of information and chairman of the 
Cambodian Mine Action Center, said the governmental agency 
requires 10 million dollars this year and next to finance its 
humanitarian programs, which include a land-mine awareness 
campaign, minefield marking, mine clearance and training of 
mine-removal experts. 
  Speaking on the closing day of a two-day meeting of the 
International Committee on the Reconstruction of Cambodia, he 
said the funds are urgently needed to free land for the 
resettlement of refugees and displaced persons and for 
cultivation. The proposed budget would allow the center to 
clear 4,000 hectares of land per year with its existing 40 
platoons of mine removers totaling 2,400 personnel, most of whom 
have been trained by overseas engineers. 
  Ieng Muli said an additional 12 million dollars would be 
needed in the next two years for even wider-scale mine clearance 
to allow for construction of infrastructure and other 
development projects to take place. 
  "Mines are one of the most serious obstacles to Cambodia's 
growth and prosperity," he explained. 
  It is estimated that between eight million and 10 million 
land mines have been indiscriminately laid in Cambodia, 
especially in the western part of the country. 
  The mines kill or main some 300 Cambodians every month, with 
the result that the country now has over 40,000 amputees. The 
proportion of these amputees to the population is the highest in 
the world -- one for every 236 persons. Vast tracts of 
once-productive agricultural land are now unusable because of 
mines. 
  Ieng Muli said that so far the center has identified 1,787 
minefields covering an area of 3,231 million square meters. 
Only 7.28 million square meters of this has been cleared of 
mines since the agency was set up under the United Nations 
Transitional Authority in Cambodia. 
  Ieng Muli said that in five to eight years "the mine problem 
will be controlled and Cambodians can carry out their daily 
functions free from the threat of mines." But he added that it 
will take at least two decades to tackle all the facets of the 
problem. 

