Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by correspondent Viktor Artemenko: "Shady Dealings </F>
With Red Poppies"] 
  [Text] Smolensk -- The task force burst into the "den" 
late one evening. Although the occupants had not been expecting 
the uninvited guests, they did not give up without a fight. The 
militia had to use their weapons, and the head of the gang 
dealing in "grass" was wounded. Members of the task force found 
25.7 kg of poppy stems in the apartment. It is not hard to 
calculate how much money Nikolay T. and his partners in crime 
were expecting to make, if they were selling glasses of dried 
stems at 15,000 rubles [R] apiece. The gang of criminals was 
arrested and an investigation is now underway. 
  Once far removed from the problems of drug addiction, 
Smolensk Oblast has lately come into contact with them in real 
earnest. It has reached the stage where last year the oblast 
internal affairs administration was forced to set up a special 
subdivision to combat illegal drug trafficking. Together with 
other internal affairs bodies, it has brought to light some 700 
drug-related crimes. It is no joke: This represents a virtual 
fourfold increase in comparison with 1992. Some 223.5 kg of 
poppy stems and more than six kg of marijuana have been 
confiscated from drug addicts. 
  It would be naive to link the growth in these indicators 
purely with the militia's increased efforts, although its 
activity on this front has undoubtedly expanded. 
  "The reason for the wave of drug addiction is that Smolensk 
Oblast is now a border oblast," Militia Major General V. 
Vorobyev, head of the internal affairs administration, believes. 
"The oblast is becoming a staging post for the movement of raw 
narcotics from the south and west into the heart of Russia. 
Signs of this serious phenomenon are already apparent. In our 
oblast alone, seven emissaries carrying raw narcotics from other 
former Soviet republics and regions of Russia have been arrested 
lately; 13 percent of the confiscated raw narcotics entered the 
region from outside the Russian Federation." 
  The fabulous profits made by the Russian drugs business are 
thoroughly bound up with the socioeconomic problems that have 
brought people face to face with unemployment and poverty and 
smashed young people's spiritual core. It is no accident that, 
of those caught illegally trafficking drugs, 2.6 percent are 
juveniles, some 39 percent are young people under the age of 30, 
and more than 44 percent are neither working nor studying. 
Almost all have a secondary education. 
  The oblast's internal affairs bodies and public health 
services now have 350 drug users on their books, 260 of whom are 
inveterate drug addicts, as well as 175 users of toxic 
substances. Drug addiction is closely linked to crime. In the 
process of investigating drug addicts' illegal activities, 
members of the internal affairs administration subdivision to 
combat illegal drugs trafficking have uncovered four cases of 
robbery with violence, some 30 apartment burglaries, several 
thefts of state property, 12 cases of extortion, 10 cases of 
forged medical prescriptions, and other crimes. 
  They were all committed for the same purpose: To get money 
to buy lethal substances. For example, drug addicts Murashkin, 
Koryagin, and the Mamchur brothers have committed 10 apartment 
burglaries in Smolensk and other cities in the oblast. Last 
year, members of the internal affairs administration subdivision 
to combat illegal drugs trafficking discovered 12 dens used for 
taking drugs. Homes and lodgings where both the husband and 
wife, children, and other relatives have become drug addicts are 
often turned into dens. In Smolensk alone, for example, the 
militia has established the existence of five married couples 
and five pairs of brothers all addicted to drugs. 
  Problems relating purely to the militia are becoming 
glaringly obvious as the battle against illegal drug trafficking 
intensifies. First of all, special subdivisions working in this 
field must be set up in the oblast's rayon centers and major 
cities. The potential of the expert criminology department 
should be expanded, particularly with regard to carrying out 
spot checks of detected substances. The legislative base must 
also be improved: As always, it has failed to keep pace with 
the demands of life and is inadequate to the evil wrought upon 
individuals and society by drug addiction. 

