BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Jose Orlando Sarmiento from "The Morning Paper" </F>
newscast] 
  [Text] Reports that say a Honduran and some Nicaraguans 
have threatened to attack the president are distressful, because 
anyone can easily enter or exit Honduras. Corrupt foreigners 
must be controlled. Angelina Ulloa Duarte, head of the 
Directorate of Population and Immigration Policy, has addressed 
this issue. 
  [Begin Ulloa recording] We believe this situation threatens 
national security and, therefore, also threatens our president. 
We are doing everything within the powers of the Directorate of 
Population and Immigration Policy to control the admission of 
certain people who are outside the law. This needs to be done 
in light of the easy access that vehicles and people from 
Central American Group of Four countries have to our country. 
This easy access has prompted a number of problems. 
  Current immigration controls are insufficient to completely 
control certain types of people whose behavior does not 
necessarily follow what is stipulated by Honduran law. We must 
also consider that, despite having administrative border posts, 
our borders are vast and include unsupervised areas of which 
outlaws take advantage. [end recording] 
  It seems there are different types of trafficking bands in 
our country, ranging from trafficking in drugs, stolen cars, and 
money laundering to gunrunning and others. All of these 
threaten social harmony. 
  [Begin Ulloa recording] We used to have gunrunning and drug 
trafficking in Honduras. Because we are situated in the 
geographic center of the American continent, we have become a 
conveniet place for those those people involved in a new type of 
crime -- people smuggling. This crime yields large earnings for 
an international crime network. 
  We have information about the high cost paid by people of 
certain nationalities who are ineligible to emigrate to the 
United States. Indians, Chinese, Pakistanis, Peruvians, or 
Bolivians pay $15,000-$20,000 to ensure access to the United 
States. An international crime network is responsible for this. 
We are aware that, in addition to causing us problems and 
affecting the good relations we should maintain with other 
countries of the region, including the United States, this 
situation also encourages corruption among officials who handle 
documents that allow these people to move about the country 
freely. [end recording] 
  The Honduran state will have to create organizations similar 
to the Directorate of Population and Immigration Policy to 
control the admission of individuals that come here to cause 
problems after gaining easy access to our country. 

