CSO 

<F P=106> [Interview with Leche Tepsurkayev, chief of Counternarcotics </F>
Division of Sakhalin Oblast Internal Affairs Administration, by 
Oleg Demakov; date and place not given: "The Sakhalin Drug 
Trade: Dealers and Victims"] 
  [Text] In 1993 there were 158 cases in the oblast in 
which people were charged with drug trafficking and drug 
possession, and more than 200 kilograms of drugs were 
confiscated. In 1992 there were only 70 such trials and only 68 
kilograms of confiscated drugs. 
  We were motivated to begin looking into the problem of drug 
abuse not only by the sinister statistics, but also by our 
personal observations. Young men and women who are clearly under 
the influence of drugs are a common sight on our streets. 
Conversations in which drug terms, such as "joint," 
"freebasing," "mainlining," and "lid," are commonly used are not 
extraordinary either. 
  Finally, the sight of teenagers openly rolling a "joint" on 
the steps of the Oktyabr movie theater provided the conclusive 
evidence that the weakness for drugs has become the genuine 
scourge of a whole generation. 
  A SVOBODNYY SAKHALIN correspondent interviewed the main 
enemy 
of the Sakhalin drug mafia, Leche Tepsurkayev, the chief of the 
Counternarcotics Division of the oblast Internal Affairs 
Administration. 
  [Tepsurkayev] One of the problems of drug abuse in Russia is 
the absence of legislation allowing us to take any action 
against, for example, those teenagers at the theater. The law 
stating that criminal proceedings would be instituted against 
any person caught using drugs twice in one year has been 
repealed. For this reason, the drug user no longer has anything 
to fear. 
  [Demakov] Would you say that most of the drugs on Sakhalin 
are not produced locally? 
  [Tepsurkayev] They definitely are not. They enter the oblast 
through a multitude of channels. They usually come through 
Central Asia (opium from Afghanistan comes through Uzbekistan, 
Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, and Tajikistan), and poppy straw comes 
here from Ukraine. The principal and most dangerous supplier, 
however, is Maritime Kray, the source of the marijuana. There 
are drugs from Vietnam, China, and North Korea. There are 
channels through which drugs and guns are shipped from Sakhalin 
to Japan.... 
  [Demakov] This is especially true now that the drug trade 
generates profits of up to 1,000 percent for the criminals. Is 
your division capable of keeping an eye on all of the known 
channels? 
  [Tepsurkayev] We can monitor them, but the legislative base 
is constantly letting us down. The only grounds for the 
institution of criminal proceedings are complaints from citizens 
or organizations, and we are not getting any. 
  The only way we can put a dealer on trial is to catch him in 
the act. Even when we do this, however, any defense attorney can 
use a number of tricks to prove that our actions were illegal. 
  [Demakov] Although literally everyone, including that 
defense 
attorney, knows that this is a real criminal.... 
  [Tepsurkayev] Of course. That is why we receive offers of 
help from representatives of the former Russian Federation 
Ministry of Security, the heads of the Internal Affairs 
Administration, and the oblast administration. 
  Back in 1987 the Supreme Soviet published an edict 
authorizing each administration to institute drug control. Our 
administration exercised this right, which allowed us to 
question suspects without any delays. Today this might be the 
only way of taking any kind of firm action while staying within 
the law. 
  [Demakov] Who is your typical "client"? 
  [Tepsurkayev] The drug trade is an international business, 
and that is why anyone at all might be involved in it. In most 
cases, however, they are adults who can afford to come up with 
the large initial investment. This kind of "client," even if he 
is put on trial, rarely pays for his own crimes. He always has 
the prospect of buying his way out of the problem by hiring a 
good defense attorney.... Furthermore, this kind of criminal is 
quite difficult to convict, because all of the work is done by 
those young people we were talking about, and they are the ones 
who do the time in prison. 
  Another problem is the tendency of illegal drugs to become a 
consolidating factor for young users, uniting the addicts in an 
extended organization. They know each other and are in contact 
with each other.... 
  Unfortunately, the percentage of crimes committed by addicts 
is constantly rising: Strong drugs cost so much that it is 
simply impossible to earn this much money legally. A single gram 
of opium, for example, or a cup of poppy straw can cost from 
25,000 to 30,000 rubles. Marijuana costs the same. 
  [Demakov] And in this community, in addition to the "common 
needles" the drug abusers share, they also have "common causes": 
They join forces in "bombing" homes and stripping passersby of 
their clothes and shoes.... 
  [Tepsurkayev] That is true, and it is frightening. That is 
why we urge them and their parents to come to us before it is 
too late. Your children will not necessarily be put on trial, 
and your statements can give us the grounds to prosecute those 
who are poisoning your family members. The telephone number of 
our division is 2-39-71. 

