Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Kent Chen] </F>
  [Text] China's recent tax reforms are causing concern 
among Japanese investors at a time when they are planning to set 
up operations in the country, according to a Japanese certified 
public accountant. China has emerged as the favourite 
investment destination for Japanese companies with the opening 
up of its domestic market and a more favourable investment 
environment. Fuminori Nakamoto, a partner at Coopers and Lybrand 
(Japan), which advises Japanese campanies investing in Asia, 
noted that a recent seminar in Japan on China's tax reforms 
attracted 500 participants. "This is an indication of how much 
Japanese companies are interested in the tax reform in China and 
investments in the country," said Mr Nakamoto. He said Japanese 
companies had experienced different stages of investments in the 
U.S., Europe and Asia. Once-favourite places like Thailand were 
beginning to be hit by over-capacity, while new destinations 
such as Vietnam were still underdeveloped, forcing Japanese 
companies to look for other investment destinations. "There is 
no choice for them. Due to the depreciation of the U.S. dollar, 
they cannot survive in Japan, they have to move out of the 
country," he said. "At the moment, Japanese companies are 
becoming more confident about investing in China and it seems to 
be the only country for Japanese companies to invest," he said. 
He noted that Shanghai was a favourite destination for Japanese 
and other multinationals, while Dalian was also popular, with 
some 500 Japanese companies already in the city. 
  Mr Nakamoto said Japanese companies were manufacturing 
products in China for distribution in the local market. As a 
result, these companies would be particularly vulnerable to the 
value-added tax. Under the value-added tax regulations, products 
manufactured for export are entitled to a tax reduction, but no 
exemption is given to products for domestic sale. The revised 
individual income tax is also a major concern for Japanese 
investors. Although the Chinese Government is not seeking to 
increase tax revenue under the revised tax, individuals earning 
more than 44,800 yuan (about HK$39,420) a month will have to pay 
more tax. "For Japanese businessmen whose salary exceeds this 
amount, their individual income tax would increase. The tax 
would be paid by the employer which usually guarantees a net 
income for employees," said Mr Nakamoto. Despite these concerns 
Japanese companies are becoming more interested in China and are 
diversifying their investments from manufacturing into retail 
and service sectors. 

