CSO 

  [Text] New Delhi, Feb. 8--The Centre today decided to 
suspend exports of cotton with immediate effect in view of the 
continuing rise in prices despite adequate availability in the 
domestic market. Consequently, the exports of two lakh bales, 
for which contracts had been finalised, would not be allowed 
now. Earlier, the Government had stopped the exports of 1.3 lakh 
bales which had been released for export, but for which 
contracts had not been finalised. 
  Secondly, a credit squeeze is being planned by the Reserve 
Bank. It might order that no further advance be made against 
cotton stocks to traders and that those made earlier this year 
be recalled to make the trade sell the stock it holds. A final 
decision is yet to be taken. 
  The Government may also make it obligatory for manufacturers 
of cotton yarn to blend with it a minimum of 10 per cent viscose 
staple fibre. This is expected to depress the demand for cotton 
somewhat. There is also a move to make suitable adjustment in 
the excise and import duties on viscose staple fibre to make it 
available at a price comparable to that prevailing for cotton. 
  Besides, the Government has told mill owners that export of 
hank yarn too would be suspended if its prices were increased. 
All exporters of cotton yarn under the Advance Licencing Scheme 
may also be asked to import cotton first instead of doing so 
after the export of yarn. This would ensure that there were no 
exports without corresponding prior import of cotton. 
  The cotton control order is also being amended to enable the 
Textile Commissioner to impose stock limits on traders and 
ginners (including co-operative federations) and to inspect 
their premises for enforcement of the order. States are being 
urged to take immediate action against hoarders of cotton under 
the Essential Commodities Act and ensure adequate availability 
of hank yarn to weavers at reasonable prices. Cooperative 
federations are being told to accelerate the deliveries of 
cotton against the quantities sold and to desist from 
arbitrarily raising prices. 
  These decisions were taken at a meeting convened here by the 
Textiles Minister, Mr. G. Venkat Swamy, to review the cotton 
situation. It was noted at the meeting that the upward trend in 
prices of cotton had been continuing since mid-January, when the 
situation was reviewed last. This though various measures were 
taken to check prices, including the announcement that five lakh 
bales of cotton would be imported duty free. it was also felt 
that there was no real shortage of cotton in the current year 
with the crop estimated to be at least 125 lakh bales, though 
against the initial estimate was 135 lakh bales. 
  The total availability, taking into account the carry-over 
stock of 31 lakh bales and the import of about one lakh bales 
under the Advance Licencing Scheme, would be 157 lakh bales. 
This should leave a balance of 30 lakh bales after meeting the 
domestic requirement. 

