Language: <F P=105> Dutch </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article signed VDB: "Eurosense Enters Chinese Market With </F>
Joint Venture in Peking; Its Partner Is Beijing Remote Sensing 
Corporation"; spelling of Chinese names as published] 
  [Text] Wemmel (TIJD) -- Eurosense, a company based in 
Wemmel which specializes in orthophotography, has recently set 
up a joint venture in China together with the Beijing Remote 
Sensing Corporation (BRSC), a Chinese state enterprise 
specializing in cartography. Eurosense holds 51 percent of the 
joint venture, currently capitalized at 10 million Belgian franc 
[BFr]. The new company is called Eurosense Beijing Aerospace 
Mapping Company Ltd and its offices will be in one of Beijing's 
new industrial development zones. 
  It is the first time that China has entered into an 
agreement 
on such a sensitive matter as cartography with a Western 
country. BRSC is a coordinating company in which all the remote 
sensing and photogrammetry activities from six different Chinese 
ministries are brought together. According to Eurosense 
Chairman Emile Maes, it was the Chinese who for about a year had 
been pressing for the setting up of a joint venture with 
Eurosense. 
  The joint venture will accept civilian orders exclusively; 
no 
military matters are included in the contract. The aim is to 
enable the Chinese to catch up quickly in the area of 
orthophotography. Thus, initially Eurosense will transfer a 
great deal of technology to the Chinese, both know-how as well 
as equipment. 
  According to Emile Maes, the Chinese can learn a lot from 
Eurosense, not only in the areas of photographic quality and 
processing methods, but also in cost control. For instance, 
several study visits by Wemmel technicians revealed that their 
Chinese partner is using heavy military aircraft for overflying 
areas, which are very expensive as far as fuel is concerned. 
<H5>  Training </H5>
  Emile Maes has just returned from Beijing where he signed 
the 
joint venture together with the managing director of BRSC, Guyan 
Haiyan. He estimates that the Chinese project will cost 
Eurosense some BFr50 million during the initial phase, 
particularly for the training of personnel. Maes and Haiyan 
will both have a seat on the board, which will consist of four 
people. 
  Eurosense will hire a Chinese to monitor the Chinese joint 
venture. This person will be trained next year [1994] and will 
operate from an office in Wemmel. In addition, Eurosense will 
provide training to another five Chinese, who in turn will 
transfer their acquired know-how to the new joint venture. 
  Initially, most orders received by the joint venture will be 
carried out at Wemmel, according to Maes. Subsequently, the aim 
is to subcontract as much work as possible to BRSC, which 
currently has a staff of 1,650 including 50 percent engineers. 
  The joint venture's employment structure will depend on 
future developments in Chinese state enterprises, which tend to 
shove more and more jobs toward private industry. Thus, it is 
possible that BRSC will attempt to transfer some of its current 
responsibilities to the joint venture. 
  Via this joint venture, China particularly wants to set up a 
digital file with orthophotographic maps whose accuracy equals 
that of topographic maps and which can be retrieved 
electronically and processed on a computer. In this way, large 
areas can be mapped far more quickly and accurately than was 
previously possible. 
  In addition, China is particularly interested in Eurosense's 
"Beasac" coastal detection technology. Chinese harbors have to 
cope with erosion and silting up, and the coastal areas with 
flooding. The joint venture will transfer the Beasac technology, 
which is now being used on the Belgian coast, to a Chinese 
hovercraft. 
  According to Emile Maes, 1994 will be a training year for 
the 
joint venture and orders will to a large extent be completed 
from Wemmel. The Chinese partner BRSC also wants to attack 
overseas markets with the joint venture. It is aiming 
particularly at Vietnam and Indonesia, as well as those other 
countries where it already has good contacts. 

