Language: <F P=105> Slovak </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report in the "Yesterday in the Government" </F>
column: "The Czechs Decided Without Us"] 
  [Excerpts] Reports keep appearing in the Czech and also in 
some Slovak media that the division of federal property could 
have been elegantly wound up if only the Slovak side had not 
made absurd demands, which the Czech side will never accept. 
There is talk about [Slovak demands for] compensation for the 
federal flag and for the Slovak territory ceded to Poland in 
1920, and the like. What is the reality? A report on the 
present state of work on the division of the property of the 
former CSFR between the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic 
was on the agenda of yesterday's meeting of the government. 
[passage omitted] 
  Of the 12 partial agreements pertaining to the division of 
federal property, eight have been signed so far. Four 
agreements, which are in the works, are still to be signed. 
These are: an agreement on the property settlement of the 
consequences of the division of the former Czechoslovak State 
Bank [SBCS] balance between the Czech National Bank and the 
Slovak National Bank; a treaty between the Czech Republic 
Government and the Slovak Republic Government on the sale of 
gold; an agreement on the division of the deficit of the federal 
budget for 1992 between the state budgets of the Czech Republic 
and the Slovak Republic and on the settlement of financial 
relations of organizations for 1992 with the state budgets of 
the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic; and the agreement on 
the aggregate mutual financial settlement of the results of the 
division of the former CSFR's property between the Czech 
Republic and the Slovak Republic approved by the [Czech-Slovak] 
"Commission" [for the division of federal property]. 
  The key problem is the division of the former SBCS's 
balance. 
No progress on this issue has been made, however. 
  The agreement on aggregate settlement is actually the final 
agreement, and its signing depends on the solution of the other 
partial disputed issues--gold, archives, Czechoslovak Airlines, 
the maritime fleet, buildings, and so forth. 
  Other outstanding issues pertaining to property division 
that 
are dealt with by the staff of the relevant ministries, the 
solution of which is monitored by the "Commission," are: the 
CSFR's share in the property of the former CEMA, the 
Czechoslovak Maritime Fleet, the division of archives (Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs of the Slovak Republic, Ministry of Interior 
of the Slovak Republic, Ministry of Defense of the Slovak 
Republic, Office for Industrial Ownership, Supreme Court), and 
the property of the former Federal Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

