BFN 

  [Text] Tokyo, May 25 KYODO -- The United States has asked 
Japan to include glass and lumber trade in trade framework talks 
with Japan, a Japanese Government source said Wednesday. 
  U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor made the request via 
telephone to Japanese Foreign Minister Koji Kakizawa, the source 
said. 
  Kakizawa refused to make lumber trade a new area in the 
framework negotiations, according to the source, who wanted to 
remain anonymous. 
  The two countries Tuesday agreed to resume the negotiations 
to hammer out new trade framework as a means to slash Japan's 
huge surpluses in bilateral trade. The negotiations, however, 
had stalled three months ago. 
  In the latest accord, they agreed to start new rounds of 
negotiations beginning with the three priority areas of 
government procurement, insurance as well as automobiles and 
auto parts. 
  Other areas will be discussed sector by sector if necessary, 
they also confirmed. However, Japan maintains the lumber trade 
has already been examined under separated talks and that Japan 
has carried out necessary measures to open up its market such as 
easing construction standards. 
  As for the area of glass trading, U.S. glass makers have 
called for wider market access to Japan. The two countries had 
two governmental-level meetings last year. 
  The source did not talk about Kakizawa's reaction to the 
U.S. 
request to include glass trading in the framework talks. 
  Meanwhile, at a session of the House of Representatives 
Budget Committee on Wednesday, Kakizawa said Japan did avoid the 
"objective criteria" in the framework talks from becoming 
"numerical targets." 
  The criteria are to be formulated as a means of assessing 
Japan's progress in overall talks. 
  Responding to a question raised by an opposition 
interpellator, Kakizawa said the objective criteria could be 
something like the number of foreign corporations or branch 
offices participating in the Japanese market. 
  Kakizawa quoted Kantor as telling him that several kinds of 
objective criteria will be set for trade areas to prevent 
misinterpretations about goals, which could prompt possible U.S. 
trade retaliation. 

