Language: <F P=105> Korean </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Reporter's Eyes" column by Yang Ki-tae] </F>
  [Text] Does the U.S. Super 301 (comprehensive trade law) 
mean the era of U.S. economic hegemony has begun? 
  An ROK trade specialist said, "The ideal of free trade which 
led the post-war international trade, is now in name only. The 
measure is a signal that the United States will play the role of 
international police and judge in economic issues as well." 
  An official of the Korea Foreign Trade Association said, "By 
the measure, the United States declared economic hegemony and 
that it will take any pretext and means to exercise power for 
the nation's economic interest. In the future, the only 
economic theory to survive is `power is justice.'" 
  ROK trade specialists say the most serious problem of the 
issue is that no country can restrain U.S. hegemonism after the 
dissolution of the former Soviet Union. 
  The fact that the United States is preparing to make 
reprisals through the Super 301 on Japan which said "no" in the 
U.S.-Japan summit talks held in February, is a declaration of 
war that anyone who challenges the authority of the United 
States cannot be left intact. It will be difficult for the 
United States, a country leading the international order, to 
avoid the denunciation that it is ignoring international 
promises and trust by restoring the Super 301 under the excuse 
of its national trade deficit. 
  It has been denounced that the United States, which had 
caused much dispute with nations concerned during Uruguay Round 
[UR] negotiations, is exercising individual retaliation, such as 
the Super 301, when the agreements are still fresh. Because the 
United States is showing its greediness by such an action 
ignoring the UR spirit although the contents of the agreements 
show the U.S. interests were reflected most. 
  It is more of a blow that the U.S. action nullifies the 
World 
Trade Organization [WTO] after it had agreed to establish the 
WTO for the management and supervision of free trade order 
beginning next year. 
  It has been pointed out that if the United States were to 
seek only its own national interests even before the start of 
the new trade order agreed by the world, it should not have 
begun the international negotiation. 

