BFN 

<F P=106> [By Flor Wang] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, April 7 (CNA) -- The disaster in which 24 
Taiwan tourists were killed last Thursday [7 April] on Lake 
Qiandao (Thousand Island Lake) in Mainland China's Zhejiang 
Province is only the tip of the iceberg as far as travel 
problems in Mainland China go, according to the Ministry of 
Economic Affairs. 
  In a report released Wednesday, the ministry said overseas 
tourists registered more complaints about travel in Mainland 
China than about travel in any other place except Southeast Asia 
as a whole. Taiwan tourists, it said, made more complaints 
about mainland travel than tourists from any other country. 
  Although the tourism industry in Mainland China experienced 
a 
sharp decline in the wake of the Tiananman Square massacre in 
1989, the number of foreign visitors and revenue from tourism in 
Mainland China began to rise again in 1990, the report indicates. 
  In 1992, as many as 37 million foreign tourists visited 
Mainland China -- an 11 percent increase in visits by foreign 
travelers over 1991 -- and tourist industry revenue jumped by an 
astounding 265 percent to US$3.6 billion. The number of visits 
made by Taiwan tourists in 1992 also increased by 251 percent to 
1.5 million, and further increased to 1.97 million last year, 
the ministry said. 
  However, tourist disputes with foreign visitors also 
increased during the same period because of the backward 
conditions on the mainland. 
  If such problems as poor social order, and insufficient 
transportation infrastructure, extra charges and price hikes 
heaped on tourists, and shoddy service from ill-mannered 
personnel cannot be rectified, the report said, Mainland China 
will undoubtedly fall short of its expectation to clear US$10 
billion in tourism revenue by 2000. 
  The Qiandao Lake disaster and several traffic accidents 
involving Taiwan tourists on the mainland in the first four 
months of the year point to the grave risk foreigners face in 
traveling in Mainland China, the report said. 
  Meanwhile, the Ministry of Transportation and 
Communications, 
the Tourism Bureau, and the Taipei Association on of Travel 
Agents all issued strongly-worded statements asking mainland 
authorities to take concrete measures to guarantee the life and 
security of Taiwan travelers there, and called on local visitors 
to suspend travel to the mainland until mainland authorities 
respond to the request. 

