Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Operation "Strong Roads 1994" was hamstrung due to 
Paraguay's refusal to accept the entry of 600 U.S. soldiers in 
our country. Foreign Minister Luis Maria Ramirez Boettner 
asserted that this would not have any negative repercussions in 
our relations with the United States nor will the latter 
withdraw its cooperation. 
  The foreign minister remarked that it was totally "absurd" 
to 
think the United States would curtail its aid to and backing for 
Paraguay in retaliation for the government's decision not to 
allow the entry of U.S. servicemen into our country. 
  "Not by any means; that is totally absurd. Our relations and 
cooperation with the United States are very friendly, very 
cordial." 
  "We have established some conditions for the coming of those 
servicemen, as their presence was totally unjustified for the 
public works they were going to build. Therefore, the good 
relations existing between Paraguay and the United States will 
not be affected by this," said the minister in response to a 
question from the press. 
  The foreign minister shared the view that the U.S. response, 
to the effect that it will suspend Operation "Strong Roads 1994" 
here for lack of time while at the same time stating that 
military maneuvers might be conducted in another Latin American 
country, is a contradiction. 
  It should be pointed out that the official U.S. response 
submitted to the Paraguayan foreign minister by U.S. Ambassador 
to Paraguay Jon Glassman contends that "the U.S. Government will 
not be able to conduct military exercises due to a lack of time 
for logistics arrangements, including the dispatching of 
building equipment." 
  Ramirez Boettner then confirmed that the Paraguayan 
Government was not pleased with the U.S. State Department report 
on human rights in Paraguay, which underscores some deficiencies 
on the issue. 
  He stated that our government will give an official response 
to the U.S. State Department next week. 
  "We thought the report had not assessed things in their true 
perspective and, therefore, we are analyzing the points in which 
they deem that human rights have been violated so as to be able 
to give an appropriate answer," he noted. 
  The minister went on to say that the United States 
customarily evaluates the respect for human rights in every 
country, and wondered whether the United States is rated on this 
issue, too. 

