BFN 

<F P=106> [By Lilian Wu] </F>
  [Text] Taipei, May 26 (CNA) -- Wildlife breeders protested 
outside the Council of Agriculture (COA) Thursday [26 May], 
urging the council to allow them to sell the animals they have 
raised. 
  The animal breeders, with animals in tow, gathered outside 
the council to argue against wildlife protection laws which 
prohibit the sale of their animals. 
  The breeders argued that they began to raise the animals 
before the Wildlife Conservation Act, which prohibits the trade 
and use of protected wildlife, was enacted in 1989. 
  They said they depend on the sale of their animals not only 
for themselves but also for their families. 
  Wildlife breeders have voiced their opposition to COA 
regulations on several occasions, but this is the first time 
that they have taken their animals, including a bengal tiger, 
crocodile, masked palm civets, formosa rock monkeys and Formosa 
reeve's muntjacks. 
  The private owners said that all the animals were kept in 
cages and posed no danger to the public. 
  Weng Chin-huo, a tiger breeder, said that private breeders 
have done a lot to promote the conservation of wild animals. He 
complained that the conservationists have completely ignored 
their contribution to wildlife preservation. 
  COA officials said that the revised wildlife conservation 
act, which is now under deliberation in the Legislative Yuan, 
would address the issue. 
  The private owners will March to the American Institute in 
Taiwan, the unofficial US Embassy in Taiwan, to protest US trade 
sanctions against Taiwan for its alleged trade in rhino horns 
and tiger parts. 
  Meanwhile, private breeders of wildlife are struggling to 
deal with the large number of animals they own which are 
protected by the wildlife conservation act. 
  COA statistics showed that there are 128 registered tigers 
in 
Taiwan, of which 79 are privately owned. Most of the tiger 
breeders use bengal tigers. 
  Tiger breeder Weng said he owns seven tigers, up from two in 
1989, and does not know what to do with the now-protected 
animals. 
  COA officials said they have contacted the Trade Record 
Analysis of Flora and Fauna in Commerce (TRAFFIC) about the 
possibility of returning the tigers to their natural habitats. 
  But the officials said that India and Thailand have refused 
the tigers after concerns about tiger attacks on humans. 

