Antidrug   Cooperation 

<F P=102> PA1106035794 Mexico City NOTIMEX in Spanish 1822 GMT 9 Jun 94 </F>
<F P=103> PA1106035794 </F>
<F P=104>  Mexico City NOTIMEX </F>
<F P=105>  Spanish </F>
BFN 

<F P=106> [By Maria Cortina] </F>
  [Text] Cartagena de Indias, 9 Jun (NOTIMEX) -- Gabriel de 
Vega, director of the Colombian National Drug Directorate, today 
said international cooperation in the struggle against drug 
trafficking has been hindered by double standards in some 
drug-consuming countries. The official, who is attending the 
10th Conference of Ibero-American Justice Ministers that began 
yesterday in this resort city, accused the industrialized 
countries of lacking the political will to fight powerful drug 
cartels. 
  "The struggle against drug trafficking has not failed. The 
truth of the matter is that many countries have not even started 
waging the battle," the Colombian delegate said, adding, "in 
terms of the fight against drugs, many contributed their noses 
and pockets, and we contributed the dead." 
  In the late eighties the now decimated Medellin Cartel waged 
a war against the Colombian Government to protest the 
extradition of Colombians to the United States. This war 
resulted in the deaths of more than 1,000 politicians, judges, 
civilians, and policemen. 
  In an interview with NOTIMEX, the director of the National 
Drug Directorate said: "Countries become sensitive to this 
matter when they experience the crude reality of this problem. 
Countries like Mexico, Peru, Bolivia, and Colombia have 
experienced this situation." 
  "This situation," the official added, "has led us to have a 
political will, at least a clearer and firmer political will." 
  After accusing the consuming countries of practicing "double 
standards" in the struggle against organized crime, De Vega 
said, "Many of them sell huge amounts of chemicals that are 
needed to produce drugs, while at the same time they are 
demanding stronger counternarcotics measures." 
  The justice minister's conference, which ends tomorrow, is 
reviewing ways to control money laundering and to strengthen 
cooperation in the areas of legislation and information exchange 
in the hope of speeding up the integration of the judicial 
systems of the region. 
  The Colombian official said he trusts that the conference 
will support the host country's proposals for measures to 
control money laundering and the signing of multilateral 
agreements for judicial assistance and the exchange of evidence 
among the nations of the hemisphere. De Vega recalled that the 
strong blows dealt to the drug cartel's financial network over 
the past two years in the United States and Europe were 
recommended by Colombia. 
  Ricardo Franco Guzman, Mexican deputy attorney general, on 
Wednesday said his government supports the Ibero-American 
efforts to jointly confront crime and the illegal traffic of 
drugs. Franco Guzman said Mexico is interested in attending 
international meetings designed to find efficient ways to help 
Ibero-American justice. 
  Interviewed at the inauguration of the conference in 
Cartagena de Indias, Franco Guzman said he believes the exchange 
of judicial experience and information among the countries of 
the region is good. He added that his country will soon sign an 
agreement for the exchange of prisoners with Colombia--an 
agreement similar to the one it has with the United States and 
Panama. 

