Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Tallinn, Mar 23, BNS -- Reactivated farm exports to 
Russia have brought up demand particularly for dairy products. 
This is also adding to the rise in food prices in Estonia, 
experts say. 
  The country's agriculture minister in his comments today 
denied that growing exports could have a major impact on the 
price rise, saying the development was natural in moving closer 
to the European price level. 
  Prices of farm products on the domestic market will continue 
to rise for some time to come and the rise apparently won't stop 
before the prices reach the European level, Estonian Agriculture 
Minister Jaan Leetsar told BNS. 
  "Rise in domestic market prices is an absolutely normal 
phenomenon and I wouldn't link it with the increase in exports 
or rise in inflation," the minister said in the interview. 
  Estonia's largest manufacturers of cheese, the dairy 
processing companies in Voru and Paide, are selling about 50 
percent of their products on the domestic market, while about 
30-40 percent goes to Russia, Leetsar said. Demand is so high 
that partners from Russia come to Estonia themselves to buy 
these products, so that the Estonian producer no longer has to 
deal with the customs problems, he said. 
  Experts say the sudden price rise in Russia has increased 
exports to that country. Because of a shortage of raw products, 
especially of milk, also prices on the Estonian market are 
growing more quickly and causing higher inflation. 
  The agriculture minister dismissed the allegations, saying a 
shortage of raw products had caused the problem. This is 
because milk production has been unprofitable for a long time in 
Estonia, he said. The minister also said Estonia's supplies 
largely depended on the time of the year and on previous 
summer's weather. 
  Estonia is estimated to reach the 1990 figures in its farm 
output only by the turn of the century. Statistics reports show 
Estonia's farm sector, apart from private farmers, sold 90,500 
tons of meat to meat processing companies in 1993, which is down 
36 percent from the year before. 
  The output of milk in the state-owned and reformed 
collective 
sectors declined 25 percent to 510,100 tons in the same period. 
For eggs, the decline was 36 percent to 220 million eggs. The 
private sector's output decreased 38 percent to 81,400 tons for 
meat, and by 17 percent to 592,200 tons for milk in one year to 
1993. The figures only show the amounts bought by meat and 
dairy processing companies and fail to reflect the substantial 
role of direct sales on open markets, etc. 

