Language: <F P=105> Spanish </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by Juan Carlos Santoyo from the "Panorama" newscast] </F>
  [Text] It was almost 1600, and the sun was hot and bright 
with only a handful of small clouds to reduce the extreme heat. 
The road was long and formidable. Nevertheless, it was well 
worth the effort to find those who just a few days earlier had 
laid siege to Ocosingo. After plenty of waiting and searching 
for signs of any member of the Zapatist National Liberation Army 
[EZLN], we finally spotted a group of EZLN members 3 or 4 km 
ahead of us. We cautiously moved forward. Suddenly, as we 
neared them, someone blocked our path. There were four young 
men wearing the EZLN uniform: green shirt, brown trousers, and 
plastic boots. Their weapons were AK-47 assault rifles. 
  The question came immediately: What are you looking for 
here? You are taking a great risk. 
  We responded: We want to talk with you. 
  They answered: We will see if it can be arranged. We will 
ask our commander. 
  About 35 minutes later the answer came. Follow me, said one 
rebel. It is not too far. We walked for about 20 minutes under 
large shade trees. It was time enough to reach our destiny. We 
never knew his name, but he was in charge of the Ocosingo 
occupation. Although his Spanish was somewhat broken, his ideas 
were clear, especially the reason he is fighting. 
  [Begin unidentified rebel commander recording] My native 
brothers need land that they do not have. The land is there, 
but the landowners control it all. We need land, and besides 
the land, we also need fertilizer, machinery, and irrigation, 
just like the landowners have. 
  If the landowners have land, why can we not have the same? 
This is our question. For this reason alone, we are fighting 
for land. We are doing this to enable all native Indians in the 
Mexican Republic to have a place to live. We need homes, but 
not the homes we have now. They have no drainage, power, 
drinking water, or parks -- things that any human being desires. 
They pushed us up against the wall, and then they call us lazy 
and ignorant. If we are ignorant, it is because the government 
has kept us that way. [end recording] 
  When we asked about their strategy or their strength, their 
answer came immediately: That is a secret, but I assure you 
there are plenty of us. Those who are here, he said, are not 
here because we like it. For years, various candidates and 
their parties have passed through this area. They made many 
promises, but none of them have been fulfilled. Instead of 
dying of hunger or of some illness such as measles, cholera, or 
snake poisoning, we would rather die fighting by way of a 
bullet. We are tired of broken promises and empty words. 
  He kept his face covered with a ski mask, through which we 
could only see his honey-brown eyes. In his voice we heard no 
fear but, rather, bitterness from the years of destitution, 
persecution, and neglect. 
  [Begin rebel commander recording] We are not followers of 
Marxism-Leninism. Many simply do not know there is a Marx 
[words indistinct]. One does not have to be Marxist-Leninist to 
realize who is behind this government. One does not have to be 
poor or a big-bellied child to [words indistinct]. One only 
cries. One does not have to study works of Marx, Che Guevara, 
or others. [end recording] 
  This interview lasted some 45 minutes, and the EZLN rebel 
commander concluded by announcing that his forces will not lay 
down their weapons, despite the amnesty. He said the most 
important step the government must take is to do everything 
necessary to finish with the tyrants and exploiters of the 
Indians and peasants in the highlands of Chiapas. We said 
good-bye with a handshake and a thank you. Before we left, he 
warned us by saying that we had better leave early, because 
nobody knows what might happen in the late afternoon or at 
night. He added that we are more important alive than dead. He 
then turned away from us and walked into the dense jungle, where 
many have found not only danger, but also death. 

