Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Amir Taheri report: "British Police Preparing To Pursue </F>
`Liberationists' and `Afghans'"] 
  [Text] London -- Police sources in London emphasized 
yesterday that Britain is planning to launch a campaign against 
the "Afghans" from various Arab and Islamic states who are 
active in the capital and and other British cities. 
  The sources said that the most important organization 
targeted by the campaign is an organization which calls itself 
"the British branch of the Islamic Liberation Party." 
  The police has sent documents obtained during the storming 
and searching of houses of some members of the organization to 
the attorney general and the home secretary to take urgent 
measures. 
  The documents include propaganda material calling for the 
hijacking of passenger planes and the use of terrorist methods, 
on the grounds that they are legitimate means, to confront what 
it terms "real enemies of Islam." 
  The organization is accused of inciting racist and 
anti-Semitic feelings, thus violating British law. 
  So far the authorities have not officially proved the 
existence of channels of communication between the British 
organization and the "Liberation" parties operating in the 
Middle East. As is known, one of the Liberation Party's 
organizations was accused recently of trying to assassinate King 
Husayn of Jordan. 
  The Liberation Army is officially banned from operating in 
almost all Islamic states because it participated in violent 
operations in several states, including Algeria, Tunisia, Egypt, 
and Indonesia. Its members are known as the Afghan Arabs, even 
though a small number of them actually fought in Afghanistan. 
  Police sources say that the British branch of the Liberation 
Party is active among university students in London, who come 
from more than 20 Muslim countries, and recruits some of them. 
The party is active in Birmingham, Bradford, and York among 
students and emigrant workers from the Indian subcontinent and 
Arab states. 
  Campaigns are launched against other groups operating as 
charity organizations, especially to support Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
  Farid Qasim, spokesman for the British branch of the 
Liberation Party, yesterday denied the accusations leveled at 
the party by the police. He said that his group is carrying out 
"legal informational actions" dissociated from any "activities 
violating the law." 
  The information about the Liberation Party's activities and 
other groups in Britain came from France and several Arab 
states, according to the sources. 
  The police sources estimated the number of the 
organization's 
members in Britain at "a few score," saying that some of them 
received special training in states like Iran, Afghanistan, and 
Sudan. The organization's members could face imprisonment or 
expulsion from Britain if they are convicted of violating the 
law. 

