BFN 

  [Text] Bratislava, June 22 (CTK) -- The agreement on 
resolving the debt of the former Soviet Union which the Czech 
Republic signed recently with Russia included claims on behalf 
of Slovak companies, Slovak Deputy Premier Brigita 
[Schmognerova] told journalists before leaving for Moscow where 
she will discuss Russian debt with Vice-Premier Yuri Yarov. 
  Schmognerova said the Czech measure was the reason why the 
Slovak Government did not approve the Slovak-Russian agreement 
on former Soviet indebtedness during its Wednesday [22 June] 
session. 
  Schmognerova was to have signed the agreement, which the 
Russia Federation has provisionally approved, with Yarov on 
Thursday [23 June]. But now the Slovak Government needed to 
consult Prague first to "determine the scale of the debt claims 
which the Czech Republic made," she said. 
  Claims for Slovak companies had been included in the Czech- 
Russian agreement in the first place, she explained, because 
before Czechoslovakia split (on 1 January 1993) most 
Slovak-produced goods were exported via foreign trade companies 
based in the Czech Republic. 
  During her three-day stay in Moscow Schmognerova will sign 
an 
agreement preventing double taxation. 
  She said she would also use the visit to prepare further 
negotiations on the Russian debt agreement. "We have received 
the provisional consent of the Russian side. They are 
considering the results of their talks with the Czech Republic. 
Now it's necessary to persuade the Czech side that claims cannot 
be included accorded to domicile but instead according to place 
of manufacture," she said. 
  Slovakia is striving for inclusion of a clause whereby 
Russia 
would pay the interests on government loans in cash. 
Schmognerova said interest on a Czechoslovak loan granted to 
the USSR in June 1989 as well as on the 1990 foreign trade 
balance had not been paid in cash but in the form of supplies of 
military technology. 
  The Russian Federation has taken over about 1.5 billion 
dollars of Soviet debt towards Slovakia, from which 180 million 
dollars' worth has been paid in the form of military supplies. 
Further supplies of military spare parts worth 90 million 
dollars under negotiation have not yet materialized because the 
Slovak and Russian Governments have not agreed on precisely what 
parts should be included in the deal. 

