CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Alexander Zhilin: "Union of Officers Changes Its </F>
Tactics"; first paragraph MOSCOW NEWS comment] 
  [Text] On April 16, the Union of Officers (UO) held its 
regular congress at the Lesnoi Gorodok boarding house near 
Moscow in secret. This was the organization's first full 
gathering after the October events of last year when its leader, 
Stanislav Terekhov, was arrested. 
  The high officer assembly was honored with the presence of 
prominent representatives from nearly all opposition forces: 
Iona Andronov, Alexander Barkashov, Sergei Baburin, Yuri Vlasov, 
Vladimir Zhirinovsky, Sazhi Umalatova and Alexander Sterligov. 
Conspicuously absent was Gennady Zyuganov, whom speakers accused 
of "treacherous collaboration with the anti-people regime." A 
full share of criticism was also heaped on Alexander Rutskoi and 
Ruslan Khasbulatov who had "given up further struggle." 
  The main item on the agenda was, of course, the situation in 
the country and the tasks of the Union of Officers. However, 
Stanislav Terekhov devoted a large part of his report to 
analyzing the reasons for the opposition's defeat last October. 
It is significant that the UO leader complemented the attacks 
against Rutskoy and Khasbulatov by referring to the "poor 
agitation-propaganda work" in the troops. Thus, the UO's 
traditional tasks--to "propagate the spirit of patriotism" and 
to strengthen "loyalty to the Soviet oath of allegiance"--were 
complemented with new ones. Activists were prescribed "to 
identify among officers those who are ready to carry out 
criminal orders for money and use arms against their own 
people," and also to set up "groups of emergency leadership" for 
the eventuality of the inner political situation taking a turn 
for the worse. 
  Essentially, the question is that the Union of Officers 
intends to build a network of military-political structures in 
the power ministries not only in Russia, but in the other former 
republics of the USSR. It has been envisaged, moreover, that 
they will be rigidly controlled by Moscow. The guests who had 
arrived at the congress from similar organizations in Belarus, 
Ukraine, Trans-Dniestria, Moldova, Crimea and Kazakhstan voiced 
their readiness to transform missions of the Union of Officers 
into republican institutions and actively join in the 
restoration of Soviet power in all the republics of "the USSR 
which has been ruined but not destroyed." 
  It is common knowledge that the Union of Officers holds 
strong positions in the central apparat of the defense 
ministries of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus, and in Russian 
military academies, including the General Staff Academy. The UO 
leaders make no secret of the fact that they receive prompt 
information on what is going on in the top echelons, including 
that from top-secret documents. 
  "The entire anti-Grachev opposition at the RF Ministry of 
Defense is ready to cooperate with the Union of Officers," the 
MN correspondent was told by a major-general, who spoke on 
condition of anonymity. His confidence is based on the 
assumption that officers' discontent with the present leadership 
of the Defense Ministry is being fuelled with mounting 
suspicions of corruption. "We actively collect compromising 
documents bearing witness to financial-material crimes," the 
major-general admitted, "to make them public at the right moment 
and introduce a split between the group of generals waxing fat 
and the officer corps being impoverished." In conditions when 
army officers do not get their pay for three months, the stake 
on their discontent is a sure winner. 
  It is significant that present at the congress were not only 
students of military academies, but also generals of the Defense 
Ministry and unit commanders who were not afraid to come in 
military uniform. It is possible that this happened because 
there were no TV reporters at the congress. 
  Admitting that after the October events the Union of 
Officers 
was "in comatose state," the delegates approved the actions of 
Terekhov, who had "called to account those who were 
shilly-shally at the period of his arrest," carried out 
personnel replacements and established firm discipline in the 
organization on the basis of one-man command. However, from now 
on the Union of Officers intends to be more wary in its actions. 
Terekhov never tired to repeat that "today the forces are not 
equal, which is why everything possible must be done to prevent 
a direct clash with the regime which is looking for a pretext 
for forcibly crushing its opponents." Not fearing being reputed 
for being banal, the UO leader told his comrades-in-arms that, 
according to his information, the authorities were preparing 
provocations on May 1 and 9 to impose a state of emergency on 
the country. 
  The following day, the officers created the Russian State 
Party (RSP). The leaders of the UO stressed that the RSP was not 
a subsidiary of their association and not a parallel structure, 
but its main mission was "to cater to the political interests of 
the Union of Officers." Another objective is to show that UO 
members are not "extremists" but "political leaders." According 
to Terekhov's words, the RSP must, with the use of permitted 
methods, "bring to power those committed to the state." Terekhov 
did not rule out that the party would nominate its candidate at 
the coming elections. 
  Representatives from the "patriotic" opposition did not 
attend the RSP congress. True, the day before Yuri Vlasov said 
that "the people are looking forward to a party in which they 
will believe and which they will follow." Sergei Baburin wished 
the RSP success in its joint work with the Russian All-People 
Union, and Zhirinovsky vowed friendship to the Union of Officers 
and transparently advised: "If all of a sudden you are unable to 
nominate your candidate at the presidential elections, it is 
important to find your bearings in time..." It is evident that 
the patriots took a cautious stand towards the formation of a 
new party, seeing it as a "competing firm." The patriotic 
electorate has already been divided and the emergence of a new 
organization may alter the balance of forces. To prevent this, 
the veterans of patriotism want to have the officers as their 
allies. 
  MN file 
  The Union of Officers was formed at the end of 1991. 
The purpose of the formation is "to assist the cohesion of 
officers on state-patriotic ideas." As seen by analysts, the 
Union is one of the most radical factions in the country. Its 
followers fought in the wars in Karabakh, Abkhazia and Serbia. 
There is no accurate information about the UO's real forces and 
influence. However, on the eve of the October events, the UO 
leader, Stanislav Terekhov, said that if needed, he could have 
as many as 25,000 men under arms. The Union has 47 regional 
departments in practically all the republics of the former 
USSR, including the Baltics. It belongs as a collective member 
to the National Salvation Front. The UO's Chairman is Stanislav 
Terekhov. He was born in 1953 in Moscow. In 1976, he graduated 
from the Leningrad Higher Military-Political School of the Air 
Defense Forces. He served in Siberia, the Trans-Baikal Area and 
in the Russian Far East. In 1987, he entered the Lenin 
Military-Political Academy (now the Humanitarian Academy). From 
1990--he was a postgraduate of the chair of law. 

