CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Yermolin, KRASNAYA ZVEZDA: "A Draft Law </F>
on the Defense Order Exists. The Important Thing Is for It Not 
To Be Pigeonholed"] 
  [Text] A discussion of the bill "On the State Defense 
Order" took place in the State Duma Committee for Industry, 
Construction, Transportation and Energy. By this point 
ministries and departments interested in the law in one way or 
another had studied the draft and had supplemented it with their 
own proposals. Around 30 major defense industry enterprises also 
submitted their conclusions to the Committee. After undergoing 
some changes, the bill departed for the next segment of its 
thorny path--according to the Duma calendar, consideration in 
the first reading lies ahead at the end of June. 
  Grigoriy Zhorin, head of the military-industrial complex 
sector in the Duma Committee, who put much effort into the law 
for the defense industry back behind the walls of the Russian 
Federation Supreme Soviet, does not rule out that opponents of 
the draft will be found in the Duma, inasmuch as it is a 
question of the federal budget. And recent parliamentary debates 
over the 1994 state budget showed that there are many proponents 
of financial suffocation of defense enterprises among deputies. 
The fact is, the R18 trillion being sought (and rejected in the 
course of the first reading) were intended specifically for the 
defense order. But those same votes showed that there still were 
more people in the hall who understood this (according to my 
observations, around 170), which means there also is hope for 
success. 
  Strictly speaking, what is this law about that is coming 
into 
being? It defines the status and the legal and economic 
principles of forming, placing and fulfilling the State Defense 
Order for delivery of products and fulfillment of work in the 
interests of Russia's defense, security, and law and order. A 
provision has been put into a legal rule for the first time that 
the development and series manufacture of set-completing 
articles and special materials is an inalienable part of the 
defense order (a through [skvoznoy] order). Program development 
of arms and military equipment is envisaged for periods of 15, 
10 and 5 years, and even for one year. An article is included 
about mandatory execution of the defense order and about the 
parties' responsibility. 
  In the developers' opinion, the Law "On the State Defense 
Order" will permit realizing Russian Federation military 
doctrine more fully and will strengthen the financial incentive 
of all executors of the State Defense Order, including for 
creating and producing set-completing articles and materials 
regardless of forms of ownership and departmental subordination. 
The law will elevate the role of state contracts and agreements, 
will allow competitive placement of the defense order to be put 
into practice, and guarantees material-technical resources for 
needs of the military-industrial complex. 
  Of course, no matter how ideal it might be, the law itself 
can remain only good intentions if the state does not find the 
money to support it. The paradox of our present economic life 
consists specifically of the fact that at times one has to 
"defend himself against the state itself." And any federal 
budget knocked together according to the principle "the fewer 
funds allocated for defense, the better" will reduce the most 
sensible law, including one on the defense order, to dust. It 
would appear the budget is above the law. Sometimes it seems to 
be above the Constitution. At any rate, purely financial 
considerations have been winning victories lately over any other 
considerations, even those of common sense. And the financier 
offhandedly pins both physicists as well as lyric poets to the 
mat. In this struggle the military and defense industry workers 
are placed in the lightest weight category. 
  But one should not grieve in advance, especially as the bill 
is destined to pass through the filters of committees and 
discussions of the first and second readings. Perhaps it will 
acquire "armor" in the form of an article which will make it 
inaccessible to the whim of bureaucrats. 
  In addition, one should remember that the law is not as 
important as the procedure for its application. One can 
proclaim, for example, the obligatoriness of the State Defense 
Order being executed by enterprises and organizations regardless 
of forms of ownership, but how is this provision to be combined 
practically with the market's legal declarations? Or tax 
breaks--one cannot get by here without an extensive explanation 
of the tax department. The law provides only general directions. 
Again, much will depend on what procedure will be established by 
the government for determining volumes, time periods of delivery 
and the list of material-technical resources subject to 
allocation. It is understandable that the bill is incapable of 
answering the question (and therefore does not do so) of what to 
do if a paralysis of nonpayments breaks up the domestic economy. 
Where then should one go with this law and what doors should be 
forced open? 
  I deliberately will not concretize the content of the bill. 
It will be possible to speak objectively about articles only 
after the first reading. We are saying that a law can be good to 
the extent to which it does not contradict the realities of 
life. And there are grounds to assume that the bill's developers 
are standing firmly on sinful soil and not getting carried away 
by speculative models. I also consider evidence of this to be 
the temperate optimism of Grigoriy Zhorin, who understands that 
the defense industry needs an entire package of laws, but who 
also is ready to thank God if He helps push through at least the 
one law--"On the State Defense Order." 

