BFN 

<F P=106> ["Press Review" -- ITAR-TASS headline] </F>
  [Text] Moscow June 2 TASS -- Anti-crime measures, the major 
aspects of President Boris Yeltsin's policy line, taxation 
policy, relief to victims of conflicts, NATO-Russia 
relationships, lack of housing for servicemen, and Aleksandr 
Solzhenitsyn's stay in the Far East are major topics in today's 
Moscow-based newspapers. 
  NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA carries a regular survey by the glasnost 
protection foundation under the headline "The Persecution of 
Journalists and the Press in Ex-USSR: May 1994". 
  Three journalists were killed in May, another three were 
beaten up, and 19 were subjected to persecution on the part of 
the state, according to the survey which was compiled by expert 
Oleg Panfilov on the strength of reports by periodicals, human 
rights organisations, and journalists during last month. 
  ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA runs an interview with Russian Minister 
of 
Justice Yuriy Kalmykov, who expressed the conviction that the 
main task in combating crime is in securing the inevitability of 
punishment for offenders, not in toughening penalties. Almost a 
half of all registered crimes last year remained unexposed (and, 
it means, went unpunished). About 1.5 million criminals were 
thus not arraigned for trial, he said. 
  Touching upon possible miscarriages of justice, the minister 
said the number of these is on the decrease. Judicial errors 
are caused, in the minister's view, by low quality of 
preliminary investigation and court examination, excessive 
workload of judges, and in particular, by an inadeguate 
competence of some judges. 
  NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA carries an interview with Aleksandr 
Livshits, leader of the group of experts to the president of the 
Russian Federation, who elucidates the president's economic 
reform policy line. The expert declined to indicate a specific 
time-frame for the signing of a second package of presidential 
economic decrees but said that one will not have to wait for 
this "for several months". 
  According to Livshits, the main aspects of the presidential 
policy are to decide what to do with debtor enterprises, work 
out a single procedure for the provision of privileges to 
enterprises, adopt specific decrees dealing with investment, to 
attract foreign investments to the production sphere, in 
particular, and to bring about changes in the banking sector. 
  In TRUD, Vladimir Gusev raises financial problems connected 
with taxation policy. The existing taxation system accords with 
the realities of the country's present-day economic situation 
but it is in need of certain adjustment, he told the newspaper. 
Gusev considers it necessary to sharply reduce the number of 
taxes and suggests delimiting clearly the competence and powers 
of legislative power bodies in the centre and at the local level 
to introduce new types of taxes. A decrease in the number of 
taxes, in his view, should automatically lead to an easing of 
the tax burden. 
  ROSSIYSKAYA GAZETA carries an article reporting that 
Konstantin Tsiolkovskiy, a great Russian scientist, the founder 
and theoretician of cosmonautics, was arrested in Kaluga in 1919 
and escorted to Moscow wehre he was kept for two weeks in the 
building of the extraordinary commission to combat 
counterrevolution, sabotage and speculation (cheka) on Lubyanka. 
The article is written by the newspaper's own correspondent 
Boris Sopelnyak, who was one of the first journalists to see 
case no. 1,096 on "counterrevolutionary activity" charges 
against the scientist. 
  In ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI, Vladimir Rubanov, deputy secretary of 
Russia's security council, comments on the presidential decree 
"on urgent measures to implement a federal programme to step up 
action to combat crime in 1994-1995". It is emphasised that, as 
a result of the measures, the numerical strength of police and 
special-purpose troops is to increase by 52,000 men. 
  In KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA, Tyeri Meira, leader of the Moscow 
delegation of the International Committee of the Red Cross 
(ICRC), said that from January to March 1994 alone, the 
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), sent 505,700 
swiss francs worth of food parcels to Azerbaijan victims of 
conflict, and 141,500 swiss francs worth of food aid to Armenia. 
The committee also provided relief to residents of Abkhazia and 
Georgia and victims of the Ossetian-Ingush conflict, Meira told 
the newspaper. 
  KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA carries Air Marshal Yevgeniy 
Shaposhnikov's article dealing with the Russian-NATO 
relationships. The invitation to join NATO's Partnership for 
Peace programme placed Russia before a difficult and responsible 
choice, the marshal writes, examining probable situations and 
possible consequences of such a choice. 
  KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA points out that there is a shortage of 
housing in Moscow for more than 7,000 servicemen, mostly senior 
officers of the main and central departments of the Defence 
Ministry. "In Soviet times, high-ranking servicemen were on 
housing waiting lists for two years at most. Nowadays 102 
generals and admirals in Moscow and 169,700 officers in the 
whole of Russia have no housing". 
  ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI, under the rubric "For Slow Reading", runs 
Lev Navrozov's article headlined "How `PRAVDA' and `Zhirinovskiy 
PRAVDA' understand polemics". Navrozov carries on his debate 
with LDPR leader Vladimir Zhirinovskiy and his supporters on 
various political aspects. 

