Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Colonel Aleksandr Andryushkov article under "Topical </F>
Subject" rubric: "Runway"] 
  [Text] The situation now developing in the Air Force is 
such that, even given combat-ready aircrew and a fleet of 
serviceable aircraft, they might never get into the sky. 
  There is one reason: Every day airfields are becoming 
increasingly unfit for use. Moreover, the entire range of 
airfield administration and support services needs emergency aid. 
  A modern airfield, for fighter aircraft for example, 
consists 
of tens of hectares of artificial surfaces -- the runway, 
taxiways, and flight line parking spaces. In addition, it has 
around 100 various facilities and many kilometers of 
special-purpose supply lines, pipe, and ducts above and below 
ground. 
  "Russia's airfield network," Major General Vladimir 
Yermakov, 
deputy chief of the Air Force Main Engineering Directorate, 
says, "is part of the country's overall infrastructure." The 
Union's disintegration also led to the network's disintegration, 
and has faced us with a number of very complex problems 
associated with the combat readiness of all Armed Forces 
branches and the state's defense capability as a whole. Before 
this our attention was concentrated on the western direction, 
where powerful air combat forces were stationed. They had 
high-quality, well-equipped airfields with concrete surfaces, 
from which all types of heavy bomber could operate. 
  Many aviation units have now been withdrawn to Russia with 
their combat equipment. But an airfield is not an aircraft -- 
you cannot lift it into the air in order to rebase it in the 
Moscow region or beyond the Urals. Now the well-equipped 
airfields belong to Ukraine, Belarus, and the Baltic countries. 
After the "carve-up" Russia was left with 100 
artificial-surface airfields which are now forming the basic 
foundation of the Russian Air Force, Air Defense Forces 
aviation, and other branches of the Armed Forces. Aircraft use 
of many of these has doubled or tripled in the last few years. 
Russia is in no position to construct new ones. A modern 
airfield complex costs in the region of 250-300 billion rubles 
[R]. Too expensive an amusement for the country's unstable 
economy. 
  "We have been forced," Vladimir Nikolayevich says, "to adapt 
existing airfields for heavy aircraft, but most airfields are 
not suitable for this. As a result of the very first flights 
runway and taxiway surfaces were put out of action." 
<H5>  Our Information </H5>
  Around 70 percent of Russia's airfields are constructed 
of slabs like SAS [PAG] (smooth airfield slab). The "life" of 
such a slab is 25 years. When used by modern aircraft the 
slab's service life is reduced to 10-12 years. Previously one 
smooth airfield slab cost R175. The cost is still 175,000. The 
Air Force has no money, and this year a request was made for 
only 5.8 batches of slabs -- and 2.9 were received. 
  What could this situation lead to? To the impossibility of 
carrying out routine airfield maintenance according to the 
schedule: One airfield is repaired and the rest are in 
operation. But if repairs are not carried out airfields will go 
out of action en masse. Repairing several airfields in a large 
strategic formation all at one time would mean failing to ensure 
the formation's combat readiness. 
  But even the availability of slabs does not solve airfields' 
problems. Smooth airfield slabs have their weak spot -- the 
joints. A standard airfield runway has around 100 km of such 
joints. In order to ensure flight safety, to prevent water from 
finding its way beneath the pavement, and to prevent foreign 
bodies from getting into aircraft engines, the joints are filled 
with special bitumen mastic, which heavy aircraft cause to be 
extruded during takeoff and landing. 
  Thus, Air Force personnel are not in a position to construct 
new airfields with solid reinforced concrete surfaces. To 
reconstruct existing airfields would also involve an immense 
amount of work. Thus, maybe the solution is to use airfields 
competently and carefully look after them using equipment and 
facilities? 
  "Do not press a sore point," Gen. Yermakov says. "The 
complex task of operational and routine maintenance of airfields 
is the duty of specialists in airfield operations subunits." 
They monitor the condition of runway, taxiway, and flight line 
parking space surfaces. It is their job to mark them, clear 
snow and ice-glaze from them, and repair them. These subunits 
have special airfield operations equipment at their disposal. 
In the Air Force as a whole slightly over 60 percent of units 
are equipped with it. For a long time now we have not been 
writing off vacuum cleaning vehicles ("dustbusters"), heating 
vehicles, rotary screw snowplows, and combination washing and 
watering vehicles which have exceeded their service life. We 
cannibalize one vehicle out of two or three. 
  Deliveries from industry of spare parts and new vehicles 
have 
almost stopped. During the entire year the Air Force did not 
receive a single combination washing and watering or heating 
vehicle. But these are the main workhorses on an airfield, 
especially in winter. Day and night they crawl around it, 
getting it in order. Because of the equipment shortage the Air 
Force, as the general client for such equipent, has not 
delivered a single item for Air Defense aviation, the Strategic 
Rocket Forces, or the Navy. 
  So it turns out that the current winter is a survival test 
for airfield personnel. Almost all Russian airfields are 
located in severe climatic conditions. Airfield operations 
equipment must therefore be delivered to units under state order 
conditions. 
  Unfortunately, whatever problem you take its solution is 
held 
up by finance. Air Force specialists have proposals on methods 
of obtaining funds. One of them is to lease out unused airfield 
facilities and charge other departments for using military 
airfields and aircraft parking spaces. Nobody is banning the 
idea, but nobody is supporting it either. This is at a time 
when military aircrew at other people's airfields are being 
robbed blind without compunction. Our civilian colleagues have 
gotten this mechanism all worked out and it is yielding profit, 
which enables them to maintain the airfield administration and 
support services in working condition. 
  The situation regarding the Russia's airfield administration 
and support services deteriorates every year. But the Air Force 
command does not sit idly waiting for manna from heaven. 
<H5>  Our Information </H5>
  In September 1992 the Air Force High Command devised a 
plan to improve the Air Force's basing and rear services system, 
bearing in mind the concept for developing them until 2000. It 
was considered by the Russian Federation Defense Ministry and 
approved on 10 July 1993. The Air Force Commander-in-Chief and 
the high commands of other branches of the Armed Forces which 
have aviation were instructed to implement a plan to reconstruct 
and equip the Russian airfield network. Through the efforts of 
Air Force airfield engineer battalions 564,000 square meters of 
artificial surfaces have already been laid (around 50 percent of 
them at airfields being used for troop withdrawal), and 
selective repairs to runways, taxiways, and flight line parking 
spaces have been carried out. 
  In short, by saving every ruble military aviation personnel 
are trying to maintain their airfield administration and support 
services at a state of combat readiness. But the Air Force 
cannot solve this problem without support at the state level. 

