CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Vladimir Jancura: "Conversation With Anna </F>
Meciarova"] 
  [Text] Ladomerska Vieska, a hamlet in the shadow of Ziar 
nad Hronom and a mammoth aluminium works. The birthplace of the 
former prime minister and chairman of the Movement for a 
Democratic Slovakia [HZDS]. The last time I visited the house on 
the hill was two years ago. It was the same kind of time--early 
spring and before elections. Anna Meciarova was already 75 years 
old, but she had a lively interest in politics and was downright 
sparkling with humor--earthy, folksy, working-class humor. After 
all, she worked for 30 years in the Ziar factory, most of the 
time in the oxidization section. In the past two years, she has 
become stooped and sad. "Since Vlado was removed as prime 
minister," she says, "I have not watched television or read the 
newspapers." Last fall, her youngest son, Jaroslav, died 
unexpectedly of a fatal disease. He was only 38 years old. When 
we met for the last time, he was in charge of the basic SDL 
[Party of the Democratic Left] organization in their community. 
"There are only six of us here, but all are young people," he 
told me. I do not believe a rightist and a leftist could not get 
on together," he insisted even then, two years ago. "Only two 
idiots are incapable of coexistence." It appears that time is 
beginning to prove him right. 
  Anna Meciarova is not hiding her fear that she could lose 
her 
oldest son as well. "His enemies want to finish Vlado off," she 
repeats. As a mother, she does not believe one word of the 
accusations cast on her son in the parliament. "I brought up all 
of my sons equally well, and I love them all equally," she 
reminisces. "We had a hard life. My husband was a tailor, and I 
was training to be a seamstress, but, at the beginning of the 
1950's, they took away our business, took away our land, and 
designated us exploiters. Moreover, my husband was disabled and 
so was able to work only as a policeman. I worked in 
shifts--seven morning, seven afternoon, and seven night shifts. 
My husband also worked nights. Therefore, our children were 
often left to manage on their own and did not have much 
opportunity to enjoy parental love. Vlado was the oldest and 
therefore had to take care of his three brothers. When he 
graduated from high school, we sent him to study metallurgy in 
Kosice. But the local national committee gave him a bad 
evaluation--son of a small businessman. After five months, he 
had to come back home...." When did he last visit his family 
home? 
  "Two weeks ago. He placed flowers on the graves of his 
father 
and brother. They lie next to each other...." 
  Tears well up in Mother Meciarova's eyes, but she fights 
them 
back and changes the subject. She has recently recovered from a 
bad accident and is still hurting all over. Her daughter-in-law 
Mariena, Jaroslav's widow, takes care of her. When she leaves 
for work in the morning, she locks the gate--today one can never 
be sure. 
  In that two-year-old picture, A. Meciarova is standing in 
the 
garden behind their house, next to the cross with two arms that 
they put up in 1943 in honor of the Slovak Republic. Almost 50 
years later, in Bratislava, she participated in celebrating the 
birth of the second Slovak Republic. "At that time, they 
applauded Vlado with cries of hosanna, and today they want to 
crucify him? That can't be true." In parting she says: "Tell 
them in Bratislava that our people continue to believe in Vlado." 

