OFFICIAL USE ONLY 
<F P=103> 94UM0237F </F>
<F P=104>  Moscow ZARUBEZHNOYE VOYENNOYE OBOZRENIYE </F>
<F P=105>  Russian </F>
CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Lietenant-Colonel A. Manachinskiy, candidate of </F>
military sciences] 
  [Text] A U.S. armored division is a tactical large unit 
which conducts combat operations as part of an army corps 
usually on the axis of its main thrust. It may operate 
independently on isolated axes. Organizationally, during 
peacetime a U.S. armored division includes the headquarters of 
three brigades, six tank battalions, four motorized infantry 
battalions, an army aviation brigade, division artillery, an 
antiaircraft battalion, and combat and logistic support units 
and subunits. 
  As an air defense installation, an armored division is the 
sum total of small, highly mobile (tanks, armored reconnaissance 
vehicles [ARV's], infantry fighting vehicles [IFV's], armored 
personnel carriers [APC's]), area (command and control 
facilities, communications centers, artillery positions), and 
linear targets (columns of units and subunits on a march). In 
the opinion of American military experts, the main targets of 
concentrated enemy airstrikes against a division will be: 
First-echelon brigades during their advance, commitment to 
battle, and conduct of combat operations; second-echelon 
(reserve) brigades in the concentration area and during 
commitment to battle (repelling an enemy counterattack); 
artillery groupings; command and control facilities; and 
communications centers. 
  Air defense weapons are also considered priority targets of 
airstrikes. Experience of combat operations of multinational 
forces in the Persian Gulf area showed that the targets of 
airstrikes by the anti-Iraq coalition were primarily Iraq's air 
defense forces and assets, and troop and weapons command and 
control facilities. In particular, the echelon for suppression 
of Iraq's air defenses included about one-third of the combat 
aircraft of the multinational forces participating in the 
massive raid. 
  The most important installations on line of communication 
and 
on routes of advance (bridges, tunnels, mountain passes, 
crossings over water obstacles) will also be subjected to enemy 
air attack. In all, in a division's area of responsibility there 
may be 10-20 battalion-type installations, up to 100 
company-type, and about 10 various command and control 
facilities. 
  The number of small targets in an armored division may 
exceed 
900 (see below). 


------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Organic Armament:                                                            | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Tanks                                 |348                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|IFV                                   |216                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|ARV                                   |118                                   | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|155-mm self-propelled howitzer        |72                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|MLRS                                  |9                                     | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Mortars                               |66                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Self-propelled ATGM                   |48                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|Attached armament:                    |                                      | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
|155-mm self-propelled howitzer        |72                                    | 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 


  [Text] The presence of a large number of objects as part of 
an 
armored division requires reliable cover against airstrikes, 
which is the main purpose of air defense. 
  A Chaparral-Vulcan air defense battalion is the standard air 
defense subunit of an armored division, the advantage of which 
is in the combination of antiaircraft artillery and 
surface-to-air missile [SAM] systems. A battalion has a 
headquarters, headquarters battery, four main batteries (two 
Chaparral SAM and two Vulcan self-propelled antiaircraft gun 
batteries). A battery includes a headquarters section, three 
platoons of self-propelled Chaparral SAM's or Vulcan 
self-propelled antiaircraft guns (four squads in each), and a 
platoon of Stinger portable SAM's (12-20 SAM's). A battalion may 
have a total of 24 Chaparral SAM's, 24 Vulcan self-propelled 
antiaircraft guns, and up to 80 Stinger portable SAM's. The 
battalion's headquarters and headquarters battery have a radar 
platoon which has eight FAAR target acquisition radars. 
  Depending on the missions to be accomplished, a division may 
receive as reinforcement an Improved Hawk SAM battalion and 
Vulcan self-propelled antiaircraft gun subunits from the army 
corps air defense brigade. Counting reinforcements, there may be 
a total of 27 Improved Hawk launchers, 24 Chaparral SAM's, 48 
Vulcan self-propelled guns, and up to 80 Stinger portable SAM's 
in the division's area of responsibility. 
  An analysis of the specifications and performance 
characteristics of a division's air defense assets shows that 
all these assets are able to successfully repel enemy airstrikes 
at extremely low, low, and middle altitudes. At the same time, 
in clear weather and during the daylight, organic air defense 
assets may fire at up to 90 airborne targets and up to 18 
targets in instrument weather conditions and at night. 
  A division's air defense is organized based on the decision 
of its commander. The commander of the antiaircraft battalion 
exercises direct supervision of the air defense, acting 
simultaneously as the division's chief of air defense. Together 
with the commanders of attached antiaircraft subunits, he draws 
up recommendations for using air defense assets and reports them 
to the division commander. In making the battle plan, the latter 
determines the missions of each air defense subunit, its place 
in the division battle formation, the maneuver during the course 
of combat, and coordination with the subunits being covered. 
  To conduct combat operations, air defense assets are 
deployed 
into a battle formation which should ensure maximum use of the 
combat capabilities of the antiaircraft systems, reliable cover 
for the most important installations, and mutual fire cover. An 
Improved Hawk battalion is located primarily in the division's 
rear area 15-20 km from the line of contact. Intervals and gaps 
between batteries can reach 20-30 km, which makes it possible to 
accomplish their mutual cover. This battalion is usually tasked 
with increasing cover for the first-echelon brigades and direct 
cover of division command and control facilities, artillery 
position areas, staging areas of the army aviation brigade, and 
the division's most important installations in the rear area. 
During the course of combat operations, battalion subunits 
relocate by echelons in order to ensure continuous cover for the 
division's forward units. A battalion may make two or three 
relocations in a 24-hour period. 
  An organic antiaircraft battalion provides cover for 
first-echelon and second-echelon (reserve) brigades, command and 
control facilities and communications centers of the division 
and brigades, march columns of troops, and important 
installations on the routes of advance. Battalion batteries are 
employed at full strength or by platoon, since the most 
effective use of their fire capabilities is achieved in this 
way. Autonomous operations by individual SAM's, self-propelled 
antiaircraft guns, and portable SAM's are not ruled out. 
  The battle formation of an antiaircraft battalion is 
structured so as to ensure reliable cover of troops from the 
most dangerous axes of operations by enemy air attack weapons. 
To this end, the positions of Chaparral SAM's are located 3-5 km 
apart, and positions of Vulcan self-propelled guns are located 
up to 1 km apart. The battalion's battle formation is usually 
disposed in depth. The fire positions of Vulcan self-propelled 
antiaircraft guns are situated 1.5 km and those of Chaparral 
SAM's are situated 5 km from the line of contact. 
  A Chaparral SAM battery relocates in such a way as to 
provide 
cover for forward battalions, primarily from low and extremely 
low altitudes. Vulcan batteries usually operate jointly with the 
subunits being covered. Subunits armed with Stinger portable 
SAM's are intended for direct cover of troops and operate in the 
battle formations. One or two portable SAM crews are assigned to 
a motorized infantry (tank) company and artillery brigade for 
this. The gaps and intervals between them may be 2-3 km. During 
the course of combat operations, the portable SAM crews relocate 
behind the forward companies and are used according the plans of 
the battalion commanders in accordance with the division's 
general air defense plan. 
  The basic mission of an armored division's air defense in an 
offensive is to cover troops and objects when moving forward, 
deploying, and conducting combat operations. Objects of cover 
include first-echelon brigades conducting combat operations on 
the main axis, the division's second echelon during its 
commitment to battle and deep offensive exploitation, artillery 
at positions, command and control facilities, communications 
centers, and army aviation staging areas. The artillery 
battalion is tasked with covering troops against enemy 
airstrikes primarily from low and extremely low altitudes. 
  Up to two batteries of Vulcan self-propelled guns and one 
Chaparral SAM battery may be attached to a first-echelon brigade 
operating on the main axis. The Vulcan guns may be tasked with 
covering first-echelon subunits of brigades operating in the 
division's first echelon. The Chaparral battery is used for 
covering brigade second echelons and command posts. The 
division's combat operations control center is covered by the 
third battery of Vulcan self-propelled antiaircraft guns, and 
the division's second-echelon brigade is usually covered by one 
of the batteries of the attached Improved Hawk SAM battalion. 
The Vulcan self-propelled guns (lateral spacing between guns not 
more than 1000 meters) operate, as a rule, as part of a platoon. 
Stinger portable SAM crews are located in the battle formations 
of the battalions to be covered. 
  Organizing an armored division's air defense calls for a 
deeper alignment of battle formations of air defense assets, 
assignment of a portion of them for operations as part of cover 
troops being sent out up to 25 km (sometimes more) from the 
forward edge, and also for protecting subunits assigned to 
general security. The main efforts of the division's air defense 
assets are directed at covering the troops defending in the main 
area, reserves, command posts, communications centers, and 
installations in the rear area. In the opinion of military 
experts, the air defense of an armored division in the defense 
should ensure more reliable cover for troops and objects than in 
an offensive. 
  The command authorities of the U.S. Army devote special 
attention to organizing air defense of troops on the march, 
believing that an armored division will be subjected to intense 
pressure from an air enemy when moving up from the depth (from 
waiting or concentration areas). Vulcan self-propelled 
antiaircraft guns are a quite effective means of protecting 
advancing columns. Crews of Stinger portable SAM's are 
positioned at the head of march columns. It is recommended to 
locate Chaparral SAM positions where routes of advance pass, and 
the distances between these positions may be up to 2 km. 
  An Improved Hawk battalion uses as a reconnaissance asset a 
pulsed-radiation radar (AN/MPQ-50) for detecting air targets at 
medium and high altitudes at distances up to 100 km and a 
continuous-wave radar (AN/VPQ-48) for detecting low-flying 
targets at distances up to 60 km. A Chaparral-Vulcan battalion 
has eight radar complexes, each of which includes a FAAR radar 
with an operating range of up to 20 km and an TADDS automated 
data transmission system with a electronic plotting board as a 
terminal device. 
  The air search radars are deployed in the division's area of 
responsibility to provide antiaircraft subunits with data on the 
air enemy. 
  Control of the radars depends on the specific combat 
situation and may be as follows: 
  --Centralized on the scale of an antiaircraft division. In 
this case, the radars are deployed by the platoon commander in 
accordance with instructions of the battalion headquarters. The 
battalion commander controls the radars via radar officers of 
the battalion headquarters. 
  --Decentralized, when the radars are attached to the firing 
batteries controlling them. It is used when communications lines 
do not support centralized control. 
  --Mixed, if some of the radars are attached to the batteries 
and the rest remain under subordination of the battalion 
commander. Stinger portable SAM sections and crews are equipped 
with electronic plotting boards and receive air situation 
information from the closest radars. 
  The division commander exercises overall control of the air 
defense. At the combat operations control center there is an 
airspace monitor group made up of representatives from air 
defense assets and army aviation. It provides air situation 
information to the antiaircraft subunits. A communications and 
coordination group, which is located at the battalion command 
post, is created to organize coordination of the division's 
organic air defense assets with the Improved Hawk battalion. It 
provides warning of a possible enemy air attack, relays 
information about air targets, and determines the procedure for 
repelling an enemy airstrike. 
  Evaluating the experience of armored division operations in 
local wars and at exercises, American military experts have 
concluded that its air defense system is not reliable enough. 
Air defense assets (organic and attached) do not ensure cover of 
all the division's important objects in various types of combat 
and on the march, and a large part of the armament cannot be 
used in instrument weather conditions, as a result of which the 
combat capabilities of the air defense grouping decrease 
sharply. Control of a considerable number of portable SAM's is 
also made difficult, which decreases the effectiveness of their 
combat employment. 
  Therefore, it is planned to improve the air defense systems 
of "heavy" U.S. divisions, particularly armored divisions, by 
replacing the antiaircraft armament with more improved and 
advanced armament, creating a fundamentally new automated 
control system for division air defense that ensures control of 
all air defense weapons in a complex air situation, and 
developing new aerial reconnaissance equipment. As a result of 
replacing the Chaparral SAM with the ADATS system, the impact 
zone will expand from 7 to 8 km in range and from 4 to 5 km in 
altitude, the reaction time will be reduced, and the number of 
SAM's on a launcher will double. 
  American military experts have concluded that in connection 
with the increase in combat capabilities of aviation and 
helicopters, it is necessary to increase substantially the 
effectiveness of air defense of combined-arms large units of the 
Army. To this end, the United States has developed the FAADS 
program, which calls for creating an integrated, fundamentally 
new division air defense system based on advanced SAM's and 
developing a divisional automated air defense control system. 
Such a system, according to the designers, will be able to 
ensure effective cover of troops against enemy airstrikes from 
low and extremely low altitudes in the division's area of 
responsibility. 
  Taking into account the fact that antiaircraft battalions 
today still have obsolete radars that have insufficient 
protection against jamming and target handling capacity, the 
LASR radar is seen as an alternative. 
  This radar makes it possible to automatically detect 
helicopters at a distance of 9-12 km and low-flying aircraft at 
a distance of up to 30 km with a probability of 0.97. It can 
operate autonomously, providing target designations for 
antiaircraft systems (target designations are received at the 
fire control post of the SAM or antiaircraft artillery system 
over the data transmission line), or be connected to the 
division-level automatic air defense control system being 
created. 
  If the LASR radar is used in a local air defense system, 
processing of target data is accomplished on a priority basis, 
and namely those air defense assets are designated which can hit 
the selected target taking into account the positions of fire 
assets on the terrain. The operator can manually select for 
destruction any target he considers the most dangerous. 
  According to the rearmament plan, between 1992 and 1995 the 
forces will receive 112 of the planned LASR radars, which will 
be mounted on the chassis of a 5-ton cross-country vehicle. 
  The new division-level automatic air defense control system 
being developed under the FAADS program will make it possible to 
accomplish command and control and target allocation more 
effectively and will ensure flight safety for friendly aviation 
and coordination with the corps air defense command post. 
  The planned rearmament of antiaircraft units and subunits of 
U.S. tactical air defense, in the opinion of military experts, 
will make it possible to increase considerably the reliability 
of covering large units and also to maintain their combat 
effectiveness at the required level both on the offensive and 
defense. 
  COPYRIGHT: "Zarubezhnoye voyennoye obozreniye", 1993 

