BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by ITAR-TASS correspondent Lyudmila Perkin] </F>
  [Text] Moscow 30 Apr -- "The most important thing for the 
Crimea now is to get real economic programs off the ground," 
Crimean President Yuriy Meshkov said today in an interview with 
ITAR-TASS. "We'll just hope they won't stop us doing that. 
  ``The makeup of Crimea's government has already been decided 
upon and there is cooperation with industrialists, entrepreneurs 
and agrarians. So now we're carrying out our planned economic 
aims," the president emphasized. He does not doubt that 
inhabitants of the peninsula support the line that has been 
taken. No groups, ethnic groupings or public movements are 
opposing it. 
  Yuriy Meshkov said that the newly elected Crimean Supreme 
Soviet would meet for its first session on 10 May. It is true 
that "the outgoing power is hanging on to every day, but these 
are the attempts of the doomed." In a word, everything is taking 
its course and the situation that has arisen on the peninsula 
does not worry the president. In his words, a businesslike 
situation is prevailing there, the supreme echelon of power has 
been established and everything is in working order. 
  "But that's inside our Republic, while outside it, in 
Ukraine, everything is a lot more complicated," Yuriy Meshkov 
stressed. "It is now clear that people have withdrawn their 
trust in Leonid Kravchuk and he has no support to stay in power. 
The only way he can achieve that is by creating tension and 
conflicts. You can see his hands reaching for the Crimea." 
  In the opinion of the president of the Crimea, evidence of 
this is provided by the actions of Ukrainian Defense Minister 
Vitaliy Radetskyy and attempts to deploy military units on the 
peninsula. This, Yuriy Meshkov is convinced, is all being done 
in order to keep Crimeans from dealing with the economy. It is 
this most of all which alarms and worries the Crimean president. 
  He is sure that the May holidays will, as always, proceed in 
a festive and good-humored manner in the Crimea. A march and 
demonstration on 1 May will start the holiday. On 2 May, 
partisans will get together for a May Day celebration. The 
first 10 days of May are full of famous dates in the Crimea 
--Sevastopol is celebrating the 50th anniversary of its 
liberation from the fascists while the whole peninsula is 
marking the anniversary of the Crimean constitution. Its towns 
are decorated and ready to receive thousands of visitors. 
Delegations from CIS countries and farther away are expected. 

