CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Ye. Frantseva under the heading "Politics": "New </F>
Movement Presses for Urals Revitalization"] 
  [Text] No members of the media were invited to the charter 
meeting of a social movement called "South Ural" [Yuzhnyy Ural]. 
However, the media were invited to the second meeting, held this 
past Saturday. In the intervening period the movement changed 
its name from a neutral one to one that is clearly more 
politicized: "For Revitalization of the Urals" [Za vozrozhdeniy 
Urala]. And even though in the program adopted at the first 
meeting and in all the movement's program points distributed to 
journalists at the second meeting the movement is always 
referred to as a social movement, nevertheless P. Sumin, its 
leader, and other speakers referred to it as both social and 
political. That appears to be closer to the truth. 
  Movement activists gave a political assessment of the 
reasons 
for the current situation in the oblast: "overly ambitious 
policies by the executive branch in the oblast center and 
locally that give little consideration to consequences...", "the 
authorities have little control over the situation at the local 
level and are not complying with laws, edicts and decrees..." 
  Among the objectives announced were opposition to any 
attempts to restrict the power of the people, support for 
domestic producers, efforts to increase the oblast's economic 
and administrative independence, and social justice. 
  Also presented at the meeting were the members of the 
movement's council, who fairly eloquently characterize this new 
association, which has aspirations of becoming a mass movement. 
In addition to P. Sumin, the head of the council, the other 
members will be: V. Utkin, State Duma deputy; jurist A. 
Salomatkin, former oblast soviet deputy chairman; D. Peters, 
former chief of Bredinskiy Rayon Administration; Professor V. 
Belkin, doctor of economic sciences; Professor G. Khashimov, 
dean of the Chelyabinsk State University Law Department; leaders 
of oblast communist organizations and the Working Chelyabinsk 
[Trudovoy Chelyabinsk] movement -- V. Buravlev, P. Svechnikov, 
V. Skachinskiy, V. Usanov and Yu. Kholshchigin -- and others. 
  At this meeting the leaders preferred not to discuss the 
movement's actual activities, which will soon be tied in with 
the election campaign, merely informing their supporters of the 
address and phone number of their headquarters and directing 
them to contact it for information. For the next meeting their 
are plans to present a list of candidates both for the 
Federation Council and the oblast Duma who will have the new 
movement's support. 

