BFN 

  [Text] Budapest, 3 May (MTI) -- The National Election 
Committee (NEC) held a session late Monday evening [2 May], and 
approved a position regarding the ongoing election campaign. 
According to the position, the Hungarian News Agency, Hungarian 
Radio and Hungarian Television cannot violate the fairness and 
impartiality of the parliamentary elections either in their 
election coverage, or in their election and other programmes. 
The position also calls on the public service media to strictly 
observe the campaign silence. 
  As was reported on Monday evening, President Arpad Goncz was 
the guest of the NEC session. NEC president Janos Nemeth 
informed members of the committee that the Hungarian President 
had indicated he would like to visit the session of the NEC at 
around 10 p.m. Sunday, May 8, after the first round of the 
elections. 
  The Hungarian Socialist Party (HSP) had asked the NEC to 
take 
a stand regarding the April 29 programme of Hungarian 
Television's current political magazine programme, Panorama, 
which carried, according to the HSP, slanderous remarks against 
HSP Chairman Gyula Horn. The HSP believes Hungarian Television 
carries out a negative campaign against the Socialist Party. 
  The leader of Hungarian Television's legal department, Emil 
Tallos, who was present at the NEC session on Monday evening, 
said he does not believe the NEC's authority extends to the 
issue as Hungarian Television is not an election organ. 
  The representative of the Hungarian Democratic Forum (HDF), 
Istvan Jakab, pointed out that the committee could not take a 
stand in the concrete issue because "no evidence motion was 
submitted when the complaint was lodged". 
  HSP Deputy Chairman, Imre Szekeres, who represented the 
party 
at the session, withdrew his complaint in the matter at the NEC 
session. Later, he told journalists that the HSP would submit 
its evidence motion in the concrete issue on Tuesday. 
  Szekeres also said the party had asked independent experts 
to 
examine the impartiality of programmes on Hungarian Television, 
and this document will also be submitted to the National 
Election Committee on Tuesday, for it to form an opinion. 

