BFN 

<F P=106> [By Philippe Debeusscher] </F>
  [Excerpts] Geneva, June 7 (AFP) -- Bosnia's warring 
parties remained far apart Tuesday [7 June] on the terms and 
length of a proposed cease-fire as they entered a second day of 
peace talks here, UN special envoy Yasushi Akashi said. 
  Serb forces meanwhile resumed intense shelling of the 
northern Bosnian town of Gradacac and neighboring villages, 
Radio Sarajevo reported. 
  "There are some significant differences which have to be 
bridged," Akashi told AFP just before resuming a series of 
separate talks with Bosnia's Croat and Moslem allies on the one 
hand and Bosnian Serb leaders on the other. 
  Akashi, working alongside UN peacekeeping chiefs General 
Bertrand Lapresle and General Michael Rose, is trying to 
convince both sides to accept a countrywide four-month 
cease-fire proposal put forward by international mediators 
attempting to negotiate a political solution to the conflict. 
  Leaders of the Croat-Moslem federation have demanded only an 
initial four-week cease-fire, with possible extensions being 
conditional on progress in the political talks. 
  In its latest proposals submitted late Monday, the 
federation 
also demanded that any cease-fire be supervised jointly by the 
UN peacekeeping force and NATO and that UN troops be stationed 
not along the front lines but behind them so as to better 
monitor the belligerents -- a demand UN officials said was 
another point of contention. [passage omitted] 
  Before entering Tuesday's talks, Akashi ruled out any UN 
approval of a cease-fire shorter than four months. 
  Asked if he would be prepared to accept the Croat-Moslem 
plan 
for the four-week renewable truce he answered firmly: "No, I am 
not." 
  The Moslem-led Bosnian Government fears that a lengthy 
cease-fire will simply freeze the situation on the ground in 
Bosnia-Herzegovina, where the Serbs control about 70 percent of 
the territory, and encourage the Serbs to stall in the political 
negotiations. 
  Those talks, mediated by the so-called contact group of 
European Union, Russian, UN and U.S. officials, are promoting an 
administrative breakup of Bosnia-Herzegovina which would give 
the Croat-Moslem federation 51 percent of the territory and the 
Serbs 49 percent. 
  Despite the persistent differences, Akashi expressed hope 
that Tuesday's talks would yield a truce accord and said he 
planned to return to his headquarters in Zagreb later in the day. 
  "Our negotiation with both parties separately is proceeding 
exceedingly well. The atmosphere is businesslike, frank and 
friendly." 
  While there were still "a few difficult questions which have 
to be resolved," he said, "we will make every effort possible to 
anchor the agreement by tonight." 
  Although the cease-fire talks were "separate from a 
political 
settlement...of course the two agreements have to be closely 
linked," he added. 
  Akashi first met the Serb delegation led by Radovan Karadzic 
on Tuesday morning for an hour before joining a meeting between 
UN Secretary General Butrus Butrus-Ghali and the joint heads of 
the Bosnian-Croat and Moslem delegation, Kresimir Zubak and Ejup 
Ganic. 
  "Then we will see the Bosnian side and the Serb side and we 
will repeat this throughout the day," Akashi said. 
  The UN envoy said he did not envisage the Bosnian 
delegations 
would sit at the same negotiating table except "for the 
signature" of an agreement. 

