BFN 

<F P=106> [From Europe editor David Wallen in London] </F>
  [Text] China has admitted for the first time to world 
shipping authorities that "a few law enforcement officers" may 
have been involved in smuggling and other incidents along the 
coast -- but it claims some reports of piracy are "groundless 
and very irresponsible". Smuggling has now become "rampant" 
along the coast, it admits in a paper, presented to the 
International Maritime Organisation (IMO), but it says it has 
investigated all incidents and, according to Chinese sources, 
they were "very complicated". 
  The Maritime Safety Committee of the IMO will meet between 
May 16-24 in London to consider what steps to take next in 
combatting the growing menace of piracy in the region. Around 
80 of the 149 members states are expected to attend, with China 
sending a team from Beijing. Hong Kong, which has associate 
status within the organisation, will send a team headed by Derek 
Hall, a former director of the Marine Department. 
  According to the IMO, piracy in the region is still on the 
increase, with 42 incidents reported in the east and south 
regions of the China Sea in the seven months to the end of last 
year -- out of 67 worldwide. IMO findings show 20 of them along 
the coast north and south of Shanghai, with the majority of the 
rest around the Philippines. Several countries have submitted 
papers to the IMO, often detailing particular incidents. 
  But in a statement indicating what some will see as an 
official reluctance to be too frank, the Chinese paper says: 
"The manifestations of the incidents were varied. Therefore it 
is not proper to regard all these incidents as 'pirate attacks' 
without investigation and evidence. 
  "Some of the acts were fishermen's disputes; others were 
misconduct by a few law enforcement officers while discharging 
their duties. The misconduct cases have been seriously 
investigated and proper action has been taken by the Chinese 
Government. 
  "However, such incidents were very rare, and should not be 
exaggerated as acts of piracy and there should be a clear 
distinction between such acts and the policy of the Chinese 
Government." 
  The Chinese Government has never commented on smuggling or 
piracy to the IMO in the past but in its paper it gives an 
assurance: "The Government will as always take effective 
measures to curb and suppress any unlawful activities 
(smuggling, piracy and armed robbery) which may sabotage peace 
and order." 
  It says some incidents "were normal law enforcement 
activities carried out by the Chinese law enforcement 
departments against foreign smuggling vessels". 
  China does not mention Hong Kong but it adds: "The reactions 
in this regard were different. Some of the normal 
anti-smuggling activities were maliciously labelled as piratical 
acts." The paper claims some incidents may have been caused by 
what it describes as "black ships" disguised as Chinese vessels. 
China and Japan had been co-operating in the investigation and 
suppression of such incidents. 
  It adds: "Some reports and statistics regarding the 
incidents of piracy in China's coast were groundless and very 
irresponsible. 
  "The Chinese Public Security Force is a highly disciplined 
and law abiding force. 
  "The Chinese navy is also a highly disciplined and armed 
national defence force and usually does not participate in 
anti-smuggling activities at sea, not to mention the possibility 
of robbing ships." 

