BFN 

  [Text] Shanghai, April 28 (XINHUA)--Chinese teenagers 
nowadays are enjoying a better material life but feeling mental 
pressures earlier than their parents did. 
  This phenomenon has drawn the attention of psychologists and 
educators, who are striving to tackle it. 
  A recent sample survey among 1,200 teenagers in this, 
China's 
largest economic center shows that 28.5 percent feel pressure 
from their studies; some 28 percent said they had trouble in 
building good relations with their teachers and classmates; 13 
percent were involved in love affairs; and 9.3 percent said they 
could not get along with their parents. 
  As China accelerates the process of modernization, it 
requires more and more talented people. To meet this need, the 
courses in primary and middle schools have become much more 
difficult, and schools and parents have set stricter demands on 
school children. 
  "All these things have imposed heavy ideological burdens on 
teenagers, who lack psychological preparation," the psychologist 
explained. 
  A student in grade three of a junior middle school said, "at 
present, I seem to live only for studying, eating and sleeping, 
and this is meaningless." 
  Sharing his feelings, many other students summed up school 
life as "living in a cage". 
  The contrast between the complex social reality and the 
ideal 
school ethical education is an important factor in teenagers' 
problems. 
  A middle school student said, "even if I enter a university, 
how much can I earn after graduation?" 
  Another grade two student in a middle school felt that "it 
is 
difficult to find a real friend". 
  Some parents estrange their children by refusing to confide 
in them. In addition, divorce and gambling cause young people 
to feel repugnance for their parents. 
  It is natural for teenagers to feel puzzled during puberty, 
according to psychologists, who have called on the whole of 
society, teachers and parents in particular, to help young 
people solve their psychological problems. 
  At present, Shanghai has a number of hotlines and special 
letter boxes as well as psychological consultancy stations 
specially for teenagers. 
  A survey shows that a letter box specially for youth has 
received more than 1,000 letters from young people since it 
opened here last year. 
  More than 30 teenagers have given up the idea of committing 
suicide, running away from their families or injuring others 
after receiving advice from psychologists and counselors 
specialising in work among teenagers. 
  Shanghai's Qinghua Middle School has made progress in this 
regard in form of heart-to-heart talks with students and helping 
them analyze the situation in present-day society. 
  Xu Zhixi, deputy head of the school, said, "the fundamental 
task of a school is to train students to adapt and contribute 
themselves to society. So if they have problems the school must 
do its utmost to help them." 
  Feng Enhong, head of Shanghai's Jianping Middle School, 
strongly opposed the training of students to be "examination 
machines" and the extension of class hours. 
  He encouraged teachers to improve their teaching methods and 
make their classes more interesting and relevant to modern 
problems. 

