BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Giuseppe Caravita: "The Sun Inside a Film"] </F>
  [Text] A semitransparent film, a few millimeters thick, is 
stretched over the roof of an automobile. It looks like a 
decorative covering that has been invented by some designer. It 
is really a highly efficient photovoltaic panel that is 40 
percent better than the silicon disc panels in current use. 
  Phos Batteries, a newly-formed company in Milan, will start 
to produce this film on an industrial scale next year. The thin 
lithium-metal based film is sandwiched between two layers of 
polymer (plastic) and is able to convert sunlight into an 
electric current and transfer it to a system of batteries that 
are also based on the same lithium-polymer technology. 
  The result is a clean, low-cost energy system. Above all, it 
will allow for the development of electric-solar vehicles (and 
an infinity of other applications) that are really within the 
reach of the mass consumer market. 
  "We are designing the first productive modules for the thin 
lithium-polymer film," said Federico Foti, researcher and 
founder of Phos, "and we will start production by the end of 
next year, using modular units that can continuously produce 
thin photovoltaic film or film for batteries (in practice it is 
the same) for 1 million Watt-years." Foti already has 
negotiations well underway for the batteries (that are three 
times more efficient than the traditional lead ones) ranging 
from electronics to portable computers and the electric car. 
Contacts are just starting for the application of the thin 
lithium-polymer film to photovoltaic panels, and the major 
European energy producers are also starting to take an interest. 
  "As well as the increased electrical efficiency that is 
intrinsic in photovoltaic energy via thin film," said Foti, 
"there is another great advantage to be taken into 
consideration. The transparent film does not require the 
special bulky and costly supports needed for silicon chip 
panels. In practice it can be stretched over any surface that 
is exposed to the sun, of any shape or curvature, and it is 
easily connected to the battery system using any normal electric 
wire." Therefore it is an innovation that can transform the 
roofs of houses and cars, and even greenhouses and agricultural 
awnings into electrical power plants. The installation costs 
are lower than those for solar energy today. 
  What led up to the discovery of this innovation, that is 
certainly one of the most promising the energy field has seen 
for some years? "Polymer electrolytes that can be used instead 
of the normal chemical electrolytes were developed in the United 
States some time ago," said Foti. "I came across this research 
some years ago when I was working for a group of Italian 
companies to study the best batteries for an electronic device. 
We already had an intuition, at that time, about the potential 
of these patents and we started a work group along these lines. 
The work group managed to develop some thin film prototypes by 
combining solutions that had been worked on in both the United 
States and in Italy (including some fundamental patents for 
polymer cathodes that had come out of Eniricerche), and 
prototype lithium-polymer batteries. Then we started to 
collaborate with an Italian company that specializes in the 
development of machines and production processes in this field, 
and that is now preparing the first production modules for the 
concrete launching of Phos." 
  There is only one other company in the world, the American 
company Valence Technology, that is preparing to compete with 
the Italian company Phos. This company was also set up by 
researchers, and it should start production of lithium-polymer 
batteries in the United States this year "but using a cathodic 
material," says Foti, "that we have tested in the laboratory and 
that has shown itself to be inferior to ours. The result is 
that their batteries will be slightly less powerful than ours 
and with a shorter lifespan than ours." 
  Certainly Valence, sponsored by the powerful American 
electric automobile consortium, has never given any signs in the 
photovoltaic direction, the other large field of application of 
the lithium-polymer film. "While we," adds Foti, "want to start 
field testing immediately and with integrated systems comprising 
a photovoltaic cell and a battery." An example is a solar 
electric car with a flat "superbattery" that is stretched (using 
thin film) over the chassis and under the seats. On the outer 
bodywork, the same film is able to capture solar energy. It is 
an urban electric vehicle that could function throughout the 
summer without ever being recharged, particularly in certain 
areas of Italy, but it would be able to assure the necessary 
autonomy for daily movements. It could be recharged once a week 
in winter using a normal electric socket outlet. This is Foti's 
dream and now it clearly seems to be nearer. 

