BFN 

<F P=106> [From the "Presidential Bulletin" feature: by Nikolay </F>
Zherebtsov, Andrey Petrovskiy; edited by Vladimir Shishlin] 
  [Text] Latvian President Guntis Ulmanis categorically 
rejected information spread by mass media and stating that 
Estonian President Lennart Meri allegedly declared at the 
meeting of the presidents of three Baltic states last Tuesday 
that having signed the package of agreements on troops 
withdrawal with Russia, Latvia had broken the integrity of the 
Baltic states. "The summit in Jurmala has not accused Latvia of 
the collapse of the Baltic states," Ulmanis stressed at a press 
conference in Riga. 
  Ulmanis has once again pointed to a confidential nature of 
the meeting between leaders of Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia, 
which lasted for six hours. Without disclosing any details, 
Ulmanis reported that the meeting primarily discussed problems 
of Russian troops withdrawal from Estonia and possibility to 
involve western states as mediators to settle contradictions 
between Tallinn and Moscow on conditions of forces withdrawal. 
In Ulmanis' words, leaders of the Baltic states have also 
discussed problems related to concentration of forces in 
Russia's Kaliningrad region. 
  The 19th round of the Estonian-Russian inter-state 
negotiations on the time of forces withdrawal from Estonia was 
started on Thursday in the village of Lohusalu near Tallinn. 
  IF Note: As it is known, late last year the Russian party 
proposed to conclude withdrawal of the remaining forces, 
approximately 2500 in number, by 31 August under provision that 
social guarantees, including residence permits, are granted to 
Russian retirees living in Estonia. The Estonian party views 
this demand as an additional one, which oversteps the agreement 
and does not correspond to the decree on aliens adopted in the 
Republic. The delegations failed to overcome these 
contradictions at the previous round of talks in Moscow. 
  The day before Estonian President Lennart Meri received head 
of the Russian delegation Vasiliy Svirin and Russian Ambassador 
to Estonia Aleksandr Trofimov. The press service of the Estonian 
president reported to INTERFAX that Svirin expressed hope for a 
mutually acceptable solution of the existing problems and 
stressed the tactfulness of mutual relations between the Russian 
and Estonian delegations and their strive to normalize relations 
between two states. 
  Speaking about the signed package of the Russian-Latvian 
agreements, Svirin pointed out that in contrast to the estimates 
of the Baltic mass media, they do not contain any concessions on 
the part of Latvia and they represent a compromise from both 
sides. 
  Meanwhile, on Wednesday [4 May] Latvian Premier Valdis 
Birkavs signed an Act testifying to the fact that Latvia takes 
the new building (its construction is not finished yet) of the 
Russian radar station in the village of Skrunda (160 kilometers 
to the south-west from Riga) under its jurisdiction. 
  IF Note: In accordance with the Russian-Latvian agreements 
signed by Presidents Guntis Ulmanis and Boris Yeltsin on 
previous Saturday in Moscow (in the framework of the package of 
agreements on Russian forces withdrawal from Latvia), the radar 
station in Skrunda will function during the next four years. 
Its complete dismantlement should be concluded during 1.5 years 
after the above mentioned term. Latvian government has received 
guarantees stipulating that the US government would allocate $2 
million and the Swedish Government -- $1 million for this 
project. The early warning radar in Skrunda was built in 1967. 
Construction of its new building was started late eighties. 
  After the signing Birkavs reported to journalists that the 
dismantlement of the new building of the station should be 
started immediately. In his words, the government intends to 
announce a tender on participation in the dismantlement of this 
site among different firms. 

