Language: <F P=105> Czech </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by "(lek)": "The Military Institute Did Not Develop </F>
Biological Weapons, Says Propper"] 
  [Text] Hradec Kralove--The former Military Research 
Institute in Techonin in the Orlicke Mountains (now the J.E. 
Purkyne Military Medical Academy Institute of Immunology and 
Microbiology) did not develop in the past, nor is it doing so at 
present, bacteriological weapons. This statement was made 
yesterday by Petr Propper, the institute's former director. 
"The institute dealt exclusively with defense-related 
research," he said. 
  Propper described as false the claim in CESKY DENIK that 
dangerous strains of bacteria and viruses, in whose development 
the Techonin-based research institute was involved, are stored 
in various locations in the Czech Republic. 
  According to Josef Fusek, the rector of the Military Medical 
Academy in Hradec Kralove, no bacterial or viral strains with 
transmuted immunological properties were ever developed at the 
institute. Fusek also denied that cholera, plague, smallpox, 
meningitis, or psittacosis germs would have been stored in the 
institute's laboratory. According to him, the research 
concerned other infectious diseases--for example, tularemia. 
  A commission of experts visited the Techonin institute last 
week, on the order of Defense Minister Antonin Baudys, where it 
carried out an inspection and destroyed the cultures that will 
no longer be used for current research, said Fusek. 
  According to staff from the Charles University Faculty of 
Medicine Institute of Microbiology, strains of all of the 
existing bacteria and viruses, including cholera, plague, 
smallpox, and other diseases, are stored in a number of 
microbiological laboratories. The way they store and dispose of 
them is, of course, subject to the regulations of the World 
Health Organization, which rules out any threat to the 
population. 
  According to its Press Department, the Defense Ministry will 
not respond to the report in CESKY DENIK. 

