Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Report by Arnold Pushkar: "Innumerable Diamonds on the </F>
Russian Plain?"] 
  [Text] Tula--"If the diamond find in the River Don 
Valley south of the Kimovskiy sector is considered....I 
recommend work on diamonds in Tula Oblast.... It is necessary 
initially to evaluate the prospects of the territory of the 
whole oblast, distinguish the maximum possible number of 
prospective sectors, and, depending on their diamond-bearing 
potential, select the most promising and begin within them a 
search for primary and placer diamond deposits"--these findings 
were made by the TsNIGRI [Central Geological Prospecting 
Research Institute]--the lead institute of the Committee for 
Geology and the Use of Natural Resources of Russia--on the 
report of V. Bogatov, chief of a prospecting team from Moscow 
Oblast's Gosgeopredpriyatiye. 
  As Candidate of Sciences Aleksandr Sychev, the director of 
this enterprise, said, diamond deposits have, as we know, been 
discovered in Arkhangelsk Oblast. "Pipes" akin to kimberlite 
pipes are anticipated in Tver, Nizhniy Novgorod, Kaluga, and 
Voronezh Oblasts. And in Tula Oblast specialists hope to 
discover diamond-bearing structures like those of Australia. 
  For many years geologists attacked the outlying areas of the 
Soviet Union, ignoring the middle territories. It was believed 
that the settled Russian platform did not contain surprise 
wealth connected with vulcanicity. But this all depends, for it 
cannot be ruled out that the bed of the shallow Central Russian 
sea which in distant geological eras lapped vast expanses was 
detonated by underwater volcanos that evacuated rocks containing 
diamonds, gold, silver, and rare-earth metals. 
  Geophysical, geochemical, and mineralogical work on 
diamonds, 
which, specifically, has uncovered minerals that are accessories 
thereof--garnets and chrome-diopsides like their Yakutsk 
counterparts--the so-called "Siberian emeralds"--has been 
performed in the oblast since 1989. Geologists have concluded 
that the most promising for diamonds is the marshy sector of the 
village of Beloozero's forest steppe. Twenty boreholes have been 
cut and samples taken here. 
  "The future of Tula Oblast could be linked not only and not 
so much with weapons," Aleksandr Sychev said, "but also with the 
use of such of its natural resources as diamonds and the large 
deposits of salt and celestite--a mineral for the production of 
strontium--all of whose deposits were in the near abroad. And it 
is so necessary for electronics, electrical engineering, and 
metallurgy. And, of course, new approaches to near-Moscow coal, 
which is consumed merely in power station furnaces as yet, is 
needed. This is, after all, the raw material for the production 
of many rare-earth elements. And our commission to the deputies 
of the State Duma is that they direct Russia's attention to the 
riches of the Russian Platform. 

