Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] Beijing, March 9 (XINHUA) -- Members of the Eighth 
National Committee of the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference (CPPCC) gave high marks to the committee 
for its outstanding work in 1993. 
  The National Committee did a good job last year in expanding 
exchanges with the outside world, offering advices on major 
state affairs and strengthening investigative work by its 
special committees, members said at group discussions here today. 
  The CPPCC National Committee is having its second plenary 
session in Beijing. 
  Hu Xuping, a member from Kunming City of Yunnan Province, 
said the visit to three countries in South Asia by Li Ruihuan, 
chairman of the Eighth CPPCC National Committee, was a great 
success and has further consolidated China's friendly relations 
with them. 
  Members expressed satisfaction at the adoption of their 
suggestions on important state affairs by the Central Committee 
of the Communist Party and the central government. 
  Wang Jue, a well-known economist, said CPPCC should play a 
greater role in participating in state affairs. He suggested 
the CPPCC National Committee dispatch special investigative 
groups to large state-owned enterprises to gather first-hand 
information as a first step to offering good advices. 
  Wang Muheng from Xiamen University said that CPPCC should 
help the mainland establish direct transport and commercial 
links with Taiwan by using its resources. He said his 
university is to enroll more Taiwan students soon. 
  Ye Xuanping, a vice-chairman of the CPPCC National 
Committee, 
attended a group discussion held by representatives of the 
All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce, China's Chamber 
of Commerce. He urged CPPCC members to bear in mind the 
country's central task of developing productive forces and 
improving the living standard of the people. "CPPCC members 
should unite people of all social circles for fulfilling this 
central task," he said. 

