Language: <F P=105> Portuguese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Excerpt] The communique that UNITA had promised for today 
pertaining to the government's military offensive in northern 
Angola has not yet been issued. The UNITA communique is 
anxiously awaited because no one knows the extent that the 
intensification of the war will influence the Lusaka talks. 
Information concerning who controls Cuito is contradictory. 
Since Saturday [5 February], 150 people have been killed and 
400 injured. Our correspondent Carlos Albuquerque reports. 
  [Albuquerque] The military situation in Angola has 
deteriorated in the last few hours. There are contradictory 
reports regarding what is really happening. In statements to 
the local radio, the Bie police commander said that his forces, 
backed by civil defense forces, took some of UNITA's positions 
as a response to provocation from Jonas Savimbi's troops. Other 
sources say that the government forces had totally retaken Cuito 
following intense fighting with UNITA rebels, who are said to 
have fled and to be bombarding the city now with heavy artillery 
from positions between the capital of the province and the 
village of Cunje, which is controlled by the government. 
  The National Radio's correspondent in Cuito said in the 
early 
hours of the morning that the city was once again like an 
inferno after being hit by more than 5,000 shells and that more 
than 170 people -- mostly women and children -- had been killed 
and the total number of injured had risen to about 400. The 
local hospital has no capacity to cope with the situation. It 
is feared many of the wounded will die in the next few hours. 
  Officials from Bie's provincial government have launched 
dramatic appeals to the international community, especially to 
the United States, to help end the war, which is killing 
thousands of Angolans. They have come out against what they 
consider to be the world's constant attention to what is 
happening in former Yugoslavia and ignoring what is happening in 
Angola. 
  In other areas of the country, there are also signs of a 
deteriorating military situation. Sources have told us that 
UNITA is moving troops in the (Celes) region in Cuanza Sul, 
toward the city of Sumbe, and that government troops are trying 
to recapture the area of the Catanda Dam in Malanje Province are 
moving toward Huambo. 
  In the meantime, a communique by the Luanda government 
blames 
UNITA for the intensification of the war and accuses it of 
wanting to sabotage the Lusaka talks. [passage omitted] 

