BFN 

  [Excerpts] Addressing yesterday's closing ceremony for the 
third term of class for Yunnan cadres at and above the country 
level to study the "Selected Works of Deng Xiaoping," volume 
three, provincial party committee Secretary Pu Chaozhu stressed 
that party committees at all levels must intensify and improve 
their leadership over the people's congress, the Chinese 
People's Political Consultative Conference [CPPCC], and the 
united front. The operations of the people's congress, the 
CPPCC, and the united front must be submitted to and serve the 
work of the entire party and country. In this connection, the 
focus should be on major issues, major events should be 
discussed, and practical work should be done. 
  Pu Chaozhu fully appreciated the performance of the 
third-term class for studying Deng Xiaoping's works--which 
included party members, people's congress chairmen, CPPCC 
committee chairmen, and united front work department directors 
from various prefectures, autonomous prefectures, cities, and 
counties--for in their studies, they had upheld the principle of 
applying the theory to reality and to the solution of actual 
problems. He noted that during the study class, the people's 
congress, the CPPCC committee, and the united front work 
department had called separate work meetings to discuss and 
assign tasks, thus paving the way for opening up a new situation 
in the work of the people's congress and the CPPCC committee. 
[passage omitted] 
  Pu Chaozhu pointed out that party committees at all levels 
must intensify and improve their leadership over the operation 
of the people's congress and the CPPCC committee. Politically 
speaking, party committees should show concern for members of 
the people's congresses and CPPCC committees; attach importance 
to and show respect for their opinions and suggestions; arrange 
for them to play a part in the democratic and scientific 
decision-making process; rely on them for expediting reform and 
construction; and encourage them to focus on major issues, 
discuss major issues, and do practical work. 
  In his speech, Pu Chaozhu also aired his views on such 
issues 
as deepening reform and developing the economy. 
  Linghu An, deputy secretary of the provincial party 
committee, presided over the ceremony. Seated on the rostrum 
were Yin Jun, Liu Shusheng, (La Dazhong), (Wang Xianxi), and 
other leading comrades. Other leading comrades present at the 
ceremony were Bao Yongkang, Yang Yitang, Yang Ming, Dao Guodong, 
Li Shuji, Bai Zuoguang, (Mai Shiqiu), Zhao Tingguang, Dao 
Shixun, Li Jin, Xiang Chaozong, Li Mingde, (Su Yingzheng), (Liu 
Bangrui), Lu Bangzheng, and (Wang Zhaoming). 

