Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Report by ITAR-TASS correspondent Fyodor Angeli] </F>
  [Text] Kishinev [Chisinau] 21 March, TASS -- Russian 
presidential envoy Vladilen Vasev is now in Moldova, where he 
has held talks with Moldovan President Mirca Snegur, Parliament 
Speaker Petru Lucinskiy and leader of the self-proclaimed 
Dniester Republic Igor Smirnov. The Russian diplomat explained 
to his colleagues the Russian leadership's proposals for a 
diplomatic solution to the civil conflict in Moldova. 
  The exact content of the documents given to the 
representatives of the two sides has not been revealed. 
However, ITAR-TASS learned from reliable sources that the 
Russian proposals are very similar in content to the report made 
by the CSCE mission in Moldova, which was published in February 
of this year. 
  The CSCE mission sees the restoration of Moldova's 
territorial integrity as the main goal of its activity in that 
area. The left-bank regions of the Dniester River are 
impossible to rule under a central government, the CSCE report 
declares. But at the same time, the break-away republic has no 
chance of getting international recognition, nor should it hope 
for the "confederation" or "federation" of Moldova, as the rebel 
leaders in Tiraspol have proposed. 
  The CSCE mission proposes to give the Dniester region a 
special political status, with its own executive power, an 
elected assembly, and court. This status would have to be 
agreed on by both sides, and would be established by Moldovan 
legislation. The special region would be an inseparable part of 
Moldova, but would have a significant amount of home-rule. 
  The CSCE document emphasizes the vital importance of a 
single 
economic, social, and legal system. Three categories of 
jurisdiction are mentioned: 
  The centre's exclusive jurisdiction would include 
citizenship, foreign policy, defence, security forces, monetary 
policy, and state symbols. 
  The region's exclusive jurisdiction would include 
administrative structures, regional bodies, a regional 
constitution, a regional budget, and regional symbols (to be 
used alongside the state ones). 
  Joint jurisdiction would include the state language and 
official regional languages, a common tax system with a regional 
branch, the police, and the court system. 
  Perhaps the most important part of the CSCE document is the 
statement that, if Moldova rejected its status as an independent 
state and decided to join with another state (meaning Rumania), 
the special Dniester region would be guaranteed the right to 
determine its own external status. 

