BFN 

<F P=106> [Press release issued by the UK Central Statistical Office: </F>
"Government Deficit and Debt Under the Maastricht Treaty"] 
  [Text] First estimates show that on the ESA [European 
System of Integrated Accounts] basis for the United Kingdom in 
the calendar year 1993: 
  The general government financial deficit was 7.7 percent of 
gross domestic product, compared with 6.4 percent in the 
previous year. 
  The general government gross debt outstanding at the end of 
the calendar year (nominal value) was 48.2 percent of GDP, 
compared with 41.7 percent at the end of the previous year. 
  The Treaty establishing the European Union requires member 
states to endeavour to avoid excessive government deficits, and 
to report their planned and actual deficits and the levels of 
their debt promptly to the European Commission. These figures 
must be on a common basis as defined in the ESA. 
  The Treaty does not determine what constitutes excessive 
debt 
or deficits. That is a matter of judgement, taking account of 
other relevant factors spelled out in the Treaty. But it does 
provide for a reference value of 3 percent of GDP for deficits 
and 60 percent of GDP for debt. 
  For consistency with other member states figures are 
reported 
on a calendar year basis, but in the United Kingdom government 
finances are planned on a financial year basis, and are focused 
on the public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR). 
  The public sector borrowing requirement for the calendar 
year 
1993 rose by 14.1 billion pounds, compared with a corresponding 
rise of 21.2 billion pounds in the previous year. These 
increases are reflected in the general government financial 
deficit, which was 48.3 billion pounds in 1993, compared to 37.8 
billion pounds in the previous year. 
  Accruals adjustments are the difference between the accrued 
transactions recorded in the current account and the associated 
cash flows. Between 1992 and 1993 accruals adjustments changed 
by 3.1 billion pounds and were largely due to changes in the 
amounts due to the goverment in taxes and social security 
contributions. Outstanding debt is affected by valuation changes 
as well as transactions. 
  The general government borrowing requirement may be financed 
by net sales of assets as well as by borrowing. Changes in the 
level of debt outstanding result from borrowing and changes in 
the valuation of liabilities. 

