BFN 

  [Text] The debate within the country's leftist movement 
has become so intense that even church functions like the 
celebration of the mass have been affected said the underground 
group Christians for National Liberation [CNL]. 
  Fr. Felipe Patricio, CNL national chair, told a clandestine 
press briefing Wednesday that the organization's 4,000 priests, 
pastors, seminarians, nuns, deaconesses, church workers, and 
bishops will be kept away from the debate which is "adversely 
affecting (their) revolutionary work and service to the masses." 
  The group likewise deplored pronouncements by Communist 
Party 
of the Philippines [CPP] Spokesperson Gregorio "Ka [Comrade] 
Roger" Rosal that death sentences will be meted out to four 
critics of CPP Chair Armando Liwanag. 
  Liwanag is believed to be Jose Ma. Sison, CPP founding 
chair, 
who now lives in exile in The Netherlands. 
  The CNL was founded in 1972 and is part of the CPP-led 
National Democratic Front, an umbrella organization of 13 
Marxist groups waging an armed revolution. 
  "The continuing division within the national democratic 
movement ... has escalated to the point of antagonism and 
violence even in places of sanctuary such as church premises," 
said Brother Gabriel, a ranking member of the CNL's national 
council, in a statement he read at the briefing. 
  He lamented that even during celebrations of the mass, some 
members of the underground movement no longer cared to listen to 
the homily if the priest delivering it did not conform with 
their political position. 
  Thus, he said, whatever good messages are contained in the 
homily are wasted. 
  But Patricio said that compared with other sectors, like the 
trade unions, peasants, and students, who have resorted to 
bad-mouthing each other, the members of CNL are less affected by 
the debate. 
  The rift in the CPP became official last July when its Metro 
Manila group declared autonomy from the Liwanag-led Central 
Committee. The Visayas Commission and some areas in Mindanao 
later also broke away. 
  A "third bloc" in the underground movement has been 
reported, 
but its organizers have yet to issue an official statement 
regarding its formation. 
  The CNL statement criticized the Sison faction for allegedly 
drawing the religious group into the internal party debate. 
  But Patricio said the CNL is keeping its lines to the three 
factions open and expressed the hope that Sison's group will 
stop branding its critics as "counter-revolutionaries." 
  In its statement, the CNL described as a "most disturbing 
development" the alleged meting out by "people's court" of death 
sentences to Romulo Kintanar, former chief of the New People's 
Army [NPA]; Arturo Tabara, former head of the CPP Visayas 
Commission; Ricardo Reyes, former CPP secretary general; and, 
Felimon Lagman, head of the breakaway Manila-Rizal Party 
Committee. 
  Rosal, head of the NPA's Melito Glor Command, was quoted as 
saying last week that the people's court was about to convene 
and was likely to issue a death penalty to the four men, whom 
Sison has described as "renegades" and "agents of the 
government." 

