BFN 

  [Text] The president and the members of the self-imposed 
government who nominated themselves arbitrarily with the 
intention to kill, are, instead of restoring peace, as they led 
Rwandans to believe, thanking instead of dismissing those who 
have excelled in murder. This shows the lack of will on the 
part of murderers who are not ready to put down their arms. The 
self-imposed institution met today and upgraded Colonel Augustin 
Bizimungu, a renowned murderer while serving as military head in 
Ruhengeri. The government council upgraded him to the rank of 
major general and appointed him as the chief of staff of the 
Army to replace Col. Gatsinzi who was the interim chief of 
staff. The latter, who was previously called Col. Marcel 
Gatsinxi, was given the grade of brigadier general. 
  Col. Gacien Kabiligi, who was formerly the Army head in 
Byumba region and was removed from there due to lack of 
discipline, and who was known for his provocations, has been 
appointed commander of the government troops in Ruhengeri and 
was upgraded to the rank of brigadier general. 
  Col. Leonidas Rusatira who (?was) the first chief of staff, 
has been appointed as brigadier general. The Council of 
Ministers reappointed him as head of the higher military academy 
in Kigali. The Council of Ministers, which was chaired by the 
self-appointed Jean Kambanda, requested that the remaining 
military files be studied quickly so that a decision could be 
made. 
  It is, therefore, not surprising to hear that killers who 
make up self-imposed institutions, promote those who helped them 
in the killings by appointing them to posts in which they shall 
not last very long. The priority of the clique of killers is to 
continue the killings, lootings, and other crimes. Their work 
is continuing. Killers are still chasing opposition leaders. 
  Today we informed you that Dr. Theoneste Gafaranga, who was 
the only remaining high-ranking official of the Social 
Democratic Party, was killed by Presidential Guards, assisted by 
the Interahamwe [Republican National Movement for Democracy and 
Development youth wingers] and the Coalition for the Defense of 
the Republic, in Rugenge sector, Kigali. 
  Other serious crimes include the ones committed in Commune 
Rukara, Kibungo, where the Rwandan Patriotic Front combatants 
found about 800 people detained in a place since the death of 
President Habyarimana. The Rwandan Army threw grenades on them. 
Some lost their limbs while others were injured. The RPF 
combatants rescued those who were still alive. 

