BFN 

    [Editorial Report] 
<H8>  THE STAR </H8>
  Too Many Holidays -- "The plethora of public holidays during 
the past few weeks undoubtedly served a purpose," the editorial 
in Johannesburg THE STAR in English on 17 May on page 14 notes. 
"But, that said, employers and workers alike must agree we have 
had more than our share of holidays. Much as the time off was 
appreciated, the days off were totally disruptive of work 
schedules." Taking the discussion one step further, the 
editorial then asks if it is not "time now to look afresh at the 
number of public holidays and assess whether all are necessary," 
because the overabundance of holidays plays "havoc with 
productivity." 
  ANC Reaction to Mandela Retirement -- A second editorial on 
the same page of the 17 May THE STAR states that "the ANC is the 
government of a democracy now -- a democracy which needs to be 
nurtured. In this capacity the ANC is going to learn the hard 
way many lessons that might have looked easy. One of these is 
that comment is not always sensible, wise or constructive. It 
is sometimes plain stupid," the editorial states in reaction to 
the London SUNDAY TIMES article, which alleged that Mandela 
would retire after two years. Mandela's "response, instead of 
being a simple 'not true', was over-heavy: 'malicious 
disinformation .... rumour- mongering with the intention to 
create uncertainty.'" In conclusion the editorial notes that 
"the new government must begin to develop a thick skin, right at 
the beginning." 
<H8>  SOWETAN </H8>
  Urgency of New Housing Plan -- "We are encouraged by the 
urgency with which Minister of Housing Joe Slovo wishes to start 
a national housing scheme," an editorial in Johannesburg SOWETAN 
in English on 17 May on page 8 states. "The ANC's reconstruction 
and development programme has set a target of 1 million 
lower-income houses in the next five years." It is "instructive 
to note that violence" has already begun in the "depressed 
areas"; "whatever the reasons for this, there is no doubt that 
the environment is which people live results in a flare-up of 
violence often from seemingly inconsequential causes. The 
politics of the past made it impossible for developers to build 
houses and attack the problem of the totally unsuitable 
hostels." "The Government should turn these hostels into 
suitable family condominiums." 
<H8>  BUSINESS DAY </H8>
  Home Truths -- "Housing Minister Joe Slovo's plans to create 
an adequate housing stock over the next five years will be more 
easily stated than executed," an editorial in the Johannesburg 
BUSINESS DAY in English on 17 May on page 16 notes, "as the 
target is already too daunting and the programme too ambitious." 
As "banks are unlikely to be eager lenders to people on low 
incomes," "an early policy statement on the role and 
establishment of a state-owned mortgage bank" is needed. "In 
theory labour-intensive construction is needed to create jobs, 
to stimulate the economy and to provide employees with the wages 
needed to buy homes. In practice, capital-intensive industrial 
building techniques might prove cheaper." "In theory, free 
market principles should apply," but "political considerations 
are equally weighty." "Rather than endorse targets that may not 
be realistic, Slovo should aim for and achieve the possible." 
  Violent Crime -- As "two major factors -- political 
instability and violence -- spurred most of the capital flight 
and emigration," "the first problem should diminish as the 
government foes work together." And since "it is obvious that 
crime levels are directly related to the critically high 
umemployment rate," "providing jobs is the government's stated 
priority," the second editorial in BUSINESS DAY on 17 May notes. 
"Reducing the crime rate and keeping it down will succeed only 
if other, longer-term social programmes succeed." 

