Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

  [Text] More than one year has passed since the DRPK (North 
Korea) announced its withdrawal from the Nuclear 
Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT) on 12 March 1993. While the 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has inspected seven 
nuclear facilities declared by North Korea, this has been 
inadequate, and data obtained has been limited. As the opening 
of the third round of meeting between senior officials of the 
United States and the DPRK on 21 March has become uncertain, the 
Japanese Government decided to make preparations at home in 
anticipation of possible economic sanctions by the UN Security 
Council against North Korea. 
Progress in Nuclear Development [subhead] 
  Although Japan is a close neighbor of North Korea, and is 
constantly under its nuclear "threat," the government relies on 
the United States for information obtained by analyzing 
satellite data. The prevailing view is that from the amount of 
plutonium the DPRK possesses, it should be able to manufacture 
two to four nuclear bombs. As to how far the development of 
nuclear devices has gone, opinions are divided within the U.S. 
Government. The Department of State claims that the DPRK is yet 
to develop any nuclear weapon, while the Department of Defense 
and the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) assert that North 
Korea has already succeeded, or is just one step from doing so. 
  Adding its own information analysis, the Japanese Government 
believes that "even if a nuclear bomb had been developed, the 
DPRK has not reached the stage of conducting an experiment to 
test the effectiveness of the explosion. A few more years will 
still be needed before the bomb is improved and becomes suitable 
for transport, and eventually becomes capable of being loaded on 
fighters or missiles," (according to a Defense Agency [DA] 
source.) 
  With regard to North Korea's nuclear development, it is said 
that "the development of nuclear arms is indispensable for 
maintaining the present regime of President Kim Il-song and 
Secretary Kim Chong- il," (according to the DA source.) 
Therefore, the prevailing view in the government is that it 
would be impossible to stop its nuclear development. 
Japan's Security [subhead] 
  In May 1993, North Korea conducted the test-firing of three 
"Nodong-1" ballistic missiles into the sea off Noto Peninsula. 
The government immediately got hold of this information. It 
made a detailed exchange of data with the United States two days 
after the launch. 
  From the information gathered from soldiers defecting from 
North Korea, it has also become clear that North Korean missiles 
were manufactured based on Japanese-made high-tech products, and 
they are now targeting Japan. 
  While Japan is not in any immediate danger, it is also a 
fact 
that on the mid- and long-term, Japan is ill-prepared to deal 
with North Korean nuclear missiles in the future with, for 
instance, "Patriot" surface-to-air missiles, or airborne warning 
and control systems (AWACS). 
Dealing With Economic Sanctions [subhead] 
  North Korea is expected to maneuver in various ways for the 
postponement of nuclear inspections by the IAEA while keeping 
its option of negotiating with the United States open. Thus, 
many think that "UN economic sanctions will be discussed sooner 
or later," (according to a Foreign Ministry source.) 
  Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's position on this issue 
is: 
"We will do what we can within the limits of the Constitution." 
However, critics point out that suspending regular shipping 
services might become a human rights issue, while it would be 
difficult even to obtain accurate data on remittances by Korean 
residents in Japan to the DPRK if a third country is involved. 
They doubt if economic sanctions will have any immediate effect. 
  On the other hand, there are also a growing number of 
supporters to the view that "economic sanctions have the 
political effect of demonstrating what is a rule violation in 
the international community," (according to the Foreign Ministry 
source.) 

