Language: <F P=105> French </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Michel Rocard, secretary general of the </F>
Socialist Party, by Jean Daniel; place and date not given: 
"What the Socialists Have To Reinvent"] 
  [Text] For the first time since his big bang speech, the 
man who wrenched control of the PS [Socialist Party] -- and who 
is playing the difficult role of opposition leader to Edouard 
Balladur -- is trying to redefine his party's doctrine. Can the 
Socialists be reborn from their legislative ashes? They will 
try to prove they can at their meeting on Saturday [5 February] 
and Sunday, their first meeting on social transformation to 
which they have invited every single leftist group. After the 
fall of the Berlin Wall, the deepening crisis, and especially 
the historic defeat that was much more than a mere electoral 
turnaround, the Left wants to show that it still has ideas. The 
PS secretary told Jean Daniel about his ideas. 
  [Daniel] Are politicians currently aware of the new 
challenges facing our society? Caught up as they are in 
short-term deadlines and driven by legitimate ambitions, do they 
not run the risk of losing sight of the international dimension 
of the problems that are appearing? 
  [Rocard] I do not think so. It is legitimate for them to be 
questioned most often about the immediate concerns of the 
French. So that is what they talk about most. Fortunately, that 
does not stop them from also thinking beyond these issues. I do 
not think you can understand your era without bearing world 
events in mind. 
  [Daniel] When General De Gaulle, at the age of 15, reenacted 
the Napoleonic wars on paper, and said "That is what I would 
have done, and that is what I am going to do," he believed his 
personal genius would coincide with France's interests. When 
Mendes France advocated withdrawal from Indochina, he knew he 
would be the best person to apply what he recommended. Do you 
sometimes have this feeling that you are a man that France needs? 
  [Rocard] I am not one of those people who, from the age of 
15, believed in their destiny. Rather, I have led a militant, 
committed, combative, and collective life. I pride myself on 
always being surrounded by people who are my intellectual 
equals. That is life: with its coincidences, trajectory, and a 
continuity that have led me to where I am. It could have been 
different, but that is the way it is. I have responsibilities. 
I wanted them. I shoulder them. I have the feeling that I 
have thoughts and an approach in politics that can match the 
needs of the country. 
  [Daniel] So you think that political ambition is moral? 
  [Rocard] Yes, provided that one assumes the contradiction 
that exists between the function of the intellectual and the 
function of the man of power. I am in the power category, but I 
think that a society cannot be led well without critical and 
analytical thought for supporting proposals. Too many French 
intellectuals refuse the ethics of responsibility or do not dare 
to take their prophesying to its conclusion. This is something 
that politics cannot allow. A recent example is when we have to 
talk about Bosnia.... 
  [Daniel] You did that. 
  [Rocard] I did that. I said to myself that when you are 
ashamed, and you have no responsibilities, then you can opt for 
silence, or, on the contrary, for mumbo jumbo -- but these two 
paths are both closed to officials. The third path is 
difficult, but how can we remain impassive before the bodies of 
children torn to pieces in the snow? The men in power know that 
if we are to put an end to this war, then we will have to go in, 
with all the risks that such a move entails. Is it possible? I 
think it is. We will come back to that. However, we have to 
convince public opinion, on the one hand, and our partners, on 
the other. That can be frustrating, but it is essential. If 
you believe in your political mission, you must accept 
compromises. There is no dishonor in that. For a politician, 
dishonor lies in silence or lies, not in taking other people's 
positions, hesitancy, concerns, or even ambiguities into account. 
  [Daniel] The ambiguity comes from what the people think you 
to be, you who are the secretary of the Socialist Party and 
candidate for president. We see you as someone who says: "If I 
were in power, I would do something else." That is what public 
opinion understands you to be. 
  [Rocard] What did I say? I said that since the status quo 
was unacceptable we had to impose a cease-fire. Who can wield 
such force? France alone? Surely not. No nation -- not even 
the United States -- can throw itself alone into this kind of 
adventure. The decision to intervene can only come from the 
international community, i.e., from the United Nations. Now, 
the United Nations' predisposition to make such a decision is 
weak. Moreover, it would do so in such a way that the problem 
would not be solved. The nations will first have to assume the 
risks that they will be making their soldiers run. The soldiers 
are ready; that is their job and they know why they have been 
chosen. However, it is the leaders who, for obvious reasons, 
are not seeing their determination through. In Sarajevo, 1,600 
children have already been killed! Every day there is a Guernica. 
  [Daniel] Could we have acted differently or sooner? 
  [Rocard] Yes. But only democracy learns to settle conflicts 
by means other than violence. None of these peoples had a 
tradition or culture of democracy. That region has always been 
a place for tough border adjustments between Islam and 
Christianity, between orthodoxy and Roman Catholicism. We would 
have had to maintain a Yugoslav federation as it was: a 
multiethnic international political power. That was Mitterrand's 
first reflex, although I will admit that it was not mine. Since 
we did not do that, we recognized identities that did not 
identify frontiers but presupposed ethnic groups! What strikes 
me in this affair is the importance of the concept of 
secularism. The whole thing is exploding because nobody over 
there knows what state secularism is. 
  [Daniel] In Sarajevo you cannot talk of secularism in the 
strict sense of the word, but rather of a harmony between 
communities. 
  [Rocard] True harmony comes from having the respect of 
differences take root in common values. That is the very 
definition of secularism. Peace is always fragile and always 
under threat. To maintain it, I believe that we must meet two 
conditions: remain constantly open, and quickly block anything 
that might make the situation get out of hand. This was true in 
New Caledonia in 1988 when I was prime minister. It is true 
today with the abandonment of the Falloux law amendment, which 
was going to bring back the education wars. That is what was 
not done for the former Yugoslavia. The chancelleries agreed to 
the dismembering of the country without supporting the 
democratic forces which, nevertheless, were present everywhere, 
including in Serbia. If we had been able to recognize them, 
encourage them, and listen to them, then perhaps we could have 
started down another path. That is my first comment. 
  My second one is that we cannot think about peace without 
thinking about force. The people who point the finger at Europe 
are often the same people who have long fought against the idea 
of Europe having powers in the areas of defense and foreign 
policy. It is nothing short of outrageous to demand that Europe 
make a unanimous decision, when it has been prohibited from 
dealing with these matters! In this, I can see a nationalist 
attempt to quietly undermine Europe. We are well aware that 
there is no political will without the means to achieve it. 
  [Daniel] Surely France is displaying a paradoxical attitude 
when, after a wave of anti-Americanism that culminated in the 
GATT movement, we hear the defense minister now ask for American 
intervention in Bosnia. 
  [Rocard] No, I do not disapprove of this. It is one thing to 
turn down the all-powerful United States, but it is another 
thing to deny their power. When I say that the United Nations 
must "get tougher," this means that inside the United Nations, 
and within the Security Council, everyone -- including the 
United States -- must assume their responsibilities. 
  We are emerging from a 70-year struggle between Communism 
and 
the free world. The side of freedom won because it brought 
together all those people for whom democracy was truly 
meaningful, and also because it had the most formidable of 
weapons: economic efficiency. This victory had a cost: We 
thought that by fighting Communism we were fighting not a 
state-controlled perversion of social organization, but the 
pretention of the state to regulate freedom. This is partly 
true, but we pushed the argument too far. Since the 
all-powerful state was dangerous, we said, the market forces, 
which are also the forces of freedom, were going to get us out 
of the world's troubles and allow us to find growth again. That 
was a mistaken use of symmetry. The market is not responsible 
for social balances. The market has no way of preventing its 
deep-rooted tendency to push toward concentration: an 
increasing amount of money for the richest people, and an 
increasing amount of concentration for enterprises. 
  Of course, democracy presupposes the market freedom which we 
need. We simply want to put limits on it while maintaining it, 
because the struggle against social inequality is not a matter 
for the market, but for rules. Giving everyone equal 
opportunities, protecting the environment, providing education, 
promoting basic research, and ensuring social protection and 
everyone's right to health are all functions which the market 
cannot assume. Look at the United States and Great Britain: 
Both countries went so far in accepting uncontrolled free 
enterprise that they are now torn apart by a social antagonism 
that is weakening them. 
  [Daniel] At the birth of capitalism, moral concerns were 
just 
as much in the forefront of people's thinking as market 
concerns, since they resulted from the Protestant idea that 
money is necessary while also assuming the rules of loyalty, 
fair play, and integrity. Therefore, we could posit that 
capitalism had "social" origins. 
  [Rocard] As a Protestant I think you are paying us more than 
our due. This puritan and virtuous capitalism never really 
existed as such. Adam Smith knew that only too well, since on 
the one hand he wrote The Wealth of Nations and on 
the other hand he wrote a treatise on morality, and was very 
careful to keep them separate. All excesses stem from there.... 
  [Daniel] What do you consider to be today's great excesses? 
  [Rocard] Firstly, excesses in the financial sphere. People 
have discovered that to make their fortunes they no longer have 
to produce goods, but instead they can trade in money and that 
the cost of this trade is borne by production. The current 
severe crisis in Japan is a perfect example of this: The 
production of goods and services other than money has slowed 
down and is almost in a recession because the financial burden 
is excessive. 
  [Daniel] This financial capitalism in the United States, for 
example, is now subject to legal controls to a much greater 
extent than ours is. 
  [Rocard] That is true, but this control only aims to ensure 
that levies are legal, whereas what we really need to do is 
lighten them. Moreover, it is quite characteristic of a system 
in which the legal sphere is growing, in the United States, at 
the expense of all other activities. 
  [Daniel] It is curious to hear you condemning this excess of 
virtue.... 
  [Rocard] I am not confusing justice with legalism, or virtue 
with impotence! The problem is a simple if considerable one. 
We have to introduce another idea of the state, a state that is 
less kingly, less centrist or centralizing, less bureaucratic 
and more partnership oriented. That is a blueprint for the 
society of the future, the great plan of our time. Where is the 
second Keynes, the great nonmonetarist economist (18 Nobel 
prizes for economy were won by monetarists!), who will show us 
the way? The stakes are huge, for we are threatened with not 
being able to find our way back to growth. That means the end 
of the stability of our societies, the end of cohesion and of 
the chance for the Third World to develop, since it can only 
develop not just through what we do for it, but also what we do 
with it and because of it. That is the real challenge: We have 
to redefine democratic socialism. 
  [Daniel] In short, you are arguing that the state's role be 
strengthened? 
  [Rocard] Yes. Redefined and strengthened, because as we 
fight the excesses of statist power we end up becoming less 
effective in the important struggles against money laundering 
and drug trafficking. We must rebuild a public power capable of 
carrying out its responsibilities of social cohesion. Our 
fellow citizens are in great need of security: quite simply, 
job security and physical security. They also have justified 
requirements in terms of education, heath, and justice. To meet 
their requirements, the state must be authoritative, on 
condition that it is considered to be useful and noble rather 
than intrusive. Socialism has not been able to invent this in 
an economic context dominated by competitiveness. Let us then 
rethink capitalism, that is to say the conditions in which the 
market can continue to exert its full power without sowing the 
seeds of social disharmony: What are the rules, what are the 
limitations, and what are the constraints? 
  [Daniel] Do you have any suggestions? 
  [Rocard] I believe that West Europe is the best place and 
that social democracy the best political instrument with which 
to experiment with what tomorrow will be an unavoidable plan for 
society. 
  [Daniel] Europe is weak, and surely the social democratic 
model has had its day? 
  [Rocard] No. On the contrary, this model is in the process 
of evolving, especially in Europe where the social democrat 
leaders are currently reflecting on their situation. What makes 
Europe original? It provides its citizens with a social 
protection that no other continent has -- not North America, not 
Australia, not Japan, to mention just the developed countries. 
The European identity could be defined thus: rights of man, a 
high standard of living, and social security. We alone have 
been able to create and defend these three things. 
  [Daniel] It is meritorious, but can it still be saved? 
  [Rocard] Preserving a high level of protection against 
countries that practice social dumping requires flexibility and 
rigorous management and even -- and I am going to shock everyone 
by this -- a reexamination of certain acquired rights. It is 
all about saving the most essential thing which is making social 
justice compatible with the aggressiveness of the industrial and 
commercial mechanism. Today, we and the Germans are thinking 
about nothing else. 
  [Daniel] Are you brave enough to say which social benefits 
should be suppressed? What blockages should we clear? Which 
myths no longer correspond to reality? 
  [Rocard] Let us identify each separate case. I will start 
with pensions. When I was prime minister I issued a white paper 
which clearly listed all the threats to the long-term 
development of pension schemes. This white paper also listed 
all the possible measures for improving the situation and ended 
by concluding that this is such a weighty problem that it is 
impossible to leave it solely to the discretion of the state. 
On such complex problems, with such a big an impact on the 
future, the state should hold a public debate and not decide on 
the behalf of society. 
  [Daniel] However, there appears to be no other way.... 
  [Rocard] There is the method of multilevel negotiation which 
takes a long time. In France we are incredibly lucky in that we 
have the time. After all, no other European country has 
produced as many children, and as a result our retirement crisis 
will come in 2005 or 2010. That gives us two or three years to 
awaken the collective consciousness of the country and create a 
climate such that nobody can deny the figures. We have to get 
used to the idea that it will be difficult -- we have to study, 
research, and then negotiate. I did say, in a doubtless 
unfortunate joke: "That is enough to bring down any 
government." The press really made the most of that. Mr. 
Balladur, however, has quietly passed three decrees on 
retirement, and it did not bring the government down. Perhaps I 
should have kept my mouth shut? No, because the measures taken 
by Mr. Balladur are unfair and unsuited. They do not take into 
account the complexities of the different schemes and 
situations. In this way, the fantastic progress made in 
medicine above all benefits the better-off. A senior manager in 
France lives on average nine years longer than a construction 
worker. Twenty years ago this difference was less. Therefore, 
we must adapt the duration and maybe even the rate of 
contributions to adjust those imbalances. 
  Another example is sickness. For 40 years, France has been 
trying to run a system that is unique in the world, namely 
maintaining a health system providing good guarantees for 
everyone and especially for the deprived of our society, while 
leaving the sufferer completely free to choose his doctor and 
leaving the doctor completely free to choose the treatment. 
However, the system has gone off the rails and now ensures a 
guaranteed income for a certain number of specialists and a 
relative number of pharmacists at the expense of general 
practitioners. 
  This is not solely a financial problem: It is also a human 
problem. Only once in 40 years have we tried to negotiate with 
each medical profession instead of globally. That was when I 
was prime minister and Claude Evin was social affairs minister. 
We obtained the agreement of the anesthetists, analysis 
laboratories, and private clinics -- and started talks with the 
physiotherapists -- to set a limit on annual social security 
spending on each type of activity. We agreed on sanctions if 
budgets were exceeded. We now know that these measures had a 
favorable effect on the social security budget. However, 
instead of continuing along these same lines, [Social Affairs 
Minister] Simone Veil returned to mass interprofessional 
bargaining with all the medical professions taken as a whole, 
which has never led anywhere. I am pessimistic in this respect. 
In the absence of any spirit of group responsibility among the 
medical professions I feel that we are heading for some 
hard-hitting legislation. 
  A third example is education. Who could be crazy enough to 
believe that schools should be developed against the will of the 
teachers? Clearly, there are many technical and budgetary 
difficulties -- I know something about it, since I raised the 
education budget from 200 billion French francs [Fr] to Fr280 
billion. 
  [Daniel] What did you do with that money? 
  [Rocard] Half of it went on wholly justified pay rises for 
teachers. We cannot put our children's future into the hands of 
a body of people who are underpaid compared with other civil 
servants. The costly revaluation was necessary. However, I did 
not invest enough in the renewal of teaching itself. There were 
stumbling blocks.... However, everything is not as catastrophic 
as certain people claim. You have to realize that in 1974 over 
300,000 children left the education system with no 
qualifications or diplomas at all, whereas now this figure has 
fallen to just 100,000. That is not bad! 
  [Daniel] Put your enthusiasm into context! The number of 
failures at school has fallen, but the level of schooling has 
not improved.... 
  [Rocard] Of course it has! The bac [French high school 
diploma] was perhaps harder when I took it, but there were just 
a few thousand of us, an infinitely small, privileged minority 
of the population, and we were ignoramuses compared with the 
high school students of 1880! Today, with over 2 million 
students, the average level has risen considerably! However, I 
am still convinced that France needs a vast program of 
pedagogical innovation. Men and women of talent are mobilizing 
around this idea with unimaginable devotion! They have a 
considerable role to play in training which affects employment 
which in turn affects exclusion which affects delinquency which 
affects social cohesion, etc. Everything is concerned by this. 
  [Daniel] You have just given three major examples. At this 
point in your thinking, what is your priority? 
  [Rocard] We have smashed all our illusions. We now have to 
forge hope. For me the hope of democratic socialism is vital 
since, as I have said, it covers a whole plan for society. 

