Language: <F P=105> Danish </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Christian Brondum: "Christian Party Conflict </F>
Intensifies"] 
  [Text] Henning Lysholm Christensen, the small government 
party's group chairman, is taking over the important post of 
political spokesman from the rebellious Merethe Due Jensen. 
  Merethe Jensen, the rebellious Christian People's Party 
[KrF] 
member, is now a little freer to present her own viewpoints and 
not necessarily those of the party. 
  Yesterday morning she informed her three totally unprepared 
colleagues in the small government party's Folketing group that 
she no longer wanted to act as political spokesperson. The 
reason is the poor cooperation with group chairman Henning 
Christensen. 
  "For the last six months I have worked to establish a 
fruitful cooperation with the group chairman, but unfortunately 
I must note that the chairman has not shown any desire to 
cooperate with the political spokesperson or any interest in 
doing so," Jensen said. 
  Jensen reached the decision yesterday morning after 
considering it for some time -- and it represents the 
culmination to date of the conflict in the small government 
party, which has earlier concerned store closing hours, the 
intervention against Aabenraa Hospital, Danish participation in 
the Western European Union, and subsidies for housewives who 
stay at home. Inger Stilling Pedersen, the group's other female 
member, threatened to leave the party last fall and makes no 
secret of the fact that she does not support the party's 
participation in Prime Minister Rasmussen's government. 
  The other two members, Ole M. Nielsen and group chairman 
Christensen, on the other hand, have supported the government 
participation more strongly. 
  The group chairman took over the post as political spokesman 
at a special group meeting later yesterday -- without a vote. He 
declined to comment on Jensen's decision but said that in a 
small party it is natural for the same person to act as both 
group chairman and political spokesman. 

