BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed report: "A Deal Worth More Than 3 Billion </F>
Francs: The Sale of Three French Submarines to Pakistan 
Expected in June"] 
  [Text] France and Pakistan are now in the final phase of 
negotiations with respect to the delivery of three conventional 
submarines worth 3-3.5 billion francs. The two countries are 
still discussing the financial terms, which cover compensation 
and technology transfers to local industry. However, talks 
should be completed by June, barring any late trade 
counterattack by Sweden or Britain. Defense Minister Francois 
Leotard visited Islamabad in mid-January. 
  The deal pertains to the Agosta-90B submarines with a 
1,700-tonne displacement in submersion. This type of submarine 
has a conventional propulsion unit and is equipped with 
torpedoes as well as Exocet SM.39 antisurface missiles. The 
first ship will be built in Cherbourg by the Naval Construction 
Directorate (DCN); the other two will be assembled in Pakistan. 
  France is faced with strong competition from Sweden, whose 
submarines only carry torpedoes, and from the United Kingdom. 
The British recently made a new offer to Islamabad, which may 
make Pakistan defer its final choice. In addition to the 
missiles it carries, the Agosta-90B is well-suited for open-sea 
missions, an added advantage from the perspective of Pakistani 
Navy officials. 
  The Americans are not really party to the competition, as 
they are not sure whether they should maintain military trade 
ties with Pakistan as long as that country has not given formal 
assurances with regard to nuclear nonproliferation. This is why 
the delivery of F-16 aircraft is currently frozen, despite 
Islamabad's having made a down payment. 
  This American attitude is also explained by the fact that 
U.S. dockyards no longer build conventional submarines and that 
they often act as intermediaries for Germany, for which they 
assemble ships to be fitted with U.S.-made equipment. This is 
currently the case for Taiwan and Egypt, which have been trying 
to obtain submarines and which may purchase Sub-Harpoon missiles 
from the United States. 

