Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by Niu Tingxiang [3662 1694 4161] and Bi Suoming </F>
[5643 6906 2494]] 
  [Text] The so-called "spigot" project for the national key 
industry and mining development zone in Shanxi, the Liulin power 
plant, has been approved for construction by the State Council. 
The Provincial Electric Power Bureau Chief, Bian Xuehai, went to 
the worksite to present the approval report, and to work with 
the Luliang Prefecture Committee and Administrative Office, and 
the Liulin County Committee and County Government to implement 
the Provincial Committee and Government directive on "Key 
Projects and Breakthroughs." The Province, Prefecture, and 
County have joined in a campaign to assemble the manpower, 
materials, and money to start generating power in 1995. 
  The Liliu coal field, a "national treasure" renowned for the 
volume, accessibility, and quality of its coal, couldn't be 
developed on a large scale because of shipping and mobilization 
limitations. The Ministry of Energy Resources and central and 
provincial experts have done numerous studies and have lobbied 
for the construction of a large-scale power plant within the 
mining zone. After the Provincial Committee and Government 
proposed the strategic policy of "putting power transmission and 
coal transportation on equal footing," the central government 
decided to list it, and it also caught the attention and the 
support of the Asian Bank. The project, which is designed for a 
scale of 1200MW at a total investment of 4.1 billion yuan, is to 
be completed by the end of the century. The scale of the first 
stage will be 200MW, which will be completed and operating in 
1995, generating 1.4 billion kWh per year. It will use 3.6 
million tons of secondary raw coal, will generate 46.4 million 
yuan in profit taxes, and the total investment is estimated to 
be 650 million yuan. Bank loans will amount to US$65 million, 
and the State Energy Investment Corporation will loan 60 million 
yuan. It will be one of China's 26 large-size power plants, and 
one of the four large power plants in the province, after 
Shentou and Yangcheng. Once built, the Liliu mining district's 
output of raw coal can increase from the current 9.14 million 
tons per year to 14 million by 1995, with an annual increase in 
social benefits of over 200 million yuan. 
  To guarantee meeting the construction schedule, officials of 
the State Planning Commission, Ministry of Energy Resources, and 
the Provincial Committee and Government have made repeated 
visits to the work site, and the Luliang Prefecture Committee 
and executive offices as well as the Liulin County Committee and 
Government together have solved the funding, technical, 
material, labor, and land acquisition problems. By 10 December, 
the provincial and local electric power foundations came up with 
the needed 240 million yuan, acquired the 825 mu of land, a full 
line of facilities, and the engineering bids. The infrastructure 
requirements and grading of the site are basically completed. 

