Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Unattributed article: "Bosnia: Defense Minister Confirms </F>
Italian Commitment"] 
  [Excerpt] Rome, Gioia del Colle, Italy, 20 Jan (ANSA) -- 
Italy "is prepared to set up a logistics base and the point of 
departure for possible operations" in Bosnia, said Defense 
Minister Fabio Fabbri at an Italian Air Force base here where 
British Royal Air Force planes flying missions over 
ex-Yugoslavia are based. 
  The minister stressed that as regards air strikes under 
discussion in United Nations and NATO quarters, "to avoid the 
strangulation of Sarajevo" and guarantee the safety of 
humanitarian convoys, "all the decisions are up to the United 
Nations and, at the level of operations, NATO. As a NATO 
member, we are ready to go along with these decisions." 
  Speaking to reporters at the home of the 36th Air Force Wing 
in the southern Puglia region, Fabbri said: "The duty which 
would be up to Italy appears evident and natural." 
  Striking a balance of the past year of the Italian armed 
forces' involvement in humanitarian operations, including those 
in ex-Yugoslavia, the minister said: "We have always acted in 
support of all international operations, because we are now the 
international community's base camp. Without our help, no 
humanitarian relief would have been developed." 
  With reference to the blockade applied in the Adriatic, 
Fabbri spoke of Italy's "leadership" role and said the balance 
of the armed forces' activities has been "extremely positive," 
that the military "has never before, in the post-war period, 
been so esteemed and respected as today." All this derives from 
the "extraordinary commitment" of the Italian military, he said, 
and went on to cite humanitarian missions in Albania, operations 
under way in Mozambique with the UN peacekeeping force and the 
Italian presence in Somalia. On Mozambique, he declared: "Our 
units are the reference point for everyone and everyone is 
asking us to stay on." 
  In Mogadishu, "our armed forces have allowed political 
authority to develop with success and there was, for the first 
time, an initiative within the international community which 
concluded with recognition that Italy's humanitarian line was 
the right one, the one due, and the one which conforms most to 
the interests of the international community." 
  On the domestic front, the minister spoke of the 
"extraordinary success" of operation Sicilian Vespers, the 
deployment of Italian Army troops in Sicily in 1992 to flank the 
Carabinieri and National Police following Mafia bombings in 
which two magistrates, the wife of one, and eight police agents 
in their escorts were killed. 
  For upcoming international missions, Fabbri named the 
deployment of the first Garibaldi Brigade, which would be made 
up entirely of professional soldiers. [passage omitted] 

