Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by UK Prime Minister John Major: "SF [Sinn Fein] </F>
Cannot Argue for Peace and Frustrate It"] 
  [Text] We have heard a great deal from Gerry Adams about 
his commitment to peace and his belief that "we are in the final 
phase of the conflict." 
  We have had plenty of words, but it is not words people 
want. 
The huge numbers of people in the north and south of Ireland, in 
the United Kingdom, the United States and elsewhere, who support 
the Joint Declaration, want an end to violence. An end to 
sickening events like last week's killing of a community 
policeman by the IRA. An end to murders, equally atrocious, 
equally pointless, by the loyalist paramilitaries. 
  Professions do not sit well with bombs and bullets. 
  Albert Reynolds and I are at one in seeking peace in 
Northern 
Ireland. That was why we negotiated the Joint Declaration. It 
is for us, a foundation stone, a set of principles which will 
stand the test of time. 
  Two months on from the Declaration, no-one, I believe, can 
credibly argue that it is not properly understood. The 
Declaration is clear. If there is genuine doubt about anything 
it says, the text itself can dispel that doubt. We shall not 
open back-door negotiations by glossing or shading the 
Declaration's language and meaning. 
  Let me repeat what it says about self-determination, because 
this has been misrepresented. 
  First the British government has no..."selfish, strategic or 
economic interest in Northern Ireland." 
  That doesn't mean that we don't care about it, nor that we 
don't share the interest of its people in a secure, prosperous 
and peaceful future. 
  It does mean that we would have no reason to wish to 
frustrate the democratically expressed wishes of the people. We 
shall abide by these wishes, and if the people prefer to remain 
in the United Kingdom, as they have done so far, we shall uphold 
their right to do so. 
  Second, our primary interest is to see peace, stability and 
reconciliation established by agreement among all the people who 
inhabit the Island. We will work with the constitutional 
parties and Irish government to achieve such an agreement, which 
may, as of right, take the form of agreed structures for the 
island as a whole, including a united Ireland achieved by 
peaceful means. But, again, I emphasise this must be by consent 
not imposition. 
  The way such agreement is to be achieved is set out clearly. 
  We say that "it is for the people of the island of Ireland 
alone, by agreement between the two parts respectively, to 
exercise their right of self-determination on the basis of 
consent, freely and concurrently given, north and south, to 
bring about a united Ireland, if that is their wish." 
  Third, we will "introduce the necessary legislation to give 
effect to this, or equally to any measure of agreement on future 
relationships in Ireland which the people living in Ireland may 
themselves freely so determine without external impediment." 
  In short, democracy will prevail. No other route is 
possible. 
  The Joint Declaration leaves no conceivable reason for 
continued violence. The reasons given by the republican 
movement in the past no longer exist. That is not just my view. 
It is the view which has been expressed by the most respected 
leaders of the nationalist community, including of course, John 
Hume. 
  Does Mr Adams share this view? If not, why not? The people 
have the right to know. He cannot be permitted to argue for 
peace and yet frustrate it. 
  If Sinn Fein believes in peace, the violence should stop. 
  Let me be plain on another point. The British government 
will, as I said in the Declaration, "encourage, facilitate and 
enable the achievement of such agreement." We will, however, 
not try to persuade people to go for Irish unity. It is not the 
government's job to tell the Irish people what they should 
think, or to dictate to them where their future should lie. 
  But what we do advocate is agreement, reached freely and 
democratically. I do not believe that the Irish people want the 
British government to coerce the greater number in the north 
into a united Ireland against their will. Nor does the 
Taoiseach [Irish Prime Minister Albert Reynolds]. Albert 
Reynolds has publicly opposed such coercion. He has said in the 
Joint Declaration that a united Ireland should not be imposed. 
We both believe that the people living the island of Ireland, 
north and south respectively, should decide. There can be no 
coercion. 
  Before the Declaration was published, there was a lot of 
speculation about what it would say. Many confident predictions 
were made, most of them wrong. 
  So I point out, once it was published, all those things it 
did not say which people had been led to expect. It did not set 
out or require any particular outcome; after all, it is not a 
solution. But nor does the Declaration rule anything out, 
providing only it is achieved peacefully, by agreement and 
consent. 
  What matters now is what is in the Declaration, and that it 
provides a foundation for progress towards a lasting settlement. 
What matters is to end the killing. Every death, every injury, 
every bereavement is an affront. Over a quarter of a century, 
violence has made no headway. But it has caused terrible pain 
on both sides of the community. The voices raised against 
violence on all sides have grown stronger and more insistent 
over the past year. They helped us to produce the Joint 
Declaration. They explain the extraordinary level of support 
given to it. The overwhelming majority of the people of 
Northern Ireland want an end to violence now. Will their voices 
be heeded? 
  Sinn Fein claims not to understand the place of the 
Declaration in a "peace process." There is nothing obscure 
about this either. The Declaration is not a peace plan. It 
certainly isn't a solution on its own. It is simply the view of 
the two governments about the principles involved in a process 
leading to an agreed outcome. 
  Those central principles are democracy, and an absence of 
coercion - in other words consent, no outside interference and 
an end to violence. 
  As a first step, those principles have to be publicly 
accepted and acted upon. 
  We would be ready within three months of an end to violence 
to begin an exploratory dialogue with Sinn Fein. Its aims would 
be to discuss how Sinn Fein would become involved in the 
three-stranded political talks how they could be brought fully 
into normal political life in Northern Ireland, and what the 
consequence of ending violence would be. They know this is our 
intention; we told them of it last November. 
  I believe this amounts to a substantial exploratory agenda. 
  Those exploratory discussions would in themselves be part of 
the process of bringing Sinn Fein back into normal political 
life, in developing a normal political dialogue between the 
government and other parties, on matters like education, 
housing, healthcare, crime and fair employment. 
  They could only take place against a background where 
violence had no place. As confidence returned, the pracical 
consequences of that would be felt across Northern Ireland. 
  The question of continuing violence is the key. I heartily 
endorse the idea that the gun should be taken out of Irish 
politics. But who has kept it there? Last year terrorists (not 
all of them republican by any means) killed 86 people. The 
security forces killed none. If the terrorists discard the gun 
for good, we shall in time be able to manage without British 
soldiers in support of the RUC and without emergency legislation. 
  Now as to the political talks. As the Taoiseach and I 
declared and I declared last Saturday [19 February]; the talks 
process is moving ahead. Sinn Fein are free to come in to 
democratic life. They can stay out, if they so decide. But 
they can't hold the talks up. It would be wrong of me to 
predict their outcome, but certain things are plain. 
  First, civil rights must and will be carefully protected. 
Power must be exercised fairly. We are all resolved on that. 
  Second, I expect to see institutions and new relationships 
reflecting the common interests in the island, as it faces the 
challenges of a competitive world and the opportunities of 
politial agreement. The character and depth of these is very 
much for discussion. 
  Third, the two governments will be building on the close 
partnership we already have as members of the European Union and 
as good neighbours in these islands. 
  Whatever may be the shape of final agreement in the talks, 
it 
will not be imposed on anyone. It will be the people who will 
have decided. 
  There is no purpose in living in the past. Dreadful deeds 
have been done by all sides in past centuries. We should all 
regret that, but those of us alive today are not responsible for 
them. 
  Our generation must look to the future. We want to give to 
the people power to take the decisions affecting their own 
lives. Will Sinn Fein take the opportunity? Will they now 
renounce violence, and trust the people? Or will they continue 
to inflict on the people further cruel and futile violence? 

