BFN 

<F P=106> [By Gilles Campion] </F>
  [Text] Beijing, May 10 (AFP) -- China on Tuesday made an 
official claim of sovereignty over the Blue Dragon oil field 
being prospected by Vietnam, stepping up the territorial dispute 
in the South China Sea. A Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman 
said the zone on the Vietnamese continental shelf should be 
transferred to the disputed Spratly island chain, adding that an 
exploration contract Vietnam has signed with the Mobil oil 
company was "illegal." 
  "The Blue Dragon sea area belongs to the adjacent waters of 
the Nansha islands," he said, using the Chinese name for the 
Spratlys -- claimed in whole or in part by Vietnam, China, 
Malaysia, Brunei, Taiwan and the Philippines. His statement was 
the clearest claim of sovereignty over this region yet made by 
the Chinese. They have not made any protests over the search 
for oil in the Great Bear (Dai Hung) field being carried out by 
several companies for the Vietnamese government. The state-run 
PetroVietnam oil company is working with Mobil on exploring the 
Blue Dragon (Than Long) field, which the Vietnamese government 
claims is not part of the Spratlys. 
  China's latest claim will further complicate the 
international bargaining for control of the archipelago. The 
hundreds of isles, atolls and sea rocks in the Spratlys are in 
one of the busiest sea lanes in the world. All vessels going 
from Japan to the Middle East and Europe pass by. 
  But the enormous riches waiting to be exploited under the 
seabed are at the centre of growing diplomatic sabre rattling. 
Vietnam, which has a presence on around 20 of the atolls, last 
week launched a veiled warning about Beijing's intentions in the 
South China Sea. The government called for measures to ease 
tensions and "avoid complicating the situation and without 
resorting to force or threats of force." A diplomat in Beijing 
said "the Chinese have never hidden their ambitions in the 
region and now they are pushing even further to keep Vietnam out 
of what they consider to be a `Chinese lake.'" 
  The Chinese have given exploration rights in a 
25,000-kilometre (10,000-square mile) zone west of the Spratlys 
to a U.S. firm, Crestone Energy Corp. The zone is only 250 
kilometres (160 miles) from the Vietnamese coast, but Crestone 
say they have been promised Chinese naval protection. Hanoi has 
in turn claimed that the Crestone deal is illegal because the 
zone is on the Vietnamese continental shelf. "Beijing seems to 
be attempting to set a frontier that Hanoi can only cross at the 
risk of a naval clash like in 1988," said the diplomat. Three 
Vietnamese vessels were sunk and 76 sailors killed during a 
brief clash with the Chinese navy in 1988. 
  Though Sino-Vietnamese relations were normalised in 1991, 
their territorial dispute remains outstanding. China has 
strengthened its presence in the South China Sea and has 
launched a modernisation programme aimed at making its navy one 
of the world's most powerful by the next century. The air force 
now has Russian Su-27 long-range bombers and are building an air 
base on the Paracels islands -- another South China Sea 
archipelago claimed by China and Vietnam. Vietnam's navy was not 
strong enough to dispute the 1988 conflict and according to 
military experts has weakened further since. 

