Language: <F P=105> Russian </F>
Article Type:CSO 

<F P=106> [Article by DELOVOY MIR staff correspondent Vladimir </F>
Sverkunov, under the "The Near Abroad" rubric: "Belarus: Without 
Money, Without Heat, Without Authority...."] 
  [Text] Empty store shelves; hours-long lines; prices 
rising almost weekly; money in freefall in relation to 
convertible currency and the Russian ruble--all of this has 
befallen the once well-to-do Belarus, which at one time had 
nearly the most favorable starting conditions to begin economic 
reforms. 
  The famous proverb "One waits for three years for the 
promise 
to be fulfilled" was not to come true: The country has not 
approached the market promised in 1990. The road of "evolution" 
proclaimed by the government in reality turned into running in 
place, contradictory in spirit, albeit "market-oriented" in 
letter; and laws adopted by the parliament--into another 
formality, which on top of that cannot compete with the numerous 
decrees, directives, and other administrative acts issued in 
great numbers by the Council of Ministers and its agencies. 
  Whichever sphere of the national economy we look at, it 
turns 
out that the leg has been raised for a decisive step, but never 
put down. Both the state sector and agriculture, as well as the 
monetary system and entrepreneurship, currently remain in this 
posture of balancing on one leg. 
  The problem that is most painful for Belarus is the supply 
of 
fuels and power. It would seem that a republic that does not 
have sufficient oil resources of its own should welcome its 
deliveries through any channels, especially considering that a 
market economy does not accept a monopoly in this sphere either. 
In reality, the government, instead of encouraging 
entrepreneurs, who could ensure that the republic has a 
plentiful supply of fuel and raw material for the chemical 
industry, has done everything to keep oil from getting into 
Belarus: Businessmen have been saddled with an enormous number 
of restrictions, the demand to sell raw materials to the state 
at laughable prices set by the latter, and killer taxes. All 
efforts have been applied at the same time to barter on a 
national scale: In accordance with the agreement on interrelated 
deliveries between Belarus and Russia, called "clearing" in 
government circles, enterprises were forced in a compulsory 
manner to surrender to the state fund a considerable part of 
their well-selling output--quite often at dumping prices. For 
instance, the state "buys" MAZ-5551 dump trucks from the 
BelavtoMAZ association at 11 million Belarusian rubles [R], 
while its production cost is R18 million. Deals of the same 
"profitability" are done with respect to refrigerators, 
television sets, tractors, footwear, and clothing. All of this 
for the sake of preserving a state monopoly on fuel and power: 
As long as it exists, these resources may be sold cheaply to 
those who will support the government's course. 
  That the clearing has not helped to maintain the supply of 
oil, and, on the contrary, has exacerbated the situation, is 
evidenced by the latest events. In October, under the pressure 
of the catastrophic situation with respect to fuel, the Council 
of Ministers made a concession to companies not owned by the 
state. It finally gave them the permission to trade in oil and 
petroleum products. And what happened? Fuel flowed like a river 
both from Russia and even from the Baltics at real 
prices--several times higher than those set by state officials. 
Private companies sell it straight from gasoline trucks, lease 
pumps at gas stations, and are agreeable to any terms of 
payment--and even in any currency. As to the fuel obtained 
through "clearing," it never materialized. Instead, Belarus' 
debt to Russia has reached almost $500 million. This order of 
things is envisaged to be maintained for the next year: A draft 
plan is ready, which envisages bringing state orders for leading 
enterprises to the level of almost 50 percent of their output. 
  Monopolistic methods also are used in the administration of 
agriculture. What kind of a market can we talk about when the 
state buys up everything produced in the agrarian sector at 
prices it sets itself and which not only do not keep up with 
inflation but often do not even cover expenses. Then later 
subsidies are issued (just enough so that the countryside should 
not die), which approach in size a quarter of the state budget, 
and preferential loans which consume up to 75 percent of the 
total amount of credit issued in the national economy. In these 
conditions the agricultural sector will never begin to trade 
and, having surrendered for peanuts the fruits of its labor, 
will remain forever a supplicant at the door of the "kind" state. 
  Entrepreneurs have to be smarter than this, among other 
reasons also because should they ever decide to ask for 
something from the state, which does everything to prevent the 
creation of a true free market, they will get in return an even 
greater worsening of economic conditions for their activities. 
In what other country does the tax on commercial activities 
reach 60 percent of income? And if the remaining 40 percent are 
intended to be paid out as salaries, there is tax trap waiting 
there as well: about 80 percent of various duties. As a result, 
out of every R100, private companies may realistically earn only 
R20. 
  Neither have the producers been shown any mercy. At a time 
when other republics of the former USSR have reduced the 
value-added tax rate, Belarus in real terms raised it this year 
by setting it at 25 percent and simultaneously introducing a 
3-percent--but applied to the entire amount of 
earnings--compulsory contribution to a mythical "fund for retail 
price regulation." Judging by the results of such "regulation," 
however, it is not enterprises that should pay the government, 
but the government that should pay a penalty to them for the 
collapse of prices. The tax on profit is also higher than 
anywhere else and reaches 30 percent. There also is another 
ineptly masked tax on profit--a payment for exceeding the 
nominal level of earnings, which is calculated at the same rate 
of 30 percent. More than 300 enterprises have been classified as 
monopolies (and really, why would a small republic have, for 
instance, several tractor or automotive plants?) for one single 
purpose: to regulate their profitability and prices by directive 
methods, to not let them operate in the market independently. 
  Thus has developed a purely Belarusian understanding of a 
market economy. Neither did it bypass the monetary and credit 
system. Funny clip-out pictures from a zoology textbook, which 
even the government officials now, following in the people's 
footsteps, call "rabbits," still represent who knows what. The 
Belarusian population, with the encouragement of the government, 
waits patiently for the "rabbits" to be exchanged for real 
money, which currently means Russian rubles. 
  It was in this crisis situation that the Supreme Soviet 
session opened in Minsk and the deputies demanded a change in 
the previously set schedule, insisting on dealing first with 
economic issues. 
  The heads of the parliament, the government, and the 
National 
Banks presented their reports. This, however, did not produce 
any clarity as to what to do next. In response to "let us have 
privatization" (over the past three years all of 2.68 percent of 
state property has been privatized), the prime minister rushed 
to assure everyone that by the end of next year 50 percent of 
enterprises will be transferred into private ownership. So what? 
The question is whether life-sustaining conditions will be 
created for these privately owned economic components, what is 
the prognosis for their future development, and whether they 
will be pushed around the same way that they were when they were 
still owned by the state. This, unfortunately, one can only 
guess. 
  Neither did it become any more clear with respect to the 
legality of circulation of "rabbits." Although the chairman of 
the board of the National Bank laid out good argumentation for 
the need to recognize Belarusian banknotes as national currency 
(without such a decision it is not possible to control to a full 
extent the monetary and credit emission, to establish a "real" 
exchange rate of the "rabbit" to foreign currencies, and to 
conduct full-fledged trade with other republics), the people's 
representatives postponed dealing with this problem until better 
(worse?) times. 
  One has to admit that power structures have turned out to be 
infected with the well-known Soviet-communist 
disease--dependency. "Now the landlord will come...." Until 
recently, Western Europe was seen as such a "landlord" and was 
firmly expected to provide aid. These illusions have evaporated; 
even small credits are obtained with great difficulties, and 
even that on the promise of reforms of the kind the Belarusian 
government has not seen in its worst nightmares. Now Council of 
Ministers representatives say openly at the parliament session 
that the government does not intend to dance to a foreign tune, 
no matter who plays it! 
  Where does such bravery come from? From a change of 
"landlord," that is where. One can even see it in the figures: 
The amount Belarus owes to Russia (about $500 million) already 
equals the amount of credit provided by other foreign countries. 
Meanwhile, winter is upon us; fuel will be needed, and the debt 
may well reach $1 billion. That is why Belarus does not 
recognize its own money as money. That is why the government, 
which has done nothing lately other than tighten "tax" screws, 
all of a sudden easily agrees to Russia's demand to 
substantially reduce three taxes simultaneously. And the 
parliament members, most of whom already have given this 
government a "no pass" mark, still do not raise the question of 
its resignation. 
  The Belarusian parliament has ratified three agreements: on 
the creation of the Economic Union; on the creation of new type 
of a ruble zone; and on combining the Russian and Belarusian 
monetary systems, in the hope that their implementation will 
help the republic to get out of the crisis. 
  Whatever may be, a necessary condition for unification with 
Russia is the existence in Belarus of a real, functioning 
authority that answers for its promises. So far, it is not there. 

