Language: <F P=105> English </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [By Xu Yang: "New Move to Boost Unions"] </F>
  [Text] The All-China Federation of Trade Unions (ACFTU) 
has vowed to organize workers in over half of the country's 
foreign-funded enterprises before the end of the year. 
  The push comes at a time when unions are becoming 
increasingly important in resolving labour disputes in such 
firms, ACFTU officials said. 
  Statistics show that only 4,200 foreign-funded firms, less 
than 10 per cent in China, had unions by the end of 1992. 
  But according to Tian Yukun, an ACFTU official, the figure 
may have reached 10,000 by the end of last year, or 25 to 30 per 
cent of the total since many joint ventures are partly funded by 
State-owned enterprises that already have trade unions. 
  Provinces like Jiangsu and Liaoning saw union coverage 
expand 
to 50 per cent of their foreign-funded firms last year. 
  Over the past few years, the foreign investment boom has 
given rise to more labour disputes in foreign-funded firms. 
  A report in the Chinese Management News said there have been 
250,000 labour disputes and strikes since 1988, mostly in joint 
ventures. Tian emphasized that most disputes occurred in firms 
without trade unions. 
  Disputes usually centre on ambiguous contracts, work hours, 
low pay, and poor worker safety conditions. 
  Contracts at many factories fail to meet state labour rules. 
  In some cases, two copies of contracts were prepared, one in 
Chinese and another in English, each containing different terms. 
Many workers have been misled by their contracts, union 
officials said. 
  In many firms, workers work twelve-hour days and do not get 
holidays or Sundays off. 
  Last year, workers in a Guangzhou foreign-funded factory 
resorted to striking when they were forced to work two months 
without a day of rest. 
  Severe negligence of worker safety is another problem. 
  Last year, 27 of the 200 employees in the Shenzhen Hongda 
Hardware Factory lost their fingers because of unsafe machinery. 
For some of the victims, it was their first day of work. 
  With all these problems, Tian said labour disputes are 
inevitable. 
  "But we do not advocate strikes since they hurt both the 
factory and workers," he said. 
  Unions can help resolve problems before extreme measures 
like 
strikes are sought. 
  According to the Trade Union Law passed last year, unions 
are 
required to have a seat on the boards of enterprises so they can 
express worker complaints. 
  Unions also help to increase factory productivity by 
organizing training programmes and assisting workers. 
  "Our tasks in foreign-invested enterprises are first to 
implement the opening up policy and second, to safeguard 
workers' legitimate rights," Tian said. 

