Language: <F P=105> German </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Article by Leo Wieland: "Clinton's New Dual Strategy"] </F>
  [Text] Washington, 11 Feb -- The Bosnian Muslims should 
not have any illusions after NATO's Sarajevo ultimatum: 
President Clinton does not want to win the war for them. The 
recent change in the White House's Balkans policy is rather 
based on a dual strategy. One part is the -- this time maybe 
somewhat more credible -- threat to carry out air strikes 
against Serb artillery positions, linked to the hope that these 
will not take place. The other part is the -- hitherto avoided 
-- political pressure on the Muslims with the objective to press 
for a territorial negotiated settlement in Geneva based on a 
partition of Bosnia. 
  Clinton, who does not see a military solution for Bosnia, 
and 
who, despite temporary success on the battlefield, sees the 
Muslims threatened by disastrous Serbian and Croatian spring 
offensives, would like to convince the government in Sarajevo to 
present a "reasonable" offer. In Washington's view, this should 
include a specific minimal territorial demand that would exactly 
specify important details -- such as access to the Adriatic and 
guaranteed links between Muslim enclaves that are surrounded by 
Serb territory. 
  Clinton was diplomatic when he told journalists that the 
United States first "would like to express what the legitimate 
and fundamental demands" of the Muslims are and then to "tell 
them clearly and honestly how we evaluate the political and 
military situation." A representative of the Washington 
Administration then explained the procedure: "If their offer is 
reasonable we will go to the Serbs and Croats and say: `Accept 
this deal or bad things might happen. If, however, you accept, 
then the sanctions may be eased.'" 
  Until the recent massacre in Sarajevo last Saturday [5 
February], Clinton rejected all European requests to bring his 
influence to bear more strongly on the Bosnian Government's will 
for a compromise. Under the impression of the recent cruel 
pictures from the Balkans, he then returned to an earlier 
formulation, according to which "for our nation clear interests 
are at stake in this conflict." Trying hard to demonstrate 
leadership, he defined the four aspects of these interests: 
NATO must prove to be the "credible peace power in Europe after 
the Cold War"; the conflict must be prevented from spreading; 
the streams of refugees must be contained; and the strangulation 
of Sarajevo must end "in the interest of humanity." 
  Without mentioning any details, Clinton pointed out that he 
had told Congress that "our contribution to the solution of the 
Bosnian conflict will correspond with our interests." White 
House sources have added that a military action would be limited 
to air strikes and would under no circumstances involve U.S. 
ground forces. One government spokesman added: "The point is 
to make it clear to the Bosnian Muslims that we will not help 
them to win this war and that within a rather small room (to 
maneuver in the negotiations) they will ultimately not get much 
more." 
  Clinton's new positioning in the case of Bosnia fits into 
the 
major framework of a redefinition of international peacekeeping 
missions with strictly limited U.S. participation. It is 
included in a presidential "decision directive" that was 
coordinated this week with congressional leaders and is now 
ready to be signed. In a contribution for THE NEW YORK TIMES, 
security adviser Lake described its basic elements: an 
interest-bound and "selective" commitment. 
  After he took office, Clinton still described international 
"peacekeeping" as one of the cornerstones of his foreign policy, 
while Lake now wrote the following: "Let us be clear about one 
thing: Peacekeeping is not in the center of our foreign or 
defense policy. The main task of our armed forces is not to 
engage in peacekeeping missions but to win wars. This 
administration does not have the intention to provide troops for 
a permanent international army." The President will not give up 
or limit his function of commander in chief and he will put U.S. 
soldiers under foreign command only in individual cases -- 
within the framework of NATO or as in the operation "Desert 
Storm." 
  According to Lake, the lessons learned in Somalia have led 
to 
a new "realism." One must not allow the United Nations to 
degenerate into a "garbage dump for conflicts that belligerent 
parties do not want to solve themselves." The questions the 
United States would ask in the Security Council in the future 
(also with respect to Bosnia) are: "Where is a threat to our 
interests? Is there a clearly defined mission? Is there a 
certain final point? How much will it cost? Are the resources 
available? What is the probability of success?" All in all, 
these questions constitute a whole bunch of factors that inhibit 
intervention -- even before the decision of Congress, which is 
increasingly opposed to any foreign "adventures." 

