BFN 

<F P=106> [By Frank Gonzalez] </F>
  [Text] Havana, 26 May (PL) -- Cuban Vice Foreign Minister 
Jorge Bolanos today said his country will attend the 4th 
Ibero-American Summit in order to make that forum a path toward 
integration, especially toward Latin American integration. 
  In statements to PRENSA LATINA, Bolanos explained the 
island's position toward the basic issues that will be discussed 
at the conference on 14 and 15 June in Cartagena de Indias, 
Colombia. He pointed out that Cuba does not have expectations 
that differ from those of previous summits and that Cuba's 
efforts are focused on making this conference a forum to 
introduce formulas and to implement policies and measures to 
achieve Ibero-American integration, especially Latin American 
integration. 
  As he commented on other issues, the deputy foreign minister 
predicted that this important summit will reject the U.S. 
blockade against the island, whose delegation will also seize 
the opportunity to make bilateral contacts with other chiefs of 
state and foreign ministers. 
  Bolanos stressed the importance of the Ibero-American 
summits, which are held, he maintained, without permission from 
anyone, based upon a community that shares cultural roots, 
traditions, interests, and history. He also criticized the 
so-called hemispheric summit, which is promoted by the United 
States and which will be held in December in Miami, because it 
is excluding Cuba. 
  The Cuban official pointed out that the summit has dubious 
origins and objectives, because it is displaying an anti-Cuban 
profile, taking into account the deliberate omission of Cuba, 
the selection of Miami as its theater, and the appointment of a 
U.S. official of Cuban ancestry to make the pertinent 
preparations. 
  He emphasized that it is worth noting that these types of 
exclusive meetings are still being organized at the end of the 
20th century, as we are talking about the end of the Cold War 
and as we are seeing tokens of worldwide compromises and harmony 
at the conferences. 
  Deputy Minister Bolanos also reported the existence of a 
concluding resolution from the 4th Ibero-American Summit. Many 
governments are currently reviewing this resolution. He said he 
will do everything possible for such a document to reflect the 
Ibero-American reality. 
  He added that he is thinking about the living conditions of 
about 210 to 220 million people from the region, people to whom 
we cannot talk about development without social justice, because 
they are living beneath the poverty line. 

