Language: <F P=105> Chinese </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> ["Roundup" by reporter Min Fanlu (7036 0416 6424): </F>
"Objectives, Motive Force, Foundation, and Preconditions -- the 
Relationship Among Reform, Development, and Stability as Seen 
From the `Two Sessions'"] 
  [Text] Beijing, 13 Mar (XINHUA) -- In China, the high tide 
of reform and opening up is surging up, economic development 
shows a strong momentum, and the 1.1 billion people are having 
an unprecedented opportunity for great development in the 
1990's. The situation in China has attracted people's attention 
both at home and abroad. How to develop further is the main 
topic for discussion among the National People's Congress [NPC] 
deputies and the members of the National Committee of the 
Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference [CPPCC] at 
the ongoing NPC and CPPCC sessions. 
  Premier Li Peng pointed out in his government work report: 
To seize the opportunity, deepen reform, open up wider, promote 
development, and maintain stability is the stress of the work of 
the whole party and the whole country. The crux of how to stick 
to the stress lies in correctly handling the relationship among 
reform, development, and stability. 
  How to stick to the stress of the work and handle well the 
relationship among the three has become the most popular topic 
at the "two sessions." 
  "Development is the last word." This famous word of Comrade 
Deng Xiaoping's is known to everyone in China. To develop 
productive forces is the fundamental objective of socialism and 
meets the basic needs of social progress and the people's 
happiness. If the economy is not developed, how can we show 
superiority of the socialist system and meet the challenge of 
the world? Our economic development in the last 15 years was 
with high growth rate in many consecutive years, which has 
caused surprise and admiration in the world. As a result, our 
annual gross domestic product has exceeded 3,000 billion yuan, 
our annual grain output has reached 900 billion jin, and our 
annual steel output has been near 90 million tonnes. In 
addition, we have had urban and rural markets with ample supply 
of goods, we have built hundreds of millions of new houses, the 
rural per-capita income has reached 921 yuan.... The people 
support our party even more and they are even fuller of 
confidence in the future of socialism. By comparing the 
realities of their own regions and departments with the 
situation of other countries, the conferees to the "two 
sessions" have profoundly realized that the current 
international situation and domestic situation are conducive to 
China's promotion of reform and construction, and it is indeed 
an unusually good opportunity for us. "The key to seizing the 
opportunity to develop ourselves lies in economic development." 
Comrade Deng Xiaoping's important talks made during his southern 
China inspection tour have inspired us to stick firmly to 
economic construction -- the central task -- and do all we can 
to develop economy. 
  What do we rely on to achieve development? We should rely on 
reform. Reform is the power, motor, and booster for 
development, as well as a panacea for the liberation and 
development of productive forces. Over the last 15 years, 
reform has added a great vitality to China's economy, given a 
pair of wings for all trades and professions to soar, and 
created a series of miracles. In short, reform and development 
grow up together. In order to make further progress in economic 
development in the 1990's, China must rely on deepening the 
reform and opening up wider, and there is no other way. Chinese 
leaders and people with breadth of vision clearly know that 
China's reform is a long process, it should be deepened steadily 
and prudently step by step with the progress of socialist 
modernization, and it cannot be achieved overnight. The 
establishment of socialist market economic structure is deeper 
and broader thorough reform. The plans for reforms of the 
fiscal and taxation, banking, investment, and foreign trade 
systems have been promulgated for implementation. They will 
involve a great deal of work and contradictions. During the 
course of examining the government work report, the NPC deputies 
and CPPCC committee members have reached the following 
consensus: The plans are being carried out quite smoothly, 
marking an important step taken by China in establishing 
socialist market economic structure; as the reform has a bearing 
on China's development and prosperity, the whole country must 
work as one, go all out, and vigorously promote it; since the 
reform is being deepened, affecting the relative interests of 
many quarters, it must be planned meticulously and carried out 
prudently. 
  Reform and development require a relaxed and harmonious 
social environment, as well as a political situation of 
stability and unity. Comrade Xiaoping has said: "Stability is 
above all else." Without stability, nothing can be achieved, 
neither reform nor development. Useful lessons in this regard 
can be found in Chinese and foreign history, both ancient and 
modern history. For this reason, stability is the indispensable 
precondition for reform and development. 
  Our country needs stability, a long-term peace and 
stability. According to reports on the "two sessions," the NPC 
deputies and CPPCC committee members have understood even more 
profoundly the necessity to promote stability with development 
and reform. A genuine social stability is impossible if the 
country is weak in national strength and suffers bad inflation 
and market supply shortage and the people's living standards are 
not improved. Development and reform are the foundation of long 
peace and stability in the society. The NPC deputies and CPPCC 
committee members suggested that in order to achieve stability, 
we should first stabilize economy and the market commodity 
prices and ensure a healthy economic development; we should 
attach importance to agriculture because stable agriculture 
will create stability across the country; and we should solve 
well any problems concerning public order so that people in both 
urban and rural areas can live and work in peace and 
contentment. Some deputies from ethnic minority regions 
emphasized that we must strengthen the great unity among the 
people of all nationalities, and the brothers of 56 
nationalities should share weal and woe, link their hearts, and 
forge ahead together. Leaders at all levels should be concerned 
about the masses, and resolve contradictions and overcome 
difficulties for the masses. There will be long-term peace and 
stability in our country if the 1.1 billion people are of one 
heart and one mind and our economy is prosperous. 
  Reform, development, and stability promote one another and 
form a single entity. General Secretary Jiang Zemin put the 
relationship in a vivid and profound way during his discussion 
with Shanghai's deputies: "Reform, development, and stability 
are like three closely related strategic pieces on the chess 
board of China's modernization drive. We will win the game if 
every move is properly made and one move helps another. If one 
move is wrong, it will endanger other pieces and even cause loss 
of the game." Everyone has a share of responsibility for the 
destiny of the country. All citizens should clearly know the 
stress of the work of the party and the state, do a solid work 
at their posts, and plunge themselves into the reform to promote 
development and maintain stability. 
  The "two sessions" have sent a message to China and to the 
world as a whole: No matter how the world situation changes, 
the Chinese people will firmly take the road of socialism with 
Chinese characteristics. China will firmly promote reform and 
opening up in a peaceful and stable environment. We will work 
as one under the banner of reform and achieve a sustained, 
rapid, and healthy development to usher in the new century. 

