Language: <F P=105> Arabic </F>
Article Type:BFN 

<F P=106> [Interview with Tal'at Fu'ad Qasim, official press spokesman </F>
of the Islamic Group abroad, by Hisham Mubarak, in Denmark; date 
not given] 
  [Text] [Mubarak] What were the pressures that made you 
leave Peshawar and seek asylum in Denmark? 
  [Qasim] The pressure began after an article appeared in the 
magazine AL-MURABITUN in which I criticized Saudi Arabia for 
refusing entry to pilgrims from countries that supported Iraq 
during the occupation of Kuwait. I also wrote several articles 
criticizing the Al Sa'ud rule. Saudi Arabia issued an order to 
the relief organizations operating in Afghanistan to stop 
supporting al-Jama'ah al-Islamiyah [the Islamic Group, IG]. The 
Saudi Government officially asked Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz 
Sharif to extradite me to Egypt and the Egyptian Government. 
This information reached 'Abdol Rasul Sayyaf, leader of the 
Afghan Ettehad-e Eslami, who asked me to enter Afghanistan. He 
put a car and Muslim guards at my disposal. He also put my new 
house under guard. I found it difficult to move around. I then 
received an invitation from Denmark and I travelled there. I 
asked for political asylum and was granted it. 
  Before that, martyr 'Adli Yusuf, whose nom de guerre was 
"Abu-Suhayb" was the first to arrive in Afghanistan through 
Saudi Arabia in 1985. He was followed by martyr 'Abd-al-Fattah 
(Abu-al-Yusr) also through Saudi Arabia and then by 'Ali 
'Abd-al-Fattah and Muhammad Shawqi al-Islambuli. 
  As for Dr. Ayman al-Zawahiri's group, some went to Saudi 
Arabia while he arrived in Afghanistan. At first, they were 
called "al-Muttahamun" [the accused] in the al-Jihad 
Organization case. They became acquainted with Usamah 
Bin-Ladin, a rich Saudi national who believes in the idea of 
al-Jihad. He trusted them and together they established the 
"al-Qa'idah" [the base], a guesthouse for receiving those 
wishing to join the Afghan jihad. They called themselves the 
(Jama'at al-Jihad) from that time. 
  [Mubarak] There are reports about uninterrupted contacts 
between the IG and the U.S. Administration and its Embassy in 
Cairo. Can you explain to us what went on in these contacts? 
  [Qasim] This is no different from the issue of dialogue with 
the government. We did not contact the U.S. Embassy. All these 
reports of such contacts are lies. I can confirm that no 
contacts have been held on any level with the U.S. Embassy. It 
was the Americans who asked for contact but we refused it. 
  [Mubarak] It is not important who began the contacts but 
what 
happened in them? 
  [Qasim] There were no contacts. There were attempts on their 
part, which we rejected. 
  [Mubarak] How were these attempts made? 
  [Qasim] The first attempt with me was made following my 
release in 1988 and my escape for the first time from the 
sentries around my house. A lawyer came and asked for an 
appointment because some foreigners wanted to meet 
me--correspondents and officials from human rights organizations 
in their countries. The first was a U.S. correspondent, the 
second was the chief editor of a Yugoslav magazine, and the 
third was the first secretary in the Swiss Embassy. I began by 
asking them: Why are you interested in meeting me? The Swiss 
emphasized that the aim was to learn the violations to which the 
IG and its members were subjected in prisons so as to inform his 
government, which would then pressure the Egyptian Government. 
The American and the Yugoslav said the meeting was important to 
them as correspondents and because they recognized me as a 
source of information on what was happening in Egypt. I 
explained to them in detail the violations, torture, and 
detention to which the IG members were subjected. The dialogue 
went no further. 
  [Mubarak] Were other attempts made? 
  [Qasim] The same lawyer came and asked for an appointment 
for 
the U.S. correspondent. I refused and asked him to tell the 
American to send a photocopy of what he published about our 
first meeting in which I spoke about human rights violations so 
that I might see the result of the meetings. Otherwise, why 
should we meet again? 
  [Mubarak] But these attempts were made by correspondents. 
What about the U.S. Embassy? 
  [Qasim] The only time the embassy tried was following my 
arrest and while I was in prison at the end of 1988. The 
attempt was made through the same lawyer. He told me that the 
embassy's political officer wanted to meet me. I was surprised 
because how could he meet me when he knew I was in prison. The 
lawyer stressed that the official said he himself would solve 
it. I told the lawyer to ask him first: What do you want from 
this meeting? When the lawyer returned, he said the official 
wanted the following: 
  1. To get acquainted with me personally. 
  2. To be assured that we did not regard the United States as 
"the great satan." 
  3. To stress to the IG, represented in my person, that the 
Egyptian Government does not use the U.S. aid reaching Egypt to 
strike at the Islamic movement. 
  My answer was to refuse a meeting. We do not meet officials 
from governments. And for us, the United States is the major 
enemy, just like Israel. 
  [Mubarak] Why has the IG carried out acts of violence 
against 
tourism? 
  [Qasim] There are several reasons for the attacks on 
tourism: 
  First, tourism represents a massive source of illicit 
[haram] 
state revenue. This revenue provides the ruling regime with 
financial resources that help it to stay in power. We believe 
the regime should be removed. So, we decided to strike at this 
activity to deprive the regime of this revenue and hasten its 
demise. According to statistics, the annual income generated by 
tourism is &pound;3.2 billion [about $1 billion]. The 
government's 
own reports admit that a limited number of operations by the 
Islamic groups, which cost us nothing, have undermined this 
illicit revenue. 
  Second, tourism in its current form is pure evil. It is an 
activity through which prostitution and AIDS are being spread, 
particularly by female Jewish tourists. It is a despicable 
source of a host of abominations. Tourism is also a way for 
foreign intelligence services to collect information about the 
Islamic movement. So, tourism is a certified evil and must be 
terminated. 
  [Mubarak] But these acts of violence that you committed 
involved murder. Tourists were killed. What does the 
government have to do with this? 
  [Qasim] Some tourists should not be killed. The target of 
our campaign is tourism, not tourists. We have taken several 
measures to protect the lives of tourists. We have issued 
several statements warning tourists against coming to Egypt, 
where their lives will be endangered. We have said that whoever 
visits Egypt subjects himself to danger because of our campaign 
against the tourism sector. We have also sent messages to the 
competent authorities warning them against inviting tourists for 
these reasons. Having done all this, those tourists who still 
visit the country are doing so at their own risk. 
  [Mubarak] You said tourism is pure evil and a source of 
abomination. This is one of the reasons you cite for the 
attacks against the tourism sector. But AIDS and drugs are not 
a result of tourism. There are countries that have no tourism 
but in which drugs and AIDS are widespread. 
  [Qasim] The Egyptians did not use drugs before the start of 
the tourism boom. I agree that tourism may not be the sole 
cause for the spread of drugs but it is a major factor. Press 
reports have repeatedly linked tourism with drugs, AIDS, and 
espionage. 
  [Mubarak] Suppose, for the sake of argument, that tourism 
was 
the reason for the spread of AIDS and drugs as you say and that 
it is an abomination that should be changed. Why did you decide 
to strike at tourism only last year when we know that the 
tourist areas are centered in Upper Egypt, where, historically, 
your influence has always been. There must be other reasons 
prompting you to strike at tourism. Otherwise, why did you keep 
silent about this evil? You have existed since the 
mid-seventies. 
  [Qasim] Tourism is basically permissible if it is conducted 
according to Islamic rules. But if a war is raging, then why 
should the tourists come to these areas when they know they are 
in danger, unless there are other reasons making them come. 
  [Mubarak] For some time, we have seen reports of divisions 
and splits within the IG, especially after the tourism 
incidents, when some dissident leaders rejected this tactic. 
This analysis is confirmed by the calm in several governorates, 
such as al-Minya and Suhaj, where the IG has a strong influence 
and yet refused to participate in this conflict against the 
security organs. What is your view? 
  [Qasim] There are no differences or splits on any leadership 
or base level inside the IG. There are no differences over 
tourism or any other issue concerning some governorates' 
nonparticipation in striking at tourism. There are two reasons 
for this: 
  1. Reasons that concern the government. The regime cannot 
open several fronts simultaneously. It has not succeeded in the 
battle it started in Dayrut and will be unable to decide this 
battle even with the forces it has brought in from Cairo and the 
areas surrounding Dayrut. So, the regime prefers not to start 
new battles now. 
  2. Reasons that concern the IG. We have not decided upon a 
comprehensive confrontation. What is happening now is 
preparation, only "a heating up." It is in our interest at the 
preparatory stage to maintain bases in calm governorates so that 
they can operate calmly in accordance with the plan prepared for 
them and achieve what is required of them. Briefly, we are the 
ones who will decide when and who will move. These governorates 
are required to remain calm. Their role has not come yet. 
  [Mubarak] You issued a statement saying that investments 
will 
soon be the target of IG operations. When will you carry out 
violent acts against investments? 
  [Qasim] The timing for striking at investments depends on 
several circumstances. These include the nature of the Egyptian 
security organs' performance against us and then our assessment 
of the conflict with the state. If the state opts for a new 
escalation against the IG, then the investment sector will be 
the target of revenge as a kind of deterrent. 
  [Mubarak] In which case, you will not have the religious 
grounds you cited for the attacks on tourism. What are your 
reasons for the campaign against investment? 
  [Qasim] We seek to destroy all the state organs and 
facilities with the least possible bloodshed. The task is easy. 
A single IG military unit can strike at investment in Egypt 
when the time is right. 
  [Mubarak] The military operations you directed against 
tourism have cost you a lot. The security organs have 
eradicated the IG influence in many areas. Most of the major IG 
leaders are in jail. Did the IG make an error of judgment when 
it took its struggle against the state to the highest level with 
the attacks on such an important sector as tourism? 
  [Qasim] I beg to differ with your use of the term the 
highest 
possible level. What has happened in our struggle with the 
state is very limited and only in line with the stages we adopt 
in our effort to weaken the state. This is just a prelude to an 
all-out confrontation. The current level of confrontation is 
only the beginning. The major struggle has not begun. Besides, 
the security organs have no clue as to the IG structure. For 
example, the recurring announcement by security officials that 
they have eliminated 99 percent of IG members contradicts the 
daily press reports about the arrests of dozens, even hundreds, 
of people. 
  [Mubarak] I feel that with your campaign against tourism you 
have launched a losing, even suicidal, battle. The ensuing 
security efforts have undercut your operations. 
  [Qasim] The IG is still alive and will remain unshaken. All 
the security strikes have been ineffectual. At any rate, our 
religious duty is to engage in jihad, not to reach a particular 
outcome. We take the right path and God Almighty decides on the 
outcome. We do what the shari'ah tells us to do with regard to 
establishing the Islamic state. If the outcome is victory, that 
is fine with us. If it is death, that too is fine. 
  [Mubarak] There have been reports about a dialogue between 
yourself and the security officials following your release in 
1988. What was that about? 
  [Qasim] First, there was no dialogue involved, despite 
recent 
reports concerning a mediation committee. When I was under 
house arrest after my release in 1988, Major General Sa'id 
Thabit of the Internal State Security Service summoned me and 
told me the acts of violence waged by the IG in south Egypt, 
'Ayn Shams [a Cairo suburb], and other areas must end. I stated 
the IG's conditions for ending violence. They are: 
  1. IG detainees and prisoners should be released. 
  2. Propagation activities should be legalized. IG mosques 
must not be sequestered. 
  3. Torture and the holding of hostages should be ended. 
  The security official did not agree. On the contrary, they 
strengthened the guard during my house arrest in 1988. After 
fleeing my house and my arrest in 1989, the same official came 
back and asked me to stop the violence, particularly in 'Ayn 
Shams, which has witnessed a noticeable escalation in the IG 
operations against the police. I repeated what I said about the 
conditions I mentioned. Again, these were rejected. That is 
the story. There was no dialogue. There will not be one. 
  [Mubarak] But there are confirmed reports that a mediation 
committee of religious scholars was coordinating and organizing 
the dialogue between the IG leaders in prison and security 
officials and that that was the reason the government dismissed 
Interior Minister 'Abd-al-Halim Musa, a party to the dialogue. 
  [Qasim] There was no dialogue. Apart from what I said 
earlier, no IG leaders inside the prison or outside have met 
religious scholars or security officials. The mediation story 
was fabricated. We issued a statement dismissing the idea of 
dialogue or mediation. Our position is clear in this regard. 
There can be no truce or reconciliation with the regime. The 
issue is confrontation between the two parties until one 
finishes the other off or the Islamic system is fully applied. 
  [Mubarak] Does this mean the IG insists on rejecting any 
dialogue designed to stop the bloodshed and violence? 
  [Qasim] We will enter no dialogue unless one of two cases 
applies: 
  1. It is dialogue with the state security and government 
shaykhs and ulema with a view to dismissing the suspicions they 
raise occasionally about our ideology. This is our duty and we 
call for it. 
  2. In the event of our achieving power, we might negotiate 
with the key figures of the outgoing authority about the 
conditions for their exit from the country. 
  [Mubarak] But the information indicates that 'Abbud al-Zumur 
was a party to the dialogue. 
  [Qasim] This never happened. What was reported was untrue 
and denied by 'Abbud al-Zumur. 
  [Mubarak] What about press reports attributed to Safwat 
'Abd-al-Ghani regarding the mediation committee in which he 
confirms the existence of a dialogue? 
  [Qasim] First, Safwat 'Abd-al-Ghani's statements were 
distorted. Second, I am the one who officially expresses the 
IG's positions. I only discussed the mediation issue to deny 
its existence. 
  [Mubarak] Many observers believe the IG has lost on every 
level and that the security services have eliminated its threat. 
What do you think? 
  [Qasim] This is wrong. At the military level, although the 
all-out confrontation has not started, and the struggle is still 
at its preparatory stage, the state has failed to decide a 
single battle. The Dayrut battle has not been decided, despite 
the massive forces brought in from the other governorates. 
Indeed, the IG members in Dayrut exhausted the government 
strength and confused its forces. Military superiority favors 
the IG. We maintain a presence in 18 governorates and their 
scores of towns and hundreds of villages. The state has failed 
to decide even a small battle in one of the 13 towns of Asyut 
Governorate. And Asyut is only one of 18 governorates in which 
we are present. 
  On the political level, the state is suffering various 
political crises. The political forces' rejection of Mubarak's 
nomination is perhaps the best example. On the economic level, 
simple strikes that cost us nothing enable us to obstruct the 
tourism sector; the state is suffering an economic crisis that 
has been deepened by tourism problems. 
  The various levels of struggle have added to the IG's 
firmness. 
  I conclude from this that the IG's curve is going upward, 
contrary to what some people imagine. 
  [Mubarak] I disagree. First, the IG's mosques, known for 
their active role, have been taken by the government. Second, 
you give government failure to decide the battle in Dayrut as 
evidence that the IG is still strong. But the government ended 
your influence in many other regions, like Imbabah, 'Ayn Shams, 
Qina, Aswan, and Damietta. The IG does not exist there. The 
IG's armed elements were liquidated, as many members were 
killed. Finally, that arrivals from Afghanistan are being used 
means the IG is using its last line of defense. 
  [Qasim] This is not true. Statements by security leaders 
indicate that we have killed more of them than they have killed 
of us since 1981. What you said about government successes in 
regions like Aswan, Imbabah, and Qina is not true either. 
Although in the past we used mosques to propagate the message, 
we did not stop when the government controlled the mosques. The 
IG invented methods to continue its activity, such as using 
direct video transmission, audio cassettes, and various 
publications. And educating members in apartments instead of 
mosques--because of the security situation--allows us to 
intensify our programs. In short, our activity is continuing 
but the methods and means have changed. The participation of IG 
members in Afghanistan in the current struggle in Egypt was 
intended from the beginning. Those members were scheduled to 
return anyway. Your thinking that they are the last line is 
wrong; they are just the beginning of the struggle. Anyway, I 
won't go into more detail about this point. 
  [Mubarak] What are the IG's poles of action now? 
  [Qasim] There are three poles of action. These are: 
  1. The military coup: 
  Work on this level is afoot. The state knows nothing about 
it and its security organs are preoccupied with minor incidents 
carried out by IG youths in Upper Egypt. 
  2. The mass action: 
  When the Islamic revolution takes place, it must be 
accompanied by a widespread mass action. This is vital to 
prevent foreign intervention, or at least to have the action 
impede intervention for 18 days, according to our military 
people. Many of the demonstrations we organized were meant, 
among other things, to train the IG cadres in mass action. We 
have expertise in this field. 
  3. The special operations axis: 
  This action is necessary to assassinate some officials. It 
is the stage of heating things up. This organ has gained 
expertise by implementing operations. It is ready now and has a 
role in implementing the plan. This organ is in action and will 
not stop the assassination acts as long as there are 
circumstances that require them. It is wrong for anyone to 
think that the arrest of its members or the halting of its 
activities for some time means an imbalance. Action is taken in 
accordance with a plan drawn up for this organ's work. 
  The state knows nothing about the military organ that is 
responsible for preparing the military coup. It knows nothing 
about the special operations organ. When some of its members 
are arrested, they only know about their group, which is no use 
to the security forces, since the group is completely separate 
and has no links with the other groups. 
  [Mubarak] I feel you are exaggerating the military action. 
We have not heard about military groups belonging to the IG and 
the intelligence service has arrested no elements affiliated to 
you. What proof do you have? 
  [Qasim] The events of 1981 [the killing of al-Sadat] answer 
you. The security organs had no idea about the IG's military 
wing. This is the most convincing answer. The arrest or 
nonarrest of military elements does not mean there are or are 
not military groups. Generally speaking, there were military 
people in the al-Jihad case. 
  [Mubarak] The military who left service or were accused in 
the al-Jihad case were officers, noncommissioned officers, and 
soldiers. They had no influence. Supposing that what you say 
about a presence in this sector is true, this does not mean 
there is any real danger. What do you think? 
  [Qasim] I beg to differ with you. The influential forces are 
the minor officers and the situation in the military units 
confirms this. Soldiers do not get their orders from 
high-ranking officers such as a brigadier general and above. We 
are convinced of the importance of the lower ranks. This is a 
lesson from history. They are the motivators. 
  [Mubarak] What are the details of the coup plan you prepared 
in 1981 and whose spark was the attack on the reviewing stand 
[on President al-Sadat]? 
  [Qasim] The plan was based on several axes: Military action 
to seize control of the main centers, such as the operations 
room, the Defense Ministry, the Interior Ministry, the 
television and radio building, and the important bridges. The 
plan also called for the issuance of fabricated statements 
attributed to various army units expressing support for the 
Islamic revolution in order to confuse the Army Command and 
paralyze its activity. At the same time, armed elements would 
move to kill some influential state figures or those who would 
attempt to ride the popular wave. The people would then go down 
to the streets to prevent foreign intervention. We also had an 
alternative plan that was to be implemented in an emergency. 
This is the one that was carried out in 1981 after the arrest 
of a number of leaders, including myself, during the September 
campaign. 
  The organization decided to implement the emergency plan for 
fear that the security service may have learned about the 
organization after our arrest. The emergency plan was amended 
after we learned that Khalid al-Islambuli has been selected to 
participate in the military parade. The leadership was hesitant 
whether to go ahead with the plan to assassinate al-Sadat or 
not. The brothers in Cairo decided to carry out the 
assassination plan, and that the shots to be fired by 
al-Islambuli would herald the start of the revolution and the 
movement in Cairo and Asyut. Usamah Hafiz was asked to travel 
to Upper Egypt to inform the other leaders about the plan. But 
he could not get to Asyut because the police had established 
checkpoints along the road. Usamah was forced to change his 
itinerary. Therefore, the assassination operation came as a 
surprise to the Upper Egypt leaders. They thought that the fact 
that they had not received information about the assassination 
plan meant that the plan has been postponed. They waited for 
two days in order to prepare for the movement that began on the 
first day of the holiday. They succeeded in seizing control of 
the Asyut Governorate and the security directorate. But the 
security forces were able after many hours to regain control of 
the governorate, and the plan failed in Cairo. 
  [Mubarak] How did Khalid al-Islambuli join the IG? 
  [Qasim] Khalid is the younger brother of Muhammad Shawqi 
al-Islambuli, one of the founders of the IG. Muhammad invited 
him to join the group, and he did. He began attending the 
weekly meetings we held in al-Rahmah Mosque. We decided to 
accept him as a member, and I was his amir in the Naja' Hammadi 
group. He was full of enthusiasm. He asked me more than once 
to give him permission to direct his unit's guns at the 
presidential palace where al-Sadat lived. He was an officer in 
the Artillery Corps. I used to calm him down, and hinted to him 
that something was being prepared and he should wait. Later I 
included Khalid in the group responsible for carrying out the 
coup. 

