Language: <F P=105> Japanese </F>
Article Type:CSO 

  [Text] Japanese automakers are groping in the dark for the 
right stance to take on development. Unable to read market 
changes, the new cars introduced after making thorough 
preparations are even doing poorly. The Tokyo Motor Show that 
will open on the 23d will symbolize the distress of the Japanese 
automakers. 
  The Tokyo Motor Show has welcomed its 30th anniversary; 352 
companies from 15 nations will participate and more than 2 
million people are expected to attend, making it the world's 
largest motor show, but this time the feeling of a gala festival 
will not exist for Japanese automakers. 
  Change From Elegance to Plain Concept Cars. All Firms 
Talk of "the Future Being in Practicality" 
  According to an executive at Mazda, whose concept car 
exhibition consisted of only one hydrogen engine car, the aim of 
the show was "to have people see as many cars for sale on the 
market as possible and tie that to sales." This idea was held in 
common with other companies as well. Says Yutaka Kume, Nissan 
Motor Chairman, the Motor Show has gone from a festival of dream 
cars abundantly endowed with the latest technology to an 
"opportunity for restoring new car sales." A serious slump in 
sales is threatening to significantly alter the purpose of the 
show. 
  However, even the idea of an opportunity to expand sales 
could end in failure if things stay as they are. Behind that is 
the change in consumer needs. Honda Motor Company Vice President 
Hiroyuki Yoshino puts it as follows: "Previously the car was the 
personification of dreams. However, the domestic market has 
entered a mature period, and there are increasing numbers of 
consumers who clearly think of the car as a tool the way people 
do in Europe and the United States." Customers will no longer go 
along with the idea up to now of making cars higher performance, 
comfortable, and elegant. 
  The "plainness" of all the company concept cars exhibited at 
the Motor Show was the manifestation of trying to anticipate 
this change in needs. Up to and including the previous show (in 
1991), numerous concept cars were displayed with the latest 
technologies, novel styling, and competing dazzling elegance, 
but this time such qualities were completely subdued. 
  Instead, what stood out were concept cars that used gasoline 
substitutes and which stressed the single point of practicality. 
Among the latter were two cars exhibited by Toyota Motor and 
Nissan based on the absolutely identical idea of "having 
interior space rivaling that of a large car, but with the car 
size and fuel consumption of a small car." 
  The pudgy appearance could not be called attractive even as 
an empty compliment, but the two companies both insist that "in 
the future this type of thoroughly rationalized car will become 
mainstream." 
  However, the true feelings of Japanese automakers do not 
welcome such a change. Inexpensive, compact, and practical were 
once characteristics of Japanese cars, but that is no longer the 
case. Since size increased and every conceivable type of new 
technology continued to be piled on during the bubble period, 
cars are no longer either inexpensive or compact. It is pointed 
out that they are excessively equipped and it has also become 
doubtful whether they are practical. 
  Price Difference Between U.S. Cars: Severe Cost 
Reductions Make Development Teams Feel Powerless 
  In January 1994 Chrysler will introduce the Japanese car 
killer "Neon," the focus of much attention, into the North 
American market. It is expected that the minimum price of this 
small passenger car will be about $9,000. A passenger car with 
engine displacement of 2,000 cc, its price at about 1 million 
yen defies the conventional wisdom of the Japanese automakers. 
Such things as power windows, and other equipment not regarded 
very highly by small car customers have been decidedly cut out, 
and it is said that, compared to a Japanese car of the same 
class, it has reduced the total number of parts by 10 percent. 
  There are critics, such as Honda President Nobuhiko 
Kawamoto, 
who says, "The Neon is a car solely in earnest pursuit of 
affordability. It will be necessary to monitor the situation a 
bit longer to make an accurate assessment of its reliability, 
among other things." One thing for certain, however, is that it 
has placed a big gap between the Japanese makers and the Big 
Three in terms of price competitiveness. 
  Lamenting his own company's disposition toward high costs, 
Nissan President Yoshifumi Tsuji says, "No matter how hard we 
try, a car under 1.5 million yen will not generate a surplus. It 
is like producing it merely to maintain the plant's rate of 
operation." Fixed costs such as personnel expenses and repayment 
expenses which soared during the bubble period have become 
encumbrances, and their constitution is such that they cannot 
turn a profit just by the manufacture of inexpensive cars. 
  Of course, they are desperately trying to cut costs by doing 
things like using parts in common with other companies and value 
analysis (VA), but just trying to reduce prices by an 
accumulation of small devices naturally has limitations. 
Confronted by the double punch of the strong yen and the sudden 
change in the Big Three's way of making cars aggravates a 
feeling of ineffectiveness of efforts to reduce costs in units 
of sen [1/10 of a yen]. 
  The drop in morale of the development teams is also a big 
problem. Recently, most of the new cars put on sale had to 
undergo a sudden price revision in the course of development. 
This is due to the need to hold down the sales price even a 
little amid the strengthening cost orientation of consumers. For 
this reason, at the time that development work gained 
considerable ground, they were ordered to use parts in common 
with other models and eliminate equipment. A technician at one 
manufacturer says, "Because top managers say this thing or that 
thing is unnecessary or wasteful, there is a great deal of 
dissatisfaction in development." 
  "Sales Change Just by Appearance. Are Consumers Really 
Emphasizing Practicality?" 
  Companies are also becoming shocked when unit sales drop 
radically once the new car effect dissipates several months 
after the beginning of sales, and this is amplifying the 
bewilderment of development teams. 
  In August Toyota did a minor change to its luxury passenger 
car "Crown," but within the industry there were many who 
described it as "virtually a full model change." Ordinarily, a 
minor change is confined to small alterations such as making 
improvements to parts, the addition of variations, etc. However, 
the Crown received major modifications. 
  It received the "major surgery" of having its front grille, 
bumper, and rear area remodeled so that its rounded styling was 
returned to a sharper cornered version that is closer to the 
older type of Crown. 
  The Crown has been one of Toyota's moneymakers, ranking 
right 
alongside the "Mark II." However, going into this year, its 
sales performance dropped to far less than the monthly target of 
17,000 units, and continued to be extreme sluggish at a monthly 
average of just over 9,000 units. The old angular style Crown 
maintained a respectable level of sales even when it was at the 
end of its model period. Therefore, Toyota decided to bring it 
closer to the old style which had enjoyed such a favorable 
reception. 
  September sales had recovered to just over 14,000 units, so 
the situation has improved, but the analysis of an executive at 
a rival maker is that "this is evidence that even Toyota, which 
is hailed as the representative of the `market in' type firm, 
has started having difficulty getting a handle on the current 
market." 
  The same sort of phenomenon can be seen with Nissan's top 
luxury car "Infiniti Q45." In a minor change in June, a grille 
was newly installed in front. As a result, unit sales which had 
dropped at one point to about 80 per month increased suddenly to 
699 units (in September). 
  The Infiniti has been using the rare grilleless appearance 
as 
a point of appeal to consumers as a luxury car. However, with 
the extremely sluggish sales, it changed its tune. Even though 
sales may increase, the distress will not diminish. One company 
official complains that "for sales to change this much just by 
changing the appearance, one loses confidence in whether 
consumers now are really valuing practicality." 
  Sales of Honda's "Domani," the small passenger car it began 
selling in November 1992, are also lethargic at about half the 
monthly sales target of 3,000 units. The Domani was the first 
small car in Japan to offer a driver's side air bag as standard 
equipment in an appeal to safety considerations. However, Vice 
President Yoshino recognizes the mistaken reading of the market, 
saying, "Many customers say they don't need air bags and that if 
the car's price could be reduced by the cost of the air bags 
they would buy it." 
  Firms understand the direction of change in the market 
viewed 
in the long term toward inexpensive and practicality, but are 
unable to get a reading of the speed of that change. Moreover, 
they have developed an excessively high-cost constitution to be 
able to respond to change. That state of affairs has caused 
Japanese automakers to lose confidence and is causing them to 
stray off course. 
  Nissan and Mazda have fallen into deficit and there are 
rumors that even Toyota will have an operating deficit in the 
coming first half, so all firms are suffering from rapidly 
worsening earnings. Because it is a climate that does not permit 
failure, new car development will be forced to strengthen its 
protective stance. 
  This motor show will be opened in a state of unprecedented 
distress. Will the festival that extolls the future of 
automobiles ironically become a stage where "the curtain will be 
closed on dreams"? 

