 

On September 23, 1993, the Texas Food Industry Association, the National American Wholesale Grocers' Association,
the International Foodservice Distributors Association, and the National Grocers Association filed a complaint
in the United States District Court for the Western District of Texas (District Court) alleging that the issuance
of the interim rule violated the APA and requested that the Court issue a preliminary injunction.
On October 14, the District Court granted plaintiffs' request for a preliminary injunction and enjoined the Department
from enforcing or implementing the interim or final regulations against the plaintiffs or any other affected entities
or individuals. The Department filed a motion with the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit on October
15 to stay the preliminary injunction and allow the safe handling regulations to take effect. This motion was denied
on October 19, 1993.
While the Department believed it would prevail on the APA issue in further litigation, it recognized that a notice
and comment rulemaking would take less time than further litigating the APA issue with the plaintiffs. Due to the importance
of protecting public health and the related need to provide this crucial information to consumers as quickly as possible,
the Department published simultaneously on November 4, 1993, a proposal to amend the regulations to require safe
handling instructions on raw and partially cooked meat and poultry products, and a final rule withdrawing the provisions
of the interim and final rules (58 FR 43478 and 58 FR 52856).


Authority


The Federal Meat Inspection Act (FMIA) (21 U.S.C. 601 

et seq.

) and the Poultry Products Inspection Act (PPIA) (21 U.S.C. 451 

et seq.

) direct the Secretary of Agriculture to maintain meat and poultry inspection programs designed to assure consumers
that meat and poultry products distributed to them (including imports) are wholesome, not adulterated, and properly
marked, labeled, and packaged.

