 



(7) Effective March 15, 2000, no vehicle subject to the 
requirements of the fleet averaging program shall be allowed to 
register in California without proof of compliance in the form of 
a valid certificate covering the subject vehicle, unless the 
vehicle has not previously been subject to the requirements of 
this program because it is a new vehicle or had not been 
previously registered in California. 



52.296752.2968 

[Reserved] 


52.2969 

Nonroad vehicles and engines, on-highway motorcycles. 



(a) 

Applicability.

 All provisions of this section will 
apply to nonroad vehicles and engines and on-highway motorcycles 
manufactured after December 31, 1995 and manufactured for sale, 
sold, offered for sale, introduced or delivered for introduction 
into commerce, or imported in the State of California. 

(b)(1) 

Compression-ignition Engines at or above 37 kW.

 EPA 
will finalize national rules for new compression-ignition engines 
at or above 37 kW by May 1994 which will achieve a cumulative 37 
percent NO

X

 emission reduction from the fleet of uncontrolled 
compression-ignition engines in this category. 

(2) 

Additional measures.

 If EPA fails to publish a national 
rule which achieves the cumulative 37 percent reduction in NO

X

 
emissions from compression-ignition engines described in 
paragraph (b)(1) of this section, EPA will promulgate additional 
compression-ignition engine control measures applicable to such 
engines in the State of California or the FIP areas. These 
additional measures will cumulatively achieve the targeted 37 
percent reduction. 

(c)(1) 

Spark-ignition Engines at or Below 19 kW.

 EPA will 
finalize national Phase 1 and 2 rules for new spark-ignition 
engines at or below 19 kW which will achieve a cumulative 90 
percent VOC emission reduction from the fleet of uncontrolled 
spark-ignition engines in this category. A Phase 1 rule will be 
finalized by May 1995 and a Phase 2 rule will be finalized by May 
1997. 

(2) 

Additional measures.

 If EPA fails to publish Phase 1 
and 2 national rules which achieve a cumulative 90 percent 
reduction in VOC emissions from spark-ignition engines described 
in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, EPA will promulgate tighter standards 
for all users of such engines and/or fees for commercial users of 
such engines in the State of California or in the FIP areas. 
These additional measures will cumulatively achieve the targeted 
90 percent reduction. 

(d)(1) 

Spark-ignition Marine Engines.

 (i) EPA will 
finalize national rules for new spark-ignition marine engines by 
November 1995 which will achieve a cumulative 5060 percent VOC 
emission reduction from the fleet of uncontrolled spark-ignition 
marine engines in this category. The national regulations shall 
be phased in commencing with model year 1998 and later spark-ignition outboard, sterndrive, and inboard engines
and all model 
year 1999 and later personal watercraft spark-ignition engines 
that are sold, manufactured for sale, offered for sale, 
introduced or delivered for introduction into commerce or 
imported into the State of California. 

(ii) A marine engine is any nonroad engine which is used on 
a ``vessel'' as defined in 1 U.S.C. 3. 

(2) 

Additional measures.

 If EPA fails to publish a 
national rule which achieves a cumulative 5060 percent reduction 
in VOC emissions from spark-ignition marine engines described in 
paragraph (d)(1) of this section, EPA will promulgate a fee 
schedule for users of such spark-ignition marine engines in the 
FIP areas. The additional measures will cumulatively achieve the targeted 
5060 percent reduction. 

(e) 

On-highway motorcycles and engines used in nonroad 
motorcycles. 

(1) General applicability.

 This regulation applies to new 
gasoline and methanol fueled on-highway motorcycles and nonroad 
motorcycles manufactured after December 31, 1995 and manufactured 
for sale, sold, offered for sale, introduced or delivered for 
introduction into commerce, or imported into the State of 
California, including motorcycles with engine displacements less 
than 3.1 cubic inches (50 cc). 

(2) 

Definitions. 

Nonroad motorcycle

 means any motorized land vehicle designed 
for transporting person or property and which has two wheels, or 
three or more wheels and a curb mass less than or equal to 680 
kilograms; it does not include devices regulated by the State of 
California as other classes of motor vehicles or devices 
regulated by EPA as other classes of nonroad engines nor does it 
include devices designed solely for operation on rails. 



On-highway motorcycle

 means any motor vehicle with a 
headlight, taillight, and stoplight and having: two wheels, or 
three wheels and a curb mass less than or equal to 680 kilograms. 

(3) 

Emission standards applicable in California for 1996 
and later model year on-highway motorcycles and nonroad 
motorcycles. 

(i) Exhaust emissions from 1996 and later model year on-highway motorcycles and nonroad motorcycles subject to this

paragraph shall not exceed: 

(A) Hydrocarbons or Organic material hydrocarbon equivalent: 
0.8 grams per vehicle kilometer. 

(B) Carbon monoxide: 12 grams per vehicle kilometer. 

(C) Oxides of nitrogen: 0.8 grams per vehicle kilometer. 

(ii) The standards set forth in paragraph (a) of this 
section refer to the exhaust emitted over driving schedules set 
forth in 40 CFR part 86, subpart F and measured and calculated in 
accordance with those procedures. 

(iii) No crankcase emissions shall be discharged into the 
ambient atmosphere from any on-highway motorcycle subject to this 
subpart. 

(iv) Evaporative emissions from on-highway motorcycles 
shall not exceed 2.0 grams diurnal and hot soak according to 
State of California procedures referenced in 13 CCR 1976. 



