 

(cc) Positions at GS15 and below when filled by persons identified as Interchange Executives by the President's
Commission on Executive Exchange. Appointments made under this authority may not extend beyond 2 years. 
(dd)(ee) (Reserved). 
(ff) Not to exceed 25 positions when filled in accordance with an agreement between OPM and the Department of Justice
by 
persons in programs administered by the Attorney General of the United States under Public Law 91452 and related
statutes. A person appointed under this authority may continue to be employed under it after he/she ceases to be in
a qualifying program only as long as he/she remains in the same agency without a break in service. 
(gg)(hh) (Reserved). 
(ii) Positions of Presidential Intern, GS9 and 11, in the Presidential Management Intern Program. Initial
appointments must be made at the GS9 level. No one may serve under this authority for more than 2 years, unless
extended with OPM approval for up to 1 additional year. Upon completion of 2 years of satisfactory service under this
authority, the employee may qualify for conversion to competitive appointment under the provisions of Executive
order 12364, in accordance with requirements published in the Federal Personnel Manual. 
(jj) Legal intern positions. Appointments under this paragraph shall be confined to bona fide students at recognized
law schools who are candidates for J.D. or LL.B. degrees. Appointments under this authority may not exceed 1 year,
but may be extended for additional period(s) not to exceed 1 year as long as the conditions for appointment continue
to be met. The appointment of any individual under this authority shall terminate upon the individual's graduation
from law school. 
(kk) (Reserved). 
(ll) Positions as needed of readers for blind employees, interpreters for deaf employees and personal assistants
for 
handicapped employees, filled on a full time, part-time, or intermittent basis. 


Section 213.3103Executive Office of the President 


(a) 

Office of Administration. 

(1) Not to exceed 75 positions to provide administrative services and support to the White House office. 
(b) 

Office of Management and Budget. 

(1) Not to exceed 10 positions at grades GS9/15. 
(c) 

Council on Environmental Quality. 

(1) Professional and technical positions in grades GS9 through 15 on the staff of the Council. 
(d)(f) (Reserved). 
(g) 

National Security Council. 

(1) All positions on the staff of the Council. 
(h) 

Office of Science and Technology Policy. 

(1) Thirty positions of Senior Policy Analyst, GS14, Policy Analyst, 
GS11/14; and Policy Research Assistant, GS9, for employment of anyone not to exceed 5 years on projects
of a high priority nature. 
(i) 

Office of National Drug Control Policy. 

(1) Not to exceed 15 positions, GS15 and below, of senior policy analysts and other personnel with expertise
in drug-related issues and/or technical knowledge to aid in anti-drug abuse efforts. 


Section 213.3104Department of State 


(a) 

Office of the Secretary. 

(1) All positions, GS15 and below, on the staff of the Family Liaison Office, Office of the Under Secretary for
Management. 
(2) One position of Curator (Arts), GM101515, in the Office of the Under Secretary for Management. 
(b) 

American Embassy, Paris, France. 

(1) Chief, Travel and Visitor Unit. No new appointments may be made under this authority after August 10, 1981. 
(c) (Reserved). 
(d) 

International Boundary Commission, United States and Canada. 

(1) Temporary and intermittent field employees such as instrumentmen, foremen, recorders, packers, cooks, and
axemen, for not to exceed 180 working days within any 1 calendar year. 
(e) 

Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs. 

(1) Two Physical Science Administration Officer positions at GS16. 
(f) (Reserved). 


