 

Motor vehicles, Imports, Labeling, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.



In consideration of the foregoing, NHTSA amends chapter V of title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations as follows:
1. Part 583 is added to read as follows:


PART 583_AUTOMOBILE PARTS CONTENT LABELING


Sec.


583.1Scope.
583.2Purpose.
583.3Applicability.
583.4Definitions.
583.5Label requirements.
583.6Procedure for determining U.S./Canadian parts content.
583.7Procedure for determining major foreign sources of passenger motor vehicle equipment.
583.8Procedure for determining country of origin for engines and transmissions (for purposes of determining
the information specified by 583.5(a)(4) and 583.5(a)(5) only).
583.9Attachment and maintenance of label.
583.10Outside suppliers of passenger motor vehicle equipment.
583.11Allied suppliers of passenger motor vehicle equipment.
583.12Suppliers of engines and transmissions.
583.13Supplier certification and certificates.
583.14Currency conversion rate.
583.15Joint ownership.
583.16Maintenance of records.
583.17Reporting.





Authority:

 49 U.S.C. 32304, 49 CFR 1.50, 501.2(f).


583.1 

Scope.


This part establishes requirements for the disclosure of information relating to the countries of origin of the equipment
of new passenger motor vehicles.


583.2 

Purpose.


The purpose of this part is to aid potential purchasers in the selection of new passenger motor vehicles by providing
them with information about the value of the U.S./Canadian and foreign parts content of each vehicle, the countries
of origin of the engine and transmission, and the site of the vehicle's final assembly.


583.3 

Applicability.


This part applies to manufacturers of new passenger motor vehicles manufactured or imported for sale in the United
States, suppliers of passenger motor vehicle equipment, and dealers of new passenger motor vehicles.


583.4 

Definitions.


(a) 

Statutory terms. 

The terms 

allied supplier, carline, country of origin, dealer, foreign content, manufacturer, new passenger motor vehicle,
of U.S./Canadian origin, outside supplier, passenger motor vehicle, passenger motor vehicle equipment, percentage
(by value), State, 

and 

value added in the United States and Canada, 

defined in 49 U.S.C. 32304(a), are used in accordance with their statutory meanings except as further defined in paragraph
(b) of this section.
(b) 

Other terms and further definitions.
(1) Administrator 

means the Administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
(2) 

Allied supplier 

means a supplier of passenger motor vehicle equipment that is wholly owned by the manufacturer, or in the case of a joint
venture vehicle assembly arrangement, any supplier that is wholly owned by one member of the joint venture arrangement.
A supplier is considered to be wholly owned by the manufacturer if a common parent company owns both the manufacturer
and the supplier, or if a group of related companies own both the manufacturer and the supplier and no outside interests
(interests other than the manufacturer itself or companies which own the manufacturer) own the supplier.
(3) 

Carline 

means a name denoting a group of vehicles which has a degree of commonality in construction (

e.g., 

body, chassis). Carline does not consider any level of decor or opulence and is not generally distinguished by such
characteristics as roof line, number of doors, seats, or windows, except for light duty trucks. Carline is not distinguished
by country of manufacture, final assembly point, engine type, or driveline. Light duty trucks are considered to be
different carlines than passenger cars. A carline includes all motor vehicles of a given nameplate. Special purpose
vehicles, vans, and pickup trucks are classified as separate carlines.
(4) 

Final assembly 

means all operations involved in the assembly of a vehicle, performed at the final assembly point including but not
limited to assembly of body panels, painting, final chassis assembly, trim installation, except engine and transmission
fabrication and assembly and the fabrication of motor vehicle equipment components produced at the same final assembly
point using forming processes such as stamping, machining or molding processes.
(5) 

Final assembly point 

means the plant, factory, or other place, which is a building or series of buildings in close proximity, where a new
passenger motor vehicle is produced or assembled from passenger motor vehicle equipment and from which such vehicle
is delivered to a dealer or importer in such a condition that all component parts necessary to the mechanical operation
of such automobile are included with such vehicle whether or not such component parts are permanently installed in
or on such vehicle. For multi-stage vehicles, the final assembly point is the location where the first stage vehicle
is assembled.
(6) 

Outside supplier 

means:
(i) A non-allied supplier of passenger motor vehicle equipment to a manufacturer's allied supplier and
(ii) Anyone other than an allied supplier who ships directly to the manufacturer's final assembly point.
(7) 

Passenger motor vehicle equipment 

means any system, subassembly, or component received at the final assembly point for installation on, or attachment
to, such vehicle at the time of its initial shipment by the manufacturer to a dealer for sale to an ultimate purchaser
except: Nuts, bolts, clips, screws, pins, braces, gasoline, oil, blackout, phosphate rinse, windshield washer
fluid, fasteners, tire assembly fluid, rivets, adhesives, grommets, and wheel weights. Passenger motor vehicle
equipment also includes any system, subassembly, or component received by an allied supplier from an outside supplier
for incorporation into equipment supplied by the allied supplier to the manufacturer with which it is allied.
(8) 

Person 

means an individual, partnership, corporation, business trust, or any organized group of persons.
(9) 

Ultimate purchaser 

means with respect to any new passenger motor vehicle, the first person, other than a dealer purchasing in its capacity
as a dealer, who in good faith purchases such new passenger motor vehicle for purposes other than resale.


583.5 

Label requirements.


(a) Except as provided in paragraphs (f) and (g) of this section, each manufacturer of new passenger motor vehicles
shall cause to be affixed to each passenger motor vehicle manufactured on or after October 1, 1994, a label that provides
the following information:
(1) 

U.S./Canadian parts content. 

The overall percentage, by value, of the passenger motor vehicle equipment that was installed on vehicles within
the carline of which the vehicle is part, and that originated in the United States and/or Canada (the procedure for
determining U.S./Canadian Parts Content is set forth in 583.6);
(2) 

Major sources of foreign parts content. 

The names of any countries other than the United States and Canada which contributed at least 15 percent of the average
overall percentage, by value, of the passenger motor vehicle equipment installed on vehicles within the carline
of which the vehicle is part, and the percentages attributable to each such country (if there are more than two such
countries, the manufacturer need only provide the information for the two countries with the highest percentages;
the procedure for determining major foreign sources of passenger motor vehicle equipment is set forth in 583.7);
(3) 

Final assembly point. 

The city, state (in the case of vehicles assembled in the United States), and country of the final assembly point of
the passenger motor vehicle;
(4) 

Country of origin for the engine. 

The country of origin of the passenger motor vehicle's engine (this is referred to as the country of origin of the ``engine
parts'' on the label; the procedure for making this country of origin determination is set forth in 583.8);
(5) 

Country of origin for the transmission. 

The country of origin of the passenger motor vehicle's transmission (this is referred to as the country of origin of
the ``transmission parts'' on the label; the procedure for making this country of origin determination is set forth
in 583.8);
(6) 

Explanatory note. 

A statement which explains that parts content does not include final assembly, distribution, or other non-parts
costs.


