 

Recovery planning under section 4(f) of the Act is the ``umbrella'' that eventually guides all of these activities
and promotes a species' conservation and eventual delisting. Recovery plans provide guidance, which may include
population goals and identification of areas in need of protection or special management, so that a species can be
removed from the list of endangered and threatened wildlife and plants. Recovery plans usually include management
recommendations for areas proposed or designated as critical habitat.

The Service considers the conservation of a species in its designation of critical habitat. The designation of critical
habitat will not, in itself, lead to the recovery of the species, but is one of several measures available to contribute
to the conservation of a species. Critical habitat helps focus conservation activities by identifying areas that
contain essential habitat features (primary constituent elements) that may require special management. The protection
given critical habitat under section 7 also immediately increases the protection given to these primary constituent
elements and essential areas and preserves options for the long-term conservation of the species. The protection
of these areas may also shorten the time needed to achieve recovery.

Designating critical habitat does not create a management plan; it does not establish numerical population goals;
it does not prescribe specific management actions (inside or outside of critical habitat); and it has no direct effect
on areas not designated. Specific management recommendations for critical habitat are more appropriately addressed
in recovery plans and in section 7 consultation. Areas outside of critical habitat also have an important role in the
conservation of a listed species that is not addressed through designation of critical habitat.

The designation of critical habitat may be reevaluated and revised at any time that new information indicates that
changes are warranted. The Service will reassess proposals for designation of critical habitat if land management
plans, recovery plans, or other conservation strategies are developed and fully implemented that may reduce the
need for the additional protection provided by any critical habitat designation.



Primary Constituent Elements



The Service is required to base critical habitat designations on the best scientific data available (50 CFR 424.12).
In determining what areas are to be designated as critical habitat, the Service considers those physical and biological
attributes that are essential to the conservation of the species and that may require special management considerations
or protection. Such requirements, as stated in 50 CFR 424.12, include, but are not limited to, the following:




&bull;Space for individual and population growth, and for normal behavior;

&bull;Food, water, or other nutritional or physiological requirements;

&bull;Cover or shelter;

&bull;Sites for breeding, reproduction, rearing of offspring; and generally; and

&bull;Habitats that are protected from disturbance or are representative of the historic geographical and ecological
distribution of a species.




The Service has determined that the physical and biological habitat features (referred to as the primary constituent
elements) that support feeding, nesting, roosting and sheltering are essential to the conservation of the least
Bell's vireo. These habitat features can be described as riparian woodland vegetation that generally contains both
canopy and shrub layers, and includes some associated upland habitats. Vireos meet their survival and reproductive
needs (food, cover, nest sites, nestling and fledgling protection) within the riparian zone in most areas. In some
areas they also forage in adjacent upland habitats.



Ecological Considerations



The least Bell's vireo is a small gray migratory songbird that has declined dramatically in both numbers and distribution.
This subspecies was once widespread and abundant throughout the Central Valley and other low elevation riverine
areas of California. Least Bell's vireos historically bred in riparian woodlands from the interior of northern California
(near Red Bluff, Tehama County) to northwestern Baja California, Mexico. Its current breeding distribution is restricted
to a few localities in southern California and northwestern Baja California, Mexico (Franzreb 1989).






