 

Comments Invited



Although this action is in the form of a final rule and was not preceded by notice and opportunity for public comment,
comments are invited on this rule. Interested persons are invited to comment on this rule by submitting such written
data, views, or arguments as they may desire. Communications shall identify the Rules Docket number and be submitted
in triplicate to the address specified under the caption 

ADDRESSES.

 All communications received on or before the closing date for comments will be considered, and this rule may be amended
in light of the comments received. Factual information that supports the commenter's ideas and suggestions is extremely
helpful in evaluating the effectiveness of the AD action and determining whether additional rulemaking action would
be needed.

Comments are specifically invited on the overall regulatory, economic, environmental, and energy aspects of the
rule that might suggest a need to modify the rule. All comments submitted will be available, both before and after the
closing date for comments, in the Rules Docket for examination by interested persons. A report that summarizes each
FAA-public contact concerned with the substance of this AD will be filed in the Rules Docket.

Commenters wishing the FAA to acknowledge receipt of their comments submitted in response to this rule must submit
a self-addressed, stamped postcard on which the following statement is made: ``Comments to Docket Number 94NM125AD.''
The postcard will be date stamped and returned to the commenter.

The regulations adopted herein will not have substantial direct effects on the States, on the relationship between
the national government and the States, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities among the various levels
of government. Therefore, in accordance with Executive Order 12612, it is determined that this final rule does not
have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the preparation of a Federalism Assessment.

For the reasons discussed above, I certify that this action (1) is not a ``significant regulatory action'' under Executive
Order 12866; (2) is not a ``significant rule'' under DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures (44 FR 11034, February
26, 1979); and (3) will not have a significant economic impact, positive or negative, on a substantial number of small
entities under the criteria of the Regulatory Flexibility Act. A final evaluation has been prepared for this action
and it is contained in the Rules Docket. A copy of it may be obtained from the Rules Docket at the location provided under
the caption 

ADDRESSES.





List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 39



Air transportation, Aircraft, Aviation safety, Incorporation by reference, Safety.



Adoption of the Amendment




Accordingly, pursuant to the authority delegated to me by the Administrator, the Federal Aviation Administration
amends part 39 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR part 39) as follows:



PART 39_AIRWORTHINESS DIRECTIVES



1. The authority citation for part 39 continues to read as follows:






Authority:

 49 U.S.C. App. 1354(a), 1421 and 1423; 49 U.S.C. 106(g); and 14 CFR 11.89.



39.13 

[Amended]



2. Section 39.13 is amended by adding the following new airworthiness directive:






942308Jetstream Aircraft Limited (Formerly British Aerospace Commercial Aircraft, Limited):

 Amendment 399071. Docket 94NM125AD.






Applicability:

 All Model Jetstream Model HS 748 series 2A and 2B airplanes, certificated in any category.



Compliance:

 Required as indicated, unless accomplished previously.

To ensure replacement of the SSI's that have reached the maximum life limit, accomplish the following:

(a) Within 60 days after the effective date of this AD, determine the number of landings accumulated on each structurally
significant item (SSI) currently installed in the nose landing gear (NLG) and main landing gear (MLG), in accordance
with Dowty Aerospace Landing Gear Service Bulletin 32104E, dated January 20, 1993.

(1) If the number of landings accumulated on an SSI is equal to or greater than the number of landings specified in the
``Life Limitations'' column of the applicable table in the service bulletin, prior to further flight, replace the
SSI with a serviceable SSI, in accordance with the service bulletin. Thereafter, replace the SSI at intervals not
to exceed the accumulation of the number of landings specified in the ``Life Limitations'' column of the applicable
table in the service bulletin.

(2) If the number of landings accumulated on the SSI is less than the number of landings specified in the ``Life Limitations''
column of the applicable table in the service bulletin, replace the SSI with a serviceable SSI prior to or upon the accumulation
of the number of landings specified in the ``Life Limitations'' column of the applicable table in the service bulletin.
Thereafter, replace the SSI at intervals not to exceed the accumulation of the number of landings specified in the
``Life Limitations'' column of the applicable table in the service bulletin.

(b) An alternative method of compliance or adjustment of the compliance time that provides an acceptable level of
safety may be used if approved by the Manager, Standardization Branch, ANM113, FAA, Transport Airplane Directorate.
Operators shall submit their requests through an appropriate FAA Principal Maintenance Inspector, who may add comments
and then send it to the Manager, Standardization Branch, ANM113.






Note:

 Information concerning the existence of approved alternative methods of compliance with this AD, if any, may be obtained
from the Standardization Branch, ANM113.




(c) Special flight permits may be issued in accordance with sections 21.197 and 21.199 of the Federal
Aviation Regulations (14 CFR 21.197 and 21.199) to operate the airplane to a location where the requirements of this
AD can be accomplished.

(d) The replacement shall be done in accordance with Dowty Aerospace Landing Gear Service Bulletin 32104E,
dated January 20, 1993. This incorporation by reference was approved by the Director of the Federal Register in accordance
with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. Copies may be obtained from Dowty Aerospace, Customer Support Center, P.O. Box
49, Sterling, Virginia 20166. Copies may be inspected at the FAA, Transport Airplane Directorate, 1601 Lind Avenue,
SW., Renton, Washington; or at the Office of the Federal Register, 800 North Capitol Street, NW., suite 700, Washington,
DC.

(e) This amendment becomes effective on December 6, 1994.




Issued in Renton, Washington, on November 7, 1994.



<SIGNER>
S.R. Miller,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Manager, Transport Airplane Directorate, Aircraft Certification Service.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9427966 Filed 111894; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 491013U
</BILLING>


