 

Therefore, it is proper for the EPA to use its authority under RCRA section 3004(n) to amend 40 CFR 262.34(a) by adding
air emission control requirements to the conditions required for a 90-day tank or container to be exempted from the
RCRA permitting requirements. For these reasons, the EPA rejects the commenters' arguments that the Agency is not
authorized or failed to cite authority to use this rulemaking to amend the exemption requirements for 90-day tanks
and containers. In addition, the EPA rejects the argument that the exemption requirements are under the EPA's pre-HSWA
authority and, therefore, are not applicable in authorized States until the individual States are authorized to
implement the rule (See 51 FR 25464, July 14, 1986, where the EPA indicated that the modifications to 40 CFR 262.34,
to reflect amended tank standards, were HSWA rules).
As a variation of the argument that 90-day tanks and containers should not be regulated, one commenter asserts that
RCRA section 3004(n) reflects a congressional intent that the EPA regulate air emissions only from permitted and
interim-status TSDF and not from 90-day tanks and containers. The commenter apparently argues that the explicit
inclusion of such authority under RCRA section 3004(n) and not under RCRA section 3002 implies a congressional finding
that waste accumulation does not significantly contribute to air pollution. The EPA finds no indication, in the legislative
history of RCRA, or elsewhere, that Congress ever made such a finding, and the EPA's conclusion, as discussed later
in this section, is that on-site accumulation of hazardous waste in 90-day units is a significant source of organic
air emissions. Again, the EPA finds no indication that Congress intended to preclude the EPA from regulating air emissions
from nonpermitted hazardous waste storage and treatment under RCRA section 3004(n).
In addition to RCRA section 3004(n), the EPA has authority under RCRA section 3002 to amend 40 FR 262.34(a). One commenter
states that, although RCRA section 3002(a)(3) authorizes the EPA to require the use of appropriate containers, RCRA
section 3002 provides no authority to regulate air emissions. The EPA disagrees with this statement. The RCRA section
3002(a)(3) authority, as well as the general authority under RCRA section 3002 to promulgate such rules regulating
generators ``as may be necessary to protect human health and the environment,'' is broad enough to encompass the regulation
of air emissions from units storing or treating hazardous waste at generator facilities.
Finally, the EPA cited both RCRA sections 3002 and 3004 as the statutory authority for the proposed rule. Therefore,
this rulemaking is in full conformance with section 553(b)(2) of the Administrative Procedures Act.
The EPA also rejects the argument that the application of air emission controls to 90-day tanks and containers impermissibly
interferes with manufacturing processes. The EPA concluded in 1980, as cited above, that the appropriate balance
between protection of the environment and noninterference with manufacturing processes was achieved by requiring
90-day tanks and containers to comply with certain technical requirements as a condition of being exempt from the
requirement to have a RCRA permit. The EPA estimates that nationwide baseline organic emissions from 90-day tanks
and containers are approximately 76,000 Mg/yr. Given the significant organic emissions from 90-day tanks and containers,
the same rationale has led the EPA to require that these units comply with the appropriate air emission control requirements
of the subparts AA, BB, and CC standards to maintain an exemption from RCRA permitting. In contrast, the EPA decided
not to extend under this rulemaking the requirements of these air standards to containers used for satellite accumulation
because of the widespread use of these containers by manufacturing process operators to collect small quantities
of hazardous waste as generated, and the integrated use of these containers with the manufacturing operations (discussed
further in section 7.2 of the BID for today's rule). The EPA believes that this regulatory framework maintains the
appropriate balance between environmental protection and noninterference with manufacturing processes.


E. Implementation of RCRA Air Standards






Comment: 

A total of 24 commenters addressed the EPA's proposed action of modifying the ``permit-as-a-shield'' practice to
require that owners and operators of TSDF that have been issued final permits prior to the effective date of this rulemaking
comply with the air standards under 40 CFR 265 subparts AA, BB, and CC until the facility's permit is reviewed or reissued
by the EPA. Four of the commenters support the EPA's proposed modification. The other 20 commenters oppose the proposed
modification and maintain that ``permit-as-a-shield'' practice should remain unchanged because any action by
the EPA to remove this practice:
(1) Is without the legal authority and that to do so would be contrary to congressional intent;
(2) Violates the due process rights of permittees, which are normally protected through the permit process;
(3) Negates the purpose and importance of the RCRA permit because the ``permit-as-a-shield'' practice serves to
unify all the regulatory requirements in the permit for a TSDF;
(4) Is contrary to previously stated policy whereby the EPA binds itself to the principle of using ``permit-as-a-shield''
(45 FR 33290, May 19, 1980); and 
(5) Is disruptive to TSDF owner and operator planning, burdensome to comply with, and has an adverse effect on the availability
and cost of control equipment.


