 

Estimate of Subsistence Need for 1994 



NMFS has used the previous year's harvest levels as a baseline to estimate need in the current year. Household surveys
have also been conducted by the tribal government on each island since 1992 to estimate, in part, the number of seals
required to meet the subsistence needs of the Pribilof Islands residents (57 FR 22450, May 25, 1992, and 58 FR 32892,
June 14, 1993). However, not all households can be assessed during a survey. Therefore, results of these surveys provide
an index of need rather than an absolute estimate. 

NMFS requested that the tribal government on each island determine the number of fur seals that each household would
need for the coming year on January 13, 1994. This year's results were consistent with past subsistence harvest survey
requests and take records. Therefore, NMFS proposes that the same estimate ranges be established for 1994 as were
established for 1992 and 1993: 281500 fur seals for St. George Island and 1,645 to 2,000 for St. Paul Island.
NMFS' biologists will continue to monitor the entire harvest on St. George and St. Paul Islands to ensure that the harvest
is carried out in a manner that fully complies with the regulations specified at 50 CFR 215.32. 

As described earlier in this notice, if the Aleut residents of either island reach the lower end of this yearly harvest
estimate and have unmet subsistence needs and no indication of waste, they may request an additional number of seals
up to the upper limit of the respective harvest estimates. The residents of St. George Island and St. Paul Island may
substantiate any additional need for seals by submitting in writing the information upon which they base their decision
that subsistence needs are unfulfilled. The regulations at 50 CFR 215.32(e)(1)(iii) require a suspension of the
fur seal harvest for up to 48 hours once the lower end of the estimated harvest levels is reached. The suspension is to
last no more than 48 hours, followed either by a finding that the subsistence needs have been met or by a revised estimate
of the number of seals necessary to satisfy the Aleuts' subsistence needs. 



Proposed Modification to Fur Seal Regulations 



In a notice published on August 1, 1991, NMFS acknowledged the need to develop other methods to monitor the subsistence
harvest conducted on the Pribilof Islands (56 FR 36735). In a workshop conducted by NMFS on November 5, 1991, NMFS recognized
the need to reevaluate the regulatory issues regarding subsistence, to determine whether changes in the fur seal
harvest from a commercial endeavor to one for subsistence may have warranted a revision of the current management
regime. 

As a first step towards addressing these concerns, NMFS proposes an amendment to 215.32 of the FSA regulations,
allowing subsistence take estimates to be applicable for a 3-year period, beginning in 1994. During this 3-year period,
NMFS will examine the current subsistence harvest management regime. The proposed amendment is based on the fact
that the actual number of fur seals harvested each year since 1989 has been relatively consistent (Table 1), and the
fur seal take has never exceeded the upper limit of the estimated range for subsistence need within any year of the harvest.
Due to recent commercial development in the Pribilof Islands, NMFS anticipates that the subsistence needs will increase
during the next 3 years, but, based on historical evidence to date, the annual subsistence needs are not expected to
increase to levels exceeding the range established in the 1993 final estimate. 



Classification 



NMFS has determined that the approval and implementation of this proposed rule will not significantly affect the
human environment, and that preparation of an Environmental Impact Statement on this is not required by section 102(2)
of the National Environmental Policy Act or its implementing regulations. This rule makes only minor changes to the
regulations governing the taking of fur seals for subsistence purposes; this action does not entail significant
substantive revision. Because this rule does not alter the conclusions of previous environmental impact analyses
and environmental assessments, it is categorically excluded by NOAA Administrative Order 2166 from the requirement
to prepare an environmental assessment. 

This proposed rule has been determined to be not significant pursuant to E.O. 12866. 









