 

Facilities meeting all the requirements in subpart F of part 483 would be qualified as PRTFs to provide the psychiatric

L

21 benefit. We would require that facilities protect and promote the rights of each resident, as specified in 483.211,
Resident rights. 

We would require that these providers meet applicable licensure laws in States that have established licensure requirements
for this type of facility. This requirement would be specified in 483.212(a)(1), Licensure and other laws.
Because it is important that the children and adolescents in the facility maintain their educational development
while they are in the facility, we would require in 483.212(a)(2) that the facility coordinate its educational
activities with school curricula in the community. 

We would specify at 483.212(a)(3) that providers would be expected to meet the regulations issued by the Department
of Health and Human Services relating to nondiscrimination, protection of human subjects, and fraud and abuse, as
specified in 45 CFR parts 46, 80, and 84 and 42 CFR part 455. The disclosure of ownership and control requirements in
section 1126 of the Act would be applicable to these providers. The requirements for provider agreements under section
1902(a)(27) of the Act would also be applicable. 

We would also require that PRTFs have a governing body which would appoint an administrator to be responsible for the
general management of the facility. These requirements would be specified in 483.212(b), Administrative
structure. There would be a general requirement relating to competence, academic credentials, and administrative
experience. We invite comments on whether these requirements should be more specific, and if so, what the requirements
should be. 

We propose to require that the facility designate a clinical director who is at least board-eligible in psychiatry
and has experience in child and adolescent mental health. The clinical director would be responsible for the implementation
of each resident's inpatient treatment plan and for the coordination of all medical/psychiatric care in the facility.


We would require that all facilities have written procedures to use for all potential emergencies, such as fire, severe
weather, and missing residents (proposed 483.218(b)). New employees would be trained in these procedures
and all staff would participate in review drills. 




