 

(2) The cost of required relocation assistance is an eligible project cost in the same manner and to the same extent
as other project costs. However, such assistance also may be paid for with funds available from other sources. 

(3) The grantee must maintain records in sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this
section. The grantee shall maintain data on the race, ethnic, gender, and disability status of displaced persons.


(f) 

Definition of displaced person.

 (1) For purposes of this section, the term 

displaced person

 means a person (household, business, nonprofit organization, or farm) that moves from real property, or moves personal
property from real property, permanently, as a direct result of acquisition, rehabilitation, or demolition for
a project assisted under this part. The term ``displaced person'' includes, but may not be limited to: 

(i) A person that moves permanently from the real property after receiving a notice requiring such move, if the move
occurs on or after: 

(A) If the notice is provided by the property owner, the date that the property owner (or person in control of the site)
submits a request for assistance to the grantee that is later approved and funded; 

(B) If the notice is provided by the grantee, the date of the firm project commitment to a specific local project. 

(ii) Any person, including a person who moves before the date described in paragraph (f)(1)(i) of this section that
HUD or the grantee determines was displaced as a direct result of acquisition, rehabilitation, or demolition for
the project. 

(iii) A tenant-occupant of a dwelling unit who moves from the building/complex, permanently, after the firm project
commitment, if the move occurs before the tenant is provided written notice offering him or her the opportunity to
lease and occupy a suitable, decent, safe, and sanitary dwelling in the same building/complex, under reasonable
terms and conditions, upon completion of the project. Such reasonable terms and conditions include a monthly rent
and estimated average monthly utility costs that do not exceed the greater of: 

(A) The tenant's monthly rent before execution of the agreement and estimated average monthly utility costs; or 

(B) 30 percent of gross household income; or 

(iv) A tenant-occupant of a dwelling, who is required to relocate temporarily, but does not return to the building/complex,
if either: 

(A) The tenant is not offered payment for all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with the temporary
relocation, including the cost of moving to and from the temporarily occupied unit, any increased housing costs and
incidental expenses; or 

(B) Other conditions of the temporary relocation are not reasonable; or 

(v) A tenant-occupant of a dwelling who moves from the building/complex permanently after he or she has been required
to move to another dwelling unit in the building/complex in order to carry out the project, if either: 

(A) The tenant is not offered reimbursement for all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with
the move; or 

(B) Other conditions of the move are not reasonable; or 

(C) The tenant is required to move to another dwelling unit in the same building/complex but is not offered reimbursement
for all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with the move, or other conditions of the move are
not reasonable; or 

(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (f)(1) of this section, a person does not qualify as a ``displaced
person'' (and is not eligible for relocation assistance under the URA or this section), if: 

(i) The person has been evicted for serious or repeated violation of the terms and conditions of the lease or occupancy
agreement, violation of applicable Federal, State or local law, or other good cause, and the grantee determines that
the eviction was not undertaken for the purpose of evading the obligation to provide relocation assistance; 

(ii) The person moved into the property after the Owner's submission of the request for assistance and, before signing
a lease or commencing occupancy, was provided written notice of the project, its possible impact on the person (e.g.,
the person may be displaced, temporarily relocated or suffer a rent increase) and the fact that the person will not
qualify as a ``displaced person'' (or for any assistance provided under this section) as a result of the project; 

(iii) The person is ineligible under 49 CFR 24.2(g)(2); or 

(iv) The grantee determines that the person was not displaced as a direct result of rehabilitation, acquisition,
or demolition for the project, and the HUD Field Office concurs in that determination. 

(3) The grantee may ask HUD, at any time, to determine whether a specific displacement is or would be covered by this
section. 

(g) 

Definition of initiation of negotiations.

 For purposes of determining the formula for computing a replacement housing payment and issuing related notices,
the term 

initiation of negotiations

 means the firm project commitment to a specific local project as defined in 850.3. 




(Approved by Office of Management and Budget under OMB Control Number 25060121) 


850.35 

[Amended]



13. In 850.35, paragraph (d) is removed and reserved. 



PART 880_SECTION 8 HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS PROGRAM FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION 



14. The authority citation for part 880 continues to read as follows: 






Authority:

 42 U.S.C. 1437a, 1437c, 1437f, 3535(d), and 1361113619. 



