 

As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall set forth with particularity the interest of the
petitioner in the proceeding, and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding. The petition
should specifically explain the reasons why intervention should be permitted with particular reference to the following
factors: (1) The nature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made a party to the proceeding; (2) the nature and
extent of the petitioner's property, financial, or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect
of any order which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest. The petition should also identify
the specific aspect(s) of the subject matter of the proceeding as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Any person
who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has been admitted as party may amend the petition without requesting
leave of the Board up to 15 days prior to the first prehearing conference scheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended
petition must satisfy the specificity requirements described above.

Not later than 15 days prior to the first prehearing conference scheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file
a supplement to the petition to intervene which must include a list of the contentions which are sought to be litigated
in the matter. Each contention must consist of a specific statement of the issue of law or fact to be raised or controverted.
In addition, the petitioner shall provide a brief explanation of the bases of the contention and a concise statement
of the alleged facts or expert opinion which support the contention and on which the petitioner intends to rely in proving
the contention at the hearing. The petitioner must also provide references to those specific sources and documents
of which the petitioner is aware and on which the petitioner intends to rely to establish those facts or expert opinion.
Petitioner must provide sufficient information to show that a genuine dispute exists with the applicant on a material
issue of law or fact. Contentions shall be limited to matters within the scope of the amendment under consideration.
The contention must be one which, if proven, would entitle the petitioner to relief. A petitioner who fails to file
such a supplement which satisfies these requirements with respect to at least one contention will not be permitted
to participate as a party.

Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subject to any limitations in the order granting leave
to intervene, and have the opportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, including the opportunity
to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.

If the amendment is issued before the expiration of the 30-day hearing period, the Commission will make a final determination
on the issue of no significant hazards consideration. If a hearing is requested, the final determination will serve
to decide when the hearing is held.

If the final determination is that the amendment request involves no significant hazards consideration, the Commission
may issue the amendment and make it immediately effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearing
held would take place after issuance of the amendment.

If the final determination is that the amendment request involves a significant hazards consideration, any hearing
held would take place before the issuance of any amendment.

