 

Barry L. Valentine, Assistant Administrator for Policy, Planning and International Aviation, Federal Aviation
Administration
Jane H. Bachner, Director, Office of Economic Analysis, Federal Railroad Administration
Antonio J. Califa, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Office of the Secretary
Madeleine S. Bloom, Director, Office of Policy Development, Federal Highway Administration
Jerry A. Hawkins, Director, Office of Personnel and Training, Federal Highway Administration
Barbara Orski, Director, Office of Right-of-way, Federal Highway Administration
George S. Moore, Jr., Associate Administrator for Administration, Federal Highway Administration


Federal Highway Administration


George S. Moore, Jr., Associate Administrator for Administration, Federal Highway Administration
John G. Bestgen, Jr., Regional Administrator, Region 1, Federal Highway Administration
Anthony R. Kane, Associate Administrator for Program Development, Federal Highway Administration
Madeleine S. Bloom, Director, Office of Policy Development, Federal Highway Administration
George L. Reagle, Associate Administrator for Motor Carriers, Federal Highway Administration
Carlos Esparza, Deputy Director, Office of Personnel, Office of the Secretary
Thomas R. Hunt, Associate Administrator for Administrator, Federal Transit Administration


Federal Railroad Administration


S. Mark Lindsey, Chief Counsel, Federal Railroad Administration
Raymond J. Rogers, Associate Administrator for Administration, Federal Railroad Administration
Philip Olekszyk, Deputy Associate Administrator for Safety, Federal Railroad Administration
James T. McQueen, Associate Administrator for Railroad Development, Federal Railroad Administration
Sally Hill Cooper, Associate Administrator for Policy, Federal Railroad Administration
Margarita Roque, Director, Office of Executive Secretariat, Office of the Secretary
Rosalind A. Knapp, Deputy General Counsel, Office of the Secretary


National Highway Traffic Safety Administration


Barry I. Felrice, Associate Administrator for Rulemaking, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
Adele L. Derby, Associate Administrator for Regional Operations, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
William A. Boehly, Associate Administrator for Enforcement, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
Donald Bischoff, Associate Administrator for Plans and Policy, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
Ana Sol Gutierrez, Deputy Administrator, Research and Special Programs Administration
Jane F. Garvey, Deputy Administrator, Federal Highway Administration
Jerry A. Hawkins, Director, Office of Personnel and Training, Federal Highway Administration


Federal Transit Administration


Thomas R. Hunt, Associate Administrator for Administration, Federal Transit Administration
Peter G. Halpin, Director, Office of Communications and External Affairs, Federal Transit Administration
Sally Hill Cooper, Associate Administrator for Policy, Federal Railroad Administration
Linda M. Higgins, Director, Office of Acquisition and Grant Management, Office of the Secretary
Rosalind A. Knapp, Deputy General Counsel, Office of the Secretary
Kevin E. Heanue, Director, Office of Environment and Planning, Federal Highway Administration
Philip Olekszyk, Deputy Associate Administrator for Safety, Federal Railroad Administration





