 

The Service received roughly 4800 comments from the public, including over 4600 form letters from private aviculturists
(bird breeders) and comments from 6 conservation and/or animal welfare organizations, 1 zoological organization,
2 scientific organizations, 1 representative of the pet industry, 2 private companies, 3 importers, 11 avicultural
organizations, and 6 falconry/raptor breeder organizations; the remaining comments were from other private individuals.




Comments of a General Nature 



Several commenters, including a scientific organization, several conservation organizations, a zoological organization,
an avicultural organization, and some private individuals, supported the criteria for listing species on the approved
list of captive-bred species and the proposed list of captive-bred species in their entirety. 

Numerous comments contended that the proposed list of approved captive-bred species was too restrictive and allowed
for the captive breeding of only those species on the approved list. The Service is aware that the proposed list of approved
captive-bred species has caused misunderstanding and confusion in the avicultural community and wishes to clarify
what the WBCA and the approved list for captive-bred species actually regulates. Neither the Wild Bird Conservation
Act nor the Service's regulations implementing Section 106 of the Act impose new burdens or requirements on buying,
selling, breeding, transport, interstate commerce, or export of birds bred in the United States. Those activities
are not regulated by the WBCA. What the WBCA does is to restrict imports of bird species listed in the CITES Appendices,
whether taken from the wild or bred in captivity. 

Species listed on the approved list of captive-bred species are those species that can be imported into the United
States without a WBCA permit. 
This approved list of captive-bred species does not regulate the breeding, selling, transport, interstate commerce,
or export of birds bred in the United States. Several commenters were under the false impression that, if a species
is not on the approved list of captive-bred species, this species could not be possessed or bred in the United States.
The Service encourages such captive breeding within the United States to meet the commercial demand for pet birds.
The Service also notes that the approved list of captive-bred species only means that the species is approved for import
without a WBCA permit; it does not mean that the Service does not approve the breeding of other species. The Service
is in the process of working to ease the bird breeding public's concerns by initiating a program of public education
on the WBCA and its regulations. 



Comments Pertaining to Section 15.31: Criteria for Including Species in the Approved List for Captive-Bred Species




This section establishes the criteria for the inclusion of captive-bred species in the approved list. Pursuant to
Section 106 of the WBCA, the Secretary of the Interior (Secretary) is required to publish a list of species of exotic
birds that are listed in an appendix to the Convention and that are not subject to a prohibition or suspension of importation
otherwise applicable under the WBCA. In order to list a species as exclusively captive-bred, the Service is required
by the statute to determine that the species is regularly bred in captivity and that no wild-caught birds of the species
are in trade, legally or illegally. 

These captive-bred species can be imported into the United States without meeting any additional requirements of
the Wild Bird Conservation Act or this Part 15; however, all of the existing requirements in Parts 13 and 14, Part 17
(species listed as endangered or threatened under the Endangered Species Act (ESA)), Part 21 (Migratory Bird Treaty
Act), and Part 23 (species listed in the Appendices to the Convention, or CITES) must still be complied with. 

This section establishes the following criteria for the approval of the importation of captive-bred species: 

(a) All specimens of the species known to be in trade (legal or illegal) must be captive-bred; 

(b) No specimens of the species can be known to be removed from the wild for commercial purposes; 

(c) Any importation of specimens of the species must not be detrimental to the survival of the species in the wild; and


(d) Adequate enforcement controls must be in place in countries of export to ensure compliance with the aforementioned
paragraphs. Imports of species approved according to the criteria of this section are not limited to specimens originating
from qualifying facilities as described under 
Subpart E of this Part. 



