 

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 


Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service


<CFRNO>9 CFR Part 91 </CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 930311] </RINDOCK>


Inspection of Animals for Export to Mexico or Canada 


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, USDA.

 
</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Proposed rule. 




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 We are proposing to amend the regulations concerning the inspection and handling of livestock for exportation by
requiring that all animals intended for exportation other than by land (that is to say, by air or sea) to Mexico or Canada
receive a final inspection by an Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service veterinarian at an export inspection
facility at a designated port of embarkation. We believe this action is necessary to help ensure that only healthy
animals are exported from the United States.

 
</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Consideration will be given only to comments received on or before June 27, 1994.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Please send an original and three copies of your comments to Chief, Regulatory Analysis and Development, PPD, APHIS,
USDA, room 804, Federal Building, 6505 Belcrest Road, Hyattsville, MD 20782. Please state that your comments refer
to Docket No. 930311. Comments received may be inspected at USDA, room 1141, South Building, 14th Street
and Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC, between 8 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays.
Persons wishing to inspect comments are requested to call ahead on (202) 6902817 to facilitate entry into the
comment reading room.

 
</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Dr. Michael David, Senior Staff Veterinarian, Import-Export Animals Staff, National Center for Import-Export,
Veterinary Services, APHIS, USDA, room 761, Federal Building, 6505 Belcrest Road, Hyattsville, MD 20782, 3014367511.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 
Background 


The regulations in 9 CFR part 91, ``Inspection and Handling of Livestock for Exportation'' (referred to below as the
regulations), prescribe conditions for exporting animals from the United States. Section 91.3(a) requires, among
other things, that all animals intended for exportation to Mexico or Canada, except cattle from Mexico imported into
the United States in bond for temporary feeding and return to Mexico, be accompanied from the State of origin of the
export movement to the border of the United States by an origin health certificate. The origin health certificate,
as defined in 91.1, is an official document issued by an Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS)
representative or an accredited veterinarian at the point of origin of a shipment of animals to be moved under part
91, which shows the identification tag, tattoo, or registration number or similar identification of each animal
to be moved, the number, breed, sex, and approximate age of the animals covered by the document, the date and place of
issuance, the points of origin and destination, the consignor, and the consignee, and which states that the animal
or animals identified on the certificate meet the export health requirements. 

Section 91.3(b) requires, among other things, that all animals in export shipments, except animals intended for
export to Mexico or Canada, be inspected, tested, or treated as prescribed in the regulations before the movement
of the export shipment to the export inspection facility. Animals intended for export to Mexico or Canada must be inspected,
tested, or treated as prescribed in the regulations before movement from the State of origin. 
Section 91.14(a) requires that all animals, except animals being exported to Mexico or Canada, be exported through
designated ports of embarkation with export inspection facilities that meet the standards for export inspection
facilities specified in 91.14(c). Section 91.15(a) requires that all animals offered for exportation to
foreign countries, except Mexico or Canada, be inspected by an APHIS veterinarian at either:
(1) An export inspection facility at a port designated in 91.14(a); or (2) In special cases, at a port or inspection
facility designated by the Administrator under 91.14(b). 
Until recently, exporters shipping animals to Mexico or Canada have moved the animals by land from the United States.
All animals moved by land to Mexico or Canada are inspected at their point of origin by an APHIS representative or an
accredited veterinarian. Upon arrival at a land border port of entry in Mexico or Canada, the animals are inspected
by a Mexican or Canadian veterinarian, respectively. Because of the inspections conducted by Mexican or Canadian
veterinarians, APHIS veterinarians have not conducted these inspections at land border port crossings. The close
proximity of U.S. land border ports to the Mexican and Canadian land border ports have facilitated the return to the
United States of any animals that may have been diseased or may have been exposed to disease. 







</SUPPLEM>
