 

Proposed 3201.102(d) would impose a two-year prohibition on an employee in the Division of Finance, the Division
of Depositor and Asset Services, the Division of Resolutions, or the Legal Division, or who is a member of a standing
committee of the Board of Directors obtaining credit from an FDIC-insured depository institution or its subsidiary
when the employee has participated personally and substantially in certain matters affecting the institution,
its predecessor or successor, or an affiliate of such institution. This prohibition would be applicable to the universe
of FDIC-insured depository institutions and would be limited to those Corporation employees who perform functions
associated with the audit, resolution, liquidation, supervision, or agency deliberation affecting a specific
FDIC-insured depository institution. The two-year prohibition has been designed to eliminate concerns over potential
benefits that an employee holding a sensitive non-examiner position could derive through a financial relationship
with an institution that has close business ties to the Corporation. An exception has been made for an ordinary credit
card relationship. The definition of 

personally and substantially

 can be found at 5 CFR 2635.402(b)(4) of the Executive Branch-wide Standards. 
Proposed 3201.102(e)(1) would prohibit a member of the depository institution's examination staff, including
senior level staff, from participating in the supervisory review of any institution with which they hold an extension
of credit. No exceptions to this rule have been provided due to the sensitive nature of the duties involved. 
Under proposed 3201.102(e)(2)(4), a covered employee and the Comptroller of the Currency and the Director
of the Office of Thrift Supervision would be prohibited from participating in matters affecting persons with whom
the employee has an outstanding extension of credit. Exceptions have been provided for ordinary credit card relationships
or when the agency designee, with the concurrence of the appropriate director, determines that participation by
the employee would be appropriate under the standard outlined under 5 CFR 2635.502(d). 
Proposed 3201.102(f) would clarify that an employee may retain certain extensions of credit that he or she
would be prohibited from obtaining anew. For example, an employee who had obtained an extension of credit prior to
employment with the Corporation would not be required to refinance the credit. Any extension of credit retained under
this section would be required to be reported to an agency designee. An employee would not be allowed to renew or renegotiate
the credit without the consent of the agency designee and appropriate director or, in the case of certain higher-level
officials, without the consent of the Ethics Counselor. This provision is substantially the same as current 12 CFR
336.16(d), and extensions of credit which were permissibly held under such provision could be retained under the
new provision. 


Section 3201.103Prohibitions on Ownership of Securities of 
FDIC-Insured Depository Institutions 


The Corporation has determined that, in light of its sensitive and diverse mission involving the institutions that
it insures, restrictions on employee ownership of securities in such institutions are necessary in order to maintain
public confidence in the impartiality and objectivity with which the Corporation executes its various functions;
eliminate concerns by private entities that sensitive information provided to the Corporation might be used for
private gain; and avoid the widespread disqualification of employees from their duties which could result in the
Corporation having difficulty in performing its mission. Under proposed 3201.103(a), an employee would
be prohibited from having a direct or indirect ownership interest in a security of an FDIC-insured depository institution
or an affiliate of such institution. 
As proposed, the exceptions in 3201.103(b) would allow an employee to acquire, own or control certain direct
and indirect ownership interests in an FDIC-insured depository institution. For example, an employee would be permitted
to retain an interest which had been acquired prior to employment with the Corporation or involuntarily acquired
by the employee such as by gift, stock split, or through a merger of a company. An employee could also acquire, own or
control an interest in an FDIC-insured depository institution through the investment vehicle of a publicly traded
or available diversified investment fund when the fund does not have an objective or practice of concentrating its
investments in securities of the financial services sector. An employee who owned securities of an FDIC-insured
depository institution under one of the exceptions in proposed 3201.103(b) would be disqualified under 5
CFR 2635.402 from participating in any particular matter that, by reason of his or her ownership of those securities,
affects his or her financial interests or those of his or her spouse or minor child. 
Under proposed 3201.103(c), the Ethics Counselor could require an employee, or the spouse or minor child of
an employee, to divest an ownership interest that would otherwise be allowed to be retained under 3201.103(b)
using the standard set forth in 5 CFR 2635.403(b).



