 

Following a full consideration of the testimony and comments, the Secretary has concluded that the 1992 final rule's
employer-employee exemption was too broad. Accordingly, the Secretary proposes to amend the final rule by withdrawing
the exemption set forth in 3500.14(g)(2)(ii) of that rule. This amendment will have the effect of providing
that, while an employer may compensate its own bona fide employees for the generation of its own business, all compensation
for referrals to outside entities, including affiliates, will be prohibited under RESPA. 


In addition to withdrawing the exemption, the proposal clarifies specifically when compensation to employees runs
afoul of the requirements of RESPA. The rule provides that: 


(i) No employee or agent may receive compensation from his or her employer or any other source when the compensation
is tied on a one-to-one basis to, or is calculated as a multiple of the number or value of, referrals of business to an
affiliated entity; and 


(ii) The compensation of agents or employees who routinely are in direct contact with the consumer may not be based
in whole or in part on the value or number of referrals made to affiliated entities. 


These two clarifications are designed to minimize any incentive that a person in a position to make or influence a referral
might have to make a referral based on his or her own financial interests. Clearly, compensation calculated as a multiple
of the number or value of referrals creates a powerful incentive to make referrals that maximize one's own compensation.
Similarly, agents or employees who ordinarily are in direct contact with the consumer may be influenced in making
referrals if their overall performance is measured and compensation is set, even in part, based on the number or value
of referrals to affiliated entities. The proposal makes clear that RESPA prohibits such compensation. By withdrawing
the broad exemption, the potential for conflict of interest by those persons making referrals is reduced, increasing
the possibility of true competition among settlement service providers based on the cost and quality of the services
provided. 



Most facets of the settlement services business are very competitive, and the Secretary wants to assure that the rule
does nothing to harm this competitiveness. The provisions set forth above that would clarify how RESPA affects employee
compensation can be enforced and will not require HUD to interfere unduly with the internal operations of controlled
business arrangements. Because Congress has clearly ruled on the acceptability, with conditions, of controlled
business arrangements, the role of the Department is not to encourage or discourage controlled business arrangements,
but to clarify what activities between interrelated companies are permissible or not permissible under RESPA. 


With the withdrawal of the exemption, employees of controlled business arrangements could continue to send consumers
to affiliated companies, but they may be more likely to exercise independent judgment reflecting the interests of
the consumer if the inducement of referral-specific compensation is not present. 


The proposal to withdraw the exemption would obviate the need for a full examination of the question raised by some
commenters about whether the exemption in the proposed rule is contrary to the statute, particularly since the Department
has decided not to withdraw the employer-employee exemption without notice-and-comment rulemaking. In any event,
the Department believes the exemption in the final rule would be legally sustainable, because of the broad exemption
authority of the Secretary under Section 19 of RESPA. 


Pending this proposed rule becoming final, the existing employer-employee exemption remains operational and employer
payments made in accordance with the existing RESPA regulation will 

not 

be treated by the Department as conduct violative of the RESPA statute. However, the exemption in the existing rule
is only available for employees, not independent contractors, a class that, under the Internal Revenue Code, includes
most real estate agents and many others in the settlement services business. Those persons engaging in sham practices
in an attempt to avoid the strictures of RESPA are not protected under the 1992 final rule during the pendency of these
revisions. 


(e) 

Questions and comments on this proposal. 

The Secretary's proposal on the employer-employee issue seeks to clarify RESPA's consumer protections while avoiding
unnecessary intrusion into controlled businesses. The Secretary intends to be flexible in finalizing this proposal
in pursuit of these objectives. To assist in this rulemaking, the Secretary is particularly interested in comments
containing responses to the following questions: 


(i) To what extent do you believe the Secretary's proposal will accomplish the objectives of eliminating compensated
referrals and other payments that pose the greatest dangers to consumers without overwhelming other legitimate
considerations for referrals, such as long-term customer satisfaction? 


(ii) What effect will the proposal have on the ability of firms to provide high-quality and well-priced services to
consumers? 


(iii) To what extent do you believe the proposal will unduly interfere with the operations of controlled businesses?



(iv) What would be the effect of any such interference (with the operations of controlled businesses) on consumers?



(v) To what extent do you believe this proposal will interfere with legitimate business development programs of affiliated
companies? 


(vi) To what extent do you believe that the proposal will result in increased competition in the settlement services
industry? 


(vii) If you disagree with the approach embodied in the proposal, what alternative approaches would increase competition?



(viii) Do you believe that the proposal will adequately protect consumers from steering? 



