 

DOE has established a Secretarial task force to evaluate disposition of surplus nuclear materials stored at various
locations within the weapons complex. Until disposition decisions are made (approximately 5 years), some of the
materials at SRS, due to their form or to the condition in which they are currently maintained, could represent an unreasonable
risk to public and worker health and safety or an unreasonable risk to the environment. For example, the aluminum cladding
on some of the targets is deteriorating due to corrosion. As the cladding corrodes, highly radioactive material is
exposed to the water in the storage basin. Some of this material is released into the water, which can result in increased
worker exposures and environmental releases. Another example of material that could present an unreasonable risk
is stored solutions containing plutonium, other transuranic elements, and uranium. These solutions require continuing
vigilance to assure their continued safe storage and to avoid potentially severe radiological impacts should an
accident occur. 

Additionally, DOE wants to reduce the cost of maintaining and storing these nuclear materials. The cost to maintain
just the SRS canyons, with their current inventory of material, is about $300 million a year. These costs could be reduced
through consolidation, conversion, and stabilization. 



Proposed Action 



The Department proposes to stabilize nuclear materials currently stored at the SRS that are in a condition that may
not be safe over the time that is necessary to make decisions regarding their long-term disposition (approximately
5 years). The EIS will evaluate and identify which nuclear materials should be stabilized because of a health, safety,
or environmental concern related to the condition of the material.
<FOOTCITE>3</FOOTCITE>
 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
3

</FOOTNAME>
If at any time during the course of preparing the environmental impact statement the Department were to determine
that an emergency condition such as unreasonable risk to public or worker health and safety or the environment exists
with respect to any of the unstable materials, the Department would take action to respond immediately to the situation
and consult with the Council on Environmental Quality regarding alternative arragements for compliance with NEPA.

</FOOTNOTE>


The Department also proposes to convert to a useable form those materials for which a programmatic need exists. These
materials are used in research and development programs. Specifically, DOE has identified a need for additional
plutonium-242, and proposes to convert the existing inventory of that material at SRS from a solution to an oxide.
In addition, if during the development of this EIS, a programmatic need is identified for neptunium-237, americium-243,
or curium-244, this material will also be proposed for conversion to a useable form. Any programmatic need for americium-243
and curium-244 could not be satisfied until conversion technology is developed. 



Alternatives Proposed for Consideration 



DOE will examine various methods to accomplish stabilization. Based on current information, the preferred alternative
for some of these materials, (e.g., in-process liquids) would be to operate the canyon facilities (including FB-Line
and HB-Line, Phases I and II) only as may be necessary for stabilization, and then to place the facilities in a standby
condition. For some materials, (e.g., americium and curium solutions) the Department currently has no preferred
alternative, and the EIS will assist the Department in identifying a preferred alternative. The Department solicits
public participation in identifying and evaluating alternatives. Alternatives could include dry storage, new
wet storage, and processing for vitrification without chemical separation. Alternatives to the conversion of material
required for programmatic needs have not been identified. Consistent with NEPA's requirement that the ``no action''
alternative be considered, DOE will evaluate the environmental impacts of continuing to manage all materials in
their current form until decisions regarding disposition are made. 



Material Inventory Evaluation Criteria 



DOE proposes to evaluate the inventory of nuclear materials at the SRS and place the material into one of three categories.
These categories are: (1) Materials that may warrant near-term stabilization in order to maintain the health and
safety of workers and the public and to maintain environmental quality; (2) material for which there is still a programmatic
need; and (3) materials for which there is currently no designated programmatic need and which are already in a stable
form. DOE proposes to use the following criteria to categorize material that warrants near-term stabilization and
solicits public comments on how these criteria may be further refined: 

