 

1. To replace an incompatible level of unrestricted use of the O'Malley River area during key bear use periods, with
a compatible recreational opportunity which would protect and conserve brown bear populations. 
2. To develop and maintain a program that provides the general public a safe and professional guided bear viewing opportunity,
that is consistent with Refuge management objectives and policies established in the Comprehensive Conservation
Plan. 
The program proved popular with the public; in 1992, 88 persons participated. The Service was satisfied that both
program goals were adequately met. 
The O'Malley Bear Viewing Program is designed to increase wildlife viewing opportunities for the public. The brown
bears of Kodiak National Wildlife Refuge offer unique and highly desirable opportunities for viewing; opportunities
that are most safely and effectively provided by a structured viewing program. 
Structured wildlife viewing programs have been used successfully as a conservation management tool and to enhance
public use opportunities elsewhere in Alaska. The best known program is conducted at the McNeil River State Game Sanctuary
by the Alaska Department of Fish and Game. The McNeil River program has gained a worldwide reputation for quality bear
viewing, and competition for permits is so intense that applicants have less than an 8 percent chance of obtaining
a permit. Another popular bear viewing program is conducted at Brooks Camp in Katmai National Park. The number of visitors
at Brooks Camp is not limited except by availability of lodge and campground facilities. Use of these facilities during
peak visitation periods is presently at or beyond capacity and the National Park Service may limit the number of visitors
in the future. A third bear viewing program is located at Pack Creek on Admiralty Island and is cooperatively managed
by the U.S. Forest Service and Alaska Department of Fish and Game. Permits are required to visit Pack Creek; during
1993 the Forest Service announced that the number of visits to Pack Creek will be limited. 
Experience at McNeil River State Game Sanctuary has demonstrated that brown bears are least disturbed by human activity
that is consistent and predictable. Studies at the Brooks Camp and Pack Creek bear viewing programs have confirmed
that unpredictable human activity causes some bears to avoid important habitat. Inconsistent human activity has
also been shown to cause conflicts between people and bears. At the McNeil River Sanctuary, implementation of a structured
bear viewing program increased bear use and at the same time reduced the incidence of bear/human conflicts. 
Successful reduction of conflict, through implementation of a structured brown bear viewing program at O'Malley
River, will require control of public use and access. Restriction of public use and access to anyone not participating
in the viewing program will promote a quality wildlife experience for participants and reduce the potential for serious
and incompatible conflicts between refuge visitors and bears. In this interim rule, public use and access would be
restricted from June 25, 1994, to September 30, 1994. These dates were selected because it is the time period when the
greatest number of bears are concentrated in the O'Malley River area to feed on the seasonal salmon runs that provide
a critical component of their diet. Consequently, this is the period bears are most vulnerable to adverse impacts
from excessive and unpredictable human use. 
The Service has issued a permit, under which a private operator will conduct the O'Malley Program, for the period 19941998.
The program will be thoroughly evaluated during 1994 and, if successful, will be continued. 
This interim rule would remain in effect only through September 30, 1994. A proposed rule is being submitted concurrently
with this interim rule to permanently restrict public entry and use of the O'Malley area annually to bear viewing program
participants during the June 25 through September 30 period of heavy bear use. 



Statutory Authority
 


In accordance with the National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966 (16 U.S.C. 668dd), the Secretary
is authorized under such regulations as he may prescribe to permit the use of any area within the National Wildlife
Refuge System for any purpose whenever he determines that such uses are compatible with the major purposes for which
such areas were established. 





