 

The equal access obligations imposed by the proposed Final Judgment apply to interexchange services, i.e., services
that extend beyond the boundaries of a Local Cellular Service Area. Section II.Q of the judgment defines those areas
as the areas in which the Bell Companies are permitted under the MFJ, including any orders entered under it or any legislation
that supersedes or modifies it, to provide cellular exchange service without an equal access obligation. The majority
of McCaw Cellular Systems are configured to provide cellular exchange services in areas that would be permissible
for the Bell Companies under the MFJ and waiver orders entered under it. There are, however, 19 McCaw Cellular Systems
whose local service areas extend beyond the bounds that would be permitted for a Bell Company. Section II.Q allows
``grandfathered'' exceptions to the general definition of Local Cellular Service Areas for those systems. As the
stipulation expressly notes, by permitting these exceptions, the United States has not concluded that these areas
are appropriate local calling areas for cellular service, but agreed to these exceptions for the present time, subject
to further order of the Court, for the following reasons.
In some cases, McCaw has a single switch (or several interconnected switches) located in one LATA but connected to
some cell sites located outside the LATA. In many of these cases, either no Bell Company is licensed to serve the area
in competition with McCaw, or a Bell Company is licensed to serve only part of the area and thus could not feasibly offer
service throughout the same area even apart from MFJ constraints.
The FCC currently has under way a proceeding considering whether to impose equal access requirements on all cellular
or commercial mobile radio service providers, in which the appropriate scope of local calling areas is an issue. In
light of these developments, the United States determined not to require McCaw to reconfigure its existing systems
until other proceedings addressing the appropriate scope of local cellular calling areas are concluded. If those
proceedings result in determinations that are inconsistent with the exceptions in Section II.Q, or if it otherwise
appears that any exceptions are not justified, the United States has reserved the right to seek orders from the Court
eliminating any such exceptions. In such a proceeding, ATT might contend that such exceptions are consistent
with prior practice under the MFJ or are otherwise appropriate.


B. Manufacturing


The proposed Final Judgment addresses competitive concerns arising from the fact that the merger will place ATT,
through McCaw, in competition with its other wireless infrastructure equipment
<FOOTCITE>8</FOOTCITE>
 customers who rely on ATT equipment and are locked in to ATT. Section V of the proposed Final Judgment contains
several provisions designed to restrict ATT's ability and incentive to use its position as equipment supplier
to McCaw's wireless competitors to disadvantage those customers/competitors vis-a-vis McCaw.
<FOOTCITE>9</FOOTCITE>



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
8

</FOOTNAME>
Because ATT is not only a leading supplier of cellular infrastructure equipment, but is also developing and
selling infrastructure equipment for other wireless services that are being developed and that may compete with
cellular service in the future, many of the provisions of Section V apply to ``wireless services'' and the infrastructure
equipment used to provide those services. ``Wireless Service'' is defined in Section II.AF to include not just cellular
service, but those telecommunications services that use radio transmission between the customer and the network,
including cellular, land mobile radio, commercial mobile radio, specialized mobile radio, personal communications
services, and any other mobile radio services that have been or might be authorized by the FCC or offered using radio
transmission between the customer and the network.

</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
9

</FOOTNAME>
The duties of Section V apply only so long as McCaw is affiliated with an ATT business unit that manufactures cellular
or other wireless infrastructure equipment, as will occur once the merger is consummated. If ATT, at a point
prior to expiration of the decree, were to divest control of either McCaw or its wireless infrastructure equipment
manufacturing business, the provisions of Section V would no longer be in effect, except for any buy-back liability
under Section V.E accruing as a result of decree violations during the period of affiliation.




</FOOTNOTE>

