 

Sections 205(g) and 223 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 405(g) and 423) Timely Filing for Attorney's Fees Under
the Equal Access to Justice Act 




Shalala 

v. 

Schaefer, 

XXXX

 U.S. 

XXXX

, 113 S.Ct. 2625 (1993) 


This Ruling concerns whether the 30-day period for filing an application for attorney's fees under the Equal Access
to Justice Act (EAJA) begins immediately upon expiration of the time for appeal of a remand order issued by a court under
sentence four of section 205(g) of the Social Security Act (the Act), or after the administrative proceedings on remand
are complete. Sentence four states, ``[t]he court shall have power to enter, upon the pleadings and transcript of
the record, a judgment affirming, modifying, or reversing the decision of the Secretary, with or without remanding
the cause for a rehearing.'' 
The claimant filed for and was denied title II disability benefits. The claimant sought review in district court under
section 205(g) of the Act. Reversing the Secretary, the district court held that the Secretary had erred in her decision
on this case and remanded the case under sentence four of section 205(g) of the Act to the Secretary for further consideration.
The Secretary subsequently awarded benefits. 
More than a year later, the claimant filed a petition for attorney's fees under the EAJA. The Secretary, in response,
noted that the claimant was required to file the petition for EAJA fees ``within 30 days of final judgment in the action''
pursuant to 28 U.S.C. 2412(d)(1)(B), and argued that the ``final judgment'' in this case was the administrative decision
on remand. 
The district court relied on 

Welter 

v. 

Sullivan 

in which the eighth circuit held that the district court did not intend to enter final judgment when it remanded the
plaintiffs' cases under sentence four. When the Secretary appealed 

Schaefer 

to the circuit court, the court declined the Secretary's suggestion for 

en banc 

reconsideration of 

Welter.

 
The circuit court affirmed the district court's award of EAJA fees to the claimant. On review by the Supreme Court,
the Secretary argued that, in light of the Supreme Court's decisions in 

Sullivan 

v. 

Finkelstein 

and 

Melkonyan 

v. 

Sullivan

, a district court cannot retain jurisdiction of a case after a remand under sentence four of section 205(g) of the Act.

Although the Supreme Court affirmed the circuit court's decision to award EAJA fees, it rejected its analysis. The
Court held that, under the clear language of section 205(g) of the Act, a district court may not retain jurisdiction
after a sentence four remand. The Court found that a sentence four remand is an appealable final judgment of the district
court that terminates the action and makes a plaintiff a ``prevailing party'' for the purposes of the EAJA. The Court
clarified dicta in 

Sullivan 

v. 

Hudson

, emphasizing that a sentence four remand (as opposed to a remand under sentence six of section 205(g), in which the
court retains jurisdiction of the case) confers prevailing party status on the plaintiff. 
The Court also clarified that, in a sentence four remand, the time period in which an EAJA petition must be filed begins
at the conclusion of the appeal period following the district court's entry of a judgment. However, in this case, the
Court found that, because the district court failed to enter a judgment pursuant to Rule 58 of the Federal Rules of Civil
Procedure, neither the appeal period nor the EAJA 30-day filing period had lapsed. 
For the foregoing reasons, the Court affirmed the judgment of the court of appeals. 


SCALIA, Supreme Court Justice 





