 

Currently, under the Perkins Act, the Departments of Education and Labor provide funding for the National Occupational
Information Coordinating Committee (NOICC) and its affiliated State Occupational Information Coordinating Committees
(SOICCs). The NOICC and the SOICCs assess current and future labor market conditions by assembling and disseminating
occupational information. Is the current system useful to educators planning programs and to students selecting
careers? If not, what changes should be made? How can the NOICC and SOICCs be linked to key elements of the Reemployment
Act, such as One-Stop Career Centers?



6. Tribally Controlled Postsecondary Vocational Institutions



Through this program, the Department provides grants for the operation and improvement of tribally controlled postsecondary
vocational institutions. Is the program fulfilling its purposes? Should the program be continued? Would the population
served through the program be better served if the program was administered by the Department of the Interior?



7. Unfunded Authorities



Currently, the Perkins Act includes separate funding authorities for career guidance and counseling programs,
business-labor-education partnerships, vocational education lighthouse schools, model community education
employment centers, supplementary State grants for facilities and equipment, and other program improvement activities.
None of these activities is currently funded. Should any of them be continued in the reauthorization? If so, why, and
with what revisions? More specifically, how should the reauthorization address the area of career development and
counseling?



Adult Education



1. State Programs



&bull;Program Focus.

According to an analysis of 1990 census data, more than 44 million adults, nearly 27 percent of the adult population
of the United States, have not received a high school diploma or its equivalent. The adult education formula targets
this population. Of that population, 39 percent have completed eight or fewer years of education, but 61 percent have
finished between nine and twelve years of schooling. Forty-one percent of the target population is 60 years of age
or older, while 11 percent fall between 16 and 24 years of age. The variation in these individuals' educational needs
and goals can make it difficult and time-consuming for adult educators to design effective instructional strategies
for them. An additional complication is the broad statement of purpose contained in section 311 of the Adult Education
Act, which focuses, in part, on providing assistance to States ``*** to improve educational opportunities
for adults who lack the level of literacy skills requisite to effective citizenship and productive employment. ***''

Should Adult Education remain as a separate program serving a diverse population of adult learners with diverse needs?
As one alternative, should the programs be refocused, for example on work preparation and literacy skills upgrading
for adults? How can Federal Adult Education programs best be structured to achieve the current objectives in areas
such as workforce preparation, family literacy, and English proficiency? Should program services be organized
around target populations (such as dislocated workers or immigrants)? By program objective (such as basic skills
or workplace literacy)?

&bull;General Educational Development (GED) Preparation.

Many of the approximately one million adults who enrolled in Adult Secondary Education programs in 1993 had as their
goal the attainment of a GED certificate. The value of the GED examination as a measure of academic competence and achievement
has attracted increasing attention over the past several years as the percentage of high school certificates awarded
through equivalency examinations has increased. In the United States, 475,602 of the 756,645 adults who took the
GED in 1993 passed the test. Studies focusing on the skill levels, economic outcomes, and postsecondary education
experience of GED holders have yielded inconclusive and sometimes contradictory results. For example, most research
on the economic value of the GED shows that it is significantly less valuable than a high school diploma; on the other
hand, some evidence indicates that GED recipients have higher incomes than high school dropouts.

Should attainment of a GED diploma continue to be a primary focus of Adult Secondary Education? If not, what credential
alternatives are available for adults seeking to complete their secondary education? Should local programs be encouraged
to offer courses that allow adults to earn a high school diploma? 

&bull;Set-Asides.

By establishing set-asides and targeting the needs of special populations, the Adult Education Act requires States
to use their Federal adult education funds to address the educational needs of a diverse population, for example:
those in need of basic education services, the limited-English-proficient, incarcerated and otherwise institutionalized
individuals, and public housing residents. While each of these groups may have a well-established need for adult
education services, the mix of their needs may make it difficult for adult education providers to target limited resources
on, and create solutions to, the most pressing problems in adult education.


