 

Sludges and Other Solid Materials 



The plausible management scenario used to assess risks for the wastewater treatment 
sludges from the production of azo dyes and pigments (K162 and K164), and still bottoms or 
heavy ends from the production of triarylmethane dyes and pigments (K166) was disposal in 
an on-site monofill. Disposal in an on-site monofill for these waste categories results 
in the highest adverse exposure of sensitive individuals or populations. For wastewater 
treatment sludges from azo dye production (K164), this plausible management scenario 
(

i.e.

, on-site monofill) currently is practiced. 

The Agency determined that disposal in an on-site monofill is a plausible management 
scenario for wastewater treatment sludges from azo pigment production (K162) and still 
bottoms or heavy ends from the production of triarylmethane dyes and pigments (K166), for 
the following reasons: 

&bull;On-site monofills have been used by industry to dispose of wastewater treatment 
sludge from the manufacture of dyes and pigments; 

&bull;Most of the still bottoms generated from the production of triarylmethane dyes 
and pigments are high-volume wastestreams for which on-site monofills are a 
plausible management option; and 

&bull;On-site monofills can be a lower-cost disposal option. 

Therefore, there is a potential for monofills to be constructed and used in the 
future, by either dye or pigment manufacturers to dispose of wastewater treatment sludges 
or other high-volume solid wastes. 

For wastewater treatment sludge from the production of triarylmethane pigments using 
aniline as a feedstock, the plausible management was determined to be the current 
management, blending with non-hazardous fuel. Currently, 100% of this waste is sent off-
site for non-hazardous fuel blending. The Agency believes that this waste will continue 
to be managed in this manner because the relatively high organic content of the waste 
gives the material value as a fuel ingredient. Therefore, generators of the waste have an 
economic incentive to continue fuel blending. For comparison purposes, the Agency also 
projected the risks from managing this wastestream in a municipal landfill (from release 
of contaminants into ground water) and in an on-site boiler (from release of contaminants 
into the air). 

The primary exposure pathway considered from disposal of solid materials in both 
unlined municipal landfills (evaluated as the baseline management practice for K162, K164, 
and K166) and monofills (evaluated as plausible management practices for K162, K164, and 
K166) is direct ingestion of drinking water from residential wells near the disposal site. 
Because of the widespread practice of daily cover, indirect air pathways and surface 
erosion and runoff were not evaluated for municipal landfills. For on-site monofills, 
however, the presumption of no daily cover was used, and risks associated with indirect 
pathways were evaluated. 

In addition to estimating potential risks from waste disposed in an unlined municipal 
landfill, the Agency evaluated risks from municipal landfills meeting the minimum 
requirements for a Subtitle D landfill (56 FR 50978, 1991). These requirements include 
daily cover, flexible membrane liner, leachate collection system, clay liner, and final 
cap and cover. The results of these analyses can be found in the Risk Assessment for Dye 
and Pigment Waste Listing Determination. This document is available in the RCRA public 
docket (see 

ADDRESSES 

section). 

A dilution factor based on the ratio of the volume of the waste to the volume of co-
disposed municipal waste and daily cover was used to estimate the concentrations of the 
constituents of concern in the landfill. The concentrations of the constituents measured 
in the waste were multiplied by this dilution factor to determine the concentration of the 
constituents in the landfill. The concentrations of the constituents in the landfill 
leachate were estimated using Toxicity Characteristics Leaching Procedure (TCLP) data 
submitted by industry for selected constituents (3,3
&rsquo;-dichlorobenzidine, aniline, 4- 
chloroaniline, and 2- and 4-aminotoluene), or when TCLP data were not available, by using 
a soil-water partitioning equation. 

EPA used the following linear partition equation (Dragan, 1988) with an adjustment to 
relate sorbed concentration to total waste concentration. 




C

L

 = C

W

/[Foc * Koc + O * S/Bd] 





where C

L

=leachate concentration 

C

W

=waste concentration 

Foc=fraction organic carbon 

Koc=organic carbon partitioning coefficient 

O=porosity 

S=fraction water content 

Bd=bulk density 





The physical properties of the waste used in this equation (

i.e.

, bulk density, 
fraction organic carbon) were obtained either from the Agency's record samples when 
available, or from the 1991 RCRA Section 3007 Questionnaire responses. 

The volume of leachate and rate of ground-water recharge were estimated using the 
HELP model. The HELP model uses site-specific precipitation values and standard 
assumptions for the characteristics of municipal waste to estimate infiltration and 
recharge rates. For the evaluation of dye and pigment wastes in municipal landfills, 
annual precipitation rates for sites near all dye and pigment facilities were ranked. 
Charlotte, North Carolina was selected as representative of the median precipitation value 
for the areas near dye and pigment facilities, and Charleston, South Carolina, was 
selected as representative of sites with high annual rainfall potential. The default 
meteorologic conditions for these locations in the HELP model were used to determine the 
infiltration and recharge rates used in the ground-water modeling. 





