 

7. The trustee shall serve, without bond or other security, at the cost and expense of MMD, on such reasonable and customary
terms and conditions as the Commission or a court may set. The trustee shall have authority to employ, at the cost and
expense of MMD, such consultants, accountants, attorneys, investment bankers, business brokers, appraisers and
other representatives and assistants as are reasonably necessary to carry out the trustee's duties and responsibilities.
The trustee shall account for all monies derived from the Agreement required by Paragraph II of this Order and all expenses
incurred. After approval by the Commission and, in the case of a court-appointed trustee, by the court, of the account
of the trustee, including fees for his or her services, all remaining monies shall be paid at the direction of MMD and
the trustee's power shall be terminated.
8. Respondents shall indemnify the trustee and hold the trustee harmless against any losses, claims, damages, liabilities,
or expenses arising out of, or in connection with, the performance of the trustee's duties, including all reasonable
fees of counsel and other expenses incurred in connection with the preparations for, or defense of any claim whether
or not resulting in any liability, except to the extent that such liabilities, losses, damages, claims, or expenses
result from the misfeasance, gross negligence, willful or wanton acts, or bad faith by the trustee.
9. If the trustee ceases to act or fails to act diligently, a substitute trustee shall be appointed in the same manner
as provided in Paragraph III.A of this Order.
10. The Commission or, in the case of a court-appointed trustee, the court, may on its own initiative or at the request
of the trustee issue such additional orders or directions as may be necessary or appropriate to enter into the Agreement
required by Paragraph II of this Order.
11. The trustee shall report in writing to MMD and to the Commission every sixty (60) days concerning the trustee's
efforts to enter into the Agreement required by Paragraph II of this Order.


IV




It is further ordered 

that for a period of ten (10) years from the date this Order becomes final, Respondents shall not acquire, without the
prior approval of the Commission, directly or indirectly, through subsidiaries, partnerships, or otherwise:
(a) Any stock, share capital, equity, leasehold or other interest in any concern, corporate or non-corporate, presently
engaged in, or within the two years preceding such acquisition engaged in, the manufacture, production, distribution
or sale of dicyclomine tablets and capsules in the United States; or
(b) Any assets currently used for or previously used for (and still suitable for use for) the manufacture and production
of dicyclomine tablets and capsules in the United States from any concern, corporate or noncorporate, presently
engaged in, or within the two years preceding the acquisition engaged in the manufacture, production, distribution
or sale of dicyclomine tablets and capsules in the United States.


Provided, however, 

that the obligations imposed by this Paragraph shall not terminate while the obligations of Paragraphs II or III are
in effect.


V




It is further ordered 

that:
A. Within sixty (60) days after the date this Order becomes final and every sixty (60) days thereafter until the Commission
has approved a Potential New Entrant, MMD shall submit to the Commission a verified written report setting forth in
detail the manner and form in which it intends to comply, is complying, or has complied with Paragraphs II and III of
the Order. MMD shall include in its compliance reports, among other things that are required from time to time, a full
description of the efforts being made to comply with Paragraphs II and III of this Order, including a description of
all substantive contacts or negotiations for entering into the Agreement required by this Order, including the identity
of all parties contacted. MMD shall include in its compliance reports copies of all written communications to and
from such parties, all internal memoranda, and all reports and recommendations concerning the Agreement required
by Paragraph II of this Order.
B. One (1) year from the date this Order becomes final and annually for the next nine (9) years on the anniversary of the
date this Order becomes final, and at such other times as the Commission may require, Respondents shall file a verified
written report with the Commission setting forth in detail the manner and form in which they have complied and are complying
with Paragraphs II, III and IV of this Order.


Provided, however, 

that the obligations imposed by this Paragraph shall not terminate while the obligations of Paragraphs II or III are
in effect.


VI




It is further ordered 

that, for the purpose of determining or securing compliance with this Order, and subject to any legally recognized
privilege, upon written request and on reasonable notice to Respondents, Respondents shall permit any duly authorized
representatives of the Commission:
A. Access, during office hours and in the presence of counsel, to inspect and copy all books, ledgers, accounts, correspondence,
memoranda and other records and documents in the possession or under the control of Respondents, relating to any matters
contained in this consent order; and
B. Upon five (5) days notice to Respondents, and without restraint or interference from Respondents, to interview
officers or employees of Respondents, who may have counsel present, regarding such matters.


