 

3. Methods for Assessing Human Neurotoxicity 



3.1. Introduction 



This chapter outlines and discusses current methods for detecting neurotoxicity in humans. In contrast to studies
of neurotoxicity in animals where functional changes readily can be correlated with neuroanatomic and neurochemical
alterations, there are ethical and technical barriers to the direct observation of neuronal damage in humans. Neurotoxicity
in humans is most commonly measured by relatively noninvasive neurophysiologic and neurobehavioral methods that
assess cognitive, affective, sensory, and motor function. The evaluation of human neurotoxicity and the relevance
to risk assessment will be discussed within the context of clinical evaluation, epidemiologic/worksite studies,
and human laboratory exposure studies. 



3.2. Clinical Evaluation 



Neurobehavioral assessment methods are used extensively in clinical neurology and neuropsychology to evaluate
patients suspected of having neurologic disease. An extensive array of examiner-administered and paper and pencil
tasks are used to assess sensory, motor, cognitive, and affective functions and personality states/traits. Neurobehavioral
data are synthesized with information from neurophysiologic studies, imaging techniques, medical history, etc.,
to derive a working diagnosis. Clinical diagnostic approaches have provided a rich conceptual framework for understanding
the functions (and malfunctions) of the central and peripheral nervous systems and have formed the basis for the development
of methods for measuring the behavioral expression of nervous system disorders. Human neurobehavioral toxicology
has borrowed heavily from neurology and neuropsychology for concepts of nervous system impairment and functional
assessment methods. Neurobehavioral toxicology has adopted the neurologic/neuropsychologic model, using adverse
changes in behavioral function to assist in identifying chemically or drug-induced changes in nervous system processes.




3.2.1. Neurologic Evaluation 



Assessment of neurobehavioral function by the clinical examination of a patient has long been used as a primary tool
in neurologic diagnosis. The domains of cognitive function, motor function, sensation, reflexes, and cranial nerve
function are a standard part of the clinical neurologic exam. Movement and gait, speech fluency and content, verbal
memory, deep tendon reflexes, muscle strength, symmetry of movement and strength, ocular movements, sensory function
(pressure, vibration, visual, auditory), motor coordination, and logical reasoning are only a few of the functions
assessed by neurologists (Denny-Brown et al., 1982). 

Trained and experienced clinicians gather these data by observation, verbal exchange, and direct examination.
Neurologic exams are sensitive indicators of neurologic disease; the data have predictive value for the diagnosis
of underlying nervous system disease, and the methods have been extensively validated against other diagnostic
procedures (e.g., imaging, neurophysiologic testing), the course of the illness, and autopsy findings. Examination
of the patient in a semistructured procedure can yield a wealth of information and insights about functional impairment
and the underlying neuropathology.



