 



Discussion: 

 In the case of a program measured in clock hours, 
the Secretary believes it is most reasonable to use the number of 
hours completed by the student in determining what percentage of 
the enrollment period has elapsed. To determine the 60 percent 
point by using scheduled hours could unjustifiably punish a 
student whose progress is slower than the average student, and 
could cause a first-time student whose progress is above average 
to be entitled to a 

pro rata

 refund past the point of 60 percent 
completion. The Secretary acknowledges that this and other 
provisions of the Title IV, HEA program rules differentiate 
between institutions based on whether programs are measured in 
clock or credit hours, and based on whether the institutions use 
standard terms. The Secretary believes this differentiation is 
justifiable and necessary, and is due to the Department's 
extensive efforts to take into account the many variables and 
circumstances found in the postsecondary educational community. 
In accordance with past guidance issued by the Department, 
excused absences may be counted when determining hours completed 
by the student if the institution has a written excused absence 
policy allowing for a reasonable number of absences which do not 
need to be made up to complete the program, and if it is 
documented that the hours were actually scheduled and missed by 
the student prior to the student's withdrawal. The Secretary 
acknowledges that, as discussed in the February 28, 1994 NPRM, 
the determination of the 60 percent point in time is 
intentionally different from the determination of the portion of 
the enrollment period that remains. The Secretary does not 
believe consistency between these two determinations is necessary 
or beneficial. 


Changes: 

 None. 


Comments: 

 Four commenters found the proposed definition of 
unpaid charges for 

pro rata

 purposes to be in conflict with the 
statutory definition. Two commenters believed the statute 
adequately defines unpaid charges and it is unnecessary for the 
Secretary to propose a different or expanded definition. One 
commenter supported the Secretary's proposal to define unpaid 
charges for 

pro rata

 purposes as it was defined for general 
refund purposes in the June 8, 1993 final regulations. One 
commenter suggested that the treatment of unpaid charges should 
be the same in all refund situations, instead of the current 
proposal which differentiates between statutory 

pro rata

 refund 
calculations and all other calculations. This commenter believed 
this discriminates against certain groups of students and thus 
fails to treat all students equitably. 


Discussion: 

 The Secretary does not believe the proposed 
definition of unpaid charges is in conflict with the more general 
statutory definition. The Secretary believes it is appropriate 
to make the definition consistent with the regulatory definition 
already in place. The treatment of unpaid charges for the 
purposes of the statutory 

pro rata

 calculation is prescribed in 
the Amendments of 1992. The Secretary has in the past 
sufficiently justified the treatment of unpaid charges for refund 
calculations other than statutory 

pro rata

 refund calculations. 
The commenter has submitted no evidence of discrimination. 


Changes: 

 None. 


Comments: 

 Three commenters support the Secretary's proposal to 
avoid double-counting certain charges (i.e., administrative fees) 
by excluding them from the 

pro rata

 refund calculation instead of 
subtracting them. Three commenters disagreed with the required 
proration of all educational costs, given that some costs 
incurred by the institution are fixed (i.e., teacher salaries, 
dormitory charges, and physical plant costs) and do not decrease 
when a student withdraws. The commenters asserted that 
institutions required to issue 

pro rata

 refunds will lose money, 
and that the students who remain will experience cost increases 
as a result. Four commenters believed an application fee should 
not be subtracted from a 

pro rata

 refund, because it is not 
really an education cost and because a portion of administrative 
costs are already recouped through the 

pro rata

 refund 
calculation. Two commenters asserted there is no statutory 
support for the Secretary's proposal that an administrative fee 
must be a real and documented charge. One commenter suggested 
the Secretary allow all administrative fees to be subtracted from 
the 

pro rata

 refund calculation. Three commenters believed it is 
intrusive and inappropriate for the Secretary to regulate details 
such as irregularly expended meal credits, passed-through room 
charges, and group health insurance fees. The commenters stated 
that such details should be handled in guidelines, not 
requirements, and should ultimately be left to the discretion of 
individual institutions. One commenter suggested that the costs 
of services voluntarily provided by an institution as a courtesy 
to its students should be excluded from the 

pro rata

 refund 
calculation. Two commenters suggested that the Secretary's 
proposed treatment of group health insurance costs should be 
extended to include other insurance, such as the liability and 
medical malpractice insurance required for medical students or 
group health insurance that is not required by the institution. 
One commenter stated that the exclusion allowed for group health 
insurance fees should be extended to all refund calculations, not 
just statutory 

pro rata

 refund calculations.






