 

Subparts BG_[Reserved]



40 CFR Chapter I


Part 745 of 40 CFR Chapter I which was proposed to be added on March 9, 1994, at 59 FR 11116 would be further amended as follows:



PART 745_LEAD EXPOSURE REDUCTION


1. The authority citation for part 745 would be revised to read as follows: 






Authority

: 15 U.S.C. 2605, 2607, 26812692 and 42 U.S.C. 4852(d). 




2. Subpart F would be added to read as follows: 


Subpart F _ Disclosure of Information Concerning Lead-Based Paint Upon Transfer of Residential Property 


Sec. 


745.100Purpose. 
745.101Scope and applicability. 
745.102Effective date.
745.103Definitions. 
745.107Disclosure requirements. 
745.110Ten calendar-day opportunity to inspect. 
745.113Disclosure and acknowledgment forms. 
745.115Agent responsibilities. 
745.118Penalties. 



Subpart F _ Disclosure of Information Concerning Lead-Based Paint Upon Transfer of Residential Property 



745.100

Purpose. 


This subpart implements the provisions of section 1018 of the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act
of 1992, which imposes certain requirements on the sale or lease of target housing. Under this subpart, a seller or
lessor of target housing shall disclose to the purchaser or lessee all information known by the seller or lessor about
lead-based paint and lead-based paint hazards, provide the purchaser with a lead hazard information pamphlet, and
attach specific disclosure and warning language to the sales contract or lease. Sellers must also give the purchaser
a 10day opportunity to conduct an inspection or risk assessment, before the purchaser is obligated under a
contract to purchase such housing. 



745.101

 Scope and applicability. 


This subpart does not apply to the sale of properties at foreclosure and informal rental agreements not involving
a lease. Renewals of existing leases would be covered by the requirements of this subpart only if the lessor: 
(a) Did not previously provide the lessee with the lead-based paint hazard information required under 745.107;
or 
(b) If the lessor becomes aware of additional information concerning lead-based paint hazards during the term of
the lease, in which case he or she is required to disclose this information prior to renewal of the lease. 



745.102

Effective date. 


The requirements in this subpart shall apply to any transaction to sell or lease target housing if the transaction
is completed on or after October 28, 1995. 



745.103

Definitions. 


All definitions as set forth in section 1004 of the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act apply in this
subpart. In addition, the following definitions are provided for the purposes of this subpart. 


Abatement

 means any set of measures designed to permanently eliminate lead-based paint hazards in accordance with standards
established by appropriate Federal agencies. Such term includes: 
(1) The removal of lead-based paint and lead-contaminated dust, the permanent containment or encapsulation of lead-based
paint, the replacement of lead painted surfaces or fixtures, and the removal or covering of lead-contaminated soil.

(2) All preparation, clean up, disposal, and post-abatement clearance testing activities associated with such
measures. 


The Act

 means the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992, (Title X of the Housing and Community Development
Act of 1992, Pub. L. 102550). 


Administrator

 means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency. 


Agent

 means any party who enters into a contract with a seller or lessor to represent the seller or lessor for the purpose of
selling or leasing target housing. 


Common area

 means a portion of a building generally accessible to all residents/users including, but not limited to, hallways,
stairways, laundry and recreational rooms, playgrounds, community centers, and boundary fences. 


Contract for the purchase and sale of residential real property

 means any contract or agreement in which one party agrees to purchase an interest in real property on which there is
situated one or more residential dwellings used or occupied, or intended to be used or occupied, in whole or in part,
as the home or residence of one or more persons. 



Evaluation

 means a risk assessment and/or inspection. 


Inspection

 means:
(1) A surface-by-surface investigation to determine the presence of lead-based paint as provided in section 302(c)
of the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning and Prevention Act [42 U.S.C. 4822], and 
(2) The provision of a report explaining the results of the investigation. 


Lead-based paint

 means paint or other surface coatings that contain lead in excess of 1.0 milligrams per centimeter squared or 0.5 percent
by weight or
(1) In the case of paint or other surface coatings on target housing, such lower level as may be established by the Secretary
of Housing and Urban Development as defined under section 302(c) of the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act
[42 U.S.C. 4822], or 
(2) In the case of any other paint or surface coatings, such other level as may be established by the Administrator.



Lead-based paint hazard

 means any condition that causes exposure to lead from lead-contaminated dust, lead-contaminated soil, lead-contaminated
paint that is deteriorated or present in accessible surfaces, friction surfaces or impact surfaces that would result
in adverse human health effects as established by the appropriate Federal Agency. 


Lessee

 means any entity that enters into an agreement to lease or rent target housing, including but not limited to individuals,
partnerships, corporations, trusteeships, government agencies, Indian tribes, or nonprofit organizations.



Lessor

 means any entity that offers target housing for lease, including but not limited to individuals, partnerships, corporations,
trusteeships, government agencies, Indian tribes, or nonprofit organizations. 

Owner

 means any entity that has legal title to target housing, including but not limited to individuals, partnerships,
corporations, trusteeships, government agencies, Indian tribes, or nonprofit organizations. 

Purchaser

 means any entity that submits a written offer to purchase an interest in target housing, including but not limited
to individuals, partnerships, corporations, trusteeships, government agencies, Indian tribes, or nonprofit
organizations. 


Residential dwelling

 means: 
(1) A single-family dwelling, including attached structures such as porches and stoops; or 
(2) A single-family dwelling unit in a structure that contains more than one separate residential dwelling unit,
and in which each such unit is used or occupied, or intended to be used or occupied, in whole or in part, as the residence
of one or more persons. 


Risk assessment

 means an on-site investigation to determine and report the existence, nature, severity, and location of lead-based
paint hazards in residential dwellings, including: 
(1) Information gathering regarding the age and history of the housing and occupancy by children under age 6. 
(2) Visual inspection. 
(3) Limited wipe sampling or other environmental sampling techniques. 
(4) Other activity as may be appropriate. 
(5) Provision of a report explaining the results of the investigation. 


Secretary

 means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. 

Seller

 means any entity that sells an interest in target housing, including but not limited to individuals, partnerships,
corporations, trusteeships, government agencies, Indian tribes, or nonprofit organizations. The term seller
also includes: 
(1) An entity which transfers shares in a cooperatively owned project.
(2) An entity which transfers its interest in a leasehold in jurisdictions or circumstances where it is legally permissible
to separate the fee title from the title to the improvement. 


Target housing

 means any housing constructed prior to 1978, except housing for the elderly or persons with disabilities (unless
any child who is less than 6 years of age resides or is expected to reside in such housing) or any 0-bedroom dwelling.

0-Bedroom dwelling means any residential dwelling in which the living area is unseparated from the sleeping area.




745.107

Disclosure requirements. 


(a) The following activities shall be completed before the purchaser or lessee is obligated under any contract to
purchase or lease target housing. (1) The seller or lessor, or the agent acting on behalf of the seller or lessor, shall
provide the purchaser or lessee with a copy of EPA's lead-hazard information pamphlet, entitled 

Lead-Based Paint: Protect Your Family

, issued under section 406 of the Toxic Substances Control Act. 
(2) The seller or lessor, or the agent acting on behalf of the seller or lessor, shall provide the purchaser or lessee
with written descriptions, or actual copies where available, of all information known by the seller or lessor or the
agent on the presence of lead-based paint or lead-based paint hazards associated with the target housing being sold
or leased. Such information includes, but is not limited to, the following items: 
(i) Reports from all lead-based paint inspections, risk assessments, and abatement activities known by the seller
or lessor, or agent. 
(ii) If the target housing contains more than one residential dwelling: (A) Records of lead-based paint inspections,
assessments, and abatement activities conducted in common areas of the property. 
(B) Records indicating whether other residential dwellings in the target housing contain or have contained lead-based
paint or lead-based paint hazards. 
(iii) Other information known by the seller or lessor, or agent that may indicate the presence of lead-based paint
or lead-based paint hazards in the residential dwelling. 
(3) The seller shall make copies of the information required under paragraph (a)(2) of this section accessible for
inspection or copying by purchasers and lessees. 
(4) Each contract or agreement to sell property defined as target housing shall contain a completed, signed, and dated
copy of the joint HUD/EPA form entitled 

Form A-Disclosure and Acknowledgement of Lead-Based Paint Before Sale

 (Form A). 
(5) Each contract or agreement to lease property defined as target housing shall contain a completed, signed, and
dated copy of the joint HUD/EPA form entitled 

Form B-Disclosure and Acknowledgement of Lead-Based Paint Before Lease

 (Form B). 
(b) The seller or lessor shall disclose to the agent, any information known to the seller or lessor regarding lead-based
paint or lead-based paint hazards within the target housing, as defined in paragraph (a)(2) of this section. 
(c) The seller, and any agent acting on behalf of the seller, shall retain a copy of the completed Form A required under
paragraph (a)(4) of this section for 3 years from the completion date of the sale. The lessor, and any agent acting on
behalf of the lessor, shall retain a copy of the completed Form B, required under paragraph (a)(5) of this section,
for 3 years from the commencement of the leasing period. 



745.110

 Ten Calendar-Day Opportunity to Inspect. 


This section applies only to transactions to sell target housing. As described in this section, each purchaser of
target housing shall be given a 10 calendar-day opportunity to conduct an inspection or risk assessment of the target
housing for lead-based paint and lead-based paint hazards prior to being bound to purchase the housing. Unless otherwise
agreed in writing by the parties, the inspection period shall be provided in the following manner. 
(a) The seller, or the agent acting on behalf of the seller, shall permit the purchaser 10 calendar days to conduct a
risk assessment or inspection of the target housing for the presence of lead-based paint or lead-based paint hazards.

(b) This opportunity shall be provided to the purchaser after the seller or the seller's agent has disclosed, in accordance
with 745.107(a)(2), all information known to the seller and agent regarding lead-based paint and lead-based
paint hazards in the target housing and after the purchaser has received the lead hazard information pamphlet required
under 745.107(a)(1). 
(c) The 10 calendar-day opportunity to inspect or assess shall commence at the time the purchaser signs a contract
to purchase the target housing. 
(d) The contract shall be contingent on finding no lead-based paint hazard in the inspection or risk assessment conducted
by a certified firm. If a lead-based paint hazard is found during the inspection or risk assessment, the seller and
purchaser shall mutually determine the terms under which the sale will or will not proceed. 
(e) The purchaser is not required to conduct a risk assessment or inspection of the target housing for the presence
of lead-based paint or lead-based paint hazards. The purchaser and seller may mutually agree in writing to lengthen,
shorten, or eliminate the 10day inspection period. 
(f) The identity of the company performing the risk assessment or inspection and the results shall be provided to the
seller. 



745.113

Disclosure and acknowledgement forms. 


(a) 

Availability of forms

. Form ADisclosure and Acknowledgement of Lead-Based Paint Before Sale (GPO #XXX) and Form BDisclosure
and Acknowledgement of Lead-Based Paint Before Lease (GPO #XXX) are included for reference in Appendix A of this part.
Copies are available from the Government Printing Office (GPO) by writing to: Government Printing Office, Superintendent
of Documents, Mail Stop XXX, Washington, DC 204029328. In addition, persons may contact EPA's TSCA Hotline
at 2025541404 for further information on obtaining copies. 
(b) 

Seller and purchaser requirements.

 (1) Part I of Form A is a ``Lead Warning Statement'' required under section 1018(a)(3) of the Act. If the contract is
written in a language other than English, the contract shall include a translation of the Lead Warning Statement in
the language of the contract as an attachment to the contract. The statement shall consist of the following language:





Every purchaser of any interest in residential real property on which a residential dwelling was built prior to 1978
is notified that such property may present exposure to lead from lead-based paint that may place young children at
risk of developing lead poisoning. Lead poisoning in young children may produce permanent neurological damage,
including learning disabilities, reduced intelligence quotient, behavioral problems, and impaired memory. Lead
poisoning also poses a particular risk to pregnant women. The seller of any interest in residential real property
is required to provide the buyer with any information on lead-based paint hazards from risk assessments or inspections
in the seller's possession and notify the buyer of any known lead-based paint hazards. A risk assessment or inspection
for possible lead-based paint hazards is recommended prior to purchase. 




(2) In Part II of Form A, the seller shall certify, by signing and dating the form, that he or she has: 
(i) Disclosed to the purchaser any information known to the seller on lead-based paint and lead-based paint hazards
in the target housing. 
(ii) Given the purchaser the EPA lead pamphlet. 
(iii) Provided the purchaser with a 10 calendar-day opportunity to conduct a risk assessment or inspection. 
(3) In Part III of Form A, the agent, if any, shall certify, by signing and dating the form, that the agent has: 
(i) Informed the seller of the seller's obligation under this subpart. (ii) Ensured that any information known to
the agent on lead-based paint and lead-based paint hazards in the target housing has been disclosed to the purchaser.

(iii) Ensured that the EPA lead pamphlet has been provided to the purchaser. 
(iv) Ensured that the purchaser has been or will be given a 10 calendar-day opportunity to conduct a risk assessment
or inspection.
(4) In Part IV of Form A, the purchaser shall acknowledge, by signing and dating the form, that he or she has: 
(i) Read and understood the attached lead warning statement.
(ii) Received the disclosures in Part II of Form A. 
(iii) Received the lead hazard information pamphlet.
(iv) Understands that he or she is entitled, by law, to a 10 calendar-day opportunity to conduct a risk assessment or
inspection.
(c) 

Lessor and lessee requirements

. (1) Part I of Form B is a statement warning of the hazards of lead-based paint poisoning. The statement shall consist
of the following language: 




A residential structure built prior to 1978 may present exposure to lead from lead-based paint. This exposure may
place young children at risk of developing lead poisoning. Lead poisoning in young children can produce permanent
neurological damage, including learning disabilities, reduced intelligence quotient, behavioral problems,
and impaired memory. Lead poisoning also poses a particular risk to pregnant women. The lessor of any residential
dwelling is required to provide the lessee with any information on lead-based paint hazards from risk assessments
or inspections in the lessor's possession and notify the lessee of any known lead-based paint hazards.



(2) In Part II of Form B, the lessor shall certify that he or she has disclosed any information known to the lessor on lead-based
paint and lead-based paint hazards in the target housing and provided the lessee with the EPA lead pamphlet. The lessor
shall sign and date the form. 
(3) In Part III of Form A, the agent, if any, shall certify that the agent has informed the lessor of the lessor's obligation
under this subpart, ensured that any information known to the agent on lead-based paint and lead-based paint hazards
in the target housing has been disclosed to the lessee, and ensured that the EPA lead hazard information pamphlet has
been provided to the lessee. The agent shall sign and date the form. 
(4) In Part IV of Form B, the lessee shall acknowledge that he or she received the disclosures in Part II of Form B and the
EPA lead pamphlet. The lessee shall sign and date the form. 



745.115

 Agent responsibilities. 


(a) Each agent shall ensure compliance with all requirements of this subpart. To ensure compliance, the agent shall:

(1) Inform the seller or lessor of their obligations under 745.107, 745.110, and 745.113 (including
the seller or lessor's obligation to disclose to the agent any information known to the seller or lessor regarding
lead-based paint and lead-based paint hazards; and,. 
(2) Either:
(i) Make certain that the seller or lessor has performed all activities required under 745.107, 745.110,
and 745.113. 
(ii) Personally comply with the requirements of 745.107, 745.110, and 745.113. 
(b) If the agent has complied with paragraph (a) of this section, the agent shall not be liable for the failure to disclose
to a purchaser or lessee information regarding lead-based paint or lead-based paint hazards known by a seller or lessor
but not disclosed to the agent. 



745.118

Penalties. 


(a) Under section 1018(b)(1) of the Act, any person who knowingly fails to comply with any provision of this subpart
shall be subject to civil monetary penalties in accordance with the provisions of section 102 of the Department of
Housing and Urban Development Reform Act of 1989 [42 U.S.C. 3545] and 24 CFR part 30. 
(b) Under section 1018(b)(2) of the Act, the Secretary is authorized to take such action as may be necessary to enjoin
any violation of this subpart in the appropriate Federal district court. 
(c) Under section 1018(b)(3) of the Act, any person who knowingly violates the provisions of this subpart shall be
jointly and severally liable to the purchaser or lessee in an amount equal to 3 times the amount of damages incurred
by such individual. 
(d) In any civil action brought for damages pursuant to section 1018(b)(3) of the Act, the appropriate court may award
court costs to the party commencing such action, together with reasonable attorney fees and any expert witness fees,
if that party prevails. 
(e) It is a prohibited act under section 409 of the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2689) for any person to fail
or refuse to comply with a provision of this subpart. For purposes of enforcing this subpart under the Toxic Substances
Control Act, the penalty for each violation applicable under section 16 of that Act is not more than $10,000.




<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9427097 Filed 102894; 10:12am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050F
</BILLING>

