 

The AAR estimated the maintenance costs of two-way devices to be twice the costs of maintenance on current one-way
devices. Based on figures presented by one railroad, the AAR stated that in 1989 maintenance costs of one-way devices
were approximately $2,000 annually per device; thus, expected maintenance costs for two-way devices will be about
$4,000 per year per device. The AAR as well as seven railroads commented that current regulations regarding one-way
EOT devices are adequate except that the current calibration period of 92 days is based on outdated technology. All
of these commenters stated that they have used the devices for years and have had little if any problems with them. One
commenter stated that the most frequent cause of failure of these devices is battery failure during periods of extreme
cold, which could be cured by replacing the batteries at initial terminals. The commenters stated that they have rarely,
if ever, found one of the devices out of calibration within the 92-day period and believe that an annual calibration
requirement would be more realistic, with all related tests being performed at that time. Several railroads also
commented that based on the performance of current one-way devices there is no reason to require calibration of the
two-way devices every 92 days. These commenters believed that the 92-day calibration requirement for one-way devices
was based on the fact that there was little experience with their operation at the time. Since that time, experience
with the devices has shown that a calibration period of one year is more than adequate. One railroad stated that its
current one-way devices operate for two to three years without a problem, and that in 1992 it replaced only about 20
of its 1,400 units. 
Several members of the BRC commented on the need to have interchangeable battery packs for all the different types
of two-way devices currently available because at present some railroads are unable to charge the devices that come
onto their lines from other railroads. Various carmen also presented written comments reiterating their concerns
that the current one-way devices are unreliable, that maintenance is not being performed, and that the gauges used
to calibrate them need to be tested. 


FRA Conclusions.

 FRA generally agrees with the cost figures presented by the commenters. FRA also believes that the 92-day calibration
period currently imposed on one-way EOT devices is outdated. FRA agrees with several of the commenters that the 92-day
requirement was established at a time when there was little experience with these types of devices. Since that time,
FRA has received no evidence indicating that calibration of the devices is difficult to maintain. Furthermore, several
railroads attested to the reliability of the one-way and two-way devices stating that they rarely find the devices
out of calibration after 92 days and that the failure rates of the devices are very low. Consequently, FRA believes
that the calibration period for all EOT devices could be extended to one year. 
FRA further believes that one of the major factors affecting the reliability of two-way EOT devices is the failure
of the batteries on the devices while a train is enroute. As several commenters stated, battery failure is often the
result of a failure to inspect the battery charge prior to departure or the inability of one railroad to charge the batteries
of the devices belonging to another railroad which are used on its line. Consequently, in order to ensure that the batteries
on a two-way EOT device are sufficiently charged to operate the device throughout a train's movement and to encourage
the development and use of interchangeable batteries or battery chargers, FRA proposes to prohibit a train equipped
with a two-way EOT device from departing from a point of origin with the batteries of such device charged to less than
75 percent of watt-hour capacity. 




