 

Question 8. In addition to the proposal mentioned in the preceding question, are there other alternative institutional
structures for the electric power industry that warrant the Commission's consideration in this Inquiry?
Question 9. What are the strengths and weaknesses of today's power pools? We are particularly interested in concrete
examples related to existing power pools. Should the Commission consider changing any existing power pool practices
or policies to facilitate competitive bulk power markets?
Question 10. Would changes to existing power pools be preferable to creating new pooling institutions? Is an RTG an
appropriate institution to become a power pool? Or should the RTG's transmission planning function be kept separate
from the pool's generation market-clearing function?
Question 11. Can a pool provide advantages to its members without unduly preferring members to non-members? How should
pool members relate to non-members in an open access market? Are any improvements in information availability necessary
for existing pools or alternative pooling institutions to be more beneficial? What reciprocity conditions are appropriate
between pool members and non-members? How would a state policy of retail access affect pool membership conditions
and reciprocity obligations? What if retail access were available in only some states in the pool?
Question 12. How should the Commission's recently-announced policy concerning comparability of transmission
services be implemented with respect to alternative power pooling institutions and/or existing power pools?


V. Public Comment Procedures


The Commission invites all interested parties to submit an original and 14 copies of their written comments. Comments
should not exceed 100 pages in length. In addition, commenters should submit an executive summary not to exceed five
pages.
The Commission will also permit interested persons to submit reply comments in response to the initial comments filed
in this proceeding. Reply comments should not exceed 50 pages in length.
Persons with common interests or views are encouraged to submit joint comments. Commenters should double space their
comments, provide a concise description identifying the commenter, and should reference Docket No. RM9420000.
In addition, commenters should submit a copy of their comments on a 31/2 inch diskette in ASCII II format. Initial and
reply comments must be filed with the Office of the Secretary, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 825 North Capitol
Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20426, no later than March 2, 1995 for initial comments and April 3, 1995 for reply comments.
All written comments will be placed in the Commission's public files and will be available for inspection in the Commission's
Public Reference Section, 941 North Capitol Street, NE., Washington, D.C. 20426, during regular business hours.



By direction of the Commission.


<SIGNER>
Lois D. Cashell,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Secretary.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9427090 Filed 11194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 671701P
</BILLING>


