 

The BNE investigation also revealed that Respondent was one of the two highest purchasers of Anavar, an anabolic steroid,
from a particular supplier between 1985 and 1988. Some of Respondent's employees divulged that Respondent prescribed,
dispensed and administered anabolic steroids out of his office to young adult males for the purpose of body enhancement.
These employees also disclosed that Respondent required cash payments and that Respondent seldom conducted blood
tests on these individuals.

A police detective admitted that he had received steroids from Respondent in 1988. Another officer, who also admitted
to obtaining anabolic steroids from Respondent for purposes of body enhancement, indicated he used steroids based
upon Respondent's recommendation. While a BNE investigator was executing the search warrant at Respondent's office
on October 17, 1989, she encountered a patient who was there to obtain anabolic steroids for body enhancement. The
individual explained to her that when he initially obtained steroids from Respondent he was not warned about any dangers
that accompanied the use of such substances. He was only given one initial blood test by Respondent.

Patient files recovered from Respondent's office revealed that many had received steroids from Respondent since
1987. Few, if any, blood tests were conducted on these patients. Another patient obtained anabolic steroids from
Respondent after the patient revealed that he had taken these substances in the past, was depressed and attempted
suicide ten months earlier. There were ten patients who obtained anabolic steroids from Respondent after April 3,
1989, the date when Respondent was informed by a BNE investigator that anabolic steroids were controlled substance
under California law; one patient received nine injections in May and June of 1989. The patient files revealed that
97 patients received anabolic steroids from Respondent during the three years preceding the execution of the search
warrant and that another 103 patients had previously received anabolic steroids from Respondent.

A number of medical journal articles concerning the dangers of continual anabolic steroid use were introduced into
evidence. These articles revealed that use of such substances was associated with certain psychological problems
such as irritability, violent aggression, forgetfulness, confusion, abrupt mood swings and depression. Such use
also was correlated with physiological problems such as decreased libido, insomnia, anorexia and metabolic disturbances.
Many of these problems were reversible if the patient discontinued the use of these substances.

An expert physician reviewed Respondent's patient records and concluded that 24 patients obtained anabolic steroids
from Respondent not for legitimate medical purposes. He opined that it was improper to use anabolic steroids in conjunction
with other controlled substances prescribed by Respondent and that the steroids were particularly contraindicated
in light of some of the patients' medical illnesses. The expert found that it was ``medically dangerous'' to give anabolic
steroids to a patient who had experienced prior depression.

Another expert physician testified on behalf of Respondent that the doses of anabolic steroids that Respondent gave
to his patients would be considered therapeutic and modest compared to reported doses used by athletes without a physician's
authorization. This expert acknowledged, however, that although it is ethical to monitor the use of anabolic steroid
use, it is not ethical for physicians to use such substances for the purpose that Respondent used them and that he would
try to dissuade a patient from using anabolic steroids because ``*** these things are cheating in
the world of sport ***.'' Moreover, there would be no way to determine if Respondent's patients were
obtaining additional steroids or other illicit drugs on the street. The expert noted that if a physician is providing
anabolic steroids, the physician should weigh the individual and take his blood pressure on every visit. In addition,
the patient's lipid levels, cholesterol and triglycerides should be measured on the first visit to establish a baseline.
Respondent's files demonstrated that, for the most part, this protocol was not followed.

During execution of the search warrant, Respondent confirmed that he dispensed anabolic steroids to his patients
for purposes of body enhancement. He explained that his services were necessary because if he did not provide that
patients with anabolic steroids they would obtain the substances from the illicit market.

On May 30, 1991, in the Contra Costa County Court, State of California, Respondent pled 

nolo contendere

 to and was convicted of six felony counts of issuing controlled substance prescriptions without a legitimate medical
purpose. Respondent was placed on probation and fined.

During execution of the search warrant, samples of various Schedule II through V controlled substances were discovered
in various locations throughout Respondent's office, including Respondent's desk. There were no records of receipts
or dispensing for any of the controlled substance samples as required by Federal law. There was only one completed
DEA 222 order form for fentanyl although Respondent also possessed Demerol, another Schedule II controlled substance.

In evaluating whether Respondent's continued registration by the Drug Enforcement Administration would be inconsistent
with the public interest, as that term is used in 21 U.S.C. 824(a)(4), the Deputy Administrator considers the factors
enumerated in 21 U.S.C. 823(f). They are as follows:

(1) The recommendation of the appropriate State licensing board or professional disciplinary authority.

(2) The applicant's experience in dispensing, or conducting research with respect to controlled substances.



