 







<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Food and Drug Administration</USBUREAU>



<CFRNO>21 CFR Part 103</CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 92N0059]</RINDOCK>


Quality Standards for Foods With No Identity Standards; Bottled Water


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Final rule.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is amending the standard of quality regulation for bottled water to establish
an allowable level of 0.005 milligrams per liter (mg/L) for lead in bottled water. FDA also is retaining the existing
allowable level of 1.0 mg/L for copper in bottled water. This final rule will ensure both that the minimum quality of
bottled water with respect to copper and lead remains comparable to the quality of public drinking water, and that
bottled water will be free of any significant lead contamination. This final rule is consistent with FDA's goal of
reducing consumers' exposure to lead in drinking water to the extent practicable. 


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Effective November 21, 1994. The Director of the Office of the Federal Register approves the incorporation by reference
in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51 of certain publications in 21 CFR 103.35(d)(3)(v), effective November
21, 1994.


</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

 Henry S. Kim, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFS306), Food and Drug Administration, 200 C St.
SW., Washington, DC 20204, 2022054681.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 


I. Background


Under section 410 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the act) (21 U.S.C. 349), whenever the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) prescribes interim or revised National Primary Drinking Water Regulations (NPDWR's) under
section 1412 of the Public Health Service Act (The Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) (42 U.S.C. 300f through 300j-9)),
FDA is required to consult with EPA and either amend its regulations for bottled drinking water (103.35(21
CFR 103.35)) or publish in the 

Federal Register

 its reasons for not making such amendments.
In the 

Federal Register

 of June 7, 1991 (56 FR 26460), EPA published a final rule promulgating NPDWR's that established corrosion control
treatment technique requirements for controlling lead and copper levels in public water systems when these contaminants
exceed levels of 0.015 mg/L for lead and 1.3 mg/L for copper in more than 10 percent of targeted tap samples. Targeted
tap water samples represent samples collected from residences most likely to have lead problems as a result of corrosion
in the distribution systems. EPA established treatment technique requirements rather than maximum contaminant
levels (MCL's) for lead and copper in drinking water because it believed that treatment technique requirements are
more appropriate to control contamination of lead and copper that is largely the result of circumstances beyond the
direct control of public water systems (i.e., corrosion in service lines not owned by the systems and in the plumbing
of residences and buildings). In addition, EPA established maximum contaminant level goals (MCLG's) of zero for
lead and 1.3 mg/L for copper which are based solely on considerations of protecting the public from the adverse health
effects of these contaminants in drinking water.
In accordance with section 410 of the act, FDA published in the 

Federal Register

 of January 5, 1993 (58 FR 389), a proposal to amend the quality standard for bottled water to establish an allowable
level of 0.005 mg/L for lead and to retain the existing allowable level of 1.0 mg/L for copper. FDA proposed a lower level
of 0.005 mg/L for lead in bottled water than EPA's level of 0.015 mg/L for lead in drinking water that triggers treatment
technique requirements. FDA's data showed that most bottlers do not normally experience the significant lead contamination
problems from corrosion of materials that are presented by public water distribution systems and residential plumbing
(e.g., pipes, faucets, and solder), and that bottlers can produce bottled water products with lead levels below 0.005
mg/L. Furthermore, this level represents the lowest level at which FDA can take enforcement action because it corresponds
to the practical quantitation limit (PQL) of the best available analytical methods for determining lead levels in
water. Finally, FDA noted that establishing the allowable level for lead at 0.005 mg/L would provide public health
protection at least equivalent to that provided by EPA's NPDWR and would ensure that bottled water products are free
of significant lead contamination.
With respect to the allowable level for copper, the existing allowable level of 1.0 mg/L in bottled water is below EPA's
MCLG of 1.3 mg/L and is equivalent to EPA's secondary maximum contaminant level (SMCL), which is based on the aesthetic
effects of copper in drinking water. Thus, FDA proposed to retain the existing allowable level to ensure that levels
of copper in bottled water meet the safety and aesthetic criteria that EPA has established for copper in drinking water.

On November 8, 1990, the enactment of the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101535) removed
standard of quality rulemakings from the coverage of the formal rulemaking procedures in section 701(e) of the act
(21 U.S.C. 371(e)). FDA, therefore, proposed the amendments to the bottled water quality standard regulations for
lead and copper using notice and comment rulemaking under section 701(a) of the act. Interested persons were given
until March 8, 1993, to comment on the proposed regulation.


II. Summary of and Response to Comments


A. 

Summary of Comments




FDA received approximately 130 responses to the January 5, 1993, proposal. Each of these responses contained one
or more comments from industry, consumers, trade associations, Federal government officials, State government
agencies, consumer advocacy organizations, and a private research foundation. The comments generally supported
the proposal. Many comments addressed issues that are outside the scope of the proposal (e.g., allowable levels for
total trihalomethanes, chlorine, and fluoride in the quality standard for bottled water). These comments will not
be discussed here. A number of comments suggested modifications to, or were opposed to, various provisions of the
proposal. A summary of the suggested changes, the opposing comments, and the agency's responses follows.


B. 

Response to Comments




1. Most comments supported the proposed allowable levels of 0.005 mg/L for lead and 1.0 mg/L for copper in the quality
standard for bottled water. One comment, however, stated that the allowable level for lead in bottled water should
not be any lower than EPA's corrosion treatment trigger level of 0.015 mg/L for lead in drinking water because this
level corresponds to an average lead level of 0.005 mg/L, the level which most bottled waters do not exceed. The comment
argued that the fact that 0.005 mg/L is at the lower limit of reliable measurement for lead does not justify setting
a standard at that level. The comment further argued that setting a standard for lead in bottled water is not necessary
because lead content is not a problem in bottled water. The comment maintained that imposing regulations for the sake
of regulation is a problem because of the high costs incurred by diverting FDA resources from significant regulatory
concerns.
FDA disagrees with this comment. Under section 410 of the act, FDA's approach has been to respond to EPA's promulgation
of drinking water regulations under the SDWA by amending the quality standard for bottled water to maintain compatibility
with EPA's regulations. FDA concludes that amending the standard for lead in bottled water to 0.005 mg/L is fully compatible
and consistent with the EPA standard. 
Based on the available health effects information, EPA established an MCLG of zero for lead in drinking water. By adopting
this MCLG, EPA was in effect saying that if zero lead in drinking water can be achieved, it should be achieved. However,
EPA concluded that zero lead in public drinking water could not be achieved because of contamination of the water with
lead from corrosion of lead-containing materials in public water distribution systems and in residential plumbing.
To control this contamination, EPA established treatment technique requirements which are triggered when more
than 10 percent of the targeted tap water samples exceeds 0.015 mg/L for lead. 
 
Bottled water, however, generally does not have significant lead contamination problems. FDA conducted a survey
of bottled water in 1990 (Ref. 1), and the findings of that survey show that most bottlers are using source waters that
are free of significant lead contamination and can readily produce bottled water products with lead levels below
0.005 mg/L, the PQL for lead in water. Consequently, because this level, which is as close to EPA's MCLG of zero as possible,
is achievable in bottled water, there is no reason for FDA to rely on EPA's 0.015 mg/L trigger level in establishing
an allowable level for lead in bottled water. In fact, in its review and comment on FDA's proposal (before it published
in the 

Federal Register

), EPA stated that the regulatory approach taken by FDA to establish an allowable level of 0.005 mg/L for lead in bottled
water is consistent with the intent of the NPDWR for lead in public drinking water (Ref. 4).
2. One comment asserted that there is no safe threshold for lead in drinking water and, because technological resources
and knowledge make it feasible to measure lead in water at the 0.002 mg/L level, FDA should establish the allowable
level for lead in bottled water at that level. The comment contended that, because large water companies have been
testing for lead and reporting lead levels of 0, 0.001, 0.002, 0.003, and 0.004 mg/L to EPA, the PQL is substantially
lower than 0.005 mg/L. The comment stated that another organization, which has limited resources and is not in the
business of supplying water commercially, uses a laboratory that has found the PQL to be 0.002 mg/L when testing for
lead in bottled water. The comment further argued that EPA's PQL concept is theoretically inappropriate for safety
determinations because the error theory of laboratory measurements (i.e., the distinction between the standard
error of a single measurement and the standard error among a group of measurements) upon which EPA bases its determination
of the PQL is misleading. 
FDA disagrees that EPA's PQL concept is inappropriate. EPA's PQL is set at the lowest concentration for a contaminant
that laboratories certified by the States or by EPA for water analyses can reliably measure within specified limits
of precision and accuracy under routine laboratory operating conditions. EPA also determines the PQL based on the
method detection limit (MDL), which is defined as the lowest concentration of a substance that can be measured with
99 percent confidence that the true value is greater than zero. EPA generally sets the PQL at 5 to 10 times the MDL, depending
on the degree of health risk posed by a contaminant (for contaminants like lead that pose a high degree of health risk,
EPA sets the PQL at 5 times the MDL), and, if possible, confirms the PQL by interlaboratory performance evaluation
studies. 
Based on EPA's calculation of a 0.001 mg/L MDL for lead by the most sensitive analytical methods available, EPA set
the PQL for lead at 0.005 mg/L. EPA confirmed this level by performance evaluation studies that evaluated the ability
of EPA, State, and non-EPA and State laboratories to analyze water samples with low lead levels (56 FR 26460 at 26511,
June 7, 1991). 
Although the comment stated that a laboratory used by another organization found the PQL to be 0.002 mg/L for lead in
bottled water, it did not provide any data to support that laboratory's determination. Therefore, this comment has
not provided an adequate basis upon which to call into question EPA's PQL. 
In summary, based on the studies conducted by EPA establishing a PQL of 0.005 mg/L for lead in drinking water, FDA finds
that an allowable level of 0.005 mg/L for lead in the quality standard for bottled water is appropriate. 
3. Another comment stated that, although it strongly endorsed the proposed allowable level for lead in bottled water,
FDA should review this standard in a few years because EPA's 1991 rule for lead in drinking water has led to increased
analysis for lead in water, and, using the best available methodology, many laboratories can now routinely measure
lead levels at 0.001 or 0.002 mg/L in water samples. The comment maintained that measurement of lead in water at these
levels may soon be the standard, ``state of the art'' technology, and that it would be appropriate to set the allowable
level in bottled water at the limit of detection, i.e., 0.005 mg/L, or no detectable lead, whichever is less. 
FDA disagrees that establishing the allowable level for lead in bottled water at the limit of detection, i.e., 0.005
mg/L, or no detectable lead, whichever is less, is appropriate. As discussed above, 0.005 mg/L, the PQL for lead in
water, represents the lowest concentration that State- or EPA-certified laboratories for water analyses can reliably
measure within specified limits of precision and accuracy under routine laboratory operating conditions. FDA recognizes
that lead levels in water can be measured below 0.005 mg/L. However, to take an enforcement action based on level of
a contaminant in a food, FDA must be able to reliably establish the level of the contaminant in the food. EPA's PQL of
0.005 mg/L has been confirmed by performance evaluation studies as the lowest level of lead in water samples that can
be reliably and consistently measured (56 FR 26460 at 26511). Thus, FDA has concluded that reliance on the PQL as the
allowable level for lead in bottled water is appropriate. 
Nevertheless, FDA agrees that technology for analytical methodology is constantly advancing. Reliable measurement
of lead levels below 0.005 mg/L in water samples, within specified limits of precision and accuracy under routine
laboratory operating conditions, may soon become the general norm. Therefore, FDA agrees with the comment that within
the next few years, it should consult with EPA about reevaluating the PQL for lead in water. Moreover, FDA recognizes
that, should EPA revise the PQL, FDA will need to consider whether an allowable level for lead in bottled water below
0.005 mg/L is appropriate. 
 4. A State government agency and a majority of the comments from industry and trade associations opposed the statement
in the proposal that if the proposal becomes a final rule, bottlers will be required to test each lot of bottled water
to ensure that it contains less than 0.005 mg/L of lead. The comments argued that, because most bottlers are routinely
meeting the 0.005 mg/L standard for lead, a requirement for testing each lot of bottled water for lead is not necessary.
Furthermore, the majority of the comments argued that testing each lot of bottled water for lead would impose a significant
financial burden on the bottled water industry. For example, comments from two trade associations representing
bottled water manufacturers maintained that a requirement for testing each lot of bottled water for lead would impose
additional annual costs that they estimated at $15,000 for a small bottler and $300,000 for a large bottler.
Under the current good manufacturing practice (CGMP) regulations for the processing and bottling of bottled drinking
water (part 129 (21 CFR part 129)), bottlers are required to analyze, at least annually, for chemical contaminants,
including lead, in a representative sample from a batch or a segment of a continuous production run for each type of
bottled drinking water produced during a day's production (129.80(g)(2)). Therefore, bottlers will not
be required to test each lot of bottled water for the presence of lead. The statement that they would, which was inadvertently
included in the economic impact analysis, was in error. 
However, FDA reminds water bottlers that each lot of bottled water must comply with the quality standard for chemical
contaminants, and compliance with the minimum annual testing requirements of the CGMP does not exempt a firm from
regulatory action if any lot of bottled water does not meet any provision of the chemical quality standard.
5. Several comments recommended that testing for chemical contaminants (e.g., lead and copper) should be more frequent
than the required minimum of annual testing. One comment noted that, although FDA has established quality standards
for bottled water, it did not set any requirements for monitoring timeframes or submission of results to ensure that
bottlers meet the quality standards. Moreover, the comment objected to allowing distribution of a bottled water
product that is below the water quality standard, arguing that, given the emphasis on the quality of bottled water
verses tap water by the bottled water industry, bottlers are not likely to print a ``substandard'' statement on the
label. 
FDA agrees that bottlers are not likely to market bottled water that would be required to bear a statement of substandard
quality with respect to lead. However, FDA notes that the use of such a statement on the label of a food covered by a standard
of quality is specifically provided for by section 403(h)(1) of the act (21 U.S.C. 343(h)(1)), if that food falls below
the prescribed quality standard. Therefore, FDA cannot preclude the use of the statement of substandard quality.
Nonetheless, 103.35(g) provides that any bottled water containing a substance at a level considered injurious
to health under section 402 of the act (21 U.S.C. 342) is deemed to be adulterated and may be subject to regulatory action,
even if the bottled water bears a label statement of substandard quality.
FDA notes that the CGMP regulations for processing and bottling of bottled drinking water (part 129) require that
the water to be bottled be obtained from an approved source properly located, protected, and operated; be of a safe,
sanitary quality; and be in compliance at all times with the applicable laws and regulations of the government agency
or agencies having jurisdiction (129.35). In addition, 129.35(a) requires that samples of source
water be analyzed as often as necessary, but at least once each year, for chemical contaminants, and 129.80(g)
requires that each type of bottled water product be analyzed at least annually for chemical contaminants. Moreover,
129.80(h) requires that records of the results for these tests be maintained at the plant for at least 2 years
and be available for official review at reasonable times. FDA is not aware of any data or other information that suggests
that requiring all bottlers to test for lead more frequently is necessary to ensure that bottled water is safe and of
acceptable quality. 
FDA emphasizes that water bottlers are responsible for ensuring, through appropriate manufacturing techniques
and sufficient quality control procedures, that all bottled water products introduced or delivered for introduction
into interstate commerce are safe, wholesome, and truthfully labeled, and that they comply with the provisions of
the quality standard. Therefore, should any bottler encounter circumstances that would warrant testing for lead
more frequently than once per year, the bottler is required to do such testing to ensure the safety and quality of the
bottled water. 
For the reasons stated above, FDA concludes that the testing requirements for contaminants in bottled water contained
in the CGMP regulations (part 129) are appropriate and sufficient to ensure the quality and safety of bottled water
products. Thus, the agency finds that revision of the CGMP regulations to require more frequent testing for chemical
contaminants in bottled water is not necessary at this time.
6. A majority of responses from industry opposed the exemption of mineral water from the lead standard for bottled
water. Another comment stated that the lead standard should apply to other types of bottled beverages, including
mineral water, soda water, and seltzer. 
Under the provisions of 103.35, the definition of ``bottled water'' excludes mineral water or any type of soft
drink commonly known as soda water. Consequently, these types of products are exempt from the provisions of the quality
standard for bottled water, including the allowable level for lead. However, in a proposal to establish a standard
of identity for bottled water (57 FR 393, January 5, 1993), FDA proposed to revise the definition for ``bottled water''
in the quality standard to include mineral water. Should FDA adopt that proposal, the allowable level of 0.005 mg/L
for lead will apply to mineral water. Even if the agency does not adopt this change, because of the health concerns raised
by lead, the agency is likely to take some action to regulate the level of lead in mineral water. 
In regard to soda water and seltzer, FDA considers these types of products to be soft drinks and not bottled water. Consequently,
they are not covered by regulations that address bottled water. The agency's reasons for considering these types
of products as soft drinks are fully discussed in its proposal to establish an identity standard for bottled water
(57 FR 393 at 395). Soft drinks are subject to regulatory action, however, if they contain a level of lead that may render
the food injurious to health. 
7. One comment from a trade association representing public water supply agencies recommended that FDA review the
latest EPA analytical techniques for determining lead and copper with respect to the use of nitric acid digestion
and incorporate this procedure as applicable. 
In accordance with FDA's responsibilities pursuant to section 410 of the act, FDA consulted with EPA by requesting
EPA's review and comment on the proposal to amend the quality standard for lead and copper in bottled water. In response,
EPA stated that FDA's regulatory approach for lead and copper in bottled water is consistent with the intent of EPA's
NPDWR's for lead and copper and concurred with the analytical methods that FDA cited for determining lead and copper
in bottled water (Ref. 4). Furthermore, in EPA Methods 200.7, 200.8, and 200.9, which FDA proposed to incorporate
by reference, the sample preparation procedures for measuring lead and copper as total recoverable metals call for
a nitric acid or nitric acid-hydrochloric acid digestion.


III. Conclusions


The agency is adopting the provisions concerning lead and copper in the quality standard for bottled water as proposed
(58 FR 389, January 5, 1993). The majority of the comments that the agency received supported the proposal. Furthermore,
after carefully considering the comments that the agency received that suggested modifications to, or were opposed
to, aspects of the proposal, the agency has determined that no changes are warranted. Therefore, upon the effective
date of this rule, November 21, 1994, any bottled water that contains an amount of lead or copper that exceeds the allowable
levels will be misbranded under section 403(h)(1) of the act unless the bottled water bears a statement of substandard
quality as provided by 103.35(f)(2)(ii). 
FDA has made one minor change concerning the analytical methods for the determination of lead and copper cited in new
103.35(d)(3)(v). The sources for these methods will be the National Technical Information Services rather
than EPA. This change is consistent with the agency's practice of relying on readily available commercial sources
for incorporated materials when possible.


IV. Environmental Impact 


The agency previously considered the environmental effects of this rule, as announced in the proposed rule (58 FR
389, January 5, 1993). At that time, the agency concluded that the action would not have a significant impact on the
human environment, and that an environmental impact statement is not required. The agency's environmental assessment
and finding of no significant impact for the proposal were displayed at the Dockets Management Branch at the time of
the proposal. FDA has received no new information or comments that would affect the agency's previous determination
that there is no significant impact on the human environment, and that an environmental impact statement is not required.


V. Analysis of Impacts 


FDA has examined the impacts of the final rule under Executive Order 12866 and the Regulatory Flexibility Act (Pub.
L. 96354). Executive Order 12866 directs agencies to assess all costs and benefits of available regulatory
alternatives and, when regulation is necessary, to select regulatory approaches that maximize net benefits (including
potential economic, environmental, public health and safety, and other advantages; distributive impacts; and
equity). The agency believes that this final rule is consistent with the regulatory philosophy and principles identified
in the Executive Order. In addition, the final rule is not a significant regulatory action as defined by the Executive
Order and so is not subject to review under the Executive Order.
The Regulatory Flexibility Act requires agencies to analyze regulatory options that would minimize any significant
impact of a rule on small entities. Because FDA has received no new information or comments that would alter its tentative
finding in the proposal that there is no substantive economic issue, the agency certifies that the final rule will
not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities. Therefore, under the Regulatory
Flexibility Act, no further analysis is required. 


VI. References


The following references have been placed on display in the Dockets Management Branch (HFA305), Food and Drug
Administration, rm. 123, 12420 Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD 20857, and may be seen by interested persons between
9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.



1. FDA FY 90 Bottle Water Survey, 1990. 
2. FDA internal memorandum of meeting, Discussions on the Analytical Methods for Determination of Lead in Bottled
Water, December 20, 1991.
3. ``Twenty Questions Concerning Bottled Water,'' International Bottled Water Association, 1990.
4. James M. Conlon, Drinking Water Standards Division, EPA, letter to Henry S. Kim, February 14, 1992.


List of Subjects in 21 CFR Part 103


Beverages, Bottled water, Food grades and standards, Incorporation by reference.
 Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and under authority delegated to the Commissioner of Food
and Drugs, 21 CFR part 103 is amended as follows:


PART 103_QUALITY STANDARDS FOR FOODS WITH NO IDENTITY STANDARDS


1. The authority citation for 21 CFR part 103 continues to read as follows:





Authority:

 Secs. 201, 401, 403, 409, 410, 701, 721 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321, 341, 343, 348, 349,
371, 379e).



2. Section 103.35 is amended in the table in paragraph (d)(1)(i) by removing the entries for ``Copper'' and ``Lead,''
by revising the introductory text of paragraph (d)(3), and by adding new paragraphs (d)(3)(i) and (d)(3)(v) to read
as follows:


103.35 

Bottled water.


* * * * *


(d) * * *
(3) Having consulted with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as required by section 410 of the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, the Food and Drug Administration has determined that bottled water, when a composite
of analytical units of equal volume from a sample is examined by the methods listed in paragraphs (d)(3)(v) and (d)(3)(vi)
of this section, shall not contain the following chemical contaminants in excess of the concentrations specified
in paragraphs (d)(3)(i) and (d)(3)(ii) of this section. 
(i) The allowable levels for inorganic substances are as follows:




<TABLE>



1Contaminant

1Concentration milligrams per liter
 (or as specified)


Copper

1.0
Lead

0.005

</TABLE>



* * * * * 
 

(iii) and (iv) [Reserved]
 (v) Analyses to determine compliance with the requirements of paragraph (d)(3)(i) of this section shall be conducted
in accordance with an applicable method and applicable revisions to the methods listed in paragraphs (d)(3)(v)(G)
and (d)(3)(v)(H) of this section and described, unless otherwise noted, in ``Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water
and Wastes,'' U.S. EPA Environmental Monitoring and Support Laboratory, EPA600/479020, March
1983, which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. Copies of this publication
are available from the National Technical Information Service, U.S. Department of Commerce, 5825 Port Royal Rd.,
Springfield, VA 22161, or may be examined at the Office of Plant and Dairy Foods and Beverages (HFS305), Center
for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Food and Drug Administration, 200 C St. SW., Washington, DC 20204, or at the
Office of the Federal Register, 800 North Capitol St., NW., suite 700, Washington, DC.
(A)(F) [Reserved] 
 (

G

) Copper shall be measured as total recoverable metal without filtration using the following methods: 
(

1

) Method 220.2_Atomic absorption; furnace technique, in ``Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes,''
which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51 or 
(

2

) Method 220.1_Atomic absorption; direct aspiration, in ``Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes,''
which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. The availability of this incorporation
by reference is given in paragraph (d)(3)(v) of this section.
(

3

) Method 200.7_entitled ``Determination of Metals and Trace Elements in Water and Wastes by Inductively Coupled
Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectrometry,'' Revision 3.3, April 1991, U.S. EPA, Environmental Monitoring and Support
Laboratory (EMSL). The revision is contained in the manual entitled ``Methods for the Determination of Metals in
Environmental Samples,'' Office of Research and Development, Washington, DC 20460, (EPA/600/491/010),
June 1991, which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. Copies of this publication
are available from the National Technical Information Service, U.S. Department of Commerce, 5825 Port Royal Rd.,
Springfield, VA 22161, or may be examined at the Office of Plant and Dairy Foods and Beverages (HFS305), Center
for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Food and Drug Administration, 200 C St. SW., Washington, DC 20204, or at the
Office of the Federal Register, 800 North Capitol St. NW., suite 700, Washington, DC. 
(

4

) Method 200.8_entitled, ``Determination of Trace Elements in Water and Wastes by Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass
Spectrometry,'' Revision 4.4, April 1991, U.S. EPA, EMSL. The revision is contained in the manual entitled ``Methods
for the Determination of Metals in Environmental Samples,'' which is incorporated by reference in accordance with
5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. The availability of this incorporation by reference is given in paragraph (d)(3)(v)(G)(

3

) of this section.
(

5

) Method 200.9_entitled, ``Determination of Trace Elements by Stabilized Temperature Graphite Furnace Atomic
Absorption Spectrometry,'' Revision 1.2, April 1991, U.S. EPA, EMSL. The revision is contained in the manual entitled
``Methods for the Determination of Metals in Environmental Samples,'' which is incorporated by reference in accordance
with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. The availability of this incorporation by reference is given in paragraph (d)(3)(v)(G)(

3

) of this section.
(

H

) Lead shall be measured as total recoverable metal without filtration using the following methods: 
(

1

) Method 239.2_Atomic absorption; furnace technique, from ``Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes,''
which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. The availability of this incorporation
by reference is given in paragraph (d)(3)(v) of this section.
(

2

) Method 200.8_entitled, ``Determination of Trace Elements in Water and Wastes by Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass
Spectrometry,'' Revision 4.4, April 1991. The revision is contained in the manual entitled ``Methods for the Determination
of Metals in Environmental Samples,'' June 1991, which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a)
and 1 CFR part 51. The availability of this incorporation by reference is given in paragraph (d)(3)(v)(G)(

3

) of this section. 
(

3

) Method 200.9_from ``Determination of Trace Elements by Stabilized Temperature Graphite Furnace Atomic Absorption
Spectrometry,'' Revision 1.2, April 1991. The revision is contained in the manual entitled ``Methods for the Determination
of Metals in Environmental Samples,'' June 1991, which is incorporated by reference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a)
and 1 CFR part 51. The availability of this incorporation by reference is given in paragraph (d)(3)(v)(G)(

3

) of this section.


* * * * * 





Dated: May 17, 1994.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
 Michael R. Taylor,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
 Deputy Commissioner for Policy.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9412666 Filed 52494; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>

