 

&bull;Consideration of suggestions made by juvenile justice policymakers concerning State and local needs. 
&bull;Consideration of all comments received during the period of public comment on the Proposed Comprehensive
Plan. 


Discretionary Program Activities


Discretionary Grant Continuation Policy


OJJDP has listed on the following pages continuation projects currently funded in whole or in part with Part C and Part
D funds and eligible for continuation funding in fiscal year 1995, either within an existing project period or through
an extension for an additional project period. A grantee's eligibility for continued funding for an additional budget
period within an existing project period depends on the grantee's compliance with funding eligibility requirements
and achievement of the prior year's objectives. 
Consideration for continuation funding for an additional project period for previously funded discretionary grant
programs will be based upon several factors, including: 
&bull;The extent to which the project responds to the applicable requirements of the JJDP Act. 
&bull;Responsiveness to OJJDP and Department of Justice fiscal year 1995 program priorities. 
&bull;Compliance with performance requirements of prior grant years. 
&bull;Compliance with fiscal and regulatory requirements. 
&bull;Compliance with any special conditions of the award. 
&bull;Availability of funds (based on program priority determinations). 
In accordance with 42 U.S.C. 5665a, Section 262(d)(1)(B), the competitive process for the award of Part C funds shall
not be required if the Administrator makes a written determination waiving the competitive process: 
1. With respect to programs to be carried out in areas in which the President declares under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster
Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 5121 

et seq.

) that a major disaster or emergency exists, or
2. With respect to a particular program described in part C that is uniquely qualified. 
In implementing the fiscal year 1995 Program Plan, OJJDP will continue the process of developing, testing, and demonstrating
the graduated sanctions concept throughout its programs, such as the Safe Futures. Partnerships to Reduce Youth
Violence and Delinquency Program, while also supporting Weed and Seed sites and Empowerment Zones and Enterprise
Communities. This support will be provided through:
&bull;New competitive programs to be funded at the State or local level and new programs that provide funds to national
organizations to provide services at the State and local level.
&bull;Continuation awards, under which OJJDP will negotiate with grantees and task contractors to identify and
ensure the provision of appropriate technical assistance, training, information, and direct program services
to Weed and Seed sites, Empowerment Zones and Enterprise Communities, other jurisdictions adopting a continuum
of care program approach, and other eligible service recipients.


OJJDP Funding Policy


OJJDP seeks to focus its assistance on the development and implementation of programs with the greatest potential
for reducing juvenile delinquency and to cultivate partnerships with State and local organizations. To that end,
OJJDP has set three goals that constitute the major elements of a sound policy for juvenile justice and delinquency
prevention. 
&bull;To promote delinquency prevention efforts.
&bull;To foster the use of community-based alternatives to the traditional juvenile justice system.
&bull;To improve the juvenile justice system.


Delinquency Prevention


The first goal of OJJDP is to identify and promote programs that prevent or reduce the occurrence of status or delinquent
offenses. A sound policy for juvenile delinquency prevention strives to strengthen the most powerful contributing
factor to good behavior: a productive place for young people in a law-abiding society. Preventive measures can operate
on a large scale, providing gains in youth development while reducing youthful misbehavior. OJJDP programs encourage
a risk-focused approach based on public health and social development models.


