 


Many of the physicians and dentists, who were interviewed, indicated they never saw the patients in question. Many
others indicated that they never saw the patient on the day in question and in some cases the practitioner had not seen
the patient for over a year. In many instances, the practitioners were able to identify the signatures on the prescriptions
as obvious forgeries. A number of the prescriptions indicated DEA registration numbers that were not assigned to
the practitioner who ostensibly signed them. 

Prior to the audit, a person acting in an undercover capacity presented a controlled substance prescription to Mr.
Ehule. This prescription, which was one of the prescriptions recovered during the administrative inspection, was
filled by Mr. Ehule, despite the fact that the practitioner's name and DEA number were fictitious. 

At the time of the audit, Mr. Ehule indicated to the investigators that he was planning on closing All In One Stop Pharmacy
which was incorporated under Real Vitality, Inc. Mr. Ehule owned 60% of Real Vitality, Inc. stock and he operated the
pharmacy. Mrs. Ehule owned 40% of the stock and she operated the other part of the store, which consisted of food and
other convenience items. 

On November 11, 1992, Mr. Ehule wrote DEA requesting that the Certificate of Registration issued to Real Vitality,
Inc., (d/b/a All In One Stop Pharmacy) be transferred to The Medicine Shoppe (Respondent), 97 Temple Avenue, Newnan,
Georgia. The corporate owner, Real Vitality, Inc., in which Mr. Ehule was the majority stockholder, remained the
same. In response to this request, DEA notified Mr. Ehule that it planned to initiate proceedings to revoke his current
DEA number and to deny the request for modification. Since Mr. Ehule discontinued business at his original location,
All In One Stop Pharmacy, the DEA registration for that location terminated pursuant to 21 CFR 1301.62. 

Shortly thereafter, DEA learned that in April 1993, Real Vitality, Inc. sold Respondent to Mr. Ehule's wife, Yvonne
Ehule. DEA then received a new application for registration of Respondent, which was operating as The Medicine Shoppe
and owned by Real Vitality, Inc. It was signed by Mrs. Ehule and dated July 30, 1993. 

Subsequently, DEA investigators determined that Mr. Ehule continued to work as a pharmacist at Respondent. The Georgia
State Board of Pharmacy granted a state controlled substance license to Respondent, based upon the transfer of ownership
of Respondent from Mr. Ehule to Mrs. Ehule. On three occasions, between August 1993 and October 1993, Mr. Ehule accepted
call-in prescriptions for controlled substances even though Respondent was not authorized by DEA to handle controlled
substances. Mr. Ehule then arranged to have another pharmacy fill these prescriptions. 

DEA investigators also uncovered various documents relating to Respondent which revealed that Mr. Ehule has a significant
interest in Respondent. Respondent is a franchise of the Medicine Shoppe International, Inc. (franchisor). On August
25, 1992, Mr. Ehule, as President of Real Vitality, Inc., signed a franchise contract with the franchisor. Both Mr.
and Mrs. Ehule are listed as guarantors of this contract. The credit and security agreement between Real Vitality,
Inc. and the franchisor, dated October 5, 1992, designates Mr. Ehule, as well as Mrs. Ehule, as the shareholders of
Real Vitality, Inc. and all licensing fees are designated to be drawn from Mr. and Mrs. Ehule's joint checking account.
On April 6, 1993, Real Vitality, Inc. assigned its interest in the franchising agreement to Mrs. Ehule. The assignment,
however, provides that Mr. Ehule is not released from the terms and conditions of the agreement. 

Mr. Ehule is listed as the sole lessee for the property of Respondent. The period of the lease agreement is effective
from October 12, 1992 through September 30, 2002. By letter, dated October 26, 1993, the president of the leasing company
stated that Mr. Ehule had not notified the company of any change of ownership of Respondent. Additionally, any change
by way of sublease would not release Mr. Ehule from the terms and conditions of the lease. 

The franchisor also agreed to a financing loan for Respondent and secured such loan using Mr. and Mrs. Ehule's personal
residence as well as the pharmacy, All In One Stop Pharmacy, that Mr. Ehule closed before opening Respondent in Newnan,
Georgia. Again, Mr. Ehule, as well as Mrs. Ehule, signed this agreement and the security deed. 

In evaluating whether Respondent's registration by the Drug Enforcement Administration would be inconsistent
with the public interest, the Deputy Administrator considers the factors enumerated in 21 U.S.C. 823(f). They are
as follows: 
(1) The recommendation of the appropriate State licensing board or professional disciplinary authority. 
(2) The applicant's experience in dispensing, or conducting research with respect to controlled substances. 

(3) The applicant's conviction record under Federal or State laws relating to the manufacture, distribution, or
dispensing of controlled substances. 
(4) Compliance with applicable State, Federal, or local laws relating to controlled substances. 

(5) Such other conduct which may threaten the public health and safety. 

In determining whether a registration would be inconsistent with the public interest, the Deputy Administrator
is not required to make findings with respect to each of the factors listed above. Instead, he has the discretion to
give each factor the weight he deems appropriate, depending upon the facts and circumstances of each case. See David
E. Trawick, D.D.S., 

Docket No. 8869, 53 FR 5326 (1988). 


