 

512.5 

Committee decision. 


The Committee considers the particular facts and circumstances in each case in determining if a commodity or service
is suitable for addition to the Procurement List. When the Committee determines that a proposed addition is likely
to have a severe adverse impact on a current contractor, it takes this fact into consideration in deciding not to add
the commodity or service to the Procurement List, or to add only a portion of the Government requirement for the item.
If the Committee decides to add a commodity or service in whole or in part to the Procurement List, that decision is announced
in the 

Federal Register

 with a notice that includes information on the effective date of the addition. 



6. Section 512.6 is amended by redesignating the current text of the section as paragraph (a) and adding paragraph
(b) to read as follows: 


512.6 

Reconsideration of Committee decision. 


(a) *** 
(b) In reconsidering its decision, the Committee will balance the harm to the party requesting reconsideration if
the item remains on the Procurement List against the harm which the nonprofit agency or its employees who are blind
or have other severe disabilities would suffer if the item were deleted from the Procurement List. The Committee may
also consider information bringing into question its conclusions on the suitability criteria on which it based its
original decision as factors weighing toward a decision to delete the item, and information concerning possible
harm to the contracting activity and the JWOD Program as factors weighing toward confirmation of the original decision.




7. Section 512.7 is revised to read as follows: 


512.7 

Fair market price. 


The Committee is responsible for determining the fair market prices, and changes thereto, for commodities and services
on the Procurement List. The Committee establishes the initial fair market price at the time a commodity or service
is added to the Procurement List. In cases where the prices are not based on competitive bids, the Committee considers
recommendations from contracting activities and the central nonprofit agency concerned. Recommendations for
fair market prices or changes thereto shall be submitted by the nonprofit agencies to the appropriate central nonprofit
agency. The central nonprofit agency shall analyze the data and submit a recommended fair market price to the Committee
accompanied by the information required by the Committee's pricing procedures to support the recommended price.



PART 513_CENTRAL NONPROFIT AGENCIES 


8. Section 513.2 is amended by revising paragraph (d), designating paragraphs (e) through (m) as paragraphs
(f) through (n), and adding a new paragraph (e) to read as follows: 


513.2 

Responsibilities under the JWOD Program. 


* * * * * 


(d) Recommend to the Committee, with the supporting information required by Committee procedures, suitable commodities
or services for procurement from its nonprofit agencies. 
(e) Recommend to the Committee, with the supporting information required by Committee procedures, initial fair
market prices for commodities or services proposed for addition to the Procurement List. 


* * * * *




9. Section 513.3 is revised to read as follows: 


513.3 

Assignment of commodity or service. 


(a) The central nonprofit agencies shall determine by mutual agreement the assignment to one of them of a commodity
or service for the purpose of evaluating its potential for possible future addition to the Procurement List, except
that the Committee shall initially assign a commodity to National Industries for the Blind when NISH has expressed
an interest in the commodity and National Industries for the Blind has exercised the blind priority. 
(b) NISH shall provide National Industries for the Blind with procurement information necessary for a decision to
exercise or waive the blind priority when it requests a decision. National Industries for the Blind shall normally
notify NISH of its decision within 30 days, but not later than 60 days after receipt of the procurement information,
unless the two central nonprofit agencies agree to an extension of time for the decision. Disagreements on extensions
shall be referred to the Committee for resolution. 




