 

677.9 

Penalties. 



See 620.9 of this chapter. 



677.10 

General requirements. 



(a) 

Compliance requirements applicable through December 31, 1995_

(1) 

Compliance by operators of Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands management area and Gulf of Alaska groundfish vessels_

(i) 

Coverage requirements. 

Observer coverage is required as follows: 

(A) A mothership processor vessel of any length that processes 1,000 mt or more in round weight or round-weight equivalents
of groundfish during a calendar month is required to have a NMFS-certified observer on board the vessel each day it
receives or processes groundfish during that month. 

(B) A mothership processor vessel of any length that processes from 500 mt to 1,000 mt in round weight or round-weight
equivalents of groundfish during a calendar month is required to have a NMFS-certified observer on board the vessel
at least 30 percent of the days it receives or processes groundfish during that month. 

(C) A catcher/processor or catcher vessel 125 ft (38.1 m) in length overall or longer must carry a NMFS-certified observer
at all times while fishing for groundfish, except for vessels fishing for groundfish with pot gear as provided in paragraph
(a)(1)(i)(F) of this section. 

(D) A catcher/processor or catcher vessel equal to or greater than 60 ft (18.3 m) in length overall, but less than 125
ft (38.1 m) in length overall, must carry a NMFS-certified observer during at least 30 percent of its fishing days in
each calendar quarter in which it participates for more than 3 fishing days in a directed fishery for groundfish. Each
vessel that participates for more than 3 fishing days in a directed fishery for groundfish in a calendar quarter must
carry a NMFS-certified observer during at least one fishing trip during that calendar quarter for each of the groundfish
fishery categories defined under paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section in which it participates. 

(E) A catcher/processor or catcher vessel fishing with hook-and-line gear that is required to carry an observer under
paragraph (a)(1)(i)(D) of this section must carry a NMFS-certified observer during at least one fishing trip in the
Eastern Regulatory Area of the Gulf of Alaska during each calendar quarter in which it participates in a directed fishery
for groundfish in the Eastern Regulatory Area. 

(F) A catcher/processor or catcher vessel equal to or greater than 60 ft (18.3 m) in length overall fishing with pot
gear must carry a NMFS-certified observer during at least 30 percent of its fishing days in each calendar quarter in
which it participates for more than 3 days in a directed fishery for groundfish. Each vessel that participates for
more than 3 fishing days in a directed fishery for groundfish using pot gear must carry a NMFS-certified observer during
at least one fishing trip during a calendar quarter for each of the groundfish fishery categories defined under paragraph
(a)(1)(ii) of this section in which it participates. 

(ii) 

Groundfish fishery categories requiring separate coverage_

(A) 

Pollock fishery. 

Fishing that results in a retained catch of pollock, during any weekly reporting period, that is greater than the retained
catch of any other groundfish species or species group that is specified as a separate groundfish fishery under this
paragraph (a)(1)(ii). 

(B) 

Pacific cod fishery. 

Fishing that results in a retained catch of Pacific cod, during any weekly reporting period, that is greater than the
retained catch of any other groundfish species or species group that is specified as a separate groundfish fishery
under this paragraph (a)(1)(ii). 

(C) 

Sablefish fishery. 

Fishing that results in a retained catch of sablefish, during any weekly reporting period, that is greater than the
retained catch of any other groundfish species or species group that is specified as a separate groundfish fishery
under this paragraph (a)(1)(ii). 

(D) 

Rockfish fishery. 

Fishing that results in a retained aggregate catch of rockfish of the genera Sebastes and Sebastolobus, during any
weekly reporting period, that is greater than the retained catch of any other groundfish species or species group
that is specified as a separate groundfish fishery under this paragraph (a)(1)(ii). 



