 




<RINDOCK>[Release No. 3433667; File Nos. SRMCC937 and SRMSTC9214] </RINDOCK>
 



<DOCTITLE>Self-Regulatory Organizations; Midwest Clearing Corporation and Midwest Securities Trust Company; Notice of
Filing of Proposed Rule Changes Relating To Establishment of a Risk Assessment Committee and Various Other Changes
to MCC's and MSTC's Rules and By-Laws </DOCTITLE>
 


February 23, 1994. 
 


Pursuant to section 19(b)(1) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (``Act''),
<FOOTCITE>1</FOOTCITE>
 notice is hereby given that on November 17, 1993, and on December 23, 1993, the Midwest Clearing Corporation (``MCC'')
and the Midwest Securities Trust Company (``MSTC'') respectively filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission
(``Commission'') the proposed rule changes as described in Items I, II, and III below, which Items have been prepared
primarily by MCC and MSTC. MCC amended its proposal on December 23, 1993, thereby making it virtually identical to
that of MSTC. MCC made a clarifying amendment on January 3, 1994.
<FOOTCITE>2</FOOTCITE>
 The Commission is publishing this notice to solicit comments from interested persons. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
1

</FOOTNAME>
15 U.S.C. 78s(b)(1) (1988). 

</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
2

</FOOTNAME>
Letter from David T. Rusoff, Foley  Lardner, to Richard Strasser, (Attorney), Division of Market Regulation,
Commission (December 30, 1993). 
 
</FOOTNOTE>


I. Self-Regulatory Organizations' Statement of the Terms of Substance of the Proposed Rule Changes 
 
 
 
 
 


MCC and MSTC propose to change their Rules and By-Laws to: (1) Allow for the establishment of additional communities;
(2) require MCC and MSTC to consult with at least one member of the Risk Assessment Committee before ceasing to act for
a participant; (3) establish a Risk Assessment Committee; (4) modify their procedures relating to appeals; (5) add
provisions relating to suits against MCC and MSTC and their employees; and (6) add a provision that requires MCC or
MSTC participants, in certain circumstances, to pay MCC or MSTC all reasonable expenses they incur in defending a
legal proceeding instigated by the participants. 
 


II. Self-Regulatory Organizations' Statement of the Purpose of, and Statutory Basis for, the Proposed Rule Changes

 


In their filings with the Commission, MCC and MSTC included statements concerning the purpose of and statutory basis
for the proposed rule changes and discussed any comments received on the proposals. The test of these statements may
be examined at the places specified in Item IV below. MCC and MSTC have prepared summaries, set forth in sections (A),
(B), and (C) below, of the most significant aspects of such statements. 
 


(A) Self-Regulatory Organizations' Statement of the Purpose of, and Statutory Basis for, the Proposed Rule Changes

 


The purpose of the proposed rule changes is to amend various by-laws and rules of MCC and MSTC to define participants'
rights and obligations more precisely and to give MCC and MSTC more flexibility and protection in dealing with violations
of their respective rules. By-laws will be added to allow MCC and MSTC to establish committees either through their
respective by-laws or rules or by the board of directors. Rules will be added to: (1) Establish a Risk Assessment Committee
for MCC and MSTC; (2) require MCC and MSTC to consult with at least one member of the Risk Assessment Committee prior
to ceasing to act for a participant; and (3) expand the types of events that permit MCC and MSTC to cease to act for a participant
to any instance where a participant poses a financial risk to MCC or MSTC. These changes will provide independent input
to management in its decision-making process while still providing MCC and MSTC the flexibility to act quickly if
necessary. 
 
To clarify that MCC and MSTC have the authority to establish the new Risk Assessment Committee, the proposed rules
will amend their by-laws to add a provision that expressly permits MCC and MSTC to establish committees by their rules
or by-laws or through their boards of directors. The Risk Assessment Committee will hear all appeals under the applicable
rules. The proposed rules specifically provide that prior participation by a member of the Risk Assessment Committee
in any inquiry, consultation, examination, or investigation of the matter under appeal will not disqualify the Committee
member from hearing the appeal. The proposed rules replace current rules which require the board of directors to appoint
a panel to hear an appeal. 

MCC and MSTC also will add provisions to their rules that will give them greater flexibility in the decision to cease
to act for a participant. Specifically, these provisions will allow MCC and MSTC to cease to act for a participant if
there are reasonable grounds to believe that the participant poses a financial risk to MCC or to MSTC even if the firm
itself is not in financial difficulty. These provisions will provide MCC and MSTC more flexibility in reducing risk
to themselves and to other participants. 




 

