 

Many commenters expressed general concern about assistive listening systems in areas where sensitive communications
require strict security. The commenters provided programmatic and technical solutions including training people
to turn assistive listening systems on or off, installing hard-wired communications systems, constructing soundproof
areas that require security and confidentiality and using computer aided transcription or real-time captioning.
The installation of an infrared listening system which cannot penetrate the confines of a room was a highly recommended
solution. Some commenters noted that since infrared signals can travel through windows, solid window coverings
would be necessary for total confidentiality. 

Very little cost information was provided. A few commenters stated that the cost of a secure assistive listening system
would vary due to the type of areas or space and the number of transmitters required to serve the space. 

In the view of many commenters, certain spaces such as control centers, armories, legal visiting areas, pharmacies
and medical service areas should be exempt from the assistive listening system requirement due to the risk of electronic
eavesdropping. An equal number of commenters stated that no areas should be exempt because technology is available
that satisfies the accessibility requirement and provides protection from electronic eavesdropping. Several
commenters noted that legislatures and similar types of facilities employ safeguards such as monitoring hallways
and establishing procedures for checking out receiver units to ensure that electronic eavesdropping does not take
place. One commenter pointed out that equipment unrelated to assistive listening devices is readily available to
persons wishing to eavesdrop. 
 


Response.

 Based on the comments received, sensitive communications can be protected from electronic eavesdropping through
existing technology, careful design of the facility, and operational policies. No provisions or exemptions were
added. 



Section by Section Analysis



This section of the preamble contains a concise summary of the significant comments received on the NPRM, the Board's
response to those comments, and any changes made to the guidelines.



1. Purpose



This section was amended to delete the reference to specific special application sections currently in ADAAG and
replace it with a general reference to special application sections.



3. Miscellaneous Instructions and Definitions


3.5Definitions

Alterations



The proposed reference to a State or local government entity, as well as the existing reference to a place of public
accommodation or commercial facility, has been deleted from the definition of an alteration. This definition now
applies to any facility covered by ADAAG. An alteration is defined as a change to a building or facility that affects
or could affect its usability. Normal maintenance, cosmetic changes, or changes to mechanical systems are not alterations
unless they affect the usability of the building or facility. New language has been added to the definition to clarify
that alterations include changes to pedestrian facilities within the public right-of-way. Such changes may include,
but are not limited to, the alteration or reconstruction of pedestrian routes, or the addition of street furniture,
landscaping, or other fixed elements along a pedestrian route. These changes were added to be consistent with the
addition of ADAAG 14 (Public Rights-of-Way). 

The original preamble to ADAAG stated: ``If a parking lot is resurfaced and does not have the number of accessible parking
spaces required by 4.1.2(5) or the parking spaces do not comply with 4.6.3, those requirements must be met with unless
it is technically infeasible.'' See 56 FR 144 at 35427. The addition of the word resurfacing to this definition is not
intended as a new interpretation of what constitutes an alteration, but rather to reinforce the original intent that
the resurfacing of streets, sidewalks, parking lots, and other outdoor surfaces is considered an alteration.

Although commenters generally supported the application of the alteration definition to State and local government
entities, several commenters requested that language be added in ADAAG ``stating that usability is to be interpreted
broadly''. The preamble to the Department of Justice's title III regulation states that: ``The Department remains
convinced that the Act requires the concept of `usability' to be read broadly to include any change that affects the
usability of the facility, not simply changes that relate directly to access by individuals with disabilities.''
56 FR 144 at 35581. 
 


Continuous Passage



This definition remains in ADAAG 14.1.1. See the discussion of this definition and appendix material at ADAAG 14.1.1
(Definitions).



Curb Ramp



A reference to ADAAG 14.1.1 (Public Sidewalk Curb Ramps) has been added to the definition for the convenience of the
reader.



Dwelling Unit



This term is defined in ADAAG 13.1(1). See the discussion of this term and appendix material at ADAAG 13.1 (General.)



Principal Public Entrance



A new definition for principal public entrances has been added to ADAAG 3.5 (Definitions). See the discussion of this
new definition at ADAAG 4.1.3(8) (Entrances). 



Public Right-of-Way



A reference to this new definition has been added to ADAAG 3.5 (Definitions). See the discussion of this new definition
at ADAAG 14.1.1 (Definitions). 


