 

09900024



System name:



Financial Transactions of HHS Accounting and Finance Offices, HHS/OS/ASMB.



Security classification:



None.



System location:



See Appendix 1.

Memoranda copies of claims submitted for reimbursement of travel and other expenditures while on official business
may also be maintained at the administrative office of the HHS employee. Records concerning delinquent debts may
also be maintained at the program office or by designated claims officers apart from the finance office.



Categories of individuals covered by the system:



All persons who receive a payment from OPDIV/Agency/Regional finance offices and all persons owing monies to these
HHS offices. Persons receiving payments include, but are not limited to, travelers on official business, grantees,
contractors, consultants, and recipients of loans and scholarships. Persons owing monies include, but are not limited
to, persons who have been overpaid and who owe HHS a refund and persons who have received from HHS goods or services for
which there is a charge or fee (e.g. Freedom of Information Act requesters).



Categories of records in the system:



Name, identification number, address, purpose of payment, accounting classification and amount paid. Also, in
the event of an overpayment and for delinquent loans, grants or scholarships, the amount of the indebtedness, the
repayment status and the amount to be collected.



Authority for maintenance of the system:



Budget and Accounting Act of 1950 (Pub. L. 81784). Debt Collection Act of 1982 (Pub. L. 97365).



Purpose(s):



These records are an integral part of the accounting systems at operating division, agency, regional office and specific
area locations. The records are used to keep track of all payments to individuals, exclusive of salaries and wages,
based upon prior entry into the systems of the official commitment and obligation of government funds. When an individual
is to repay funds advanced as a loan or scholarship, etc., the records will be used to establish a receivable record
and to track repayment status. In the event of an overpayment to an individual, the record is used to establish a receivable
record for recovery of the amount claimed. The records are also used internally to develop reports to the Internal
Revenue Service and applicable state and local taxing officials of taxable income. This is a Departmentwide notice
of payment and collection activities at all locations listed in Appendix 1.



Routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categories of users and the purposes of such uses:



1. Records will be routinely disclosed to the Treasury Department for check preparation.

2. Records may be disclosed to members of Congress concerning a Federal financial assistance program. Also, disclosure
may be made to a congressional office from an individual's record in response to an inquiry from the congressional
office made at the request of the individual.

3. In the event the Department deems it desirable or necessary, in determining whether particular records are required
to be disclosed under the Freedom of Information Act, disclosure may be made to the Department of Justice for the purpose
of obtaining its device.

4. A record from this system of records may be disclosed as a ``routine use'' to a Federal, State or local agency maintaining
civil, criminal or other relevant enforcement records or other pertinent records, such as current licenses, if necessary
to obtain a record relevant to an agency decision concerning the hiring or retention of an employee, the issuance of
a security clearance, the letting of a contract or the issuance of a license, grant or other benefit.

5. A record from this system of records may be disclosed to a Federal agency, in response to its request, in connection
with the hiring or retention of an employee, the issuance of a security clearance, the reporting of an investigation
of an employee, the letting of a contract or the issuance of a license, grant, or other benefit by the requesting agency,
to the extent that the record is relevant and necessary to the requesting agency's decision on the matter.

6. Where Federal agencies having the power to subpoena other Federal agencies' records, such as the Internal Revenue
Service or the Civil Rights Commission, issue a subpoena to the Department for records in this system of records, the
Department will make such records available.


