 






<CFRNO>50 CFR Part 17 </CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>RIN 1018AC86 </RINDOCK>


Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; Establishment of a Nonessential Experimental Population of Gray
Wolves in Central Idaho and Southwestern Montana 


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Fish and Wildlife Service, Interior. 


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Final rule. 



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service) will reintroduce the gray wolf (

Canis lupus

), an endangered species, into central Idaho, including a portion of southwestern Montana. These wolves will be classified
as a nonessential experimental population pursuant to section 10(j) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended
(Act). Gray wolf populations have been extirpated from most of the Western United States. They presently occur in
a small population in extreme northwestern Montana, and as incidental occurrences in Idaho, Wyoming, and Washington
as a result of wolves dispersing from existing populations in Montana and Canada. The purpose of this reintroduction
plan is to reestablish a viable wolf population in central Idaho, one of three wolf recovery areas identified in the
Northern Rocky Mountain Wolf Recovery Plan. Potential effects of this final rule were evaluated in an Environmental
Impact Statement (EIS) completed in May 1994. This gray wolf reintroduction does not conflict with existing or anticipated
Federal agency actions or traditional public uses of park lands, wilderness areas, or surrounding lands. 


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE:

 November 18, 1994.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Comments or other information may be sent to Gray Wolf Reintroduction, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, P.O. Box 8017,
Helena, Montana 59601. The complete file for this final rule is available for inspection, by appointment, during
normal business hours at 100 North Park, Suite 320, Helena, Montana. 


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Mr. Edward E. Bangs, at the above address, or telephone (406) 4495202. 

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 
Background 



1. 

Legal: 

The Endangered Species Act Amendments of 1982, Pub. L. 97304, made significant changes to the Endangered Species
Act of 1973, as amended (16 U.S.C. 1531 

et seq.

) (Act), including the creation of section 10(j), which provides for the designation of specific animals as ``experimental.''
Under previous authorities in the Act, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service) was permitted to reintroduce
a listed species into unoccupied portions of its historic range for conservation and recovery purposes. However,
local opposition to reintroduction efforts from certain parties concerned about potential restrictions, and prohibitions
on Federal and private activities contained in sections 7 and 9 of the Act, reduced the utility of reintroduction as
a management tool. 
Under section 10(j), a listed species reintroduced outside of its current range, but within its historic range, may
be designated, at the discretion of the Secretary of the Interior (Secretary), as ``experimental.'' This designation
increases the Service's flexibility and discretion in managing reintroduced endangered species because such experimental
animals may be treated as a threatened species. The Act requires that animals used to form an experimental population
be separated geographically from nonexperimental populations of the same species. 
Additional management flexibility is possible if the experimental animals are found to be ``nonessential'' to the
continued existence of the species in question. Nonessential experimental animals located outside national parks
or national wildlife refuges are treated, for purposes of section 7 of the Act, as if they were only proposed for listing.
Consequently, only two provisions of section 7 would apply to animals located outside of national wildlife refuges
and national parks_section 7(a)(1) and section 7(a)(4). Section 7(a)(1) requires all Federal agencies to establish
conservation programs for federally listed species. Utilization of Federal public lands, including national parks
and national forests, is consistent with the legal responsibility of these agencies to sustain the native wildlife
resources of the United States and to use their authorities to further the purposes of the Act by carrying out conservation
programs for endangered and threatened species. Section 7(a)(4) requires all Federal agencies to informally confer
with the Service on actions that will likely jeopardize the continued existence of species proposed to be listed as
threatened or endangered. The results of a conference are advisory in nature, and agencies are not required to refrain
from committing resources to projects as a result of a conference. In addition, section 10(j) of the Act states that
nonessential experimental animals are not subject to the formal consultation provision of the Act unless they occur
on land designated as a national wildlife refuge or national park. Activities undertaken on private lands are not
affected by section 7 of the Act unless they are funded, authorized, or carried out by a Federal agency. 

Specimens used to establish an experimental population may be removed from a source or donor population, provided
their removal is not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of the species and appropriate permits have been
issued in accordance with 50 CFR 17.22. Gray wolves for the reintroduction will be obtained from healthy Canadian
wolf populations with permission from the Canadian and Provincial governments. Gray wolves are common in western
Canada (tens of thousands) and Alaska (about 7,000). No adverse biological impact is expected from the removal of
about 150 from the Canadian population. Consequently, the Service finds that wolves to be used in the reintroduction
effort meet the definition of ``nonessential'' (50 CFR 17.80(b)) because the loss of the reintroduced wolves is not
likely to appreciably reduce the likelihood of survival of the species in the wild. 





</SUPPLEM>
