 

(1) Deputy Director; 
(2) Chief of Staff; 
(3) Inspector General; 
(4) General Counsel; 
(5) Director of the Office of Congressional and 
Governmental Affairs; 
(6) Director of the Office of Emergency Information and 
Public Affairs; 
(7) Director of the Office of Policy and Assessment; 
(8) Director of the Office of Human Resources 
Management; 
(9) Director of the Office of Equal Rights; 
(10) Chief Financial Officer; 
(11) Director of the Office of Regional Operations; 
(12) Regional Directors; 
(13) Federal Insurance Administrator; 
(14) United States Fire Administrator; 
(15) Associate Director for Mitigation; 
(16) Associate Director for Preparedness, Training, and Exercises; 
(17) Associate Director for Response and Recovery; and 
(18) Associate Director for Operations Support. 
(c) Each officer named in paragraph (b) of this section is authorized to: (1) Approve official travel as temporary
duty travel on official business and allowable expenses incidental thereto for employees of their respective organizational
units, in accordance with the Federal Travel Regulations; except that travel to and from points outside of the United
States is subject to prior notification to the Director and foreign travel (i.e., travel outside the United States
and its insular areas) is subject to prior approval of the Director. However, no officer or employee may approve his
or her own travel. Travel of officers named in paragraph (b) of this section is approved by the Deputy Director or the
Chief of Staff, except that travel of a Regional Director may be approved by the Deputy Regional Director for that Region.

(2) Approve travel advances of funds through disbursing officers or imprest fund cashiers for employees of the respective
organizational units who are entitled to per diem or mileage allowance or subsistence expenses in accordance with
the Federal Travel Regulations. 
(3) Approve travel vouchers for employees of their respective organizational units. 
(4) Approve travel by employees of their respective organizations at the invitation and expense of parties outside
of the Federal Government, with the concurrence of the Designated Agency Ethics Officer (DAEO) or a Deputy DAEO; 
(5) Approve funding requisitions; 
(6) As appropriate, issue final agency decisions on individual or class complaints of discrimination because of
race, color, national origin, religion, sex, disability, age, or economic status. 
(7) Promulgate internal guidance to cover areas of assigned responsibilities. 
(8) Approve training costing less than $2500 (all expenses) or training of less than 80 hours in duration, whichever
is more restrictive, except that this authority does not include authority to approve training involving the use
of facilities of foreign governments or international organizations, which must be approved by the Director; or
the authority to approve acceptance by employees of contributions or awards from non-Government organizations,
whether in cash or in kind, which must be approved by the Director. 
(9) Adjust working hours for individual employees when there is special justification therefor that it is in the interest
of FEMA or to accommodate individual needs of employees for legitimate reasons where the work of the agency will not
be impeded. 
(10) Approve incentive awards to subordinates, Public Service Awards, cash awards of $1,500 or less for individuals
and quality within-grade salary increases. 
(11) Enter into and administer funded and unfunded memoranda of understanding with respect to assigned duties. 



