 


iii. Displaying or offering newsletters at a credit union lobby, branch, or office.


3. 

Impermissible Distribution.

 Distributing a newsletter in a place open to nonmembers, such as a sponsor's lunch room, is not reasonably calculated
to reach only members, and such newsletter would be subject to all applicable advertising rules. 




Section 707.9_Enforcement and Record Retention




(c) Record Retention




1. 

Evidence of required actions.

 Credit unions comply with the regulation by demonstrating they have done the following: 


i. Established and maintained procedures for paying dividends and providing timely disclosures as required by the
regulation, and


ii. Retained sample disclosures for each type account offered to members, such as account-opening disclosures,
copies of advertisements, and change-in-term notices; and information regarding the dividend rates and annual
percentage yields offered.


2. 

Methods of retaining evidence.

 Credit unions must be able to reconstruct the required disclosures or other actions. They need not keep disclosures
or other business records in hard copy. Records evidencing compliance may be retained on microfilm, microfiche,
or by other methods that reproduce records accurately (including computer files). Credit unions must retain copies
of all printed advertisements and the text of all advertisements conveyed by electronic or broadcast media, and newsletters.


3. 

Payment of dividends.

 Credit unions must retain sufficient rate and balance information to permit the verification of dividends paid on
an account, including the payment of dividends on the full principal balance.




Appendix A to Part 707_Annual Percentage Yield Calculation




Part I. Annual Percentage Yield for Account Disclosures and Advertising Purposes




1. 

Rounding for calculations.

 The following are examples of permissible rounding rules for calculating dividends and the annual percentage yield:


i. The daily rate applied to a balance carried to five or more decimals. For example; .008219178%, 3.00% for a 365 day
year, would be rounded to no less than .00822%.


ii. The daily dividends or interest earned carried to five or more decimals. For example; $.08219178082, daily dividends
on $1,000 at 3% for a 365 day year, would be rounded to no less than $.08219.


2. 

Exponents in a leap year.

 The annual percentage yield formula's exponent numerator will remain 365 in leap years. The ``days in term'' figure
used in the denominator should be consistent with the length of term used in the dividends calculation.


3. 

First tier of a tiered-rate account. 

When credit unions use a rate table, the first tier of a tiered rate account is to be disclosed and advertised; ``Up to
but not exceeding ***'', ``$.01 to ***'', or similar language.


4. 

Term Share Accounts Opened in Midterm.

 For club accounts that meet the definition of a term share account, the annual percentage yield is based on the maximum
number of days in the term not to exceed 365 days (or 366 days in a leap year).




Part II. Annual Percentage Yield Earned for Periodic Statements




1. 

Balance method.

 The dividend or interest figure used in the calculation of the annual percentage yield earned may be derived from the
daily balance method or the average daily balance method. Regardless of the dividend calculation method, the balance
used in the annual percentage yield earned formula is the average daily balance. The average daily balance calculation
is the sum of the balances for each day in the period divided by the number of days in the period. The balance for each day
is based on a point in time; i.e. beginning of day balance, end of day balance, closing of day balance, etc. Each day's
balance, for dividend accrual and payment purposes, must be based on the same point in time and cannot be based on the
day's low balance.


2. 

Negative balances prohibited.

 Credit unions must treat a negative account balance as zero to determine the balance on which the annual percentage
yield earned is calculated. (See commentary to 707.7(a)(2).)




A. General Formula




1. 

Accrued but uncredited dividends.

 To calculate the annual percentage yield earned, accrued but uncredited dividends:


i. May not be included in the balance for statements that are issued at the same time or less frequently than the account's
compounding and crediting frequency. For example, if monthly statements are sent for an account that compounds dividends
daily and credits dividends monthly, the balance may not be increased each day to reflect the effect of daily compounding.
Assume a credit union will pay $13.70 in dividends on $100,000 for the first day, $6.85 in dividends on $50,013.70 for
the second day, and $3.43 in dividends on $25,020.55 for the third day. The sum of each days balance is $175,000 (does
not include accrued, but uncredited, dividends amounts $13.70, $6.85, and $3.43), thereby resulting in an average
daily balance for the three days of $58,333.33.


ii. Must be included in the balance for succeeding statements if a statement is issued more frequently than compounded
dividends is credited on an account. For example, if monthly statements are sent for an account that compounds dividends
daily and credits dividends quarterly, the balance for the second monthly statement would include dividends that
had accrued for the prior month. Assume a credit union will pay $411.78 in dividends on 30 days of $100,000, $427.28
in dividends on 31 days of $100,411.78, and $415.23 in dividends on 30 days of $100,839.06. The balance (average daily
balance in the account for the period) for the second 31 days is $100,411.78.


