 

(2) An audit finding during the servicer's two most recent 
audits amounting to at least five percent of funds received 
or administered by the servicer under the Title IV, HEA 
programs; and 

(3) A citation within the preceding five years for the 
servicer's failure to submit a required audit report within 
an acceptable amount of time. 

A third-party servicer that shows these indicators of 
questionable past performance with regard to the Title IV, HEA 
programs could not, under paragraph (d) of this section, contract 
with an institution unless the persons or entities with 
substantial control over the servicer agree to be responsible for 
any potential liability arising from the servicer's 
administration of the Title IV, HEA programs. In the case of a 
third-party servicer that has been subjected to a termination 
action, the servicer could not contract with an institution 
unless either the servicer or persons or entities with 
substantial control over the servicer (or both) provide financial 
guarantees (specified by the Secretary) to the Secretary for 
potential liabilities arising from the administration of the 
Title IV, HEA programs. These provisions are necessary to hold 
persons who have substantial control over a third-party servicer 
accountable for their past performance in the administration of 
the Title IV, HEA programs. 

Any contract between an institution and a third-party 
servicer would have to require the servicer to agree to comply 
with all applicable Title IV, HEA program requirements, including 
using any Title IV, HEA program funds that the servicer 
administers and any earnings on those funds solely for Title IV, 
HEA program purposes. The servicer would have to agree to refer 
suspected instances of fraud and criminal activity to the 
Department of Education's Inspector General. These requirements 
would parallel those currently required of institutions in 
establishing an institution's administrative capability but add 
that the servicer would also have to refer suspected instances of 
fraud and criminal activity committed by the institution. The 
contract would have to require the servicer to agree to be liable 
to the Secretary, jointly and severally with the institution, for 
any violation by the servicer of any Title IV, HEA program 
requirement. 

With regard to third-party servicer liability, a number of 
negotiators opposed the Secretary's proposed language, submitted 
to negotiators at negotiated rulemaking, requiring a third-party 
servicer to share liability with an institution for an infraction 
by the servicer of any Title IV, HEA program requirement. The 
negotiators offered three basic reasons for their opposition. 

First, the negotiators stated that any imposition of 
liability would improperly interfere with the private contract 
between the servicer and the institution. The parties, in the 
view of the negotiators, should be free to decide how and if 
liability should be divided without Federal regulatory 
prescription. 






