 

The Cleveland Electric Illuminating Company, Centerior Service Company, 
Duquesne Light Company, Ohio Edison Company, Pennsylvania Power Company, 
Toledo Edison Company, Docket No. 50440, Perry Nuclear Power Plant, Unit 
No. 1, Lake County, Ohio 





Date of amendment request: 

November 22, 1993. 



Description of amendment request: 

The proposed amendment would result in 
the replacement of most of the analog Riley temperature instrumentation 
associated with leak detection with digital equipment from the General 
Electric Company NUMAC product line. Technical Specification changes would 
be made to instrumentation surveillance requirements for temperature 
instruments associated with main steam line isolation, reactor water 
cleanup system isolation, reactor core isolation cooling system isolation, 
and residual heat removal system isolation. 



Basis for proposed no significant hazards consideration determination: 

As 
required by 10 CFR 50.91(a), the licensee has provided its analysis of the 
issue of no significant hazards consideration, which is presented below: 

1. The proposed changes do not involve a significant increase in the 
probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated. 

The Technical specifications are proposed to be revised to 
perform a Channel Functional Test on a semiannual frequency 
versus the current monthly frequency for both ambient and 
differential temperature and for the MSL tunnel temperature timer 
functions, for the above listed piping lines. Additionally, this 
evaluation addressees the potential for, and implications of, 
common mode failures due to software, hardware and/or 
electromagnetic and radio-frequency interference (EMI/RFI). 

The NUMAC instrumentation has certain design features which 
contribute to its reliability. The replacement NUMAC LDMs are 
digital instruments that use a microcomputer to monitor the 
ambient and differential temperatures (also the MSL tunnel 
temperature timer) and provide outputs and automatic self-testing 
and calibration. A description of the major design features 
include: a) isolation of the essential microcomputer by a serial 
data link from the front panel display (and display 
microcomputer), b) a self-test system feature that provides 
automatic testing of internal circuits and reports failures, c) 
thermocouple failure detection, d) provisions to test the output 
relays without the use of jumpers (reducing the threat of 
spurious isolation), and e) two independent built-in instrument 
power supplies (that automatically switchover to the other supply 
in the event of failure). Also, several features have been 
included, among these, a) a hardware ``watchdog'' timer to monitor 
against software cycling in continuous loops, and b) software 
structured with the safety-related essential tasks running at the 
highest priority in the system. These capabilities increase the 
reliability of the collected data, reduce the possibility of 
inadvertent isolation and plant shutdowns, reduce the need for 
frequent calibrations, and reduce the likelihood of common mode 
failures. 

The NUMAC Leak Detection Monitors will maintain the same 
environmental and electrical physical independence criteria 
(qualifications) as the existing Leak Detection System 
components. The LDMs, the associated thermocouple input units 
(TCIUs), and relay output units (ROUs) will be mounted 
seismically such that qualification of these components and the 
Control Room panels will be maintained. The LDMs are qualified 
for the PNPP Control Room environment. The LDMs (one per 
division) will be physically and electrically independent of each 
other and do not share power supplies, thermocouple inputs, 
output relays, microcomputer logic units, display units or 
enclosures and mounting locations. A postulated gross failure of 
any one NUMAC LDM, such as gross malfunction of the input unit, 
microcomputer logic unit or the relay output unit, will not 
propagate to the other NUMAC LDM, such as gross malfunction of 
the input unit, microcomputer logic unit or the relay output 
unit, will not propagate to the other NUMAC LDM. Thus, a failure 
within one NUMAC LDM will not prevent or disable the function of 
the other NUMAC LDM. A failure within one NUMAC LDM may cause 
the loss of one division of the isolation trip logic. However, 
since the other redundant division (the MSLs have three other 
divisions) will not be affected by this failure, the Leak 
Detection System will still be able to perform its designed 
safety-related function and provide the necessary system 
isolation. This is the same as the current Leak Detection System 
design basis. 

The possibility of a common mode failure of both NUMAC LDM 
divisions is minimized by the design of the NUMAC hardware and 
software, the verification and validation (VV) of the software 
to reduce the likelihood of errors, the testing of the software 
(to discover and eliminate errors), and the design of and testing 
of the hardware to demonstrate its resistance to EMI/RFI. The 
NUMAC instrument design features, by effectively eliminating the 
potential for common mode failures, maintain the Leak Detection 
System within its current licensing basis. (A discussion of 
common mode failure protection is presented in more detail in the 
answer to question two.) Therefore, the design, isolation and 
separation criteria remain the same. 

Additionally, as described within Chapter 7 of the Updated Safety 
Analysis Report (USAR), diversity is provided to the ambient and 
differential temperature monitoring trip functions for the 
various systems by alternative leak detection methods (such as 
measuring steam line flow or pressure) that provide backup in the 
event of the loss of both divisions of the NUMAC Leak Detection 
Monitors. These alternative leak detection methods are 
physically separate from those being performed by the NUMAC LDM 
and constitute a diverse, redundant, safety related backup 
capable of responding to a design basis line break for the 
various systems. Therefore, a common mode failure of both LDM 
divisions would not prevent any of the necessary system isolation 
from occurring. 

No changes are being made to the isolation logic of the Leak 
Detection System. No accident initiators or precursors are 
affected by the proposed changes to the Channel Functional Test 
surveillance intervals for the various trip functions. One 
purpose of a Channel Functional Test is to check the instrument 
setpoints. The NUMAC instrument setpoints are set digitally and 
do not drift. An engineering evaluation has established that the 
Channel Functional Test surveillance interval can be extended 
from one to six months. The potential for common mode failures 
has been accounted for in the design and measures have been taken 
to lower the probability of this to an acceptable level (see the 
answer to question two). Also, alternative leak detection 
methods exist for this eventuality. Since the NUMAC Leak 
Detection Monitoring equipment meets or exceeds the design and 
licensing criteria specified for the Leak Detection System, the 
proposed upgrade cannot increase the probability of occurrence of 
any accident previously evaluated. 

A portion of the Leak Detection System logic causes a closure of 
the Main Steam Isolation Valves on a steam leak signal. This 
transient, described in Chapter 15 of the USAR, may also occur 
due to a LDS equipment malfunction. Since this modification 
replaces some of the existing Riley temperature monitoring 
instrumentation with more reliable instrumentation the 
probability of this transient is reduced (no radiological 
consequences are associated with this event). The LDS is also 
used to mitigate the consequences of a pipe break outside primary 
containment by isolating the affected system connected to the 
Reactor Coolant Pressure Boundary (RCPB). The replacement of the 
Riley instrumentation with NUMAC LDMs will not change, degrade, 
or prevent the Leak Detection System response to mitigate the 
radiological consequences of an accident. Therefore, replacement 
of the Riley temperature modules with NUMAC Leak Detection 
Monitors will not significantly increase the consequences of any 
accident previously evaluated. 

2. The proposed changes do not create the possibility of a new or 
different kind of accident from any accident previously 
evaluated. 





