 

1208.43

 Other contracts and agreements.



The Council may enter into contracts or agreements for administrative services, including such contracts of employment,
as may be required to conduct its business in accordance with such fiscal period budgets as may have been approved by
the Secretary. To the extent appropriate to the contract involved, contracts entered into by the Council under the
authority of this section shall contain provisions comparable to those described in 1208.42(c).



Assessments



1208.50

 Assessments.



(a) Each qualified handler, as defined in 1208.16_including but not limited to wholesale handlers, as defined
in 1208.16(a); bouquet manufacturers as described in 1208.16(b); manufacturers of floral articles,
as described in 1208.16(c); auction houses that clear sales of cut flowers and greens, as described in 1208.16(d);
distribution centers owned or controlled by retailers if the principal business activity is floral sales, as described
in 1208.16(e); importers that are qualified handlers as defined in 1208.16(f); producers that are
qualified handlers as defined in 1208.16(g)_shall pay to the Council an assessment in an amount determined
in accordance with this subpart, on each sale of cut flowers and greens to a retailer or an exempt handler (as defined
in 1208.8) and on each non-sale transfer of cut flowers and greens to a retailer by a qualified handler that is
a distribution center; as well as each direct sale of cut flowers and greens to a consumer by a producer that is a qualified
handler, or by an importer that is a qualified handler. Such assessments shall be remitted by each qualified handler
to the Council or its agent within 60 days after the end of the month in which the sale or non-sale transfer subject to
assessment under this subpart took place. Such assessments shall be paid at the following rates:

(1) During the first three years after the effective date of this subpart:

(i) Except as provided in paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section, the rate shall be one-half of 1 (0.5) percent of the
gross sales price of the cut flowers and greens sold;

(ii) In the case of non-sale transfers to a retailer by a qualified handler that is a distribution center and in the case
of direct sales by importers or producers, the rate shall be one-half of 1 (0.5) percent of the amount of each transaction's
valuation for assessment as provided in paragraph (b);

(2) After the first three years that this subpart is in effect, the uniform assessment rate may be increased or decreased
annually by not more than one-quarter of 1 (0.25) percent of the gross sales price of a product sold; or in the case of
other transactions the amount of such transactions, except that the assessment rate may not exceed 1 percent of the
gross sales price or the transaction amount. Changes in the rate of assessment may only be made if such changes are adopted
by a two-thirds majority vote of the Council and approved by the Secretary (after public notice and opportunity for
comment as provided in the Act) as being necessary to carry out the objectives of the Act. Any such change so approved
by the Secretary may be put into effect without a referendum but shall be announced not less than 30 days prior to the
beginning of a fiscal year.

(b) Each non-sale transfer of cut flowers and greens to a retailer from a qualified handler that is a distribution center
shall be treated as a sale of cut flowers and greens to a retailer and shall be assessable. Each direct sale of cut flowers
and greens to a consumer by a producer or an importer who is a qualified handler shall be assessable. These transactions
shall be determined to have the following valuations for assessment purposes:

(1) In the case of a non-sale transfer of cut flowers and greens from a distribution center that is a qualified handler
and each direct sale of cut flowers and greens to a consumer by an importer that is a qualified handler, the amount of
the valuation of the cut flowers and greens for assessment purposes shall be the price paid by the distribution center
or importer to acquire the cut flowers and greens, and determined by multiplying the acquisition price by a uniform
factor of 1.43 to represent the markup of a wholesale handler on a sale to a retailer.

(2) In the case of a direct sale to a consumer by a producer who is a qualified handler, the valuation of the cut flowers
and greens for assessment purposes shall be equal to an amount determined by multiplying the price paid by the consumer
by a uniform factor of 0.50 to represent the cost of producing the article and the markup of a wholesale handler on a sale
to a retailer.

(3) The Council may consider and adopt changes in the uniform factors specified in subparagraphs (1) and (2) above.
Any such change shall not become effective until it has been adopted by a majority vote of the Council and approved by
the Secretary after public notice and opportunity to comment on such change as provided in the Act. Changes so adopted
and approved shall become effective at the beginning of the next fiscal year.

(c) The collection of assessments shall commence on or after a date established by the Secretary, and shall continue
until terminated by the Secretary. If the Council is not constituted on the date the first assessments are to be remitted,
the Secretary shall have the authority to receive assessments on behalf of the Council and may hold such assessments
in an interest bearing account until the Council is constituted, and the funds may be transferred to the Council.

(d) No assessments may be levied on any sale of cut flowers and greens for export from the United States. The Council
is authorized to establish procedures for the verification of exports.

(e) In general, assessment funds (less refunds, if any) shall be used:

(1) For payment of costs incurred in implementing and administering this subpart;

(2) To provide for a reasonable reserve to be maintained from assessments to be available for contingencies; and






