 




<CFRNO>14 CFR Part 39 </CFRNO>




<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 93NM143AD; Amendment 398954; AD 941402] </RINDOCK>



Airworthiness Directives; Boeing Model 757 Series Airplanes Equipped With Rolls Royce RB211535C Engines




<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Federal Aviation Administration, DOT.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Final rule.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 This amendment adopts a new airworthiness directive (AD), applicable to certain Boeing Model 757 series airplanes,
that requires tests of the thrust reverser system, and repair, if necessary; installation of a modification that
would terminate those tests; and repetitive operational checks of that installation, and repair, if necessary.
This amendment is prompted by results of a safety review, which revealed that in-flight deployment of a thrust reverser
could result in a significant reduction in the controllability of the airplane. The actions specified by this AD are
intended to prevent deployment of a thrust reverser in flight and subsequent reduced controllability of the airplane.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Effective August 1, 1994. 



The incorporation by reference of certain publications listed in the regulations is approved by the Director of the
Federal Register as of August 1, 1994.



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 The service information referenced in this AD may be obtained from Boeing Commercial Airplane Group, P.O. Box 3707,
Seattle, Washington 981242207; and Rolls-Royce plc, P.O. Box 31, Derby DE24 8BJ, England, ATTN: Technical
Publications Department. This information may be examined at the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Transport
Airplane Directorate, Rules Docket, 1601 Lind Avenue, SW., Renton, Washington; or at the Office of the Federal Register,
800 North Capitol Street, NW., suite 700, Washington, DC.



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Jeffrey Duven, Aerospace Engineer, Propulsion Branch, ANM140S, FAA, Transport Airplane Directorate, Seattle
Aircraft Certification Office, 1601 Lind Avenue, SW., Renton, Washington 980554056; telephone (206) 2272688;
fax (206) 2271181.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 A proposal to amend part 39 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR part 39) to include an airworthiness directive
(AD) that is applicable to certain Boeing Model 757 series airplanes was published in the 

Federal Register

 on October 4, 1993 (58 FR 51589). That action proposed to require tests of the thrust reverser system, and repair, if
necessary; installation of a modification that would terminate those tests; and repetitive operational checks
of that installation, and repair, if necessary. 




Interested persons have been afforded an opportunity to participate in the making of this amendment. Due consideration
has been given to the comments received. 

One commenter supports the proposed rule. 


Boeing requests that specific references to page numbers and revision dates of the Boeing 757 Airplane Maintenance
Manual (AMM) be eliminated from the proposed rule, and that the proposal be amended to include copies of the required
test procedures so that reference to the AMM would not be necessary. 

Boeing explains that the AMM's are customized for each operator to reflect all of the equipment in that operator's
fleet. Therefore, the number of pages for any given procedure is variable, depending on the number of different equipment
configurations documented in an operator's AMM. Boeing also indicates that AMM procedures are revised periodically
for non-technical reasons. Boeing adds that changes to the structure of the procedures are necessary to accommodate
an upgrade of the publishing system that is currently under way, which, in addition to repagination, will necessitate
the issuance of revised AMM pages. 


Boeing states that the effect of specifying AMM page numbers and revision dates in the AD is that operators may be unable
to use the procedure contained in the AMM to perform certain tests required by the AD. Each operator would be required
to maintain an obsolete version of the procedure, or to request FAA approval of an alternative method of compliance
with the AD that would allow the use of the current version of the AMM. 

The FAA concurs partially. In light of the information submitted by the commenter, the FAA finds that specific AMM
page numbers and dates should not be specified in the final rule. Therefore, such references have been removed from
paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of the final rule. However, for those paragraphs, the FAA does not agree that copies of
the specific procedures should be included in the final rule. Therefore, paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of the final
rule have been revised to cite only the appropriate section and task title specified in the AMM for accomplishment
of the tests required by those paragraphs.

The FAA's objective in proposing periodic operational checks of the sync-lock device, as specified in paragraph
(c) of this AD, is to ensure the integrity of the locking function. However, subsequent to the issuance of the proposal
and the receipt of Boeing's comments to the proposal, Boeing has submitted to the FAA separate procedures for accomplishment
of the operational check of the sync-lock integrity. These procedures have been defined in paragraph (c) of the final
rule; therefore, the AMM references specified in paragraph (c) of the NPRM have been removed from the final rule. Additionally,
the procedures for the operational checks are accomplished independently of the other thrust reverser system tests
specified in the proposal. Accordingly, the FAA has revised paragraph (c) of the final rule to require periodic accomplishment
of operational checks of the sync-lock integrity only, and has removed the requirement for accomplishment of other
tests specified in that paragraph of the proposal. 


The Air Transport Association (ATA) of America, on behalf of its members, states that, while ATA members are not opposed
to accomplishing the operational checks specified in paragraph (c) of the proposal as part of their maintenance programs,
these members are opposed to accomplishing the checks as part of the requirements of an AD. The commenters believe
that the adoption of paragraph (c), as proposed, is equivalent to issuing a Certification Maintenance Requirements
(CMR) item by means of an AD. 


ATA adds that, if the FAA finds sufficient justification to include the requirement for operational checks in the
AD, an alternative to accomplishment of the checks should be provided in the final rule. ATA reasons that an alternative
is justified because no data exist to show that repetitive checks of a modified thrust reverser cannot be handled adequately
through an operator's maintenance program. The suggested alternative follows: Within 3 months after accomplishing
the sync-lock installation, revise the FAA- approved maintenance inspection program to include an operational
check of the sync-lock. The initial check would be accomplished within 1,000 hours time-in-service after modification.
The AD would no longer be applicable for operators that have acceptably revised the maintenance program. Operators
choosing this alternative could use an alternative recordkeeping method in lieu of that required by Federal Aviation
Regulation (FAR) 91.417 or 121.380 (14 CFR 91.417 or 121.380). The FAA would be defined as the cognizant Principal
Maintenance Inspector (PMI) for operators electing this alternative. 


</SUPPLEM>
