 



Changes: 

None. 


Comments: 

A number of commenters felt strongly that the term ``satisfactory arrangements to repay the loan'' should be defined
in terms of the impact on the borrower and the institution. Commenters believed that the requirement of 6 months of
consecutive payments in this definition is too stringent, particularly when this definition is used to determine
when to exclude loans from the cohort default rate calculation. Because of the window of time in the cohort default
rate tracking period, one commenter believed it would be more equitable to consider the fact that the institution
was able to establish a new repayment plan with the borrower as meeting the criteria for satisfactory arrangements
to repay the loans. Other commenters suggested a minimum of three consecutive monthly payments as the basis for excluding
the loan from the cohort default rate. These commenters further stated that institutions do not have enough time to
locate and contact the delinquent borrower, obtain the written agreement, and have 6 months of payments made prior
to June 30. One commenter suggested that once the new written repayment agreement has been signed and all payments
due by June 30 have been properly made by the borrower, institutions should be allowed to exclude that account from
their cohort default rate. 


Discussion: 

While the Secretary is sensitive to the 
concerns of the commenters, the Secretary does not agree that six consecutive months of payment is too stringent.
In order to reduce the administrative burden at the institution, the Secretary is seeking ways to make the Federal
Perkins Loan program consistent with the other title IV loan programs. Including six consecutive monthly payments
in the definition of satisfactory arrangements to repay the loan is consistent with provisions in these programs.



Changes: 

None 


Section 674.5Cohort Default Rate and Penalties 




Comments: 

Several commenters stated that while the definition of ``loan rehabilitation'' in 674.5(e)(1) has limited
benefit to the school in reducing a school's cohort default rate, it will be a benefit to the borrower whose loan is no
longer considered to be in default. These commenters noted that a loan rehabilitated because the borrower has made
12 consecutive monthly payments is not removed from the school's cohort default rate. The commenters recommended
that the definition be revised to allow for lump sum payments or up to a three-month payment plan. One commenter also
invited the Secretary's consideration of allowing a quarterly repayment option and a reduction in the minimum payments
required to consider the loan rehabilitated. 


Discussion: 

While the Secretary is sensitive to the concerns of the commenters, the Secretary does not agree that the definition
of a rehabilitated loan is too restrictive. Rehabilitating a loan gets the borrower out of default. Consequently,
the borrower must establish a significant repayment history. Again, in order to reduce administrative burden at
the institution, the provision is parallel to similar provisions in the FFEL and FDSL programs. 


Changes: 

None. 






