 

<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 
Purpose and Need for Action


One of the most urgent and difficult technical tasks facing the DOE is to assess the effects of aging on the weapons that
remain in the nation's nuclear stockpile, and to ensure the continuing safety of those weapons. Because the President
has decided not to build any new nuclear weapons for the foreseeable future, but instead to continue to rely upon a smaller
stockpile of existing but aging weapons as a nuclear deterrent, DOE must ensure that the weapons remaining in the stockpile
are safe, secure and reliable. Under the Atomic Energy Act, this mission rests with DOE and essentially requires DOE
to certify that the weapons will not accidentally detonate during storage and handling, that the weapons would thwart
any attempts for unauthorized use, and that they would function as designed in the event of authorized use. 
To fulfill this mission, DOE needs to collect diagnostic information regarding the condition of the weapons which
remain in the enduring stockpile. Some of these weapons are approaching the end of their design life, and DOE is not
certain how they may be affected by the aging process. One important type of information that is currently lacking
concerns the three-dimensional condition of the various internal components of aging weapons. These are often shielded
by thick and dense materials. Multiple view hydrodynamic testing (experiments to look at the flow of adjacent materials
as they are driven by high explosives) and dynamic testing (experiments to study other effects of high explosives),
combined with computer modeling, provide the only means of obtaining this data in the absence of nuclear testing.
The President has endorsed hydrodynamic testing as the preferred means of conducting experiments in support of stockpile
stewardship and maintenance. Hydrodynamic testing has become more important since the United States moratorium
on nuclear testing was extended. A future Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, moreover, would foreclose the acquisition
of additional performance and safety data through nuclear testing. 



Proposed Action



DARHT would be a specialized high energy X-ray machine that would take three-dimensional, sequential and high-resolution
X-ray pictures of the dynamic behavior of dense materials that are being shocked and compressed by high explosives.
DARHT would be used to evaluate the nonnuclear behavior of nuclear weapons components and would provide the nation
with a significantly improved diagnostic capability to evaluate and assess the safety and reliability of the existing
nuclear weapons stockpile. DARHT would consist of an existing support lab, a new firing site, and the necessary infrastructure,
all located at Technical Area 15 at LANL. DARHT would be used to detonate high explosives, and to use very high-speed,
tightly-focused radiographic (X-ray) photography to determine the motions (dynamic experiments) or flow (hydrodynamic
tests) of the explosive-driven materials. Two X-ray machines at right angles to each other (dual-axis lines of sight)
would be powered by two 16 million electron volt (MeV) electron accelerators, each housed in a building about 225 feet
long. By using two machines, DARHT would be able to provide three-dimensional, sequential information on occurrences
within millionths of a second during a test. The accelerators' small beam size would allow DARHT to provide a very high-quality
resolution of the radiographic image. This resolution is necessary to resolve the fine details of the material flowing
in these experiments. 





</SUPPLEM>
