 

Paperwork Reduction



In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. Chapter 35), the information collection requirements
contained in the regulations issued under the United States Grain Standards Act have been previously approved by
OMB under control number 05800013.



Background



On August 9, 1993, FGIS published in the 

Federal Register

 (58 FR 42257), a proposed rule entitled ``Tolerances for Near-Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS) Analyzers''. At the
time the proposed revisions to the regulations were published the AOAC International (formerly known as the Association
of Official Analytical Chemists) had not yet completed official adoption of the Combustion method. Therefore, the
Combustion method was referred to as the FGIS Combustion method is the proposed revisions. Since the proposed rule
was published, the AOAC International has completed the approval process and officially published the method.

When the AOAC International published the Combustion method, an identifying method number was assigned. The Combustion
method is identified and referenced in the final rule as AOAC International, Method 992.23, Crude Protein in Cereal
Grains and Oilseeds Generic Combustion Method (1992).

FGIS currently uses the Kjeldahl method as the primary reference method by which NIRS protein-measuring instruments
are calibrated. NIRS instruments are used to determine protein in wheat and soybeans in both domestic and export markets.
The final rule incorporates by reference the AOAC International Method 992.23, Crude Protein in Cereal Grains and
Oilseeds Generic Combustion Method (1992) into the regulations. FGIS will replace the Kjeldahl method with the Combustion
method as the chemical reference method for protein determinations. The Combustion method uses a nitrogen analyzer
consisting of a computer-controlled closed-system combustion process and a thermal conductivity detector. This
method has also been approved (September 1992) by the American Association of Cereal Chemists (AACC) for protein
determination in cereal grains. In addition, this method has been approved as a Recommended Practice (April 1993)
by the American Oil Chemists' Society (AOCS) for protein determination in oilseeds.

Changing from the Kjeldahl method to the Combustion method will provide many benefits to FGIS and other users. The
Combustion method does not use hazardous chemicals or produce the environmental pollutants associated with the
Kjeldahl method. Also, the shorter analysis time for the Combustion method allows a larger sample throughput, permitting
a more effective evaluation of the NIRS instrument calibrations.

FGIS has extensively compared the protein results obtained using the Combustion method and the Kjeldahl method.
Statistical analysis of these data shows that each method is capable of providing equally precise and reproducible
protein results; however, the Combustion method has a general tendency to yield slightly higher results than the
FGIS Kjeldahl method. The results from the Combustion method should reflect the true protein content of U.S. wheat
and soybeans more accurately than the Kjeldahl reference method. The observed differences are approximately +0.03
percent protein for wheat and +0.3 percent protein for soybeans. The increase in the protein for wheat should have
a minimal impact on domestic and export wheat markets. The increase in protein for soybeans should have a minimal impact
on domestic and export soybean markets because trading price of soybeans is not routinely based on the protein content.
The maintenance tolerances for NIRS instruments are used to maintain consistent results among official protein
and oil determinations. All NIRS instruments are adjusted to give consistent results on the national Standard Reference
Samples (SRS). Values for the SRS are assigned using the FGIS national standard NIRS instruments. Further, the FGIS
national standard NIRS instruments are calibrated and routinely standardized to the FGIS chemical reference method.



Comment Review



During the 30-day comment period, 14 comments were filed in response to the proposal. Comments were received from
two grain industry associations. The associations stated that they did not oppose the proposal and that they generally
supported the adoption of the Combustion method.

One comment was received from a foreign oilseed processor association. The association supported the change; however,
it requested that FGIS continue to use both the Kjeldahl method and the Combustion method as references for the NIRS
instruments. FGIS after considering this comment, has determined that maintaining two reference methods is counterproductive
for protein uniformity and efficient use of space and staff. Consequently FGIS must maintain only one reference method
for protein.

One oilseeds processor association stated that it generally supported the adoption of the Combustion method. The
association was concerned about differences among industry Kjeldahl labs and FGIS and other labs using the Combustion
method. FGIS has recognized the existence of a positive bias between methods and reported that in the proposed rule.
FGIS contends that this small increase in the protein will have a minimal impact on domestic and export soybean markets
because the trading prices of soybeans are not routinely based on the protein content and the small bias is insignificant
in proportion to the total average protein content of soybeans.

One university professor commented in support of the proposed change; however, he requested a delay in implementing
the change to allow for an industry discussion to promote uniformity throughout the soybean industry. FGIS believes
that such a delay is unwarranted because the Combustion method is currently being used in several countries around
the world by industry laboratories, commercial and private laboratories, and government laboratories.

Two foreign milling companies expressed interest in the Combustion method, but they did not have enough information
to comment on the proposed changes.



