 

There currently are no Model A340211 or 311 series airplanes on the U.S. 
Register. All airplanes included in the applicability of this rule currently are operated by 
non-U.S. operators under foreign registry; therefore, they are not directly affected by this 
AD action. However, the FAA considers that this rule is necessary to ensure that the 
unsafe condition is addressed in the event that any of these subject airplanes are imported 
and placed on the U.S. Register in the future. 

Should an affected airplane be imported and placed on the U.S. Register in the 
future, it would require approximately 63 work hours to accomplish the required actions, 
at an average labor charge of $55 per work hour. Required parts will be supplied by the 
manufacturer at no cost to operators. Based on these figures, the total cost impact of this 
AD would be $3,465 per airplane. 

Since this AD action does not affect any airplane that is currently on the U.S. 
register, it has no adverse economic impact and imposes no additional burden on any 
person. Therefore, notice and public procedures hereon are unnecessary and the 
amendment may be made effective in less than 30 days after publication in the 

Federal Register

. 



Comments Invited 



Although this action is in the form of a final rule and was not preceded by notice 
and opportunity for public comment, comments are invited on this rule. Interested 
persons are invited to comment on this rule by submitting such written data, views, or 
arguments as they may desire. Communications shall identify the Rules Docket number 
and be submitted in triplicate to the address specified under the caption 

ADDRESSES.

 
All communications received on or before the closing date for comments will be 
considered, and this rule may be amended in light of the comments received. Factual 
information that supports the commenter's ideas and suggestions is extremely helpful in 
evaluating the effectiveness of the AD action and determining whether additional 
rulemaking action would be needed. 

Comments are specifically invited on the overall regulatory, economic, 
environmental, and energy aspects of the rule that might suggest a need to modify the rule. 
All comments submitted will be available, both before and after the closing date for 
comments, in the Rules Docket for examination by interested persons. A report that 
summarizes each FAA-public contact concerned with the substance of this AD will be 
filed in the Rules Docket. 

Commenters wishing the FAA to acknowledge receipt of their comments 
submitted in response to this rule must submit a self-addressed, stamped postcard on 
which the following statement is made: ``Comments to Docket Number 94NM106AD.'' 
The postcard will be date stamped and returned to the commenter. 

The regulations adopted herein will not have substantial direct effects on the 
States, on the relationship between the national government and the States, or on the 
distribution of power and responsibilities among the various levels of government. 
Therefore, in accordance with Executive Order 12612, it is determined that this final rule 
does not have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the preparation of a Federalism 
Assessment. 

For the reasons discussed above, I certify that this action (1) is not a ``significant 
regulatory action'' under Executive Order 12866; (2) is not a ``significant rule'' under DOT 
Regulatory Policies and Procedures (44 FR 11034, February 26, 1979); and (3) will not 
have a significant economic impact, positive or negative, on a substantial number of small 
entities under the criteria of the Regulatory Flexibility Act. A final evaluation has been 
prepared for this action and it is contained in the Rules Docket. A copy of it may be 
obtained from the Rules Docket at the location provided under the caption 


ADDRESSES.

 



List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 39 



Air transportation, Aircraft, Aviation safety, Incorporation by reference, Safety. 



Adoption of the Amendment 



Accordingly, pursuant to the authority delegated to me by the Administrator, the 
Federal Aviation Administration amends part 39 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 
CFR part 39) as follows: 



PART 39_AIRWORTHINESS DIRECTIVES 



1. The authority citation for part 39 continues to read as follows: 






Authority:

 49 U.S.C. App. 1354(a), 1421 and 1423; 49 U.S.C. 106(g); and 14 CFR 
11.89. 



39.13

[Amended] 



2. Section 39.13 is amended by adding the following new airworthiness directive: 






941601 Airbus Industrie:

 Amendment 398990. Docket 94NM106AD. 

 


Applicability: Model A340211 and 311 series airplanes on which Airbus 
Industrie Modifications 42337 and 42338 (reference Airbus Industrie Service Bulletin 
A340284012) have not been installed; and on which Airbus Industrie Modification 
42038 (reference Airbus Industrie Service Bulletin A340284008) has not been installed; 
certificated in any category. 

Compliance: Required within 100 landings after the effective date of this AD, 
sunless accomplished previously. 

To prevent electrical arcing and a resultant fire in the event of a lightning strike, 
accomplish the following: 

(a) Modify the bonding leads on the water drain pipe, engine fuel feed pipe, fuel 
recalculation pipe, vent pipe, and surge tank drain pipe in accordance with Airbus 
Industrie Service Bulletin A340284008, dated July 9, 1993. 





