 

To the extent that ETBE is used to meet part of the renewable oxygenate requirement, however, today's rule could increase
the cost of the program. EPA projects that ETBE-blended RFG would cost 0 to 0.8 cents per gallon more than ethanol-blended
or MTBE-blended RFG. This estimate, which is highly sensitive to MTBE and ethanol costs, includes ETBE's value in
reducing RVP and increasing octane but does not fully reflect its value in diluting the levels of aromatics and sulfur
in gasoline. It also assumes that ETBE producers can take advantage of the reduced gasoline excise tax for fuels containing
ethanol. Without this tax reduction, the cost of ETBE-blended RFG would be 3.1 to 3.9 cents per gallon higher than MTBE-blended
RFG. 
With regard to the second component of the cost analysis, ethanol is produced primarily in the Midwest, but RFG will
be required in California, the Northeast, and Texas in addition to several Midwestern markets. As a result, additional
transportation costs may be incurred. EPA estimates the cost of transporting ethanol to range from 3 to 11 cents per
gallon of ethanol, depending on the markets to which it is being shipped. As discussed in detail in the RIA, EPA estimates
the average cost of transporting a gallon of ethanol to RFG markets to be 68 cents per gallon. Based on the estimate
that the renewable oxygenate program will increase ethanol demand by 335 million gallons per year, the total transportation-related
cost due to today's rule would range from $20 million to $27 million annually. 
In many parts of the nation, facilities to store and blend ethanol have already been constructed. However, adequate
facilities are not currently in place in many RFG markets. Based on information obtained from a draft DOE report,

25

 EPA estimates the cost of building sufficient storage and blending capacity to meet the renewable oxygenate requirement
to be approximately $17.6 million. This represents a one-time cost for additional tankage, storage, and blending
capacity, however, and not a continuous cost. There may be some additional cost for blending beyond the costs of the
facilities and equipment, however, that is believed to be small. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


25

</FOOTNAME>
''Assessment of Costs and Benefits of Flexible and Alternative Fuel Use in the U.S. Transportation Sector, Progress
Report Three: Vehicle and Fuel Distribution Requirements (DRAFT),'' United States Department of Energy, Office
of Policy, Planning, and Analysis, July 1989. 
</FOOTNOTE>


With regard to the third component of the cost analysis, under both the Simple and Complex reformulated gasoline emission
models, ethanol and ETBE provide smaller toxics emission reduction benefits than do MTBE and TAME, the primary nonrenewable
oxygenates expected to participate in the RFG program. To offset the increase in toxics emissions, refiners will
have to alter other gasoline properties such as aromatics, benzene, or sulfur. Assuming that refiners lower benzene
levels to offset any worsening in toxics performance, EPA estimates that the additional cost could range as high as
0.89 cents per gallon of RFG blended with ethanol in 19951999 and from 0.32 to 0.88 cents per gallon of RFG blended
with ethanol in 2000 and beyond. The higher minimum costs in 2000 and beyond stem from the more stringent toxics standards
and the larger contribution of exhaust toxics to total toxics; see the RIA for further details. These increased costs
would be incurred only for the volume of RFG blended with ethanol in excess of the volume that would have been blended
with these two oxygenates in the absence of today's rule. Assuming that ethanol volume increases by 335 million gallons
(as discussed previously and in the RIA) and that ethanol is blended at 6.04 volume percent (or 2.1 weight percent oxygen),
the total volume of RFG involved would be approximately 5.55 billion gallons. This translates into an annual cost
for the program of up to $49 million in 19961999 and $18 million to $49 million in 2000 and beyond. 
According to EPA's fuel economy analysis (as discussed in the RIA for the RFG final rule), ethanol-blended RFGs provide
slightly poorer fuel economy than otherwise-identical RFGs which use MTBE or ETBE as the oxygenate. The fuel economy
penalty amounts to approximately 0.2 percent for the additional 5.55 billion gallons of RFG that would be blended
with ethanol as a result of the renewable oxygenate program. Based on current wholesale gasoline prices, this reduction
in fuel economy would add approximately $5.55 million in annual costs to the RFG program. 


2. Impact on Renewable Fuels Industry 


As discussed in section III of this notice, the renewables program will require blending approximately 490 million
additional gallons of ethanol (or its equivalent) in RFG over and above the amount of ethanol blended into gasoline
in RFG areas in 1993. This increase represents a growth of approximately 40 to 50 percent in renewable fuel demand from
current levels. EPA is phasing in the renewable oxygenate requirement in order to avoid disrupting existing ethanol
markets and the RFG program. If the renewable oxygenate program causes ethanol to shift out of its current markets
into RFG markets, the benefits to the renewable fuels industry would be reduced and the long-term growth prospects
for the industry would be jeopardized. Phasing the program in over two years permits a more orderly expansion of renewable
oxygenate production capacity and helps assure that the additional demand created by today's rule will occur without
causing undesirable logistical problems, which could result in supply problems and price spikes and might not help
stimulate the use of renewable fuels in the United States. 






