 

(i) Preparing a record of the decision and the 
rationale for the decision made by the head of the 
agency, evidencing the consideration given to the 
Council's comments; 
(ii) Providing that record to the Council prior to 
the approval of the undertaking; 

(iii) Notifying known interested parties of the 
decision; 

(iv) Providing a copy of the record of decision to 
all interested parties who participated in the 
negotiation process; and 

(v) Notifying the public and making the record 
available for public inspection. 



800.12 

Monitoring and compliance. 


(a) 

Review of Agency Official findings_

(1) 

Timeliness. 


The Council shall consider a request for review of an Agency 
Official's finding under this part at any time, regardless 
of the status of the undertaking in the planning and 
approval process. The Council may determine that a request 
for review is not timely and decline to consider the 
substance of the request. The Council shall deem a request 
for review timely if it determines that an opportunity 
exists to influence the effects of an undertaking on 
historic properties, provided that such a determination 
shall not preclude the Council from subsequently determining 
that an agency has foreclosed the Council's opportunity to 
comment pursuant to 800.12(b). 

(2) 

Council review. 

The Council shall review the 
substance of a request for review and provide its 
conclusions to the Agency Official, the State Historic 
Preservation Officer, and the requesting party within 
30 days. The Council shall reach a determination on 
the finding that is presented for review and may also 
advise the Agency Official of appropriate steps to take 
in light of the Council's determination. 

(3) 

Agency Official responsibilities. 

The Agency 
Official shall take all measures to avoid adverse 
effects to historic properties while the Council is 
reviewing the finding. The Agency Official is not 
required to delay approval of the undertaking prior to 
a request for review being filed or during the 
Council's review of such request, but should recognize 
that a Council determination may require the Agency 
Official to reconsider actions previously taken in the 
Section 106 process. In response to the Council's 
determination, the Agency Official shall take the 
appropriate steps specified in this part. 





