 

&bull;We clarify the term ``professionals'' as it relates to 
the members of a survey team by setting forth examples and 
by stating that the State, subject to HCFA approval, 
determines what constitutes a ``professional.'' 
&bull;We modify the qualifications for temporary managers and 
set a salary floor. 
&bull;We expand the financial, employment, and familial 
circumstances that disqualify a surveyor from surveying a 
particular facility. 
&bull;We limit the instances in which a reduction in FFP is 
taken for inadequate survey performance to situations when a 
State demonstrates a pattern of failure to identify 
deficiencies in Medicaid facilities. 
&bull;We redefine what constitutes inadequate survey 
performance. 
&bull;We amend the regulations text at 488.312 (488.162 
of the proposed rule), consistency of survey results, to 
require that State survey agencies study surveyor accuracy 
as well as consistency. 
&bull;We clarify that the survey agency will review complaint 
allegations and conduct a standard or abbreviated standard 
survey 

if

 the survey agency concludes that a deficiency in 
one or more requirements may have occurred and 

only

 a survey 
can confirm the existence of the deficiency or deficiencies. 
&bull;We limit HCFA's and the State agency's discretion to 
conduct an extended or partial extended survey to situations 
in which substandard quality of care has been identified. 
HCFA or the State will, however, continue to have complete 
discretion to examine any and all aspects of a facility's 
performance in order to determine compliance with the 
requirements. 
&bull;We add directed in-service training as a new remedy. 
&bull;We expressly state that denial of all payment for all 
Medicare residents in a facility may be imposed by HCFA and 
that HCFA may deny payment to the State for all Medicaid 
residents in a facility. 
&bull;We clarify that one or more remedies may be imposed for 
one or more deficiencies. 
&bull;We eliminate as a remedy denial of payment for certain 
diagnostic categories. 
&bull;We add the following to clarify the civil money penalty 
provisions: 
+The amount of the civil money penalty can be adjusted 
to reflect changes from non-immediate jeopardy to immediate 
jeopardy and from immediate jeopardy to non-immediate 
jeopardy. 
+A civil money penalty is increased for repeated 
deficiencies within the same regulatory grouping of 
requirements in those cases where a civil money penalty was 
imposed as a remedy for the first occurrence of the 
deficiency; 
+The interest rate for civil money penalties is in 
accordance with the rate fixed by the Secretary of the 
Treasury and used by the Department for Medicare and 
determined by the State for Medicaid; 
+The HCFA notice of the imposition of the civil money 
penalty does not have to be sent by mail; 
+The HCFA notice of intent to impose the civil money 
penalty includes more information regarding the nature of 
the noncompliance, dates of accrual and dates of collection; 
+The State's notice to non-State operated NFs when the 
State takes action must include at a minimum the information 
specified in the HCFA notice; 
+If the facility waives its right to a hearing in 
writing within 60 days from the date of the notice of intent 
to impose the civil money penalty, HCFA or the State reduces 
the civil money penalty by 35 percent. 
+The civil money penalty may start to accrue as early as 
the date the facility was first found out of compliance, as 
determined by HCFA or the State. This may be the last day 
of the survey or, in certain situations, before that date. 




