 




<DOCTITLE>Nationwide Implementation of a Revolving Line of Credit Program</DOCTITLE>


<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Small Business Administration (SBA).


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Notice.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Small Business Administration (SBA) is issuing notice to advise the public it is implementing a new revolving
line of credit loan guaranty program on a national basis to be called the GreenLine Revolving Line of Credit Loan Guaranty
Program (GreenLine). This program authorizes SBA to use its guaranty authority to provide the Agency's full faith
and credit support to loans made by approved lenders that finance the short term, cyclical working capital needs of
small businesses.


The establishment of GreenLine is in response to information obtained over a two year period demonstrating the need
for a nationwide revolving line of credit loan guaranty program. Many lenders acknowledged that this type of financing
was generally available in the commercial marketplace to only larger businesses with a need for larger lines of credit.
Small businesses would require the guaranty from SBA in order for lenders to provide them with the same opportunity.
GreenLine shall serve as the umbrella for all the Agency's short term lending programs with the exception of the Export
Revolving Line of Credit (ERLC) and the Export Co-Guaranty programs. Under GreenLine, authority to provide a revolving
feature to the Agency's traditional Contract, Seasonal, and Contractors loan programs is added.


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE: 

July 22, 1994.


</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Michael J. Dowd, Chief Loan Policy  Procedures Branch, (202) 2056490.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

The predecessor for this program was tested on a pilot basis in selected local markets beginning on October 1, 1992
when SBA began piloting two revolving line of credit loan programs. Both Programs were designed to assist small business
in obtaining cyclical working capital financing through the authority of SBA's 7(a) guaranty loan program.


The first pilot, called the Green Line Revolving Line of Credit Program (GRLC), was implemented in the Agency's South
East and South Central Regions, while the second, called the Domestic Revolving Line of Credit Program (DRLC) was
tested in all SBA Regions not served by the Green Line pilot. The predominant distinction between the programs dealt
with the maximum maturity permitted on the loans: GRLC loans had a maturity of up to five years, while the DRLC loans
had a maturity of only one year.
Case files were collected from field offices active in the two pilot programs which were reviewed in order to determine
the creditworthiness of the businesses seeking this financing, as well as to identify various terms and conditions
which would be prudent for inclusion in the new loan program's approval documents. The reviews and program formation
meetings also revealed that the new program would need servicing guidelines designed to provide maximum assurances
that the line would revolve and the losses minimized.
Since October 1, 1992, 531 loans have been approved under the GRLC pilot for a total of $130.0 million, while for the
same period, 327 loans have been approved under the DRLC pilot for a total of $71.0 million. It is important to note that
this volume of GRLC activity was generated in only two regions, while the DRLC volume was generated in eight. This activity
indicated that a much keener interest exists for the extended terms available under Pilot GRLC than under the Pilot
DRLC Program.
Under this program, advances will generally be made against a borrower's certified level of inventory and accounts
receivable, while repayment will be derived from the sale of that inventory and the collection of any resulting accounts
receivable. Participating lenders will be expected to monitor the disbursements of funds from the line and control
the payment of funds back to the line. Primary collateral will consist of a senior lien position on the assets being
financed.


Implementation


SBA will consider all applications submitted by approved GreenLine lenders which seek up to a 75% SBA guaranty of the
GreenLine financing, not to exceed $750,000. Lender's desiring to participate need to complete a Lender's Qualification
Survey which can be obtained from their local SBA District Office. The processing of GreenLine applications can only
be done by SBA personnel from offices which have completed SBA sponsored training, and received approval from SBA's
Office of Financial Assistance (OFA). Training material has been developed and the training schedule set. Once the
staff in a field office completes the required training, and is designated by OFA, it will be eligible to process GreenLine
applications received from approved participating lenders.
All field offices which have processed either GRLC or DRLC loans under the respective regional pilots will continue
to be able to accept and process these loans under their existing pilot guidelines until training has been offered
to their office by the SBA Associate Administrator for Financial Assistance (AA/FA), but in no event later than August
30, 1994. After this date, offices will only be able to accept GreenLine applications.


Additional Fees Permitted


In recognition of the additional servicing and monitoring required to adequately protect the interest of the lender
and SBA, the Agency is temporarily waiving its limitations on service related fees in order to permit the lender to
offset the costs associated with increased servicing required to prudently monitor the lines, and to provide a program
that relates to the lending practices of the private sector.
All of SBA's Regulations presently in effect relative to 7(a) guaranteed business loans (see 13 CFR, paragraphs 120
and 122) will also govern the implementation of GreenLine, provided, however, that the limitation on processing
and servicing fees as found in 120.1042(a)(3) and 120.1042(e) of SBA regulations (13
CFR 120.1042(a)(3) and 120.1042(e)) will be waived for a maximum two year pilot period. Notice of this
pilot is issued pursuant to 120.12 of SBA regulations (13 CFR 120.12). In addition, SBA will ascertain
whether this type of loan can be sold on the secondary market.
SBA will require that participating lenders fully disclose to both the borrower and SBA the fees they intend to charge
the borrower, and that the borrower acknowledge these fees in writing to the lender and SBA prior to the time the guaranty
of the loan is authorized by SBA, and every six months thereafter.
SBA is waiving the fee restriction for GreenLine for up to two years provided the Lender charges their SBA supported
borrowers the same fees and charges for services they would normally charge their non-SBA borrowers with similar
types of revolving lines of credit for similar services.
</SUPPLEM>
