 

(e) A copy of the appropriate U.S.G.S. map with the 
boundaries prominently marked. 


Petition 
 

 ATF has received a petition from Mr. Charles A. Carpy, 
Chairman of the St. Helena Appellation Committee, proposing 
to establish a new viticultural area in Napa County, 
California, to be known as ``St. Helena.'' The St. Helena 
Appellation Committee is composed of various vineyard and 
winery owners located throughout the St. Helena area. The 
proposed St. Helena viticultural area is located 
approximately 16 miles northwest of the city of Napa. It is 
located totally within the larger and previously established 
Napa Valley viticultural area. As stated in the petition, 
the St. Helena viticultural area covers approximately 9,060 
acres, and is densely planted to vines. There are over 30 
wineries within the area. The petition provides the 
following information as evidence that the proposed area 
meets the regulatory requirements discussed previously. 
Mr. Charles Sullivan, Napa Valley historian, has provided 
the petitioner with most of the historical information 
concerning the St. Helena area that is covered in the 
petition whereas Dr. Deborah Elliott-Fisk of the University 
of California has provided the petitioner with most of the 
information in the petition concerning soils, geology and 
physical geography of the St. Helena area. 


Evidence That Viticultural Area Name Is Widely Known 
 

 Data prepared by Mr. Sullivan in support of the 
petition provides the following historical information. 
  The town of St. Helena was founded by Henry Still, who 
bought land from the Edward Bale family in 1855. By 1858 
there was a school house and a little Baptist church. Four 
years later Professor William Brewer of the Whitney party 
called it a ``pretty little village with fifty or more 
houses *** nestled among grand old oaks.'' Early winemakers in 
the St. Helena area included Charles Krug and George Belden 
Crane. At the end of the 1879 vintage the 

San Francisco 
Post

 ran an article on northern California wines which noted 
the flavor characteristics of Napa clarets. This article 
was copied by the 

St. Helena Star 

which predicted that there 
would be 2,000 acres of grapes planted in the Napa Valley in 
1880. According to Mr. Sullivan, the final total was closer 
to 3,000, and concentrated in the St. Helena area. 
  As early as 1869, San Francisco's 

Alta California

 was 
making reference to a ``St. Helena district,'' as did the 


Pacific Rural Press.

 These were references to vineyard 
plantings in the area. In 1872 the Napa Reporter made 
reference to the boom in vineyard land around St. Helena. 
The 

Alta California 

ran an article on the area in 1878, 
treating St. Helena as a specific district with a great 
reputation. By then Charles Krug, the Beringers, Crane, 
John Lewelling, H. A. Pellet, and 14 other producers had 
built cellars in the St. Helena area. 
  In 1875 Krug and Pellet organized the producers and 
growers in the district, a move that culminated in the 
formation of the St. Helena Viticultural Club on January 22, 
1876. According to Mr. Sullivan, others outside the 
district could join, but it was a local St. Helena 
organization. In 1880 the Club constructed Vintners Hall, a 
two story building with a reading room, meeting rooms, and a 
social hall upstairs. 
  Mr. Sullivan states that by the end of the 1870s there 
was no question concerning Napa's special reputation as a 
winegrowing region, or about St. Helena's as a discrete 
district in that region. As support for this statement, 
Mr. Sullivan cites the 

Alta California 

which concluded in an 
article published in 1880 that ``Napa is now the leading 
wine-growing county of California, and *** St. Helena has 
become the center of the most prosperous wine district in 
the State.'' 
  According to Mr. Sullivan, by the turn of the century 
Napa prices were still higher than those of other districts, 
but the special position accorded St. Helena wines had 
ceased to exist. The popular image of the wines of 
Oakville, Rutherford, Larkmead, and Howell Mountain had 
ended the perception of St. Helena wines standing above all 
others. After Prohibition, the regional association of the 
leading Napa Valley producers was far from foremost in 
consumers' minds and in the minds of wine writers according 
to Mr. Sullivan. However, Mr. Sullivan states that more 
recently there has been a tendency for wine writers to make 
reference to the St. Helena ``district'' and to its wines, 
particularly to its Cabernet Sauvignons. 
  In addition to the historical name information 
mentioned above, the ``St. Helena'' name appears on a U.S.G.S. 
7.5 minute series map entitled ``St. Helena Quadrangle'' which 
includes the city of St. Helena and much of its surrounding 
area. 



