 

Many commenters stated that arranging for the provision 
of the proposed supervisory requirements would impose 
significant burdens and costs associated with scheduling, 
travel, and the inefficient allocation of nursing resources. 
Many commenters also stated that the joint visits would be 
of limited value because many patients are reluctant to 
voice concerns or complaints in the presence of the home 
health aide (preferring to speak with the nurse privately in 
person or by telephone). These legitimate and practical 
concerns have persuaded us that the value to be gained by 
the proposed requirements does not merit the burden which 
they would impose on HHAs. Because of the progress we have 
already made in our efforts to ensure the high quality of 
home health aide services furnished by Medicare-approved 
HHAs, we do not believe that the advantages of the proposed 
requirements justify their associated cost and burden. 
Therefore, this final rule does not contain the 
requirements. 



Comment:

 Two commenters stated that the required 
supervisory visit by a registered nurse every 62 days when 
the non-Medicare patient is receiving home health aide 
services but no skilled nursing care or physical, speech, or 
occupational therapy is too infrequent. One commenter 
believes that the required frequency of supervisory visits 
does not provide adequate oversight of home health aide 
services. 



Response:

 We disagree. We believe that these non-Medicare patients who are not receiving skilled nursing 
care, physical or occupational therapy, or speech-language 
pathology services are not as ill as those who are receiving 
skilled services and therefore are at less risk of medical 
problems or complications that could occur during the course 
of receiving home health aide services. Because these 
patients are less ill, and therefore receiving home health 
aide care that is likely to be more custodial in nature, we 
believe that it is appropriate to require a lower frequency 
of supervision. Due to the lower frequency of these visits, 
we have specifically required them to occur while the aide 
is furnishing services so that the nurse can assess the 
aide's actual provision of care as well as the general 
condition of the patient. Also, we are requiring the 
on-site supervisory visit (which applies only to non- 
Medicare patients) at this frequency to conform Federal 
requirements that apply to HHAs that participate in Medicare 
with the licensure requirements of many States, thus 
enabling many HHAs to meet the administrative requirements 
of two bodies with a single visit. 



Condition of Participation: Clinical Records (409.48) 





Comment:

 Several commenters expressed concern that the 
proposed requirement that discharge summaries be sent to the 
attending physician will increase the flow of unwanted 
paperwork into physicians' offices. One commenter suggested 
that we require HHAs to inform the attending physician of 
the availability of the discharge summary. 



Response:

 We understand the commenters' concern and 
have accepted the suggestion. We have revised 484.48 to 
require the HHA to inform the attending physician of the 
availability of a discharge summary and send it to him or 
her upon request. This requirement will allow physicians to 
remain informed of the care furnished to their patients 
while minimizing the amount of unwanted paperwork being sent 
to physicians' offices. We would also like to clarify that 
the discharge summary need not be a separate piece of paper 
and could be incorporated into the routine summary reports 
already furnished to the physician. 



Comment:

 One commenter stated that the discharge 
summary requirement could not be implemented without 
clearance under the Paperwork Reduction Act. 



Response:

 We do not agree with the commenter. The 
requirement that HHAs maintain a discharge summary for each 
patient is not new. Section 484.48 has long required the 
HHA to include a discharge summary in the patient's clinical 
record. This rule does not impose any additional paperwork 
requirements. It only requires the HHA to make the 
discharge summary (already required under the existing 
conditions of participation) available to the patient's 
attending physician upon request. Also, as stated above, we 
are not requiring that the discharge summary be a separate 
piece of paper that is not part of the routine summary 
reports already being submitted to the physician. 



Comment:

 One commenter requested that we specify the 
required contents of the discharge summary. 



Response:

 We are specifically requiring only that the 
discharge summary include the patient's medical and health 
status at discharge. We are otherwise providing the HHAs 
the flexibility to include whatever additional information 
they consider to be relevant and necessary. 






