 

FSIS believes that conclusions reached in the 1979 health and safety report regarding fluoride content of MS(K) from
fowl and MS(K) from all other poultry sources have not changed significantly. FSIS believes that the data reported
in the 1979 health and safety report are currently the best available on this subject and the conclusions reached are
valid. However, FSIS is aware that the benefits of fluoride in the diet continues to be studied by the scientific community
and that more information is available today on the subject than in 1979 when the Agency published the health and safety
report. 
The 1993 National Academy of Sciences' Subcommittee on Health Effects of Ingested Fluoride report titled, ``Health
Effects of Ingested Fluoride'' (NAS Fluoride Report),

8

 commissioned by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) provides current information on the complexities of
assessing effects of fluoride in the diet and makes recommendations for further research. The NAS Fluoride Report
cites dental products containing fluoride (topical fluoride applications by dentists, fluoride supplementation,
and ingestion of fluoride dentifrices), beverages made with water containing fluoride (tea and coffee, as well as
manufactured drinks), and foods as being the major sources of ingested fluoride. The NAS Fluoride Report points out
that, while ingestion of fluoride from some sources may have gone up, some food sources of fluoride have gone down.
For example, ingestion of fluoride from infant formulas (a source of dietary fluoride considered in the 1979 health
and safety report) has gone down because of the agreement among the producers of infant formulas to use only water low
in fluoride for all their products. The changing sources of fluoride ingestion makes assessing intakes and effects
on populations inherently difficult. In the modern U.S. environment, people are exposed to fluoride from food, beverages,
toothpaste, and a variety of prescribed or over-the-counter dental products. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


8

</FOOTNAME>
This report is available for public inspection in the FSIS Docket Clerk's office. 
</FOOTNOTE>


While the NAS Fluoride Report reiterates the positive effects of increased fluoride intake on reduction of dental
caries in the 1990's as compared to the 1950's, it also cites the side effect of dental fluorosis, e.g., too much fluoride
ingested in early childhood while teeth are forming. Dental fluorosis occurs when the enamel covering of the teeth
fails to crystallize properly, leading to defects that range from barely discernible to severe brown stain, surface
pitting, and brittleness. The report states that ``the most effective approach to controlling the prevalence of
severity of dental fluorosis, without jeopardizing the benefits of fluoride to oral health, is likely to come from
more judicious control of fluoride in foods, processed beverages, and dental products, especially those items used
by young children.'' 
FSIS agrees with this conclusion and maintains its concern for the potential effect of fluorosis in the susceptible
population of babies, infants, and toddlers. Therefore, FSIS believes that the tentative position set forth in its
March 1994 ANPR previously discussed, to restrict the use of MS(K) made from fowl in baby (i.e., strained), junior,
and toddler foods is prudent. However, FSIS is requesting that commenters provide to the Agency any information that
would either reaffirm or contradict the conclusions reached in the 1979 health and safety report. FSIS intends to
reassess and update the 1979 health and safety report regarding fluoride in light of information submitted in response
to this proposal. 
3. 

Poultry product limitations. 

FSIS believes that the use of MS(K) should be limited in certain poultry products. FSIS is proposing that MS(K) should
not be allowed in poultry products that are composed of whole poultry muscle, and expected to be as such by consumers,
except that it may be used for binding purposes at a level that is sufficient for purpose. However, FSIS will allow MS(K)
in the sauce portion or any dressing of poultry products. 
MS(K) is a highly comminuted ingredient with a spread-like consistency and FSIS considers its use to be inconsistent
with the basic characteristics associated with poultry products that have been processed only to the extent of cutting
or grinding or that are made from poultry products so processed, such as chicken breasts, turkey fillets, and shredded
chicken. FSIS also considers their use to be inconsistent with the basic characteristics associated with poultry
products that are processed, convenience versions of ready-to-cook poultry or cuts or solid pieces of poultry or
poultry meat, such as roasted chicken, boned turkey with natural juices, chicken a la Kiev, and turkey ham. FSIS is
proposing that the use of MS(K) not be permitted in these products. FSIS recognizes, however, that these types of products
sometimes are prepared with components the characteristics of which are not inconsistent with those of MS(K). 




