 

Background



In keeping with the FAA's policy of reviewing and upgrading regulations to ensure that they are consistent with changes
in the aviation environment, the FAA is conducting a two-phase regulatory review to amend Part 65, Subparts D and E
(14 CFR Part 65) of the FAR, which pertain to mechanics, mechanics holding inspection authorizations, and repairmen.
Since the recodification requirements for these airmen has not been accomplished and few significant revisions
to the subparts have been made. However, numerous technological advances in the aviation industry, recent FAA and
international regulatory activities, concerns over aging aircraft, and enhancements in training methods have
significantly affected all aspects of maintenance operations. Additionally, various and often conflicting interpretations
of the existing regulations periodically have resulted in confusion among the airmen for whom this part was intended.
Because of these factors, the FAA has instituted this complete regulatory review of Part 65, Subparts D and E.

In November 1989, a joint industry/FAA Part 65 review group was formed to evaluate and review certification requirements
for mechanics and repairmen. The review group's objective was to develop and present a unified position on Part 65.
The group comprised representatives from several aviation associations and was coordinated by the Professional
Aviation Maintenance Association (PAMA). FAA interests were represented by the Aircraft Maintenance Division
(AFS300) of the FAA.

The review group conducted a series of panel discussions throughout the United States and, as a result, drafted the


Industry/FAA Part 65 Review Group Working Paper, 

which was published on January 31, 1991. This paper presented the issues of general agreement within the review group
and also presented those issues that the group believed would require further discussion.

Further impetus for the Part 65 review came with ARAC's establishment. The ARAC charter became effective on February
5, 1991. ARAC was established to assist the FAA in the rulemaking process by providing input from outside the Government
on major regulatory issues affecting aviation safety. ARAC includes representatives of air carriers, manufacturers,
general aviation, labor groups, universities, associations, airline passenger groups, and the general public.
Under the framework provided by ARAC, the previously established Part 65 review group became a working group of ARAC.
ARAC's formation has given the FAA additional opportunities to solicit information directly from significantly
affected parties who meet and exchange ideas about proposed rules and existing rules that should either be revised
or eliminated.

The issues agreed upon by the review group in the January 31, 1991, working paper and the consensus achieved at subsequent
meetings of the Part 65 working group have become the basis for the changes proposed in this NPRM, which constitute
phase I of the Part 65 regulatory review. The issues that require further discussion and agreement by the members of
the working group (such as the evaluation of any potential for additional certificates and ratings and the expansion
of aviation repair specialist privileges) will become the basis for phase II of the regulatory review and a subsequent
NPRM.

In support of this regulatory review, the FAA completed a historical review of Part 65, Subparts D and E, on October
22, 1991. This review revealed that there have been 17 amendments (1 of which was rescinded), 3 petitions for rulemaking,
and 100 exemption actions to these subparts since recodification. In addition, one accident, the Aloha Airlines
Boeing 737 structural failure on April 28, 1988, generated National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) recommendations
related to these subparts.

The three petitions for rulemaking addressed issues associated with establishing certificates and ratings for
avionics and instrument technicians, recertifying mechanics, and allowing applicants for mechanic certificates
who desire to qualify on the basis of experience and have not graduated from an approved Part 147 aviation maintenance
technician school to take the oral and practical tests for a certificate or rating before completing the required
written tests.



