 

Chief Operating Officer, Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation, McLean, Virginia 221020826. 


Notification procedure: 


All inquiries about this system of records shall be addressed to: Privacy Act Officer, Farm Credit System Insurance
Corporation, McLean, Virginia 221020826. 


Record access procedures: 


Requests for access to a record shall be directed to: Privacy Act Officer, Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation,
McLean, Virginia 221020826, as provided in 12 CFR 1403.3. 


Contesting record procedures: 


Requests for amendments of a record shall be directed to: Privacy Act Officer, Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation,
McLean, Virginia 221020826, as provided in 12 CFR 1403.7. 


Record source categories: 


Corporation employees and other individuals doing business with Corporation. 


FCSIC6 


System name: 


Procurement Records_FCSIC. 


System location: 


These records are located at the Farm Credit Administration, McLean, Virginia 221020826. 


Categories of individuals covered by the system: 


Individuals, corporations, and governmental entities who provide or may provide supplies or services to the Corporation
by contract or purchase order. 


Categories of records in the system: 


Bids, offers, lease agreements, purchase orders, requisitions, and other pertinent written information related
to purchase transactions. 


Authority for maintenance of the system: 


12 U.S.C. 2277a7, 2277a8; 40 U.S.C. 471 

et seq. 


Routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categories of users and the purpose of such uses: 


Information contained in this system of records is used by the Corporation as the basis for maintaining control of
purchase transactions and to provide a minimum of opportunity for fraud as well as the maximum feasible opportunity
for audit as related to the purchase of supplies and services obtained. 
(1) In the event that information in this record system indicates a violation or potential violation of law, whether
civil, criminal, or regulatory in nature, and whether arising by general statute or particular program statute,
or by regulation, rule, or order issued pursuant thereto, the relevant records may be referred, as a routine use, to
the appropriate agency, whether Federal, State, local, or foreign, charged with the responsibility of investigating
or prosecuting such violation or charged with enforcing or implementing the statute, or rule, regulation, or order
issued pursuant thereto. 
(2) Information in this record system may be disclosed as a routine use to a Federal, State, or local agency maintaining
civil, criminal, or other relevant enforcement information or other pertinent information, such as current licenses,
if necessary to obtain information relevant to a decision concerning the hiring or retention of an employee, the letting
of a contract, or the issuance of a grant or other benefit. 
(3) Information in this record system may be disclosed to a Federal agency, in response to its request, in connection
with the hiring or retention of an employee, the issuance of a security clearance, the reporting of and investigation
of an employee, the letting of a contract, or the issuance of a license, grant, or other benefit by the requesting agency,
to the extent that the information is relevant and necessary to the requesting agency's decision on the matter. 
(4) Disclosure may be made to a congressional office from the record of an individual in response to an inquiry from
the congressional office made at the request of that individual. 
(5) It shall be a routine use of the records in this system of records to disclose them to the Department of Justice or
to disclose them in a proceeding before a court or adjudicative body before which the agency is authorized to appear,
when 
(a) The agency, or any component thereof; or 
(b) Any employee of the agency in his or her official capacity; or 
(c) Any employee of the agency in his or her individual capacity where the Department of Justice or the agency has agreed
to represent the employee; or 
(d) The United States, where the agency determines that litigation is likely to affect the agency or any of its components,

 

is a party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and the use of such records by the Department of Justice
or the use of such records in the proceeding is deemed by the agency to be relevant and necessary to the litigation, provided,
however, that in each case, the agency determines that disclosure of the records to the Department of Justice or the
disclosure of such records in the proceeding is a use of the information contained in the records that is compatible
with the purpose for which the records were collected. 


(6) In the event that information in this record system is needed in the course of presenting evidence to a court, magistrate,
or administrative tribunal, the relevant records may be referred, as a routine use, to the appropriate person to use
as evidence. 


Policies and practices for storing, retrieving, accessing, retaining, and disposing of records in the system: Storage:



Records are maintained in file folders. 


Retrievability: 


Records filed: (1) In numerical order by purchase order or contract number; and (2) alphabetically by the name of the
vendor. 


Safeguards: 


Maintained in area which is locked after business hours. Access to this record system is limited to employees and persons
with contractual authority within the Corporation and the FCA. 


Retention and disposal: 


In accordance with National Archives and Records Administration General Records Schedule requirements for procurement
records. 


System manager(s) and addresses: 


Chief Operating Officer, Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation, McLean, Virginia 221020826. 


Notification procedure: 


All inquiries about this system of records shall be addressed to: Privacy Act Officer, Farm Credit System Insurance
Corporation, McLean, Virginia 221020826.

