 

Education and Service Linkage 



As part of its long-range planning, HRSA will be targeting its efforts to strengthening linkages between U.S. Public
Health Service education programs and programs which provide comprehensive primary care services to the underserved.




Smoke-Free Workplace 



The Public Health Service strongly encourages all grant recipients to provide a smoke-free workplace and promote
the non-use of all tobacco products. This is consistent with the PHS mission to protect and advance the physical and
mental health of the American people. 



Other Considerations 



In addition, funding factors may be applied in determining funding of approved applications. 

A funding preference is defined as the funding of a specific category or group of approved applications ahead of other
categories or groups of approved applications in a discretionary program, or favorable adjustment of the formula
which determines the grant award in a formula grant program. 

It is not required that applicants request consideration for a funding factor. Applications which do not request
consideration for funding factors will be reviewed and given full consideration for funding. 



Statutory General Preference 



All of the Family Medicine Training grant programs are subject to the statutory general preference. As provided in
section 791(a) of the PHS Act, statutory preference will be given to any qualified applicant that_ 

(A) Has a high rate for placing graduates in practice settings having the principal focus of serving residents of medically
underserved communities; or 

(B) During the 2-year period preceding the fiscal year for which such an award is sought, has achieved a significant
increase in the rate of placing graduates in such settings. 

This statutory preference will only be applied to applications that rank above the 20th percentile of proposals recommended
for approval by the peer review group. 

For Grants for Predoctoral Training in Family Medicine, the following definitions apply: 

High rate 

is defined as a minimum of 20 percent of graduates of the medical school in academic year 198990 or 199091.




Significant increase in the rate

 means that the rate of placing academic year 199091 graduates in the specified settings is at least 50 percent
higher than the rate of placing academic year 198990 graduates in such settings and that not less than 15 percent
of academic year 199091 graduates are working in these areas. Academic years 198990 and 199091
are used because they are the two most recent years that medical school graduates would have entered practice following
the completion of residency training. 

For Grants for Graduate Training in Family Medicine, the following definitions apply: 

High rate 

is defined as a minimum of 25 percent of combined graduates of the residency training program in academic years 199192
through 199394. 



Significant increase in the rate 

means that, between academic years 199293 and 199394, the rate of placing graduates in the specified
settings has increased by a minimum of 50 percent and not less than 15 percent of graduates from the most recent year
are working in these areas. 

For Grants for Family Medicine Faculty Development, the following definitions apply: 

High rate

 is defined as a minimum of 20 percent of faculty development/fellowship program graduates in academic year 199293
or academic year 199394, whichever is greater, who spend at least 50 percent of their worktime in the specified
settings. 



Significant increase in the rate

 means that, between academic years 199293 and 199394, the rate of placing faculty development/fellowship
program graduates in the specified settings has increased by a minimum of 50 percent and that not less than 15 percent
of the academic year 19931994 graduates are working in these areas. 




