 




<RINDOCK>[File No. 941 0075]</RINDOCK>



<DOCTITLE>Revco D.S., Inc.; Proposed Consent Agreement With Analysis to Aid Public Comment</DOCTITLE>


<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Federal Trade Commission.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Proposed consent agreement.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

In settlement of alleged violations of federal law prohibiting unfair acts and practices and unfair methods of competition,
this consent agreement, accepted subject to final Commission approval, would require, among other things, a Ohio-based
drugstore chain to divest, within one year of the order, to a Commission approved acquirer, all assets related to the
retail sale of prescription drugs in either the respondent's store or in the acquired Hook-SupeRx (HSI) retail store
in each of three geographic areas, and to complete the divestiture within one year. If not complete in that period of
time, the order would require the respondent to consent to the appointment of a trustee to divest the assets. In addition,
the proposed consent agreement would require the respondent to obtain prior Commission approval, for ten years,
before acquiring any similar business interest in any of the three specified towns. 


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

Comments must be received on or before September 26, 1994.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Comments should be directed to FTC/Office of the Secretary, Room 159, 6th St. and Pa. Ave., N.W., Washington, DC. 20580.


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:
0

Laura Wilkinson or Ann Malester, FTC/S2224, Washington, DC 20580. (202) 2262830 or 3262682.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

Pursuant to Section 6(f) of the Federal Trade Commission Act, 38 Stat. 721, 15 U.S.C. 46 and Section 2.34 of the Commission's
Rules of Practice (16 CFR 2.34), notice is hereby given that the following consent agreement containing a consent
order to divest, having been filed with and accepted, subject to final approval, by the Commission, has been placed
on the public record for a period of sixty (60) days. Public comment is invited. Such comments or views will be considered
by the Commission and will be available for inspection and copying at its principal office in accordance with Section
4.9(b)(6)(ii) of the Commission's Rules of Practice (16 CFR 4.9(b)(6)(ii)).



In the matter of Revco D.S., Inc., a corporation. File No. 9410075.


Agreement Containing Consent Order



The Federal Trade Commission (``Commission'') having initiated an investigation of the proposed acquisition of
all of the voting stock of Hook SupeRx, Inc. (``HSI''), by Revco D.S., Inc. (``Revco''), and it is now appearing that
Revco, hereinafter sometimes referred to as ``Proposed Respondent,'' is willing to enter into an agreement containing
an order (``Agreement'') to divest certain assets, and to cease and desist from making certain acquisitions, and
providing for certain other relief:
It is hereby agreed by and between Proposed Respondent, by its duty authorized officers and attorneys, and counsel
for the Commission that: 
1. Proposed Respondent Revco is a corporation organized, existing, and doing business under and by the virtue of the
laws of the State of Delaware with its office and principal place of business located at 1925 Enterprise Parkway, Twinsburg,
Ohio 44087. 
2. Proposed Respondent admits all the jurisdictional facts set forth in the draft of complaint here attached.
3. Proposed Respondent waives:
a. any further procedural steps;
b. the requirement that the Commission's decision contain a statement of findings of fact and conclusions of law;

c. all rights to seek judicial review or otherwise to challenge or contest the validity of the order entered pursuant
to this agreement; and 
d. any claim under the Equal Access to Justice Act.
4. This Agreement shall not become part of the public record of the proceeding unless and until it is accepted by the
Commission. If this Agreement is accepted by the Commission it, together with the draft of complaint contemplated
thereby, will be placed on the public record for a period of sixty (60) days and information in respect thereto publicly
released. The Commission thereafter may either withdraw its acceptance of this agreement and so notify the Proposed
Respondent, in which event it will take such action as it may consider appropriate, or issue and serve its complaint
(in such form as the circumstances may require) and decision, in disposition of the proceeding. 
5. This Agreement is for settlement purposes only and does not constitute an admission by Proposed Respondent that
the law has been violated as alleged in the draft of complaint here attached, or that the facts as alleged in the draft
complaint, other than the jurisdictional facts, are true. 
6. This Agreement contemplates that, if it is accepted by the Commission, and if such acceptance is not subsequently
withdrawn by the Commission pursuant to the provisions of Section 2.34 of the Commission's Rules, the Commission
may, without further notice to the Proposed Respondent, (1) issue its complaint corresponding in form and substance
with the draft of complaint here attached and its decision containing the following Order to divest and to cease and
desist in disposition of the proceeding, and (2) make information public with respect thereto. When so entered, the
Order shall have the same force and effect and may be altered, modified, or set aside in the same manner and within the
same time provided by statute for other orders. The Order shall become final upon service. Delivery by the United States
Postal Service of the complaint and decision containing the agreed-to Order to Proposed Respondent's address as
stated in this Agreement shall constitute service. Proposed Respondent waives any right it may have to any other manner
of services. The complaint may be used in construing the terms of the Order, and no agreement, understanding, representation,
or interpretation not contained in the Order or the agreement may be used to vary or contradict the terms of the Order.

7. Proposed Respondent has read the proposed Complaint and Order contemplated hereby. Proposed Respondent understands
that once the Order has been issued, it will be required to file one or more compliance reports showing that it has fully
complied with the Order. Proposed Respondent further understands that it may be liable for civil penalties in the
amount provided by law for each violation of the Order after it becomes final. 


Order 


I


It is ordered That, as used in this Order, the following definitions shall apply: 
A. ``Revco'' means Revco D.S., Inc., its predecessors, subsidiaries, divisions, groups and affiliates controlled
by Revco, and their respective directors, officers, employees, agents, representatives, and their respective
successors and assigns. 
B. ``Commission'' means the Federal Trade Commission. 
C. ``Acquisition'' means the acquisition of all the voting stock of Hook-SupeRx, Inc. (``HSI`'') by Respondent Revco.

D. ``Acquirer'' means the party or parties to whom Respondent Revco divests the assets herein ordered to be divested.

E. ``Prescription drugs'' means ethical drugs available at retail only by prescription. 
F. ``HSI Pharmacy Business'' means HSI's business of selling prescription drugs at any of the retail stores listed
in Paragraph I.(J). of this Order, but does not include HSI's business of selling other products in those retail stores.


</SUPPLEM>
