 

(iii) Remedial measures have been recommended by the Standing Committee of the Convention that have not been implemented;
and 

(B) The suspension might be necessary for the conservation of the species.'' 

This final decision is based on various documents, including published and unpublished studies. Documents on which
this final decision is based are on file in the Service's Office of Management Authority, and are available on request.


On February 22, 1993, the Service received a letter from G. A. Punguse, Chief Game and Wildlife Officer for Ghana, requesting
that the United States stop African grey parrot shipments from Togo to the United States and stating that no African
grey parrot populations are found in Togo and that all of the birds exported from Togo are actually smuggled from Ghana.


On April 12, 1993, the Environmental Investigation Agency submitted a petition to the Service requesting the Secretary
to suspend imports of African grey parrots from C&ocirc;te d'Ivoire, Togo, and Benin to the United States. 

On April 15, 1993, the Service received a letter from the CITES Secretariat in Switzerland noting that a CITES report
(Dandliker, 1992) on the African grey parrot in Ghana indicates that the majority of the specimens that are exported
from C&ocirc;te d'Ivoire are in reality smuggled into C&ocirc;te d'Ivoire from Ghana and other countries. The letter
further noted that the Secretariat had corresponded with the Government of C&ocirc;te d'Ivoire, expressed its concerns
that large number of birds may have been smuggled from Ghana, and recommended that C&ocirc;te d'Ivoire stop exports
of African grey parrots until populations could be surveyed. 

At the eighth meeting of the CITES Conference of the Parties in Kyoto, Japan, Resolution Conf. 8.9 was adopted. The
Resolution, entitled ``The Trade in Wild-Caught Animal Specimens,'' established a process whereby the CITES Animals
Committee would communicate primary and secondary recommendations to CITES Parties regarding species that had
been identified as high-priority species. The African grey parrot is such a species. The resolution established
a process whereby the CITES Secretariat would assess whether a Party had implemented specific recommendations;
any failure to so demonstrate would be brought to the attention of the CITES Standing Committee. The Secretariat sent
recommendations from the Animals Committee to several CITES Parties in June 1992; those that did not reply were sent
reminders in October 1992 and January 1993. Based on the report of the Secretariat to the March 1993 meeting of the CITES
Standing Committee in Washington, DC, the Standing Committee unanimously recommended to all Parties that imports
be suspended for a number of species, including the African grey parrot from Guinea. 

On April 20, 1993, the CITES Secretariat issued Notification to the Parties No. 737, which notified the Parties of
the Standing Committee's recommendation to suspend imports of 

Psittacus erithacus 

from Guinea. 

On May 7, 1993, the CITES Secretariat issued Notification to the Parties No. 746, which ``strongly recommended''
that Parties ``not accept any comparable documentation from C&ocirc;te d'Ivoire for trade in specimens of African
grey parrots (

P. erithacus

), including the subspecies 

P. e. erithacus 

and 

P. e. timneh.

'' This recommendation remains in effect until the CITES Secretariat is satisfied that the government of C&ocirc;te
d'Ivoire has ``completed surveys on its wild populations of African grey parrots and based on those surveys, establishes
a management plan for sustainable international trade; and has taken appropriate measures to prevent the illegal
import of grey parrots from other countries, and to ensure that shipments of grey parrots that are exported from C&ocirc;te
d'Ivoire do not include birds that have been imported illegally.'' The Notification notes that a CITES report on the
grey parrot in Ghana indicates that the majority of 

P. erithacus

 exported from C&ocirc;te D'Ivoire are birds that are smuggled from Ghana and other countries. 

On August 25, 1993, the Service published a notice in the 

Federal Register

 (58 FR 44847) of receipt of the petition to suspend the import of African grey parrots from C&ocirc;te d'Ivoire, Togo,
and Benin to the United States under the Wild Bird Conservation Act of 1992 (WBCA). That notice proposed suspension
of imports of African grey parrots from those countries and Guinea, and invited public comments. 

On October 23, 1993, the importation of African grey parrots as well as all other CITES-listed bird species (with some
exceptions) are prohibited, as provided by the WBCA, except as allowed pursuant to regulations which the Service
has promulgated under the WBCA (see 58 FR 60524). The Service notes however that it is required under the WBCA to issue
and publish in the 

Federal Register

 a final action on the petition, by not later than 90 days after the end of the period for public comment. Since the statutorily
mandated moratorium makes such a final action moot, and any action to suspend imports of African grey parrots from
C&ocirc;te d'Ivoire, Togo, and Benin to the United States would now be unnecessary, the Service instead hereby publishes
its findings and decision, and a summary of public comments received on the petition. 


