 

Pollution prevention is an important aspect of sediment 
management, as it is for most environmental issues. A variety of 
federal, state, and local pollution prevention efforts are underway 
that should result in long-term reductions in the degree to which 
sediments become contaminated. However, sediments also act as ``sinks'' 
for contaminants discharged in the past, and dredging projects by 
their very nature can expose this historic contamination. Therefore 
pollution prevention efforts in the foreseeable future are not 
expected to eliminate the dredging of contaminated sediments. 
Finally, there is no need to systematically tighten ocean suitability 
criteria because existing criteria do not allow toxic or highly 
contaminated sediments to be disposed at the site (suitability 
criteria are not tied to existing levels of contamination in area 
sediments). 


5. Compliance Wth Ocean Site Selection Criteria




Two commentors 
disagreed with EPA's determination that the regulatory requirements of 
the MPRSA were fully satisfied by the proposed site designation, 
particularly regarding the assessment of impacts to existing and 
potential fisheries, fish habitat and marine sanctuaries. 


Response 



EPA's determination of insignificant impacts to fisheries 
used conservative modelling of the worst case (highly dispersive) 
disposal scenarios. The evaluation indicated only localized impacts 
within the disposal site boundaries, based on: the highly mobile 
nature of the fish species present; the fact that the disposal site 
has relatively low abundances of commercially important fish species; 
and the fact that the site does not comprise unique fish habitat 
within the slope and shelf region. 
With respect to impacts to marine sanctuaries, the Final EIS 
documented that the expected increase in vessel traffic and resultant 
increased chance for accidents (

i.e., 

dredged material spills) during 
transportation through the sanctuaries will not be significant. 
Nevertheless, specific requirements to minimize any such risks are 
incorporated in the Final Rule. 


6. Requirement to Implement Site Management and Monitoring




Several 
commentors were concerned that the Proposed Rule did not clearly state 
that implementation of the site management and monitoring provisions 
is a strict condition for site use. 


Response



EPA intends that full implementation of the SMMP is a 
strict requirement of site use, and revisions have been be 
incorporated into the Final Rule to emphasize this and remove any 
ambiguity. 


7. Unique Nature of the Disposal Site



Several commentors stated 
that they were not satisfied that the SMMP as summarized in the 
Proposed Rule accounts for risks associated with a site which is the 
deepest and farthest from shore of any so far designated in the U.S., 
or that there is sufficient information on how dredged material will 
behave following disposal at such a deep site. 


Response


EPA recognizes that the proposed SFDODS, as well as the 
potential alternative ocean sites evaluated in the Final EIS, is the 
deepest and the farthest from shore of any ocean disposal site so far 
designated in the U.S. However, EPA has expended considerable effort 
to adequately characterize this previously not well-studied region of 
the California coast. Studies were conducted in accordance with an 
Ocean Studies Plan which was developed with input from Federal and 
State agencies as well as environmental and public interest groups. 
Because of the deep depths and distance from shore, EPA performed 
conservative (worst case) modeling to assess the fate of dredged 
material disposal at the alternative sites. The modeling results 
indicate that the bulk (75 to 90 percent) of the dredged material 
would be deposited on the seafloor within the disposal site 
boundaries, and that residual suspended material in the water column 
would be dissipated to background concentration levels within the 
disposal site boundaries, as well. These modeling predictions were 
confirmed by recent monitoring of actual dredged material disposal in 
the vicinity of the SFDODS by the U.S. Navy, performed as a 
requirement of their MPRSA Section 103 project-specific site 
designation. Preliminary results of their field studies confirmed 
that plumes in the water column could be tracked until they dissipated 
to background levels, and that the plumes dissipated to background 
levels within the disposal site boundaries. Furthermore, their 
findings confirmed that the sediment deposit footprint on the seafloor 
could be mapped, and that the sediment deposited within the disposal 
site boundary as predicted by the modeling performed for EPA's site 
designation EIS. Finally, the SMMP was developed to address the 
uncertainties and risks associated with use of this disposal site. 


8. Impacts to Nearby Marine Sanctuaries



One commentor stated that 
past disposal of chemical munitions, explosives, radioactive 
materials, sulfuric acid, and oil refinery waste at the site or nearby 
locations does not justify designating a disposal site near federally 
protected marine sanctuaries such as the Gulf of the Farallones 
National Marine Sanctuary and the Monterey Bay National Marine 
Sanctuary. 


Response




National marine sanctuaries are continuous along the 
coastline of the study region. The ocean disposal site is located off 
the continental shelf, at the extreme point of the Zone of Siting 
Feasibility established by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and 
several miles beyond the outer boundary of the nearest sanctuary. It 
is therefore as far removed from sanctuary boundaries as practicable. 
Furthermore, extensive oceanographic and modelling studies indicate 
that suspended sediment plumes should dissipate to background levels 
within the disposal site boundaries, and that under prevailing 
conditions (currents predominately to the north-northwest) the 
probability of any detectable sediment plumes drifting into the marine 
sanctuaries is extremely remote. The seafloor in the vicinity of the 
site has already been somewhat degraded by historic disposal of 
military munitions and other wastes so that, compared to alternative 
sites evaluated, cumulative effects to the deep benthos are minimized 
at this site. Indeed, there may even be a long-term beneficial effect 
within the disposal site as a result of cleaner (ocean suitable) 
dredged material being deposited on a previously degraded seafloor. 
Finally, designation of this site is consistent with guidance in the 
Ocean Dumping Regulations [40 CFR 228.5(e)] to locate disposal sites 
beyond the continental shelf and in areas of historical dumping where 
possible. 







