 

Several commenters indicated that the requirement for a new PIC/CEO agreement was beyond the requirements of the
Act and was potentially disruptive of agreements and arrangements that had been carefully and delicately worked
out at the inception of JTPA. There is no requirement to negotiate or renegotiate an otherwise satisfactory agreement
which is in place. The regulations only require the Governor to review the sufficiency of the PIC/CEO agreement in
terms of the requirements of the Act. 
In response to comments on 628.410(a)(3) of the interim final rule which requested clarification of the meaning
of paragraph (a)(3)(iv), this paragraph is removed in the final rule, since it is largely redundant of the contents
of the PIC/CEO agreement and the material that follows in paragraph (b) which the Governor may review in the course
of normal oversight. 
A few commenters asked for clarification on the components of the Wagner-Peyser plan which were applicable to SDA's.
The SESA agreement requirements are set forth in the Wagner-Peyser Act, at section 8(b)(1). These requirements generally
deal with employment service operational plans for carrying out the provisions of the Wagner-Peyser Act which must
be developed jointly with the PIC and local chief elected official. 
Regarding PIC membership selection, a few comments touched on the selection process for representatives of organized
labor. One comment asked that the regulations define ``labor federation'' to mean the AFLCIO at the State and
local levels and that a process be instituted for the Chief Elected Official (CEO) to ensure PIC representation by
the local AFLCIO rather than by individual workers. As provided in section 102(c)(3) of the Act, CEO's are to
consult recognized State and local labor federations for recommendations for the labor representatives to the PIC
and not an individual labor organization. For this reason, a description of the nomination process is specifically
required to be included in the PIC certification to be reviewed by the Governor. The Department agrees, however, that
there is a need for clarification as to what constitutes a labor federation and is adding language in the final rule,
at 628.410(a)(3), to indicate that a labor federation is an alliance of two or more labor unions, an example
of which is the AFLCIO. 
With respect to PIC representation in general, several commenters stressed the importance of ensuring that the nomination
process is opened up to balance important interests in the community, including the interests of older individuals
and women. The Department recognizes the importance of balanced demographic and community interest representation
and sensitivity to the diverse populations being served. This sensitivity is best displayed at the local level where
the composition of the community is known. While the Department strongly encourages CEO's and PIC's to make every
effort to assure that PIC membership is broadly representative of the community, the Department does not believe
it is appropriate to require this result through national rules. Thus, the Department has decided not to impose membership
requirements beyond those enumerated in section 102 of the Act. In communities with public housing agencies, given
the similarities in target populations, the Department does, however, encourage chief elected officials to include
such representation in their PIC membership under the category of ``public assistance agency''.

