 



Comments: 

Two fishermen commented in support of a permit buyout, with one recommending that all of the funds be used for this purpose,
after determining how many permits can remain in the fishery. An economic development council favored buyout of both
permits and vessels, to be implemented only if additional funds are made available. A charterboat operator supported
an unspecified buyout for ``businesses reliant on the salmon fishing.'' One individual noted that buying inactive
permits is ineffective. 

A trade association strongly opposed permit buyouts, citing lack of funds and the need to buy out both vessels and permits.
However, this group stated that a permit leaseback for a fixed time period might be necessary. A charterboat operator
stated that permit buyouts or leasebacks are impossible at this funding level, and would not reduce future harvests,
since only the least active would turn in their permits. He also noted that, since charterboats in Oregon and California
are not under limited entry permits, reduction of the charter fleet would not reduce recreational effort. A coastal
zone management association and a state senator stated that buyout or leaseback was an inappropriate use of the limited
funds. 



Response: 

NMFS believes that a program to buy out fishing permits is needed to provide immediate relief to fishermen and to reduce
the number of participants in the fishery. NMFS is proposing to allocate $4 million to a buyout program. NMFS recognizes
that permit buyouts would be feasible only in Washington at this time, since it is the only one of the affected states
that currently has a limited entry system without a fixed number of permits. California and Oregon laws provide that
new permits be issued to replace permits lost, in order to maintain an established number of existing permits. 



Comments: 

One fisherman supported a vessel buyout; another favored either a boat buyout or permit leaseback. A third fisherman
was strongly opposed to vessel buyouts, citing lack of funds and his belief that Washington State is trying to eliminate
the commercial industry in favor of recreational vessels. CDFG also opposed a vessel buyout, as their State
Code mandates restoration, not elimination, of fisheries. 



Response: 

NMFS believes that, given the limited resources for the NEAP program, the buyout program should apply to permits and
not to vessels. Vessels could potentially be used in other fisheries. Relinquishing permits would have the desired
effect of removing participants from the commercial fishery for salmon. 



Comments: 

A county economic development council supported efforts in development, diversification, and tourism promotion.
However, two individuals involved in fishing opposed any funding of local governments, or businesses for tourism
or other development projects. One of these expressed concern that tourism efforts would promote recreational opportunities
in fisheries where commercial fishermen have been ``regulated off the stocks.'' 



Response: 

EDA has allocated $882,000, primarily for tourism development activities in local communities and for reclamation
projects in tribal communities. Tourism projects will not be funded under the proposed NEAP program, the purpose
of which is to compensate individual commercial fishermen for uninsured losses suffered as a direct result of the
West Coast salmon fishery disaster. 



Comments: 

Two individuals, one of these a member of an Indian tribe, commented that dams on spawning rivers are the main cause
of the salmon disaster. 



Response: 

NMFS recognizes that there are factors other than natural causes that are responsible for the decline in the West Coast
salmon resources. The proposed NEAP program is intended to address some of these factors, including habitat restoration.




Comments: 

A fisherman, a member of an Indian tribe, and another individual questioned the quality of the data used by NMFS in the
ANPR. 



Response: 

NMFS reviewed several studies that attempted to determine impacts of the disaster on various sectors. NMFS used the
best data available at the time the ANPR was drafted. 



Comment: 

The Washington Department of Fisheries and Wildlife provided an economic analysis of the impact of the salmon fishery,
indicating that Washington's loss is approximately 65 percent of the total, and probably much greater when tribal
impacts are considered. 



Response: 

After careful consideration of many factors, which are discussed elsewhere in this document, NMFS is proposing total
target distributions among the affected states as follows: For Washington, $6.6 million; for Oregon and California,
$2.7 million each. 



Comments: 

Two charterboat operators and a member of an Indian tribe made recommendations related to fishery management needs,
including development of quotas and specific closure recommendations. 



Response: 

NMFS recognizes that there are many management issues to be considered in rebuilding the salmon stocks. However,
such issues are beyond the scope of this action and should be raised in the appropriate fishery management forums.




Comment: 

One Indian tribe noted that the conditions impacting the coho and chinook stocks also affect the availability of Fraser
River sockeye to tribal fishermen. 



Response: 

The sockeye salmon fishery is not excluded from the proposed program; all five species of salmon in the West Coast fisheries
are included. 



Comment: 

A member of an Indian tribe mentioned the increasing U.S interception of Canadian salmon. 



Response: 

The United States and Canada are continuing to negotiate on this issue. 



Proposed NEAP Program 



I. Statutory Authority 





