 

Still, the 

de facto

 protection of uninsured liabilities 
fueled the argument that such protected liabilities should 
be assessed. Since the assessment base already consisted 
(as it still does) generally of total domestic deposits, the 
universe of non-assessed liabilities was limited to foreign 
deposits and non-deposit liabilities. 

Section 141(a) of FDICIA amended section 13(c) of the 
FDI Act to impose a revised test for failure resolution. 
Instead of requiring that the resolution be no more costly 
than liquidation, the new test requires use of the 
resolution method that is least costly to the affected 
deposit insurance fund. Provisions for present-value 
analyses and documentation are specified in order to 
determine the least-costly resolution method. The FDIC may 
not protect uninsured deposits unless it is less costly to 
provide such protection than not to do so. Further, the 
FDIC is prohibited from pursuing any action, directly or 
indirectly, that would have the effect of increasing losses 
to the insurance fund by protecting foreign deposits 
(generally meaning deposits payable only outside the United 
States). Hence, all-deposit PA transactions are still 
permitted, provided the insurance fund does not incur any 
loss with respect to such deposit liabilities in an amount 
greater than the loss which would have been incurred with 
respect to such liabilities if they had not been assumed by 
the acquirer. 

The perceived ``too big to fail'' doctrine has been 
replaced by a new statutory exception for situations 
involving ``systemic risk''. In such cases_as determined 
by consensus among the FDIC, the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System, and the Secretary of the Treasury 
(in consultation with the President)_the FDIC may take 
action or provide assistance as necessary to avoid or 
mitigate the systemic effects of failure. However, the FDIC 
is required to recover the losses incurred under the 
systemic risk exception through one or more special 
assessments on the members of the affected insurance fund. 
As yet, this exception has not been used. 

The net result going forward is that for any individual 
resolution, protection will be provided only for insured 
deposits unless it is less costly to protect uninsured 
deposits as well. In any instance (expected to be quite 
rare) in which the ``systemic risk'' exception might be 
triggered, the FDIC is required to recover the loss to the 
applicable deposit insurance fund by means of a special 
assessment on the members of that fund. 

It has been argued in the past that the assessment base 
should be expanded beyond total domestic deposits in order 
to conform the base to the actual protections provided by 
the FDIC under the failure-resolution policies. However, 
many now believe that, given the new failure-resolution 
policies, this rationale for expanding the base has been 
weakened. (Of course, a shrinking of the assessment base 
might be viewed as warranted under the failure-resolution 
requirements, or an expansion might be warranted for other 
reasons.) 



D. Depositor Preference 



In August 1993, Congress enacted legislation 
establishing the priority order for payment on claims 
against an institution in receivership. As amended by this 
legislation, section 11(d)(11) of the FDI Act now provides 
for the priority of deposit liabilities of the institution 
over other general or senior liabilities. (Subject to the 
cross-guarantee provisions of section 5(e) of the FDI Act, 
claims with priority over deposit liabilities are secured 
claims to the extent of the security, and administrative 
expenses of the receiver.) This situation raises the 
question of whether, or to what extent, the assessment base 
should reflect the protection granted by this provision to 
uninsured deposits. 



III. Analytical Framework 



A. Evaluation Criteria 



It is the FDIC's intention to apply an assessment base 
definition that addresses the requirements of the deposit 
insurance program over the long run, rather than one 
designed only to respond to the current conditions in the 
banking industry. To this end, the FDIC has identified 
certain characteristics that it believes can be used as 
criteria for analyzing and comparing alternative 
definitions. These criteria, which address the issues and 
concerns discussed in the preceding section, are outlined 
below. They are applied in the final section of this Notice 
as a framework for analyzing various alternative assessment-base definitions. 




