 

GNMA has established a multiclass securities bulletin board, named ``gREX'', which is operated by GNMA's Information
Agent, which at present is Chemical Bank. Financial information and offering circular disclosure information for
multiclass securities transactions will be posted on gREX. Interested parties may obtain gREX software by contacting
Chemical Bank at 18002341REX, or at the address set out in section II.B. above. Users must pay
for their connect time and software. 


G. Eligible MBS 



The May 26, 1994 Notice identified eligible MBS as GNMA I MBS backed by single family mortgages that were issued on or
after February 1, 1993. GNMA intends to expand the program to include other MBS and perhaps other securities. Announcements
of additional eligible securities will be made on gREX. 


H. Distribution Date 



With the expansion of eligible collateral and securities, GNMA may vary the distribution date, referred to as the
``Payment Date'' in the May 26, 1994 Notice, based on the type of multiclass transaction. Announcements of any changes
in the distribution date of multiclass securities will be made on gREX. 


I. Transaction Expenses 



During the initial stage, GNMA had no liability for payment of any fees or expenses, other than those of GNMA's Legal
Advisor, in connection with the GNMA guaranty of multiclass securities. One commentor suggested that GNMA include
the transaction expenses in its guaranty fee, citing the practice of FNMA and FHLMC. GNMA notes that these entities
have different programs from GNMA in that both of these entities issue securities as well as guaranteeing the securities.


GNMA has decided to continue the initial stage approach. Therefore, GNMA will not be liable for transaction expenses,
other than the Legal Advisor's fees. Subject to GNMA requirements, during the full participation stage, the Sponsors
generally will select the program participants to be used for each transaction and negotiate the fees (other than
those of the Financial Advisor) to be paid to the other program participants. 


III. Combination of Outstanding MBS 



There are a large number of outstanding MBS in current principal amounts that are not large enough to be traded efficiently
in the current MBS market. In addition, there are certain multiclass securities transactions that can be effected
most efficiently if the trust issuing the multiclass securities is funded by GNMA MBS having large outstanding principal
amounts. As necessary, to facilitate other multiclass securities transactions, to enhance the secondary market
for MBS and to raise revenues through the receipt of guarantee fees by GNMA, GNMA is implementing a program to permit
the combination of MBS into a new GNMA combined multiclass security entitled to the payments on the underlying MBS.
The guaranty fees to be charged to effect combination transactions will be established by GNMA from time to time and
announced on gREX. 


IV. Participation by Minority and Women-Owned Firms 


