 

Proposed Federal Information Processing Standards Publication


XXXXXX




(date)


Announcing the Standard for Application Profile for the Government Information Locator Service (GILS)




Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUBS) are issued by the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) after approval by the Secretary of Commerce pursuant to Section 111(d) of the Federal Property
and Administrative Services Act of 1949 as amended by the Computer Security Act of 1987, Public Law 100235.


1. Name of Standard. Application Profile for the Government Information Locator Service (GILS).

2. Category of Standard. Software Standard, Information Interchange.

3. Explanation. This standard describes an application profile for the Government Information Locator Service
(GILS). This application profile is based primarily on the American National Standard for Information Retrieval
Application Service Definition and Protocol Specification for Open Systems Interconnection (ANSI/NISO Z39.501992),
developed by the National Information Standards Organization (NISO). The Government Information Locator Service
(GILS) is a decentralized collection of servers and associated information services that will be used by the public
either directly or through intermediaries to find public information throughout the Federal government.

This GILS Profile specifies the use of ANSI/NISO Z39.501992 in information service applications and provides
specifications for the overall GILS application, including the GILS Core and other aspect of a GILS server operating
in the Internet environment. This GILS profile will enable GILS client systems to interconnect and to interoperate
with any GILS server. This profile addresses intersystem interactions and information interchange for the GILS,
but does not specify user interface requirements, the internal structure of databases that contain GILS Locator
Records, or search engine functionality.

GILS servers will support search and retrieval by accepting a search query and returning a result set or diagnostic
messages. GILS servers may also support browsing by accepting a well-known search query and returning a list of Locator
Records in brief display format.

Some of the information resources pointed to by GILS Locator Records, as well as the GILS server itself, may be available
electronically through other communications protocols including the common Internet protocols that facilitate
electronic information transfer such as remote login (Telnet), File Transfer Protocol (FTP), and electronic mail.
The use of SMTP and MIME protocols or other communications paths is outside the scope of the GILS Profile.

The GILS Profile was developed by a group of industry and government experts in ANSI/NISO Z39.501992 implementations,
system implementations, and the organization of information. The specifications included in the GILS Profile reflect
the consensus of this group based on its work and input from a range of stakeholders.

4. Approving Authority. Secretary of Commerce.

5. Maintenance Agency. U.S. Department of the Interior, United States Geological Survey (USGS).

Questions concerning this standard are to be addressed to the Maintenance Agency: GILS Program, United States Geological
Survey (USGS), 802 National Center, Reston, VA 22092. Users of this standard who need to be notified or changes that
occur prior to the next publication of the standard should complete the Change Request Form provided in this publication
and send it to: Standards Processing Coordinator (ADP), Computer Systems Laboratory, National Institute of Standards
and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899. The NIST will issue Change Notices on an as-needed basis.




