 

FDA also tentatively concludes that the label must state: 
``If a child accidentally swallows this product, call a doctor or 
a poison control center immediately.'' FDA agrees with the NDMA 
petition that treatment-oriented information should be included 
on the label because it informs attending persons in a poisoning 
incident of the need to take immediate action that could save the 
child's life and about what that action should be. Thus, it 
relates directly to the consequences of use of the product. 


FDA does not believe that the warning statement should be 
based upon or contain information relating to the potency of the 
iron product (i.e., different statements for products above and 
below 30 mg per dosage unit as requested by the AG petition, or 
reference to ``large doses'' of iron as a factor in determining 
whether poisoning may occur). The agency tentatively finds that 
such statements could cause members of the public to attempt to 
determine whether a large dose has been taken in a possible 
poisoning incident. Because most people are not capable of 
determining what dosage of iron may be nontoxic, toxic, or 
capable of causing serious harm or death, qualified medical or 
poison control personnel should determine the significance of the 
dose a child has ingested. 


Nor does there appear to be any reason to require that the 
statement include reference to the specific types of consequences 
that may arise from acute overdosage, i.e., nausea, vomiting, 
cardiovascular collapse, as requested by the AG petition. FDA does not believe that this information would materially
add to 
the label statement that overdose can cause harm or death, and 
fears that it may lead to the erroneous conclusion that, because 
a child does not exhibit one of the listed symptoms, the child is 
not in danger. 
e. 

How should the warning appear on the label? 

FDA agrees 
with the AGs' contention that the warning statement should appear 
prominently on the label of iron-containing products to 
effectively convey its message. Further, the act specifically 
requires, in sections 403(f) and 502(c), that information 
required to appear on the label of a food or a drug be 
prominently placed and appear with such conspicuousness, as 
compared with other printed matter, as to render it likely to be 
read by the ordinary individual under customary conditions of 
use. 


However, the AG petition provided no evidence to support the 
specific presentation elements that it requested for the warning 
statement, i.e., that it be boxed, in boldface type, and in a 
color that contrasts with the background and with other printed 
material on the label or labeling. The agency is not aware of 
any basis on which it can conclude that any of these specific 
elements are necessary to ensure that the statement appears on 
the label in a prominent and conspicuous manner. 

Further, in the agency's rulemaking that mandated warning 
statements on certain protein products, the agency decided not to 
mandate specific requirements for letter size and other format 
elements. However, the agency did require that the warning 
statement appear ``prominently and conspicuously on the principal 
display panel of the package label'' (21 CFR 101.17). FDA made a 
determination to give manufacturers flexibility to design their 
own label warning formats, while ensuring that the statement is 
prominent and conspicuous, so that consumers are given adequate 
notice of the information contained in the warning (47 FR 25379 
at 25382, June 11, 1982). In addressing the placement of the 
label warning, the agency noted that the seriousness and nature 
of the risk associated with the use of protein products in very 
low calorie diets was sufficient to require placement of the 
warning statement on the principal display panel (49 FR 13679 at 
13689). 

Section 201(k) of the act defines the term ``label'' as ``a 
display of written, printed, or graphic matter upon the immediate 
container of any article'' and further states that a requirement 
``that any word, statement, or other information appear on the 
label shall not be considered to be complied with unless such 
word, statement, or other information also appears on the outside 
container or wrapper if any there be, of the retail package of 
such article***.'' Thus, if FDA requires a label warning 
statement to appear on the immediate container of iron-containing 
products, it would also have to appear on the retail package of such a product if that package is not the immediate container.


As stated above, the fact that iron-containing products have 
resulted in reports of 2,000 poisonings in children over 
approximately 7 years provides evidence that many adults are not 
aware of the potential for serious harm posed by iron-containing 
products. Based on this fact, FDA tentatively finds that there 
are sufficient grounds to require that the label warning 
statement be printed directly on the immediate container of the 
product, i.e., the container that holds the tablet or capsule, 
and on the principal display panel of the retail package, i.e., 
an outer box, if such package is not the immediate container 
(many iron-containing products are packaged in this manner). If 
a product is sold in unit-dose packaging, this requirement will 
mean that the product will have to bear the warning directly on 
each unit-dose package or on a strip of unit-dose packages in 
such a way that separating the unit dose packages would not 
destroy the warning labeling. 




