 

During 1989 and through 1992, both historic and potential habitat of the species was surveyed (Harp 1991, 1992). No
new populations of the spruce-fir moss spider were discovered, and of the five previously recorded populations,
only one_the Avery and Caldwell County, North Carolina, population_appears to be stable (Harp 1992). 
The Yancey County, North Carolina, population appears to have been extirpated, and only a single individual could
be found at each of the two sites in Swain County, North Carolina (Harp 1992). The population in Sevier County, Tennessee,
was surveyed in 1989 and was considered to be relatively healthy at that time (Harp 1991). However, revisits to this
site in 1992 indicated the population level is declining, apparently in conjunction with a rapid decline in the forest
canopy occurring at the site and associated desiccation of moss-mat habitat (Harp 1992). 
The spruce-fir moss spider is very sensitive to desiccation and requires situations of high and constant humidity
(Coyle 1981; Harp 1991, 1992). Loss of forest canopy leading to increased light and decreased moisture on the forest
floor (resulting in desiccation of the moss mats) appears to be the major cause for the loss and decline of the spruce-fir
moss spider at all four of these sites and the major threat to the species' continued existence. In a 1991 letter to Keith
Langdon (National Park Service, Great Smoky Mountains National Park), Dr. Frederick Coyle (Western Carolina University)
indicated that the spruce-fir moss spider was common at one of the sites in Swain County, North Carolina, as late as
1983 but was extremely rare by 1988. In his letter to Keith Langdon, Dr. Coyle stated that many of the moss mats at this
site had become dry and loose, which he suspected was due largely to deterioration of the forest canopy at the site.
Fraser firs at all four of these sites (the Swain and Yancey County sites in North Carolina and the Sevier County, Tennessee,
site) have suffered extensive mortality, believed to be primarily due to infestation by the balsam wooly adelgid
(J. Harp, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, personal communication, 1993), a nonnative insect pest believed to have
been introduced into the United States from Europe (Eager 1984). 
Atmospheric deposition of pollutants, primarily affecting the red spruce (Harp 1992), may also be a major factor
(either directly or indirectly) in the decline of the forest canopy at these sites. It has been estimated that the red
spruce at the site in Yancey County, North Carolina, where the species is now believed to be extirpated, have lost 75
to 90 percent of their foliage (Krahl-Urban et al. 1988), possibly due to acid precipitation. The death and thinning
of the canopy trees within these stands also cause the remaining trees to be more susceptible to wind and other storm
damage, which has become a major concern at the Sevier County, Tennessee, site (J. Harp, personal communication 1992).





