 



Comment. 

The NPRM asked whether an exemption for National Guard facilities and other similar dwelling units in addition to
dwelling units for unaccompanied personnel should be included. The majority of commenters did not support such an
exception. A few suggested that the Board might contemplate an exemption if there was clear linkage between employee
job descriptions which preclude persons with disabilities and employee housing. One State's department of fish
and game requested an exemption for very remote cabins and dwellings used by seasonal employees. They stated: 




*** the nature of the work at these remote sites is such that employees must be `able-bodied' ***
Common sense dictates the Department not assign employees with mobility or sight impairments to these facilities
for the safety of the employee as well as the safety of his/her coworker(s). 




A number of commenters, including the National Conference of States on Building Codes and Standards, the State of
Hawaii Architectural Access Committee, and the City of New York, opposed such an exemption since the facility occupancy
and use may change. The Hawaii Commission for People with Disabilities and the Kentucky Office of the Governor both
pointed out that National Guard facilities are used to house the general public in the event of a disaster and neither
supported an exemption. 





Response. 

The guidelines do not contain an exemption for National Guard housing facilities or other similar dwelling units
for unaccompanied personnel. The majority of the commenters did not support such an exception. Several commenters
pointed out that in times of disaster, these facilities are used to shelter or provide other assistance to the public.
This is a compelling reason to require accessibility. 

Additionally, the Board has not provided any exceptions based on the presumed physical capabilities of building
occupants or employees. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), commented that such exceptions may
be inconsistent with title I of the ADA as it pertains to access for employees with disabilities. Title I of the ADA states
that employers must accommodate employees with disabilities unless doing so would impose an undue hardship. Issues
relating to other exceptions are further discussed in relation to ADAAG 4.1.1(5) (General Exceptions).



Comment. 

A few commenters, including the University of California and the National Association of Home Builders suggested
that in lieu of the proposed rule, the Board should adopt the Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines issued by Housing
and Urban Development (HUD) pursuant to the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (42 U.S.C. 3604 et seq.). Commenters
were concerned that overlapping federal guidelines would cause confusion among facility owners and developers.
The New Jersey Department of Community Affairs suggested that the Board adopt ``the reasonable and effective approach''
in the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards (UFAS). A number of commenters including the Disability Rights Education
and Defense Fund (DREDF) and the World Institute on Disability strongly supported the proposed rule. DREDF commented:
``It is highly commendable that the Board has chosen to apply ADAAG and UFAS to housing for its basic requirements ***
This approach must remain unchanged in the final standards.'' 


