 


Tuesday 


December 6, 1994 


 


Part VI 


Department of Education 


 


Notice Inviting Applications for Designation as an Eligible 
Institution for Fiscal Year 1995 for the Strengthening Institutions and 
Endowment Challenge Grant Programs; Notice 








Federal Register

/Vol. 59, No. 233/Tuesday, December 6, 
1994/Notices 











<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION</USDEPT>



<RINDOCK>[CFDA No. 84.031A, CFDA No. 84.031G] </RINDOCK>



Notice Inviting Applications for Designation as an Eligible Institution for fiscal year 1995 for the Strengthening
Institutions and Endowment Challenge Grant Programs 



PURPOSE: 

Institutions of higher education must meet specific statutory and regulatory requirements to be designated eligible
to receive funds under the Strengthening Institutions and Endowment Challenge Grant Programs authorized, respectively,
under Parts A and C of Title III of the Higher Education Act of 1965, as amended (HEA). 



In addition, section 316 of Title III of the HEA authorizes grants to Hispanic-serving institutions to enable them
to improve and expand their capacity to serve Hispanic and other low-income students. Since Congress has provided
funding for section 316 grants, the Department will hold a competition for new awards in Fiscal Year 1995. Hispanic-serving
institutions should note that to receive a grant under section 316, a Hispanic-serving institution must satisfy
the institutional eligibility requirements for the Strengthening Institutions and Endowment Challenge Grant
Programs, as well as additional statutory eligibility criteria. 

For Fiscal Years 1995 and 1996, the Department will conduct biennial grant award competitions under the Strengthening
Institutions Program and under section 316 of the HEA for Hispanic-serving institutions. Under a biennial grant
award competition, an institution submits a grant application that may be considered for funding under two successive
fiscal year grant award competitions. Applications are evaluated and ranked by field readers for the first competition.
If the institution's application is not selected for funding under the first fiscal year's award competition, it
will be considered for funding under the second fiscal year's award competition for new awards based upon the score
it received in the first competition. As part of this scheme, no new applications will be accepted for the second fiscal
year competition for new awards. Accordingly, if an institution wishes to apply for a new grant award under the Strengthening
Institutions Program for Fiscal Year 1995 or Fiscal Year 1996, it must submit an application for Fiscal Year 1995;
and if an institution wishes to apply for a grant award under section 316 of the HEA, it must submit an application for
Fiscal Year 1995. The Department will publish a separate closing date notice for those grant applications. 

In making awards under the Strengthening Institutions Program, under section 313(b) of the HEA, the Secretary gives
priority in funding to institutions that are not already receiving funding under a Strengthening Institutions Program
grant. Therefore, in awarding grants in Fiscal Year 1995, the Secretary will fund in rank-order from those applicants
that have a funding priority in Fiscal Year 1995. In awarding grants in 
Fiscal Year 1996, the Secretary will fund in rank-order from those applicants that have a funding priority in Fiscal
Year 1996. 

The biennial grant award competition has the following institutional eligibility implications. To receive a grant
in Fiscal Year 1995, an institution must submit an institutional eligibility application to the Department by the
deadline date set forth in this notice and must qualify as an eligible institution. To receive a grant in Fiscal Year
1996, an institution must submit an institutional eligibility application to the Department by the deadline date
set forth in a notice that will be published for that year and must qualify as an eligible institution under that notice.


For purposes of awarding grants under section 316 of the HEA, if the Secretary selects an institution to receive a grant
in Fiscal Year 1996, for purposes of determining whether the institution has an enrollment of undergraduate full-time
equivalent students that is at least 25 percent Hispanic students, the Secretary will consider that the institution
submitted its application in Fiscal Year 1996. 

To receive a grant in Fiscal Year 1996, an institution does not have to submit an institutional eligibility application
to the Department in Fiscal Year 1995. However, the failure to submit an eligibility application for Fiscal Year 1995
will preclude that institution from receiving any benefits that derive from being an eligible institution during
that fiscal year. 



