 



Response. 

NMFS acknowledges that the proposed rule would increase observer costs for vessels equal to or greater than 60 ft (18.3
m) LOA but less than 125 ft (38.1 m) LOA that use trawl or hook-and-line gear to participate in a directed fishery for
Alaska groundfish. Larger vessels currently are required to have an observer on board at all times and are not affected
by the proposed change in coverage requirements. The increased observer coverage for vessels equal to or greater
than 60 ft (18.3 m) LOA but less than 125 ft (38.1 m) LOA is necessary to obtain more adequate information on which the
groundfish fisheries are managed, including better estimates of groundfish catch, discard amounts, and prohibited
species bycatch rates. Delay of regulatory action to increase observer coverage until the North Pacific Fisheries
Research Plan is effective would neglect identified data requirements necessary for effective management of the
Alaska groundfish fisheries.



Comment 2. 

The increased financial burden to the small boat fleet that will ensue from increased observer coverage is out of proportion
to the benefits that might result, particularly if NMFS continues to use observer data primarily as a basis for fishery
closures or enforcement, rather than for more effective fishery management.



Response. 

NMFS's primary responsibility for inseason management of the groundfish resource is to monitor groundfish harvests
and prohibited species bycatch rates, so that when a groundfish total allowable catch (TAC) or a prohibited species
bycatch allowance is reached, fishery closures can be implemented to prevent specified TACs or bycatch allowances
from being exceeded.

Existing observer coverage requirements established for vessels equal to or greater than 60 ft (18.3 m) LOA but less
than 125 ft (38.1 m) LOA were determined by the Council and its 

ad hoc

 Observer Committee to be inadequate to meet data needs for effective monitoring of groundfish and prohibited species
catch amounts by this segment of the groundfish fleet. NMFS concurs in this determination and has approved the Council's
recommended increase in observer coverage for vessels equal to or greater than 60 ft (18.3 m) LOA but less than 125 ft
(38.1 m) LOA. The increase is intended to improve the level of observer coverage from this size class of vessel without
imposing costs that are disproportionate to the benefits that are anticipated to result from better inseason management
of the groundfish fisheries.

Use of observer data is not limited to inseason management of the fisheries and compliance monitoring of regulatory
programs. Observer data also are used to assess the status of fishery resources and as a basis for assessment and development
of management measures. NMFS has released certain observer data to the public under the Freedom of Information Act
for purposes of independent industry analyses of prohibited species bycatch rates and operational factors that
may reduce bycatch rates of these species. Additional observer data may be disclosed to support industry initiatives
to reduce prohibited species bycatch rates under a proposed rule published in the 

Federal Register

 January 19, 1994 (59 FR 2817). These Federal and private initiatives to use observer data for more effective fishery
management will be enhanced to the extent that more observer data are collected from vessels under 125 ft (38.1 m) LOA
as set out in this final rule.



Comment 3. 

The purpose and intent of the proposed rule to correct problems encountered by NMFS in administering observer coverage
on vessels equal to or greater than 60 ft (18.3 m) LOA but less than 125 ft (38.1 m) LOA are supported. However, given the
direction in which the fishery management process is progressing, 30 percent coverage for these vessels likely is
inadequate; 100 percent observer coverage on all vessels capable of carrying an observer should be considered.



Response. 

One hundred percent observer coverage on vessels equal to or greater than 60 ft LOA but less than 125 ft LOA has been required
for particular fisheries for specified areas and limited time periods to meet special management needs (59 FR 3000,
January 20, 1994, as modified at 59 FR 4009, January 28, 1994, and 59 FR 15346, April l, 1994). However, the additional
costs associated with 100 percent observer coverage on all vessels in the groundfish fishery under 125 ft LOA in all
areas at all times would impose disproportionate costs on this sector of the groundfish fleet and, therefore, are
not now justified under the current open access groundfish management program. NMFS will continue to assess the need
for increased observer coverage to meet special resource or fishery management needs.



Comment 4. 

Despite support for the proposed action, concerns remain about the ability of vessels to manipulate observer coverage
in certain fisheries and/or in certain areas where prohibited species bycatch rates may be higher. To address these
concerns, the final rule should be amended to require a vessel equal to or greater than 60 ft (18.3 m) LOA but less than
125 ft (38.1 m) LOA to carry an observer for 30 percent of the days it engages in any particular fishery during any calendar
quarter in which it meets the threshold (3-day) minimum requirement on a fishery-by-fishery basis.



Response. 

The final rule limits the manipulation of observer coverage by decreasing the number of fishing days in a quarter that
trigger observer coverage requirements, basing coverage requirements on fishing days rather than fishing trip
days, and requiring observation of at least one trip for each fishery that a vessel participates in during a quarter.
These measures should reduce the potential for manipulation of observer coverage and increase the amount of observer
data available for the management of specific fisheries. Nonetheless, an opportunity still exists for a vessel operator
to manipulate observer coverage to reduce or increase coverage in different fisheries.



