 

C. 

Participant Eligibility:

 Each participant representing a U.S. institution, whose travel costs are covered under this program's funding,
must be a U.S. citizen. Each participant representing a foreign institution must be a citizen, national, or permanent
resident of the eligible foreign country in which the foreign partner institution is located.
D. 

Ineligibility:

 A proposal will be deemed technically ineligible if:
(1) It does not fully adhere to the guidelines established herein and in the Application Package, including budgetary
requirements.
(2) The applicant is not an accredited two- or four-year institution, or a non-profit organization.
(3) The project does not constitute a direct partnership with a post-secondary business management program in Croatia
or Macedonia.
(4) The project involves partnerships in more than one country.
(5) The project does not seek to address the faculty, curriculum, and administrative aspects entailed in developing
the business management program identified.
(6) The project does not provide for in-country presence of U.S. faculty.
(7) The proposal requests USIA support for indirect costs.
(8) The project includes profits or fees.
E. 

Institutional Commitment:

 In making award decisions, USIA will focus especially on evidence of an ongoing commitment by the U.S. partner to internationalizing
its educational programs as well as a commitment by both partner institutions to the success of the particular exchange
program. Each proposal must include documentation of institutional support for the proposed program in the form
of signed letters of endorsement from the president, chancellor, or director of the U.S. and foreign institution(s)
involved. The documentation may also be submitted in the form of a signed agreement by the same persons. Each agreement
or letter of endorsement must describe the institution's commitment to an on-going partnership and make specific
reference to the proposed program and how it will fit into and be supported by the institution's current activities
in internationalizing its educational programs. Proposals must discuss on how the partnership will be continued
beyond the period of the grant award. If not submitted with original proposal, documentation of support from foreign
institutions must be received by 5 p.m. Washington, D.C. time on October 24, 1994, addressed to Robin Kline or Mary
Ann Garlic, E/ASU, Room 349, U.S. Information Agency, 301 4th Street SW., Washington, DC 20547. Applicant institutions
are required to make their own arrangements with the appropriate foreign institutions regarding institutional
commitment and visas, and the proposal must make reference to this requirement.


Proposed Budget:

 USIA anticipates awarding one grant not to exceed $300,000 for a project in Macedonia, and one grant not to exceed $200,000
for a project in Croatia. Institutions must submit a comprehensive line item budget, including a budget summary page,
based on the specific guidance in the Application Package. USIA will not pay for indirect costs under this program;
however, indirect costs may be included as part of an institution's cost sharing. Requesting USIA support for indirect
costs will result in technical ineligibility. Proposals must demonstrate substantial cost-sharing (dollar and
in-kind) in both program and administrative categories, including overseas partner contributions. Cost-sharing
may be in the form of allowable direct or indirect costs. The recipient must maintain written records to support all
allowable costs which are claimed as being its contribution to cost participation, as well as cost to be paid by the
Federal government. Such records are subject to audit. The basis for determining the value of cash and in-kind contributions
must be in accordance with OMB Circular A110, Attachment E. Cost-sharing and matching should be described in the proposal.
In the event the recipient does not provide the minimum amount of cost sharing as stipulated in the recipient's budget,
the USIA contribution will be reduced in proportion to the recipient's contribution.
The recipient's proposal shall include the cost of an audit that:
1. Complies with the requirements of OMB Circular No. A133, Audits of Institutions of Higher Education and
Other Nonprofit Institutions;
2. Complies with the requirements of American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) Statement of Position
(SOP) No. 929; and
3. Includes review by the recipient's independent auditor of a recipient-prepared supplemental schedule of indirect
cost rate computation, if such a rate is being proposed.
The audit costs shall be identified separately for:
1. Preparation of basic financial statements and other accounting services; and
2. Preparation of the supplemental reports and schedules required by OMB Circular A133, AICPA SOP 929,
and the review of the supplemental schedule of indirect cost rate computation.
USIA reserves the right to reduce, increase or otherwise modify proposal budgets in accordance with the needs of the
program. For organizations with less than four years of experience in international exchange activities, grants
will be limited to a maximum of $60,000. Administrative costs cannot exceed 20 percent of the requested budget, including
administrative expenses for orientation.
Allowable costs for the program include the following (see Application Package for further details):


A. Program Costs


(1) International travel (via U.S. flag carriers);
(2) Domestic travel;
(3) Maintenance (lodging/meals/incidental expenses);
(4) Educational materials, not to exceed 35 percent of total budget;
(5) Honoraria or compensation for in-country work, not to exceed $100/day per person;
(6) Visa fees for foreign participants;
(7) Medical insurance for foreign participants during U.S. visits;
(8) Salaries/benefits of U.S. participant(s) in residence at foreign partner institution for one academic year
or more. Total costs for the participant(s) in residence must not exceed 30 percent of the total budget.


B. Administrative Costs (Not to exceed 20% of Total Budget)


