 

(c) The type of procuring instruments used (e.g., fixed price contracts, cost reimbursable contracts, purchase
orders, and incentive contracts) shall be determined by the recipient but shall be appropriate for the particular
procurement and for promoting the best interest of the program or project involved. The ``cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost''
or ``percentage of construction cost'' methods of contracting shall not be used.
(d) Contracts shall be made only with responsible contractors who possess the potential ability to perform successfully
under the terms and conditions of the proposed procurement. Consideration shall be given to such matters as contractor
integrity, record of past performance, financial and technical resources or accessibility to other necessary resources.
In certain circumstances, contracts with certain parties are restricted by agencies' implementation of E.O.s 12549
and 12689, ``Debarment and Suspension.'' (See 45 CFR part 76.)
(e) Recipients shall, on request, make available for the HHS awarding agency, pre-award review and procurement documents,
such as request for proposals or invitations for bids, independent cost estimates, etc., when any of the following
conditions apply.
(1) A recipient's procurement procedures or operation fails to comply with the procurement standards in this Part.
(2) The procurement is expected to exceed the small purchase threshold fixed at 41 U.S.C. 403(11) (currently $25,000)
and is to be awarded without competition or only one bid or offer is received in response to a solicitation.
(3) The procurement, which is expected to exceed the small purchase threshold, specifies a ``brand name'' product.
(4) The proposed award over the small purchase threshold is to be awarded to other than the apparent low bidder under
a sealed bid procurement.
(5) A proposed contract modification changes the scope of a contract or increases the contract amount by more than
the amount of the small purchase threshold.


74.45

Cost and price analysis.


Some form of cost or price analysis shall be made and documented in the procurement files in connection with every procurement
action. Price analysis may be accomplished in various ways, including the comparison of price quotations submitted,
market prices and similar indicia, together with discounts. Cost analysis is the review and evaluation of each element
of cost to determine reasonableness, allocability and allowability.


74.46

Procurement records.


Procurement records and files for purchases in excess of the small purchase threshold shall include the following
at a minimum: (a) Basis for contractor selection, (b) justification for lack of competition when competitive bids
or offers are not obtained, and (c) basis for award cost or price.


74.47

Contract administration.


A system for contract administration shall be maintained to ensure contractor conformance with the terms, conditions
and specifications of the contract and to ensure adequate and timely follow up of all purchases. Recipients shall
evaluate contractor performance and document, as appropriate, whether contractors have met the terms, conditions
and specifications of the contract.


74.48

Contract provisions.


The recipient shall include, in addition to provisions to define a sound and complete agreement, the following provisions
in all contracts. The following provisions shall also be applied to subcontracts:
(a) Contracts in excess of the small purchase threshold shall contain contractual provisions or conditions that
allow for administrative, contractual, or legal remedies in instances in which a contractor violates or breaches
the contract terms, and provide for such remedial actions as may be appropriate.
(b) All contracts in excess of the small purchase threshold shall contain suitable provisions for termination by
the recipient, including the manner by which termination shall be effected and the basis for settlement. In addition,
such contracts shall describe conditions under which the contract may be terminated for default as well as conditions
where the contract may be terminated because of circumstances beyond the control of the contractor.


