 


6. Recall Program


The enhanced recall program for light-duty vehicles has already been described in Section A(5). The heavy-duty program
will be the same as the light-duty program except for a change related to vehicle selection described below. Like the
light-duty program, it is intended to ensure that vehicles and engines meet applicable standards throughout their
life. Its provisions also apply to medium-duty vehicles that are equipped with engines certified to engine standards
rather than being certified to the medium-duty vehicle chassis-based standards. Medium-duty vehicles certified
to chassis-based standards will be subject to the light-duty recall program requirements. Rather than repeat the
detailed provisions of the enhanced recall program for light-duty vehicles, the reader is referred to the light-duty
discussion for more information. Both programs are based on the current recall program which interested readers
should also review (39 FR 44375, December 23, 1974).
There is one difference between the heavy-duty and light-duty recall programs. For light-duty enhanced vehicles,
EPA is proposing to draw recall test samples from only those vehicles subject to EPA's enhanced I/M program, generally
corresponding to vehicles registered in the FIP areas. This would focus testing on identifying problems which were
not being corrected by the I/M program. Because there is no I/M program for HDEs, this approach is not appropriate for
heavy-duty. Therefore, EPA proposes to draw HDE recall test samples from vehicle families registered throughout
California although the FIP areas would clearly be an important focus.


7. Multiple-State High-Emitting Engines


Many trucks operating in California are engaged in interstate commerce. CARB data show that more than 20 percent of
the mileage accumulated by heavy-duty vehicles in California is from trucks registered to operate in at least one
other state.
<FOOTCITE>114</FOOTCITE>
 Even if new emission standards are adopted for California trucks, some interstate trucks would continue to be certified
to less stringent federal emission standards. In that case, a significant amount of the potential benefit of the California
standards would be lost. Given the cost impact expected for the California standards, there would also be an incentive
to circumvent the intent of the standards by registering trucks in other states and operating them in California.
EPA wants to avoid such a competitive disadvantage for trucking firms based in California.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
114

</FOOTNAME>
``Update on the Feasibility of Reducing Oxides of Nitrogen and Particulate Matter Emissions from Heavy-Duty Vehicles,''
CARB, July 1993.

</FOOTNOTE>


To engage in commerce in multiple states, state law requires that trucks must be registered to operate in each state.
The registration requirements allow each state to enforce its traffic laws and engage in some taxing. There are therefore
three types of trucks operating in California: Those operating exclusively in California, those based in California
but also operating in other states, and those based in other states but operating in California. Emissions control
for engines operated exclusively in California is handled through the fleet averaging and importation requirements
of the FIP. This section affects the two categories of trucks operating in other states in addition to California.
It affects both categories equally.
Except as described below, EPA is proposing that owners of trucks registered in multiple states be required to participate
in the fleet averaging program. Only that portion of an interstate trucking fleet registered in California would
be involved in the program, including the calculation and assessment of surcharges. Trucks that never enter California
would not be included.
EPA is concerned about the burden that the fleet averaging program may place on interstate trucking firms, especially
if engine manufacturers choose to base their compliance with the proposed enhanced engine standards on alternative
fuel technologies. The declining fleet average emissions requirement will eventually force owners of all trucks
entering California to meet these standards or to pay increasingly stiff surcharges. Further, to the extent different
fuels are used, interstate truckers may have difficulty finding adequate fuel supplies for their low-emitting trucks
when they are traveling outside California. As a result, they may be forced to maintain dedicated California fleets
or to comply with the program requirements through the payment of surcharges, with little benefit to FIP area air quality.


