 

(vi) Taking beaver in the Minto Flats Management Area with the use of an aircraft for ground transportation, or by landing
within one mile of a beaver trap or set used by the transported person;
(vii) Taking or assisting in the taking of furbearers by firearm before 3 a.m. on the day following the day on which airborne
travel occurred; however, this does not apply to a trapper using a firearm to dispatch furbearers caught in a trap or
snare;
(c) 

Possession and transportation of wildlife.
(1) Except as specified in 

XX

.25(c)(3)(ii) or (c)(4), or as otherwise provided, no person may take a species of wildlife in any Unit, or portion
of a Unit, if that person's total statewide take of that species has already been obtained under Federal and State regulations
in other Units, or portions of other Units.
(2) An animal taken under Federal or State regulations by any member of a community with an established community harvest
limit for that species counts toward the community harvest limit for that species. Except for wildlife taken pursuant
to 

XX

.6(f)(3), an animal taken by an individual as part of a community harvest limit counts toward that individual's harvest
limit for that species taken under Federal or State regulations for areas outside of the community harvest area.
(3) 

Individual harvest limits.
(i) Harvest limits authorized by 

XX

.25 and bag limits established in State regulations may not be accumulated.
(ii) Wildlife taken by a designated hunter for another person pursuant to 

XX

.6(f)(2), counts toward the individual harvest limit of the person for whom the wildlife is taken.
(4) The harvest limit specified for a trapping season for a species and the harvest limit set for a hunting season for
the same species are separate and distinct. This means that a person who has taken a harvest limit for a particular species
under a trapping season may take additional animals under the harvest limit specified for a hunting season or vice
versa.
(5) A brown/grizzly bear taken in a Unit or portion of a Unit having a harvest limit of one brown/grizzly bear per year
counts against a one brown/grizzly bear every four regulatory years harvest limit in other Units; an individual may
not take more than one brown/grizzly bear in a regulatory year.
(6) A harvest limit applies to the number of animals that can be taken during a regulatory year; however, harvest limits
of grouse, ptarmigan, and caribou (in some Units) are regulated by the number that may be taken per day. Harvest limits
of grouse and ptarmigan are also regulated by the number that can be held in possession.
(7) Unless otherwise provided, any person who gives or receives wildlife shall furnish, upon a request made by a Federal
or State agent, a signed statement describing the following: names and addresses of persons who gave and received
wildlife, the time and place that the wildlife was taken, and identification of species transferred. Where a qualified
subsistence user has designated another qualified subsistence user to take wildlife on his or her behalf in accordance
with 

XX

.6, the permit shall be furnished in place of a signed statement.
(8) A rural Alaska resident who has been designated to take wildlife on behalf of another rural Alaska resident in accordance
with 

XX

.6, shall promptly deliver the wildlife to that rural Alaska resident.
(9) No person may possess, transport, give, receive or barter wildlife that was taken in violation of Federal or State
statutes or a regulation promulated thereunder.
(10) 

Evidence of sex and identity.
(i) If subsistence take of Dall sheep is restricted to a ram, no person may possess or transport a harvest sheep unless
both horns accompany the animal.
(ii) If the subsistence taking of an ungulate, except sheep, is restricted to one sex in the local area, no person may
possess or transport the carcass of an animal taken in that area unless sufficient portion of the external sex organs
remain attached to indicate conclusively the sex of the animal; however, 

XX

.25(c)(10)(ii) does not apply to the carcass of an ungulate that has been butchered and placed in storage or otherwise
prepared for consumption upon arrival at the location where it is to be consumed.
(iii) If a moose harvest limit includes an antler size or configuration restriction, no person may possess or transport
the moose carcass or its parts unless both antlers accompany the carcass or its parts. A person possessing a set of antlers
with less than the required number of brow tines on one antler shall leave the antlers naturally attached to the unbroken,
uncut skull plate; however, 

XX

.25(c)(10)(iii) does not apply to a moose carcass or its parts that have been butchered and placed in storage or otherwise
prepared for consumption after arrival at the place where it is to be sorted or consumed.
(d) A person who takes an animal that has been marked or tagged for scientific studies must, within a reasonable time,
notify the ADFG or the agency identified on the collar or marker, when and where the animal was taken. Any ear tag,
collar, radio, tattoo, or other identification must be retained with the hide until it is sealed, if sealing is required;
in all cases, any identification equipment must be returned to the ADFG or to an agency identified on such equipment.
(e) 

Sealing of bear skins and skulls.
(1) Sealing requirements for bear shall apply to brown bears taken in all Units, except as specified below, and black
bears of all color phases taken in Units 16, 1114, 16, and 20.
(2) No person may possess or transport from Alaska, the untanned skin or skull of a bear unless the skin and skull have
been sealed by an authorized representative of ADFG in accordance with State or Federal regulations, except
that the skin and skull of a brown bear taken under a registration permit in the Western Alaska Bear Management Area,
the Northwest Alaska Brown Bear Management Area, Unit 5, or Unit 9(B) need not be sealed unless removed from the area.
(3) A person who possesses a bear shall keep the skin and skull together until a representative of the ADFG has
removed a rudimentary premolar tooth from the skull and sealed both the skull and the skin; however, this provision
shall not apply to brown bears taken within the Western Alaska Brown Bear Management Area, the Northwest Alaska Brown
Bear Management Area, Unit 5, or Unit 9(B) which are not removed from the Management Area or Unit.
(i) In areas where sealing is required by Federal regulations, no person may possess or transport the hide of a bear
which does not have the penis sheath or vaginal orifice naturally attached to indicate conclusively the sex of the
bear.
(ii) If the skin or skull of a bear taken in the Western Alaska Brown Bear Management Area is removed from the area, it
must first be sealed by an ADFG representative in Bethel, Dillingham, or McGrath; at the time of sealing, the
ADFG representative shall remove and retain the skin of the skull and front claws of the bear.
(iii) If the skin or skull of a bear taken in the Northwestern Alaska Brown Bear Management Area is removed from the area,
it must be first be sealed by an ADFG representative in Barrow, Fairbanks, Galena, or Kotzebue; at the time of
sealing, the ADFG representative shall remove and retain the skin of the skull and front claws of the bear.
(iv) If the skin or skull of a bear taken in Unit 5 is removed from the area, it must first be sealed by an ADFG representative
in Yakutat; at the time of sealing, the ADFG representative shall remove and retain the skin of the skull and front
claws of the bear.
(v) If the skin or skull of a bear taken in Unit 9(B) is removed from the area, it must first be sealed by an ADFG representative
in Port Alsworth or King Salmon; at the time of sealing, the ADFG representative shall remove and retain the skin
of the skull and front claws of the bear.
(4) No person may falsify any information required on the sealing certificate or temporary sealing form provided
by the ADFG in accordance with State regulations.


