 

DARHT experiments would variously involve radioactive materials (primarily depleted uranium), beryllium and
other hazardous materials, and other metals. Additionally, experiments involving plutonium contained in steel
vessels may be conducted. DARHT would not test materials that could result in nuclear yield, or a nuclear detonation.
Experiments at DARHT would be expected to result in metal fragments and other airborne debris being deposited up to
750 meters from the open-air explosives testing (standard operating procedures would require the evacuation of
this area before any experiments were conducted). 

In addition to testing the nonnuclear behavior of nuclear weapons components, DARHT would be used to evaluate conventional
weapons systems, explosives-driven materials for non-weapons uses, and high-velocity impact phenomena. The facility
would also be used to support non-proliferation and counter-proliferation efforts, such as experiments intended
to disable a terrorist-designed or proliferant-designed nuclear weapon. Although DARHT could be used to collect
information relevant to the design of new weapons, no new weapons are anticipated to be designed in the foreseeable
future. 

Design of DARHT began in the early 1980's. Memoranda to File, describing the environmental impacts of constructing
and operating DARHT, were completed in 1983 and 1987. DARHT construction began in 1988 with the Radiographic Support
Laboratory, which was completed in 1990. The Radiographic Support Laboratory is currently being used to support
the development of the accelerator equipment that is planned to be used in DARHT. In May 1994, DOE began construction
of the Hydrodynamic Firing Site. Approximately 20 percent of the Hydrodynamic Firing Site construction work (e.g.,
site preparation, foundation pouring) has been completed. Current schedules call for the Hydrodynamic Firing Site
construction to be completed, and the first X-ray machine to be operating, in 1997 at a cost of approximately $86 million,
and the second X-ray machine, if approved, would begin operation in 2000. The total estimated project cost of DARHT
in its final two-axis configuration is $124 million; to date, approximately $44 million has been spent or obligated
on the project. 

In response to public concern, the DOE has decided to prepare this EIS at this time to allow for a full dialogue between
DOE and the State, tribes, other agencies and the general public regarding the environmental impacts of completing
and operating DARHT, and the impacts of other alternatives. The EIS will also assist in ensuring that appropriate
mitigation measures are developed if DARHT is completed and put into operation. Construction and related work on
the facility will continue during the preparation of the EIS. 



Proposed Alternatives



DOE has tentatively identified the following alternatives for analysis in the EIS and seeks public comment on their
adequacy, inclusiveness, and reasonableness: 



(1) Proposed action



Under this alternative, DOE would complete construction and operate the DARHT facility as currently planned. This
alternative would provide a state-of-the-art diagnostic capability for ensuring the safety, security and reliability
of the aging nuclear weapons stockpile. If DARHT becomes operational, operation of the Pulsed High Energy Radiation
Machine Emitting X-Rays (PHERMEX) facility, an existing facility at LANL also located at Technical Area 15, near
the DARHT site, will be phased out. 



(2) No Action (status quo) Alternative



Under this alternative, DARHT would not be completed and DOE would continue to operate the Pulsed High Energy Radiation
Machine Emitting X-Rays and the Flash X-Ray facility at the Department's Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Site 300 located near Livermore, California. The Pulsed High Energy Radiation Machine Emitting X-Rays, a single-axis
radiographic facility, was built in the mid-1960's and has been used continuously since that time. It uses a pulsed
power accelerator to power the X-ray machine, and does not have the small beam size (tight focus) planned for DARHT,
thereby precluding the high-resolution images that DARHT would provide. Flash X-Ray, also a single-axis radiographic
facility, was built in 1982 and has been used continuously since that time. It uses a linear induction accelerator
to power the X-ray machine and also does not have the small beam size planned for DARHT. 



(3) Containment Alternative



Under this alternative, DOE would modify the construction and/or operation of DARHT to contain some or all airborne
emissions of fragments or other debris. Under one approach, the X-ray pictures would be taken through the walls of
a containment vessel. Another approach would be to construct a building to enclose and contain the explosive experiments;
X-ray pictures would be taken within the containment building. These two approaches may be considered separately
or together, for some tests or for all tests. 



