 






Federal Register

/Vol. 59, No. 58/Friday, March 25, 1994/Notices






<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION</USDEPT>




Assistance for School Expenditures and Construction in Cases of Certain Disasters



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Department of Education.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Notice to extend deadline for applications for disaster assistance from local educational agencies affected by
the midwestern floods of 1993.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Secretary of Education announces the extension of the deadline for local educational agencies (LEAs) to apply
for assistance needed as a result of the midwestern floods of 1993 in the States of Iowa, Illinois, Kansas, Minnesota,
Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, and Wisconsin. These LEAs must be located in a county identified
in the Presidential Disaster Declarations and amendments as eligible for public assistance as a result of the midwestern
floods of 1993.



To apply, LEAs must submit applications, through their State educational agencies, for disaster assistance under
section 7(a) of Public Law 81874 (the Impact Aid statute) to cover the costs of increased operating expenses
or reduced revenue.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

The new deadline for applications from all LEAs located in eligible counties will be May 24, 1994.



</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:



Frank Delia, Impact Aid Programs, U.S. Department of Education, 400 Maryland Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 202026244.
Telephone: (202) 2603893. Individuals who use a telecommunications device for the deaf (TDD) may call the
TDD number at (202) 2055516.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

Under the current statutory and regulatory provisions of Public Law 81874 (the Impact Aid statute), the Secretary
provides section 7(a) assistance to eligible LEAs that have increased costs or reduced revenue as a result of a Presidentially-declared
disaster. Under 219.21 of the current regulations, an LEA must submit its application for section 7(a) disaster
assistance to its State educational agency (SEA) and ensure that the SEA certifies and transmits the application
to the Secretary of Education on a timely basis. To be timely, the application must be transmitted by the SEA on or before
90 days after the publication of a notice in the 

Federal Register

 that the President has declared a major disaster and that the county in which the LEA is located is eligible for public
assistance. However, in an amendment to the regulatory provision in 219.21, published in this same issue of
the 

Federal Register

, the Secretary is authorized to extend the 90-day requirement, under unusual circumstances, through the publication
of a notice in the 

Federal Register

 extending the deadline.



Since the midwestern floods of 1993 affected a large part of the Midwest over a span of several months, 502 counties
in nine States were declared eligible for public assistance with application deadlines ranging from September 30,
1993 to February 3, 1994. The regulatory closing date for applications for section 7(a) assistance is 90 days from
the publication date of the Presidential declaration or amendment. The nature of this particular disaster resulted
in numerous closing dates and confusion as to applicable deadlines, even within a given State. Consequently, certain
LEAs and SEAs failed to file timely applications with the Department.

In recognition of the unusual circumstances of this specific disaster and the resultant confusion with regard to
the application deadlines, the Secretary extends the deadline for all applications for section 7(a) assistance
from LEAs covered by the Presidential disaster declarations that pertain to these floods. All other statutory and
regulatory criteria regarding section 7(a) disaster assistance remain in effect.

</SUPPLEM>

