 

A claim is not allowable under this section that_ 


(a) Is for damage to, or loss or destruction of property, or for personal injury or death, resulting directly or indirectly
from action by the enemy, or by U.S. Armed Forces engaged in armed conflict, or in immediate preparation for impending
armed 
conflict. 


(b) Is for the personal injury or death of a member of the Armed Forces of the United States or a civilian employee incurred
incident to his or her service. 

(c) Is for the personal injury or death of a Government employee for whom benefits are provided by the FECA (5 U.S.C.
81018150). 


(d) Is for the personal injury or death of an employee, including nonappropriated fund employees, for whom benefits
are provided by the Longshoremen's and Harbor Workers' Compensation Act (33 U.S.C. 901). 



(e) Has been made the subject of a suit by or against the United States, except as provided in 536.127(b). 


(f) Arises in a foreign country and was considered by the authorities of a foreign country and final action taken thereon
under Article VIII of the NATO SOFA, Article XVIII of the Japanese Administrative Agreement, or other similar treaty
or agreement, if reasonable disposition was made of the claim. 



(g) Is based upon the exercise or performance or the failure to exercise or to perform a discretionary function or duty
whether or not the discretion is abused, provided that the United States Court of Appeals for the jurisdiction in which
the claim arises has not specifically refused to incorporate the discretionary function exception into the Suits
in Admiralty Act (e.g. United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit). 


(h) Is presented by a citizen or government agency, or a corporation controlled by a citizen or government agency,
of a country at war or engaged in armed conflict with the United States, or any country allied with such enemy country
unless the appropriate settlement authority determines that the claimant is, and, at the time of the incident, was
friendly to the United States. 



536.125 

Claims under other laws and regulations. 



(a) Claims of DA personnel and civilian employees of DOD including military and civilian officers and crews of Army
vessels, for damage to or loss of personal property occurring incident to their service will be processed under the
provisions of subpart K. 

(b) Claims that are within the scope of this section and also within the scope of subpart J may be processed under subpart
J when specific authority to do so has been obtained from the Commander, USARCS. The request for such authority should
be accompanied by a copy of the report of the incident by the Marine Casualty Investigating Officer, or other claims
investigator. 




536.126 

Subrogation. 




(a) An insurer will be recognized as a claimant under this section to the extent that it has become subrogated by payment
to, or on behalf of, its assured, pursuant to a contract of insurance in force at the time of the incident from which the
claim arose. An insurer and its assured may file a claim either jointly or separately. Joint claims will be asserted
in the names of, and must be signed by, or on behalf of, all parties; payment then will be made jointly. If separate claims
are filed, payment to each party will be limited to the extent of such party's undisputed interest. 


(b) For the purpose of determining authority to settle or compromise a claim, the payable interests of an insurer (or
assurers) and the assured represent merely separable interests, which interests in the aggregate must not exceed
the amount authorized for administrative settlement or compromise. 


(c) The policies set forth in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section with respect to subrogation arising from insurance
contracts are applicable to all other types of subrogation. 



536.127 

Limitation of settlement. 



(a) The period of effecting an administrative settlement under the Army Maritime Claims Settlement Act is subject
to the same limitation as that for beginning an action under the Suits in Admiralty Act; that is, a 2-year period from
the date the cause of the action accrued. The claimant must have agreed to accept the settlement, and it must be approved
for payment by the Secretary of the Army, or other approval authority, prior to the end of such period. The presentation
of a claim, or its consideration by the DA, neither waives nor extends the 2-year limitation period and the claimant
should be so informed in accordance with paragraph (c), of this section. 

(b) In the event that an action has been filed in a U.S. district court before the end of the 2-year statutory period,
an administrative settlement may be negotiated by the Commander, USARCS with the claimant, even though the 2-year
period has elapsed since the cause of action accrued, provided the claimant obtains the written consent of the appropriate
office of the Department of Justice charged with the defense of the complaint. Payment may be made upon dismissal of
the complaint. 




