 

2.5Hazardous Materials Transportation Emergency Preparedness Assistance 



2.5.1Description of Program 





a. Background. 

The DOT Research and Special Programs Administration, Office of Hazardous Materials Safety 
(OHMS), currently carries out a national safety program to protect against the risks to life, 
health, property, and the environment inherent in the transportation of hazardous materials by 
water, air, highway and railroad. OHMS plans, implements, and manages hazardous materials 
regulatory, enforcement, and outreach programs, and administers a user fee funded grant 
program to States and Indian tribes for planning and training for hazardous materials 
emergencies. 

The number and type of entities regulated by OHMS have increased dramatically since 1990, 
when the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (HMTA) was amended. Prior to 1990, the 
office had jurisdiction over approximately 40,000 hazardous materials shippers and carriers. In 
the future, the inclusion of intrastate shippers and carriers will bring an additional 110,000 newly 
regulated shippers and carriers mandated by the HMTA amendment under the Hazardous 
Materials Regulations (HMR). 

Certain shippers and carriers are required to register with the Department and pay an annual fee. 
The Hazardous Materials Registration Program, which began in September 1992, funds 
emergency preparedness grants to States and Indian tribes for training and preparing to respond 
to hazardous materials emergencies. 

The HMTA Grant Program was presented to Congress in 1990 during the legislative process 
reauthorizing the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act of 1974. Grant funds were first 
distributed in Fiscal Year 1993. The HMTA grant program is carefully crafted to build upon 
existing programs and relationships. It has increased the emphasis on improving the capability 
of communities to plan for the full range of transportation related hazardous materials risks they 
face. 

Forty-seven States are participating in the HMTA grant program_an overwhelming first year 
response. Fifty-eight grants, totaling approximately $8.4 million, were given to States, Tribes, 
and Territories in the first grant budget period. 180,000 emergency responders will be trained 
with HMTA grant funds in the first year of the program; 81% of these responders are either 
paid or volunteer firefighters. 

The existing grant process begins with each participating State's Governor determining which 
agency within the State receives the HMTA grant. The selected agency distributes funds in 
accordance with HMTA grant rules and required certifications, ensuring the assistance is 
provided to intended recipients. The grant distribution system allows each State's Governor to 
make decisions on funding based on local factors, and allows DOT to leverage resources, 
thereby operating the HMTA grant program efficiently. The HMTA grant distribution system 
is lean, and gives exceptionally responsive service to State grantees. 



b. National Service Corps. 

Under the OHMS's ``Hazardous Materials Transportation Emergency Preparedness Assistance'' 
Program, national service funding will be used to employ national service participants as 
assistants to the State Emergency Response Commission (SERC), Local Emergency Planning 
Committee (LEPC), and State Emergency Management Agency levels. This Program will 
reinforce the Nation's Hazardous Materials Transportation Emergency Response/State 
Emergency Response structure, one of the objectives of the existing HMTA grant program. 

Local SERC/LEPC/emergency management national service participants may serve as assistants 
to prepare local emergency plans, perform hazardous materials commodity flow studies, and 
coordinate exercise of plans. These jobs, requiring little previous experience, could be learned 
mainly through on-the-job training. 

Use of national service funds to increase the effectiveness of the nationally recognized HMTA 
grant program would not only help the nation and localities, but also give national service 
participants experience in, and access to, an industry which is experiencing growth. The 
Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986, a reaction in part to the 
Bhopal, India tragedy, created SERCs and LEPCs to plan for emergency response, including 
feedback and coordination from broadly based local groups; many responsibilities were levied 
on states and localities with little funding. This program can provide assistance not previously 
available. Similarly, state emergency management agencies need assistance with hazardous 
materials planning and training grants. 

It is proposed that national service participants be involved as follows: 

1. A day in the life of a national service participant might include assignment 
to an LEPC. For this participant the day might include working under the 
LEPC chairperson's supervision to gather data at the state police inspection 
point for a commodity flow study. The participant might use the data while 
interacting with LEPC members at an evening meeting. As a result of the 
meeting the LEPC might modify their emergency plan. 

2. At other times the participant might distribute material safety data sheets to 
the public, conduct community outreach meetings, or receive notification of a 
hazardous materials release and provide support for the SERC/LEPC or the 
community. At a state emergency information center, the participant might 
assist the watch officer in preparing and distributing the daily situation report. 

3. Daily activities provide on-the-job training. For example, data may have 
indicated heavy transport of gasoline indicating the need for training in response 
to tanker incidents. The participant learns from experience the interaction 
between data, planning, and training. The participant might also be mentored 
by the members of the LEPC, the response community, or the trucking industry. 
In this way, the public good is served and the participant receives valuable 
training. 



2.5.2Goals and Priorities 



The proposed program meets all criteria for funding under the President's National Service 
program; it improves public safety and health, guards the environment, and educates program 
participants. The program addresses national service priorities while at the same time provides 
an opportunity for public service and giving participants training that may enable them to gain 
employment later. It specifically addresses the following national priorities: 



