 

9312

Medical Brachytherapy Misadministration at Mercy Hospital in Scranton, Pennsylvania



One of the AO reporting guidelines notes that a therapeutic dose that results in any part of the body receiving unscheduled
radiation can be considered an abnormal occurrence.

Date and Place_

October 15, 1993; Mercy Hospital; Scranton, Pennsylvania.



Nature and Probable Consequences_

On October 15, 1993, Mercy Hospital in Scranton, Pennsylvania, notified NRC Region I of a therapeutic misadministration
involving a Nucletron Micro-Selectron high dose rate (HDR) remote afterloader which occurred at the facility on
April 23, 1993. The licensee identified this misadministration during a review of the past treatment records.

A patient was scheduled to receive brachytherapy treatment to the apex of her vagina in three fractions using a Nucletron
Micro Selectron HDR remote afterloader. The prescribed dose was 500 centigray (cGy) (500 rad) for each fraction and
the use of a ring applicator was specified. On April 13, 1993, the patient was administered the first fractional treatment.
After an examination of the patient following the first treatment, the physician revised the written directive and
prescribed a change from the ring applicator to a standard vaginal cylindrical applicator for the remaining two treatments.
On April 23, 1993, during the administration of the second treatment, the therapist erroneously entered the catheter
length of 920 millimeter (mm) (36.2 inch) into the treatment computer instead of the intended 992 mm (39.1 inch). The
physician failed to identify this error during his review of the treatment parameters prior to the initiation of the
treatment.

As a result of this erroneous entry, a majority of the treatment dose was administered to an unintended region near
the opening of the vagina, and the intended site received an underdose differing from the prescribed dose by more than
20 percent. The physician stated that no adverse clinical effects are expected as a result of the underdose to the target
site because this treatment was intended to administer a booster radiation dose. The oncologist also stated that
the patient is not expected to experience any adverse effects as a result of the 500 cGy (500 rad) overexposure to the
wrong treatment site misadministration. The NRC medical consultant, in his report to Region I, also stated a similar
opinion (that it is unlikely the patient will suffer any adverse effects from the misadministration).

The third fraction of the treatment was administered to the patient on April 29, 1993, as prescribed.

The referring physician and the patient have been notified. The licensee submitted a written report of the misadministration
to NRC Region I on October 29, 1993.



Cause or Causes_

The therapist did not enter the correct catheter length during initial setup for the second treatment. The licensee
followed established procedures; however, the procedure did not require verification of all parameters at the time
of the second check prior to each treatment.



Actions Taken to Prevent Occurrence





Licensee_

The licensee has instituted a requirement that a medical physicist also review the final treatment plan prior to initiating
the treatment. The treatment parameters for all brachytherapy (HDR) treatments will be transferred electronically
to the magnetic card directly from the simulator. The output of this card will be reviewed by the medical physicist
and the oncologist before the initiation of the treatment.



NRC_

Region I conducted a special inspection at Mercy Hospital on October 19, 1993. Inspection Report No. 03002983/93001,
issued November 5, 1993, identified two apparent violations:

(1) Failure to require supervised individual to follow written quality management procedures (QMP) 10 CFR 35.25(a)(2);

(2) Failure to include policies and procedures in the QMP to meet the objective that each administration is in accordance
with the written directive 10 CFR 35.32(a) After receipt and review of the medical consultant's report, Region I issued
a Notice of Violation to the licensee on February 9, 1994, classifying the two violations at Severity Level IV in accordance
with the NRC Enforcement Policy.

An NRC medical consultant has been retained to review this misadministration. The medical consultant's report was
received by Region I on February 3, 1994. (The medical consultant's report is filed in Docket No. 03002983 in
the Region I Materials License Docket Room. Inspection Report No. 03002983/93001 issued November
5, 1993, and the February 9, 1994, Notice of Violation are in the PDR.) The medical consultant questioned the licensee
concerning its identification of a radiation oncologist as the referring physician. After discussion with the NRC's
medical consultant, the licensee identified the patient's physician as the primary referring physician and then
agreed to notify the physician. Following a review of the medical consultant's report, Region I confirmed in a telephone
conversation that the licensee had contacted the patient's physician regarding the misadministration. The licensee
stated that both referring physicians have been notified of this misadministration. The radiation oncologist had
discussed the misadministration with the patient on October 21, 1993.



9313

Medical Brachytherapy Misadministration at Mountainside Hospital in Montclair, New Jersey



One of the AO reporting guidelines notes that a therapeutic dose that results in any part of the body receiving unscheduled
radiation can be considered an abnormal occurrence.




