 

In the proposal, EPA solicited comments on changing the limits for cadmium, chromium, lead, nickel, silver, and zinc
to those used in the Office of Water's Metal Finishing Effluent Guidelines. These standards represented a more comprehensive
database, addressed many more facilities, and represented the most difficult to treat waste. Although none of the
commenters submitted data, they (commenters) supported the use of the Metal Finishing standards as the UTS wastewater
treatment numbers. We are adopting the metal wastewater limits used for the Effluent Guidelines for the Metal Finishers
Point Source category for cadmium, chromium, lead, nickel, silver and zinc for the reasons outlined above. 
The Agency received comments, but no data, that the proposed vanadium limit of 0.042 was unachievably low. At the proposed
level, vanadium would be the most stringent regulated metal. With little data supporting the proposed level, the
Agency tried to follow up with commenters and other sources to obtain data. Wastewater with significant vanadium
is rare, and EPA's efforts yielded limited data supporting a level of 4.3 mg/l. This level is within the range of other
metal limits, and is achievable, based on the data availability. While the Agency would have preferred having more
data for vanadium, the UTS is set at 4.3 mg/l. If the few facilities that have significant vanadium wastewaters can
not meet this limit, EPA's treatability variance process is available. Also, the Agency would be willing to reassess
this limit in a future rule, if data are submitted which supports a change in this standard. 
For all other metal wastewater UTS_antimony, arsenic, barium, beryllium, mercury, selenium and thallium_EPA is
promulgating limits as proposed. The data used for UTS reflect, for each of these metals, the best data available.
With the possibility of more wastewaters being treated to comply with LDR standards_particularly characteristic
wastewaters that heretofore have been decharacterized and whose underlying hazardous constituents may not have
been treated, EPA has made a determined effort in this rulemaking to base treatment standards on the best data available,
which data reflects a wide variety of wastewaters. Although the UTS are in some cases higher than existing limits,
EPA believes that these existing lower limits, in many cases, reflected low levels of metals in untreated wastes.
In addition, wastewater standards, to date, have not had direct effect on many wastes, because most hazardous wastewaters
are either treated in tanks and discharged, managed in 3005(j)(ii) impoundments, injected into Class I hazardous
deep wells which have received no-migration variances, or decharacterized, and so are not subject to these lower
standards. 
The following table is a compilation of final metal universal treatment standards for wastewaters.

