 

(2) such portion of the outstanding indebtedness as does not exceed 90 percent (95 percent for a private nonprofit
mortgagor) of the Commissioner's estimate of the fair market value of such land and improvements prior to the repair
or rehabilitation; or 



(c) 

Property to be acquired.

 If the project is to be acquired by the mortgagor and the purchase price is to be financed with a part of the insured mortgage,
the maximum mortgage amount shall not exceed 90 percent (95 percent for a private nonprofit mortgagor) of: 

(1) The Commissioner's estimate of the cost of the repair or rehabilitation; and 

(2) The actual purchase price of the land and improvements, but not in excess of the Commissioner's estimate of the
fair market value of such land and improvements prior to the repair or rehabilitation. 

7. In 232.39, a new paragraph (c) would be added as follows: 



232.39 

Construction standards. 



* * * * * 



(c) An assisted living facility shall be one or more free-standing structures (architecturally independent of any
other structure), an entity of an existing structure such as a board and care home, or connected to a main building or
identifiable separate portions of one or more free-standing structures containing not fewer than five residential
efficiency, one-bedroom or two-bedroom units. Residential unit means a separate apartment or unit for one or more
persons. An assisted living unit must contain a full bathroom and may contain a kitchenette or a full kitchen depending
on the design and market. A kitchen is not required in each unit; however, the facility must have a central kitchen and
group dining facilities. The assisted living facility or designated portion of the structure shall not contain any
nursing home or intermediate care beds, but may contain board and care beds. In addition, assisted living facilities
must meet State and local licensing requirements, governmental building codes, and other occupancy standards.


8. A new 232.42a would be added to subpart A to read as follows: 



232.42a 

Additions to existing projects. 



A mortgage which covers an addition to an existing project is eligible for insurance under this part, provided that,
if there is a mortgage on the existing project, such mortgage must be refinanced under this part. The mortgage amount
for an addition in all cases shall be determined under section 232.30. If the existing project requires substantial
rehabilitation then the mortgage amount for refinancing the existing facility shall be determined under 232.30
and 232.32. If the existing project does not require substantial rehabilitation then the mortgage amount for refinancing
the existing facility shall be determined under 232.903. The resulting determination for the mortgage on
the addition and the resulting determination for the refinanced mortgage on the existing project must be blended
and both the addition and the existing project must be subject to the same mortgage. 

9. Section 232.89 would be revised to read as follows: 



232.89 

Reduction in mortgage amount. 



If the principal obligation of the mortgage exceeds 90 percent (95 percent for a private nonprofit mortgagor) of the
total amount as shown by the certificate of actual cost plus the value of the land (the cost shown by the certificate
of actual cost in rehabilitation cases), the mortgage shall be reduced by the amount of such excess prior to final endorsement
for insurance. 

10. Section 232.90 would be amended by revising the section heading, the introductory paragraph, and paragraphs
(b) and (c) to read as follows: 



232.90 

Substantial rehabilitation projects. 



In the event the mortgage is to finance substantial rehabilitation, the mortgagor's actual cost of the substantial
rehabilitation may include the items of expense permitted by new construction in accordance with this part and the
applicable cost certification procedure described therein will be required; provided such mortgage shall be subject
to the following limitations: 



* * * * * 



(b) 

Property subject to existing mortgage.

 If the insured mortgage is to include the cost of refinancing an existing mortgage acceptable to the Commissioner,
the amount of the existing mortgage or 90 percent (95 percent for a private nonprofit mortgagor) of the Commissioner's
estimate of the fair market value of the land and existing improvements prior to the repair or rehabilitation, whichever
is the lesser, shall be added to the actual cost of the repair or rehabilitation. If the principal obligation of the
insured mortgage exceeds the total amount thus obtained, the mortgage shall be reduced by the amount of such excess,
prior to final endorsement for insurance. 





