 

Submissions not meeting these requirements cannot be considered.


Proposed Items To Receive Accelerated Duty Elimination


Articles in the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States that are proposed for accelerated duty elimination
are listed in Annex I to this notice. Lists of articles in the Mexican Tariff Schedule of the General Import Duty Act
and the Customs Tariff of Canada that are proposed for accelerated duty elimination are listed in Annexes II and III,
respectively. Inclusion on this list does not signify that the parties have agreed to accelerate elimination of its
duty, only that the parties will consider doing so. Comments of the public on the advisability of an acceleration will
be taken into account in determining the U.S. position with respect to each product under consideration. Petitions
received by January 25, 1994, in accordance with the 

Federal Register

 of December 23, 1993, but not listed in this notice, shall be considered during the next round of tariff acceleration
discussions with Mexico and Canada.


Advice of the United States International Trade Commission


The United States International Trade Commission is being furnished with the list of articles published in Annex
I of this notice for the purpose of securing from the Commission its judgement as to the probable economic effect of
accelerated elimination of U.S. duties under the NAFTA on industries producing like or directly competitive articles
and on consumers.


Advice of the Private Sector Advisory Committee


Pursuant to section 103(a) of the Act, private sector advisory committees are being furnished with the list of articles
published in the Annexes of this notice for their advice.


Articles That May Be Considered in Negotiations


Please read this section carefully. Except as noted, all articles provided for in the subheadings of the Harmonized
Tariff Schedule of the United States that are listed in the Annexes to this notice are being considered for accelerated
duty elimination. A description of articles provided for in these subheadings is available for Annex I in the ``Harmonized
Tariff Schedule of the United States (1994), Supplement 1,'' U.S. International Trade Commission Publication 2690.
The ``Customs Tariff'' of Canada and the Mexican ``Tarifa de la Ley del Impuesto General de Importaci&oacute;'' (Tariff
Schedule of the ``General Import Duty Act'') should be consulted for a description of the articles provided for in
the tariff subheadings in Annex II and III.
For subheadings listed in the Annexes with an asterisk, only certain products will be considered for accelerated
tariff elimination. A list of the specific products which will be considered is available (see 

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

 above).
As with the NAFTA itself, the tariff acceleration exercise will result in three separate bilateral agreements between
the United States and Mexico, the United States and Canada, and Canada and Mexico. Thus, in some cases, acceleration
is not being considered among all three parties, as indicated in the Annexes, and a subsequent agreement to accelerate
may not include all countries indicated in the Annexes. As a rule, accelerated duty elimination is being considered
on a reciprocal basis on the equivalent tariff subheadings by the parties involved. In many cases, however, one or
two parties may already provide NAFTA duty-free treatment to one or both of the other parties. In such cases, the Annexes
do not list products already eligible for NAFTA duty-free treatment. A concordance showing the equivalent items
in all three tariff schedules, including those already duty-free, is available (see 

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

 above).


<SIGNER>
Charles E. Roh, Jr.,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant U.S. Trade Representative for North American Affairs.




</SIGNJOB>
