 




<CFRNO>14 CFR Part 39</CFRNO>




<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 93NM174AD; Amendment 398989; AD 941518]</RINDOCK>



Airworthiness Directives; Boeing Model 747 Series Airplanes



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Federal Aviation Administration, DOT. 



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Final rule.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 This amendment supersedes an existing airworthiness directive (AD), applicable to certain Boeing Model 747 series
airplanes, that currently requires that the FAA-approved maintenance inspection program include inspections
which will give no less than the required damage tolerance rating (DTR) for each Structural Significant Item (SSI).
This amendment requires the inclusion of additional airplanes to the candidate fleet. This amendment is prompted
by a recommendation from the Airworthiness Assurance Working Group, Model 747 Structures Task Group. The actions
specified by this AD are intended to ensure the continued structural integrity of the total Boeing Model 747 fleet.




</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Effective September 12, 1994. 


The incorporation by reference of certain publications listed in the regulations is approved by the Director of the
Federal Register as of September 12, 1994. 



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 The service information referenced in this AD may be obtained from Boeing Commercial Airplane Group, P.O. Box 3707,
Seattle, Washington 981242207. This information may be examined at the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA), Transport Airplane Directorate, Rules Docket, 1601 Lind Avenue SW., Renton, Washington; or at the Office
of the Federal Register, 800 North Capitol Street NW., suite 700, Washington, DC. 



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Steven Fox, Aerospace Engineer, Airframe Branch, ANM120S, FAA, Transport Airplane Directorate, Seattle
Aircraft Certification Office, 1601 Lind Avenue SW., Renton, Washington 980554056; telephone (206) 2272777;
fax (206) 2271181. 



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 A proposal to amend part 39 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR part 39) by superseding AD 930601,
amendment 398526 (58 FR 19571, April 15, 1993), which is applicable to certain Boeing Model 747 series airplanes,
was published in the 

Federal Register

 on January 4, 1994 (59 FR 265). The action proposed to require that the FAA-approved maintenance inspection program
be revised to include inspections which will give no less than the required damage tolerance rating (DTR) for each
Structural Significant Item (SSI). That action was prompted by a recommendation from the Airworthiness Assurance
Working Group, Model 747 Structures Task Group (STG). The requirements of that AD are intended to ensure the continued
structural integrity of the total Boeing Model 747 fleet.



Interested persons have been afforded an opportunity to participate in the making of this amendment. Due consideration
has been given to the comments received.

One commenter supports the proposed rule.

Several commenters request that the selection of airplanes in the candidate fleet be determined by the STG, which
is comprised of representatives from various operators, the FAA, and Boeing. The FAA does not concur. The FAA has determined
that retired airplanes, hull losses, or parked airplanes that are in the current candidate fleet must be replaced
with in-service airplanes to maintain the candidate fleet size of 117 in-service airplanes. In selecting replacement
airplanes for the candidate fleet, the FAA evaluates, among other factors, age and service history of in-service
airplanes. The FAA will continue to consider recommendations from the STG for replacement airplanes; however, the
responsibility for determining the suitability of airplanes for the candidate fleet ultimately rests with the FAA.

One commenter questions the validity for including Boeing Model 747SR series airplanes in the Supplemental Structural
Inspection Document (SSID) candidate fleet. This commenter states that the FAA's justification for including these
airplanes was based upon the conversion of these airplanes from passenger operations to cargo operations, which
the commenter alleges is incorrect. The commenter further states that the FAA needs to consider the inclusion of airplanes
based upon maintenance requirements, especially airplanes that have been modified in accordance with supplemental
type certificates (STC). The FAA does not concur. The FAA points out that it included certain Boeing Model 747SR series
airplanes because these airplanes were no longer operated as Model 747SR series airplanes (at low gross weights and
at reduced engine thrusts), not because they were converted from passenger operations to cargo operations. 
Since those airplanes are now operated similarly to other airplanes that are in the Boeing Model 747 SSID candidate
fleet and that are operated as both freighter and passenger airplanes, the FAA has determined that they, too, should
be included in the SSID candidate fleet. As noted above, the FAA considers many factors when selecting airplanes for
inclusion into the candidate fleet, including age and service history of the airplane, which may be affected by modifications
that were performed in accordance with STC's.

Since AD 861901 requires structural inspections and repairs or replacements on certain Model 747100SR
series airplanes, a number of commenters request that AD 861901, Amendment 395395 (51 FR 29212,
August 15, 1986), be revised to exclude Model 747SR series airplanes that are now included in this rulemaking action
to avoid redundant requirements for inspection. One of these commenters requests that the requirement to inspect
SSI's, required by AD 861901, be exempt from the requirements of this AD. The FAA concurs. The FAA will,
in a separate rulemaking action, revise AD 861901 to exclude Model 747100SR series airplanes
that have been included in this final rule.

One commenter requests an extension in the compliance time until such time that a review of the damage tolerance rating
(DTR) check forms has been completed and a revised SSID has been issued. The FAA does not concur. To extend the compliance
time for this action would be inappropriate, since the FAA has determined that an unsafe condition exists and that
inspections must be conducted to ensure continued safety. Additional rulemaking may be considered, however, once
the DTR check forms have been reviewed and incorporated into the revised SSID.

After careful review of the available data, including the comments noted above, the FAA has determined that air safety
and the public interest require the adoption of the rule as proposed.

There are approximately 128 Boeing Model 747 series airplanes of the affected design in the worldwide fleet. The FAA
estimates that 87 airplanes of U.S. registry and 8 U.S. operators will be affected by this AD. Incorporation of the
SSID program into an operator's maintenance program, as required by AD 930601, and retained in this
AD, is estimated to necessitate 1,000 work hours (per operator) at an average labor rate of $55 per work hour. Based
on these figures, the total cost to the 8 affected U.S. operators to incorporate the SSID program is estimated to be
$440,000, or $55,000 per U.S. operator.

The recurring inspections cost, as required by AD 930601, and retained in this AD, is estimated to be
1,275 work hours per airplane at an average labor rate of $55 per work hour. Based on these figures, the annual recurring
cost required by AD 930601, and retained in this AD, is estimated to be $6,100,875 for the affected U.S.
fleet, or $70,125 per airplane.

Since no new operators have been added by this AD, there will be no new costs associated with incorporating the SSID
program into an operator's maintenance program. Therefore, the future economic cost impact of this AD on U.S. operators
is now only the cost of the recurring inspections for these additional airplanes.

The number of required work hours for the recurring inspections in this AD, as indicated above, is presented as if the
accomplishment of the actions were to be conducted as ``stand alone'' action. However, in actual practice, these
actions, for the most part, will be accomplished coincidentally or in combination with normally scheduled airplane
inspections and other maintenance program tasks. Therefore, the actual number of necessary additional work hours
will be minimal in many instances. Additionally, any costs associated with special airplane scheduling will be minimal.

The total cost impact figure discussed above is based on assumptions that no operator has yet accomplished any of the
requirements of this AD action, and that no operator would accomplish those actions in the future if this AD were not
adopted.

The regulations adopted herein will not have substantial direct effects on the States, on the relationship between
the national government and the States, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities among the various levels
of government. Therefore, in accordance with Executive Order 12612, it is determined that this final rule does not
have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the preparation of a Federalism Assessment.

For the reasons discussed above, I certify that this action (1) is not a ``significant regulatory action'' under Executive
Order 12866; (2) is not a ``significant rule'' under DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures (44 FR 11034, February
26, 1979); and (3) will not have a significant economic impact, positive or negative, on a substantial number of small
entities under the criteria of the Regulatory Flexibility Act. A final evaluation has been prepared for this action
and it is contained in the Rules Docket. A copy of it may be obtained from the Rules Docket at the location provided under
the caption 

ADDRESSES

.


</SUPPLEM>
