 

4. On an ongoing basis, the Directors of the Fund, pursuant to their fiduciary responsibilities under the Act and otherwise,
will monitor the Fund for the existence of any material conflicts among the interests of the classes of shares. The
Directors, including a majority of the Independent Directors, shall take such action as is reasonably necessary
to eliminate any such conflicts that may develop. The distributor and the investment advisers will be responsible
for reporting any potential or existing conflicts to the Directors. If a conflict arises, the distributor and the
investment advisers, at their own cost, will remedy such conflict up to and including establishing a new registered
management investment company.

5. The Distributor will adopt compliance standards as to when each class of shares may be sold to particular investors.
Applicants will require all persons selling shares of the Fund to agree to conform to such standards.

6. The Shareholder Services Plans will be adopted and operated in accordance with the procedures set forth in rule
12b1 (b) through (f) as if the expenditures made thereunder were subject to rule 12b1, except that shareholders
need not enjoy the voting rights specified in rule 12b1.

7. The Directors will receive quarterly and annual statements concerning the amounts expended under the Shareholder
Services Plans and any Distribution Plans complying with paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of rule 12b1, as it may be amended
from time to time. In the statements, only expenditures properly attributable to the sale or servicing of a particular
class of shares will be used to justify any distribution or servicing fee charged to that class. Expenditures not related
to the sale or servicing of a particular class will not be presented to the Directors to justify any fee attributable
to that class. The statements, including the allocations upon which they are based, will be subject to the review and
approval of the Independent Directors in the exercise of their fiduciary duties.

8. Dividends paid by the Fund with respect to each class of its shares, to the extent any dividends are paid, will be calculated
in the same manner, at the same time, on the same day, and will be in the same amount per outstanding share, except that
Service Payments made by a class under a Plan and any Class Expenses will be borne exclusively by that class.

9. The methodology and procedures for calculating the net asset value and dividends and distributions of the classes
and the proper allocation of expenses among the classes have been reviewed by an expert (the ``Expert'') who has rendered
a report to the Applicants, which has been provided to the Commission, that such methodology and procedures are adequate
to ensure that such calculations and allocations would be made in an appropriate manner. On an ongoing basis, the Expert,
or an appropriate substitute Expert, will monitor the manner in which the calculations and allocations are being
made and, based upon such review, will render at least annually a report to the Fund that the calculations and allocations
are being made properly. The reports of the Expert will be filed as part of the periodic reports filed with the Commission
pursuant to sections 30(a) and 30(b)(1) of the Act. The work papers of the Expert with respect to such reports, following
request by the Fund (which the Fund agrees to provide), will be available for inspection by the Commission staff upon
written request to the Fund for such work papers by a senior member of the Division of Investment Management or a regional
officer of the Commission. Authorized staff members would be limited to the Director, an Associate Director, the
Chief Accountant, the Chief Financial Analyst, an Assistant Director, and any Regional Administrator or Associate
or Assistant Administrators. The initial report of the Expert is a report on policies and procedures placed in operation,
and the ongoing reports will be ``reports on policies and procedures placed in operation and tests of operating effectiveness''
as defined and described in SAS No. 70 of the AICPA, as it may be amended from time to time, or in similar auditing standards
as may be adopted by the AICPA from time to time.

10. The Applicants have adequate facilities in place to ensure implementation of the methodology and procedures
for calculating the net asset value and dividends and distributions of the classes of shares and the proper allocation
of expenses among the classes of shares and this representation has been concurred with by the Expert in the initial
report referred to in condition (9) above and will be concurred with by the Expert, or an appropriate substitute Expert,
on an ongoing basis at least annually in the ongoing reports referred to in condition (9) above. Applicants will take
immediate corrective action if this representation is not concurred in by the Expert or appropriate substitute Expert.

11. The prospectuses of each class of shares will contain a statement to the effect that a salesperson and any other
person entitled to receive different compensation for selling or servicing Fund Shares may receive different compensation
with respect to one particular class of shares over another in the Fund.


