 

(a) *** This section does not apply to projects for the elderly or handicapped (except for units housing
children less than six years of age) or projects subject to an application for insurance under sections 231, 232, 241,
or 242 of the National Housing Act. *** 

(b) 

Defective paint surfaces. 

In the case of a residential structure constructed before 1978, the HUD or coinsurer's architect and the sponsor's
architect shall inspect the property for defective paint surfaces before the issuance of a commitment. If defective
paint surfaces are found, testing and abatement as required by 35.24(b) of this title shall be completed before
final endorsement as a condition of the firm commitment. If defective paint surfaces are tested, a random sample of
dwelling units shall be tested as required by paragraph (e) of this section. 

(c) 

Chewable surfaces

_(1) 

Random sample. 

In the case of a residential structure constructed before 1978, a random sample of dwelling units shall be tested for
lead-based paint on chewable surfaces as required by paragraph (e) of this section, including a sample of common areas
and exterior chewable surfaces. Common areas included in the sample should include nondwelling facilities commonly
used by children less than six years of age, such as child care centers. All chewable surfaces in selected units shall
be tested. If none of the tested units, common areas or exterior chewable surfaces contain lead-based paint, the project
may be considered free of lead-based paint, and no further testing or abatement action will be required. If lead-based
paint is found in any unit in the sample, all units in the project are required to be tested. If lead-based paint is found
in any common area, all common areas in the project are required to be tested. If lead-based paint is found in any exterior
chewable surface, all exterior chewable surfaces in the project are required to be tested. 

(2) 

Testing requirements. 

Testing shall be performed using an X-ray fluorescence analyzer (XRF) or by laboratory analysis of paint samples.
Test readings of 1 mg/cm2 or higher using an XRF shall be considered positive for presence of lead based paint. If the
laboratory reports the test results in percent by weight the standard shall be 0.5 percent or 5000 parts per million
(ppm). Testing of chewable surfaces shall be performed by a State or local health or housing agency or by an inspector
certified or regulated by the State or local health or housing agency. The testing entity shall certify to the results
of the test. The mortgagor shall be responsible for obtaining these testing services. 

(3) *** Treatment shall consist of covering or removal of the paint surface in accordance with 35.24(b)(4)
in this title. *** 

(4) 

Abatement without testing. 

In lieu of the procedures set forth in paragraphs (c)(1), (2) and (3) of this section, in the case of a residential structure
constructed before 1978, the developer may forego testing and abatement and abate all chewable surfaces in accordance
with the methods set out in 35.24(b)(4) of this title before final endorsement. HUD or the coinsuring lender
will reinspect all units after repair and before final endorsement. 

(d) 

EBL child. 

In the case of a residential structure constructed before 1978, if the developer is presented with test results that
indicate a child less than six years of age living in a unit has an EBL, the developer must test defective paint surfaces
and chewable surfaces in the unit occupied by the child. If such test is positive for lead-based paint, the developer
either: 

(1) Must abate the unit surfaces in accordance with the methods set out at 35.24(b) of this title; or 

(2) If the developer chooses not to test, the developer must abate all unit surfaces. 

(e) 

Random sampling of units. 

Random sampling of housing units for testing of chewable and defective paint surfaces shall be based on the following
table: 






