 

Pursuant to the legislation authorizing the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs, programs must maintain
a nonpolitical character and should be balanced and representative of the diversity of American political, social,
and cultural life.

Beyond the immediate goals of this program, USIA is interested in supporting programs which will lay the groundwork
for new and continuing links among American, Israeli, and Palestinian institutions and professional organizations
and which will encourage the further growth and development of democratic structures.

The grantee will be responsible for most arrangements associated with this program. These include organizing a coherent
progression of activities, providing international and domestic travel arrangements for all participants, making
lodging and local transportation arrangements for visitors, orienting and debriefing participants, preparing
any necessary support material, and working with host institutions and individuals to achieve maximum program effectiveness.

To prepare the foreign educators for this project prior to their arrival in the United States, E/P encourages the grantee
organization to develop material that would be sent to USIS offices overseas for distribution to participants. This
material might include a tentative project outline and suggested goals and objectives, relevant background information,
and information about American institutions and individuals involved in the project.

At the beginning of the program, the grantee organization should conduct an orientation session for the visiting
participants which addresses administrative details of the program and provides general information about American
society and culture which will facilitate the participants' understanding of and adjustment to daily life in the
United States.

At the conclusion of the program, the group should meet in a symposium to review what has been presented to and experienced
by the participants and to consider how that which has been learned can most effectively be applied upon the participants'
return to their home countries.



Additional Guidelines



Program monitoring and oversight will be provided by appropriate USIA elements. Per Diem support from host institutions
during an internship component is strongly encouraged. However, for all programs which include internships, a nonprofit
grantee institution which receives funds from corporate or other co-sponsors should then use those funds to provide
food, lodging, and pocket money for the participants. In no case could the intern receive a wage or ``be hired'' by the
sponsoring institution.

Internships should also have an American studies/values orientation component at the beginning of the program.
The American grantee institutions should try to maximize cost-sharing in all facets of the program, and to stimulate
U.S. private sector (foundation and corporate) support.

Proposals incorporating internships will be more competitive if letters committing prospective host institutions
to support these efforts are provided.



Funding



Competition for USIA funding support is keen. The final selection of a grantee institution will depend on assessment
of proposals according to the review criteria delineated below.

The amount requested from USIA for this program should not exceed $135,000. However, organizations with less than
four years of successful experience in managing international exchange programs are limited to $60,000.

While applicants must provide an all-inclusive budget with the proposal, they are also encouraged to include separate
sub-budgets for each program component, phase, location or activity.

The recipient's proposal shall include the cost of an audit that: (1) Complies with the requirements of OMB Circular
No. A133, Audits of Institutions of Higher Education and Other Nonprofit Institutions; (2) complies with
the requirements of American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) Statement of Position (SOP) No.
929; and (3) includes review by the recipient's independent auditor of a recipient-prepared supplemental
schedule of indirect cost rate computation, if such a rate is being proposed.

The audit costs shall be identified separately for: (1) Preparation of basic financial statements and other accounting
services; and (2) preparation of the supplemental reports and schedules required by OMB Circular No. A133,
AICPA SOP 929, and the review of the supplemental schedule of indirect cost rate computation.

USIA will consider funding the following project costs:
 

