 

III. Section-By-Section Analysis 



A. Subpart A_General 



1. Section 765.1Purpose 



Section 765.1 specifies that the purpose of this rule is to establish procedures and requirements governing the reimbursement
of remedial action costs authorized by Title X of the Act. The section confirms that the rule is promulgated as required
by section 1002 of the Act (42 U.S.C. 2296a1). 



2. Section 765.2Scope and Applicability 



Section 765.2 describes the general scope and applicability of the rule. In particular, the section provides that
reimbursements shall be made to a licensee of an active uranium or thorium processing site for costs of decontamination,
decommissioning, reclamation, or other remedial action, which are supported by reasonable documentation and determined
by the Department to be attributable to byproduct material generated as an incident of sales to the United States.
Costs of decontamination, decommissioning, reclamation, and other remedial action must be for work that is necessary
to comply with the requirements of UMTRCA or, where appropriate, with applicable requirements established by an
Agreement State. Moreover, except as provided by 765.32, reimbursement of a uranium site licensee shall be
limited to $5.50, as adjusted for inflation, per Federal-related dry short ton of byproduct material. The total reimbursement
paid to all uranium licensees shall not exceed $270 million, as adjusted for inflation. Reimbursement of the thorium
site licensee shall not exceed $40 million, as adjusted for inflation. 



3. Section 765.3Definitions 



Section 765.3 defines the acronyms and key terms used in the rule. Many of the definitions contained in 765.3
are taken verbatim, or with minor changes, from Title X, UMTRCA, or the Atomic Energy Act. Additional definitions,
discussed below, were developed specifically for this rule. 

The term ``active uranium or thorium processing site'' or ``active processing site'' means: 

(1) any uranium or thorium processing site, including the mill, containing byproduct material for which a license,
issued either by NRC or by an Agreement State, for the production at such site of any uranium or thorium derived from
ore_

(i) was in effect on January 1, 1978; 

(ii) was issued or renewed after January 1, 1978; or 

(iii) for which an application for renewal or issuance was pending on, or after January 1, 1978; and 

(2) any other real property or improvement on such real property that is determined by the Secretary or by an Agreement
State to be: 

(i) in the vicinity of the site; and 

(ii) contaminated with residual byproduct material. 

The term ``Agreement State'' means a State that is or has been a party to a discontinuance agreement with NRC under section
274 of the Atomic Energy Act (42 U.S.C. 2021) and thereafter issues licenses and establishes remedial action requirements
pursuant to a counterpart to section 62 or 81 of the Atomic Energy Act under state law. 

The term ``Atomic Energy Act'' means Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, (42 U.S.C. 2011 

et seq

.). 

The term ``byproduct material'' means the tailings or wastes produced by the extraction or concentration of uranium
or thorium from any ore processed primarily for its source material content. 

The term ``claim for reimbursement'' is defined as the submission of an application for reimbursement in accordance
with the requirements established in subpart C of this rule. 

The term ``costs of remedial action'' means costs incurred by a licensee prior to or after enactment of UMTRCA to perform
decontamination, decommissioning, reclamation, or other remedial action. These costs must be substantiated by
documentation in accordance with the requirements of Subpart C of the rule. Costs of remedial action may include,
but are not limited to, ground water remediation, treatment or containment of contaminated soil, disposal of process
wastes, removal actions, air pollution abatement measures, mill and equipment decommissioning, site monitoring,
administrative activities directly related to remedial action, expenditures required to meet necessary regulatory
standards, and other costs for activities necessary to comply with the requirements of UMTRCA or applicable requirements
established by an Agreement State. 

The term ``decontamination, decommissioning, reclamation, and other remedial action'' means work performed which
is necessary to comply with all applicable requirements of UMTRCA or, where appropriate, with applicable requirements
established by an Agreement State. 

The term ``Department'' means the United States Department of Energy or its authorized agents. 

The term ``dry short ton of byproduct material'' is defined as the quantity of tailings generated from the extraction
and processing of 2,000 pounds of uranium or thorium ore-bearing rock. 

The term ``Federal reimbursement ratio'' means the ratio of Federal-related dry short tons of byproduct material
to total dry short tons of byproduct material present at an active uranium or thorium processing site on October 24,
1992. The ratio shall be established by comparing Federal-related dry short tons of byproduct material to dry short
tons of total byproduct material present at the site on October 24, 1992, or by another means of attributing costs of
remedial action to byproduct material generated as an incident of sales to the United States which the Department
determines is more accurate than a ratio established using dry short tons. 

The term ``Federal-related dry short ton(s) of byproduct material'' is defined as the dry short ton(s) of byproduct
material present at the site on October 24, 1992 that was generated as an incident of sales to the United States. 

The term ``generally accepted accounting principles'' means those principles established by the Financial Accounting
Standards Board which encompass the conventions, rules, and procedures necessary to define accepted accounting
practice at a particular time. 

The term ``inflation index'' is defined as the consumer price index for all urban consumers (CPIU) as published
by the Department of Commerce's Bureau of Labor Statistics. 

The term ``licensee'' includes any site owner licensed under section 62 or 81 of the Atomic Energy Act by either NRC,
or an Agreement State. 




