 


Item IV, Reactions to NCAP information, will be in the form 
of a panel discussion. Those wishing to serve on the panel are 
requested to notify the agency. NHTSA will seek to insure 
balanced representation from those desiring to serve on the 
panel.



Item V, Methods of Presenting NCAP Information, will use the 
speaker format, while Item VI, Current Test Procedure Issues, 
will again be in a panel format.



NHTSA desires that Item VII, the Future of Consumer Safety 
Information Initiatives have the largest time for discussion of 
any item on the agenda. Again, the agency believes a panel 
discussion would be most appropriate for this item. 





Written Comments





The agency invites written comments from 
all interested parties. The agency notes that participation in 
the public meeting is not a prerequisite for the submission of 
written comments. It is requested but not required that 10 copies of each written comment be submitted. 


No comment may exceed 15 pages in length. (40 CFR 553.21). 
Necessary attachments may be appended to a comment without regard 
to the 15-page limit. This limitation is intended to encourage 
commenters to detail their primary arguments in a concise 
fashion. 



If a commenter wishes to submit specified information under 
a claim of confidentiality, three copies of the complete 
submission, including purportedly confidential business 
information, should be submitted to the Chief Counsel, NHTSA, at 
the street address given above, and seven copies from which the 
purportedly confidential information has been deleted should be 
submitted to the Docket Section. A request for confidentiality 
should be accompanied by a cover letter setting forth the 
information specified in the agency's confidential business 
information regulation, 49 CFR Part 512. 



All comments received before the close of business on the 
comment closing date indicated above will be considered, and will 
be available for examination in the docket at the above address 
both before and after that date. Comments will be available for 
inspection in the docket. NHTSA will continue to file relevant 
information as it becomes available in the docket after the 
closing date, and it is recommended that interested persons 
continue to examine the docket for new material. 



Those persons desiring to be notified upon receipt of their 
written comments in the Docket Section should enclose, in the 
envelope with their comments, a self-addressed stamped postcard. 
Upon receipt, the docket supervisor will return the postcard by mail. 



Persons making oral presentations at the public meeting are 



 requested, but not required, to submit 25 written copies of the 
full text of their presentation to Vincent Quarles no later than 
the day before the meeting. Presentations should be limited to 
15 minutes. If time permits, persons who have not requested 
time, but would like to make a statement, will be afforded an 
opportunity to do so. Copies of all written statements will be 
placed in the docket for this notice. A verbatim transcript of 
the public meeting will be prepared and also placed in the NHTSA 
docket as soon as possible after the meeting. A schedule of the 
persons making oral presentations at the meeting will be 
available at the designated meeting area at the beginning of the 
public meeting. 



To facilitate communication, NHTSA will provide auxiliary
 aids to participants as necessary, during the meeting. Thus, any 
person desiring assistance of ``auxiliary aids'' (e.g., sign-
language interpreter, telecommunications, devices for deaf 
persons (TDDs) readers, taped texts, braille materials, or large 
print materials and/or a magnifying device) should contract 
Vincent Quarles at (202) 3661708 by October 26, 1994. 









Authority:

 49 U.S.C. 32302; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.



