 

Although the [Delta] 75 SGs, revised operating conditions, 
and higher allowable CHG/SI pump flows will require changes 
to the VCSNS Technical Specifications, it will not 
invalidate the LOCA, non-LOCA, or SGTR [steam generator tube 
rupture] conclusions presented in the FSAR accident 
analyses. For all the FSAR non-LOCA transients, the DNB 
design basis, primary and secondary pressure limits, and 
dose limits continue to be met. The LOCA peak cladding 
temperatures remain below the limits specified in 
10 CFR 50.46. The calculated doses resulting from a SGTR 
event will continue to remain within a small fraction of the 
10 CFR 100 permissible releases. Environmental conditions 
associated with High Energy Line Break (HELB) both inside 
and outside containment have been evaluated. 

The containment design pressure will not be violated as a result 
of the HELB. Equipment qualification will be updated, as 
necessary, to reflect the revised conditions resulting from HELB. 
The margin of safety with respect to primary pressure boundary is 
provided, in part, by the safety factors included in the ASME 
Code. Since the components remain in compliance with the codes 
and standards in effect when VCSNS was originally licensed (with 
the exception of the [Delta] 75 RSGs which use the 1986 ASME Code 
Section III Edition), the margin of safety is not reduced. Thus, 
there is no reduction in the margin of safety as defined in the 
bases of the VCSNS Technical Specifications. 







The NRC staff has reviewed the licensee's analysis and, based on this 
review, it appears that the three standards of 10 CFR 50.92(c) are 
satisfied. Therefore, the NRC staff proposes to determine that the 
amendment request involves no significant hazards consideration. 
 


Local Public Document Room Location: 

Fairfield County Library, Garden and 
Washington Streets, Winnsboro, South Carolina 29180.



Attorney for Licensee: 

Randolph R. Mahan, South Carolina Electric  Gas 
Company, Post Office Box 764, Columbia, South Carolina 29218.



NRC Project Director: 

William H. Bateman.



The Cleveland Electric Illuminating Company, Centerior Service Company, 
Duquesne Light Company, Ohio Edison Company, Pennsylvania Power Company, 
Toledo Edison Company, Docket No. 50440, Perry Nuclear Power Plant, Unit 
No. 1, Lake County, Ohio 





Date of Amendment Request: 

March 12, 1993.



Description of Amendment Request: 

The proposed amendment would revise 
Technical Specification Table 3.3.7.11, to clarify the actions to be taken 
if the control room ventilation radiation monitor is not operable. 



Basis for Proposed No Significant Hazards Consideration Determination: 

As required by 10 CFR 50.91(a), the licensee has provided its analysis of the issue of no significant hazards consideration,
which is presented below: 

1. The proposed changes do not involve a significant increase in the 
probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated. 

The proposed change clarifies Technical Specification 3.3.7.1, 
``Radiation Monitoring Instrumentation'' by revising Action 72 (for an 
inoperable Control Room Ventilation Radiation Monitor) to remove 
several inconsistencies between it and Action 3.7.2.b.2 of the Control 
Room Emergency Recirculation System Specification. Revised Action 72 
simply makes the two Specifications more consistent by incorporating 
alternative compensatory measures that the operators may take after 
the Control Room Ventilation Radiation Monitor has been inoperable for 
more than seven days. The proposed Action would retain the choice of 
initiating at least one train of the Control Room Emergency 
Recirculation System, while providing a second option to take which 
would depend on the current Operational Condition. In Operational 
Conditions 4, 5 and *** the current Specification 3.3.7.1 Action 72 
does not contain the provisions of the Control Room Emergency 
Recirculation System Action 3.7.2.b.2 which directs the Operators to 
suspend performance of Core Alterations, handling of irradiated fuel 
and operations with a potential for draining the reactor vessel 
instead of initiating the Control Room Emergency Recirculation System. 
This inconsistency between the two specifications has caused 
compliance difficulties; therefore, the proposed Action adds this 
alternative. Also, in Operational Conditions 1, 2 and 3 a shutdown 
provision is being added. The other changes are editorial, in order 
to clarify the applicability of the proposed alternative compensatory 
measures, to be consistent with PNPP-specific terminology, and to be 
more consistent with Action b of Specification 3.7.2. 

In summary, there is no change in the probability or consequences of 
any accident since the revision of Specification 3.3.7.1 Action 72 is 
simply proposed in order to achieve consistency with the current 
Action 3.7.2.b.2. Incorporation of the already approved 3.7.2.b.2 
compensatory measures to suspend possible radiation accident 
initiating activities provides an alternative which would actually 
reduce the probability of occurrence of a previously analyzed 
accident, and would have no adverse effect on accident consequences. 
None of the proposed changes to the clarified action, including the 
editorial changes, involves a change to the design of the plant, nor 
the operational characteristics of any plant system, nor the 
procedures by which the Operators run the plant. 

2. The proposed changes do not create the possibility of a new or 
different kind of accident from any accident previously evaluated. 

No design changes are being made that would create a new type of 
accident or malfunction, and the methods and manner of plant operation 
remains unchanged. The proposed revisions to Action 72 will remove 
several inconsistencies between the two Specifications by providing 
consistent actions within the Radiation Monitoring Instrumentation 
Specification with those currently existing in the Control Room 
Emergency Recirculation System Specification and provide an additional 
shutdown requirement in Operational Conditions 1, 2 and 3. The other 
changes to Action 72 are editorial, and therefore cannot affect 
accident initiation parameters. The instrument to which Action 72 
applies (the Control Room Ventilation Radiation Monitor (Noble Gas)) 
simply serves as a supporting instrumentation channel for the Control 
Room Emergency Recirculation System, therefore no new or different 
kind of accident can be created. 

3. The proposed changes do not involve a significant reduction in a 
margin of safety. 

The proposed change to Specification 3.3.7.1 Action 72 simply makes 
the two Specifications more consistent by making the Action for a 
supporting instrumentation channel, the Control Room Ventilation 
Radiation Monitor (Noble Gas), more consistent with those of the 
supported system Specification, the Control Room Emergency 
Recirculation System. A shutdown requirement is also being added if 
the operators should choose not to initiate the supported system in 
Operational Conditions 1, 2, and 3. Since the Actions of the two 
Specifications will now correspond, the margin of safety as currently 
exists today for the governing Specification (the Control Room 
Emergency Recirculation System Specification) is maintained and the 
proposed changes do not therefore reduce the margin of safety. 

The NRC staff has reviewed the licensee's analysis and, based on this 
review, it appears that the three standards of 10 CFR 50.92(c) are 
satisfied. Therefore, the NRC staff proposes to determine that the 
amendment request involves no significant hazards consideration. 



Local Public Document Room Location: 

Perry Public Library, 3753 Main 
Street, Perry, Ohio 44081.



