 

Outside air dilutes and removes contaminants through natural ventilation, mechanical ventilation or through infiltration
and exfiltration. Natural ventilation occurs when desired air flows occur through windows, doors, chimneys and
other building openings. Mechanical ventilation is the mechanically induced movement of air through the building.
Mechanical systems usually condition and filter the air and allow for the entry of outdoor air through outdoor dampers.
Infiltration is the unwanted movement of air through cracks and openings into the building shell. 

The outside air ventilation rate of a building affects indoor air quality. It determines the extent to which contaminants
are diluted and removed from the indoor environment. The extent to which outside air ventilation is effective in diluting
indoor contaminants depends on how well outside air is mixed with indoor air and is reflected by ventilation efficiency.
Ventilation efficiency can be reduced by air short-circuiting from the supply diffusers to the return inlets, by
modular furniture partitions, and differences between the supply air temperature and the room air temperature.


The rate at which outside air is supplied to a building is specified by the building code at the design stage. Outside
air ventilation rates are based primarily on the need to control odors and carbon dioxide levels (e.g., occupant-generated
contaminants or bioeffluents). Carbon dioxide is a component of outdoor air whose excessive accumulation indoors
can indicate inadequate ventilation. 

Lack of adequate ventilation contributes to indoor air related health complaints. Specific deficiencies that produce
air quality problems include inadequate outside air supply, poor air distribution, poor air mixing (and therefore
poor ventilation efficiency), inadequate control of humidity, insufficient maintenance of the ventilation system,
inadequate HVAC system capacity and inadequate exhaust from occupied areas. Inadequate outdoor air supply and distribution
and insufficient control of thermal conditions can result from strategies to control energy consumption. In approximately
500 indoor air quality investigations conducted in the late 1970's and early 1980's, the National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health (NIOSH) found that the primary causes of indoor air quality problems were inadequate ventilation
(52%), contamination from outside the building (10%), microbial contamination (5%), contamination from building
fabric (4%) and unknown sources (13%) [56 FR 47892]. To date, NIOSH has conducted over 1,100 IAQ related investigations,
but has not yet evaluated them to provide updated estimates. 

OSHA, therefore, believes that it is necessary to require maintenance of the HVAC system components that directly
affect IAQ, since failure to do so results in the degradation of IAQ. Standards of HVAC maintenance vary and sometimes
are deficient where untrained personnel are designated to maintain complex systems. It is, also, customary for companies
to defer maintenance for economic and budgetary reasons, with adverse impacts on IAQ. Some examples of maintenance
deficiencies include: plugged drains on cooling coil condensate drip pans (resulting in microbial contamination);
failed exhaust fans in underground parking garages; microbial fouling of cooling tower water from lack of water treatment
with biocides resulting in legionellosis cases; and failure of the automatic temperature control system resulting
in lack of outside ventilation air. 



4. Building Characteristics 



During the last 25 years, technical and socioeconomic changes have profoundly influenced the methods employed to
plan, design, construct and operate buildings. Buildings system design, maintenance and operation can, and regularly
do, provide acceptable indoor environments. However, neglect or disregard of the sources of indoor air contaminants,
or of the proper design, operation and maintenance of building system components which influence indoor air quality
can create an uncomfortable and unhealthy indoor atmosphere [Ex. 31075H2]. 

The oil embargo of 1973 brought about the realization that considerable savings could be made in reducing the consumption
of energy used to heat and cool buildings. Prior to 1973, the energy to heat and cool buildings was much cheaper and the
buildings reflected that reality. Building enclosures had lower insulating values and allowed more infiltration.
More air was circulated to the occupied spaces and more outdoor air was provided for ventilation. This resulted in
a lower concentration of pollutants and higher velocities of air motion in indoor air. Office buildings were divided
into individual rooms with their own walls as opposed to the current practice of open spaces with movable screens [Ex.
474]. 

The centralization of services and the expanding economy have led to concentration of office space in the cities.
The cost of land has shaped buildings into high-rise structures. The cost of materials and popularity of mirror glass
has led to the sprouting of hundreds of what may be termed ``glass boxes''. These boxes are sealed to keep out noise and
pollution_mainly from traffic. 

Buildings designed after 1973 have incorporated many energy conservation measures that range from adjusting thermal
comfort zones to increased awareness of lighting efficiency, to designing new operating methods for ``sealed building''
[Ex.31159, p.1]. In large buildings, outside air ventilation rates were also reduced by closing outside air
dampers in mechanical ventilation systems at nights, on weekends and sometimes even during occupancy. As a result
of these measures, which primarily reduced costs for conditioning outdoor air as opposed to increasing energy efficiency,
considerable energy savings have been achieved in buildings. 

In addition, during the 1970's variable air volume (VAV) HVAC systems became widely accepted. VAV systems condition
supply air to a constant temperature and insure thermal comfort by varying the airflow. Early VAV systems did not allow
control of the outside air quantity, so that a decreasing amount of outside air was provided as the flow of supply air
was reduced. 

In some cases, building design flaws contribute to the poor quality of indoor air, such as locating air intake vents
near to a loading dock or parking garage. Design flaws of interior space also contribute to indoor air problems. Most
building cooling systems are designed to remove the heat generated by office machines, employees and light. The heat
generated by these sources often exceeds the capacity of the HVAC system to remove it [Ex.31159C1]. Ideally
with effective filtration and management systems, the air indoors should be cleaner than the air outdoors. 




