 

Because the site was operated for only five months during 1992, there is a large gap in data for the new site for 1992.
Appendix H contains a formula for estimating the number of exceedances for a year when there is missing data. Normally,
for an established site with two previous years of monitoring data, this number would be added to the number of exceedances
for the two previous years and averaged to yield an expected exceedance per year. However, because the new site was
established at a nearby but different location, it must be considered to be a different site. For this reason, the estimated
exceedances for 1992 cannot be averaged over the three year period from 1990 through 1992. Therefore, while an expected
annual exceedance rate can be calculated for the Alum Rock site, the lack of three complete years of data introduces
uncertainties into the calculation using the formula contained in appendix H. 

Appendix H does not explicitly address the situation where a new site starts up and collects data for only a portion
of the calendar year. However, this situation has been addressed in an EPA memorandum, ``Ozone and Carbon Monoxide
Design Value Calculations,'' William Laxton, Director, Technical Support Division, OAQPS, June 18, 1990 (Laxton
memo). The memo recognizes the disincentive created by applying the estimated exceedance calculation for missing
data to new sites. The missing data penalty created by the calculation is designed to encourage prompt repair or replacement
of monitors, rather than to discourage air pollution control agencies from installing new monitoring sites in excess
of the number required by 40 CFR part 58. For this reason, the Laxton memo essentially allows an agency which installs
a new monitoring site to base the estimated exceedance calculation for the initial year on the portion of the year following
start-up of the monitor. Based on the underlying reasoning of the Laxton memo and the fact that there were no exceedances
at any of the 22 established monitoring sites during June, July and August of 1992, EPA calculated expected exceedances
for the new Alum Rock site using data from August 24, 1992, the date on which the new Alum Rock monitoring site was established,
through the end of December 1992. That calculation results in an estimated expected exceedance calculation of 1.0
exceedances for 1992. EPA believes that, in light of the uncertainties attendant to the lack of three full years of
data from the Alum Rock monitor, this calculation represents the ``best estimate'' of the expected exceedance rate
for the Alum Rock monitor in 1992 and leads to the conclusion that, in all likelihood, the San Francisco Bay Area achieved
attainment during the 19901992 period. The lack of any monitored exceedances at any of the other monitors in
the San Francisco Bay Area's extensive SLAMs network during the June-August 1992 period provides additional support
for EPA's belief that this calculation represents the best estimate of expected exceedances at the Alum Rock site.


EPA notes that monitoring at Alum Rock following the end of 1992 continues to show attainment. This provides further
support for the conclusion that the best estimate of expected exceedances at the Alum Rock site for 1992 is 1.0. 



D. Demonstration of Attainment 



In sum, while some uncertainty attaches to the monitoring data from the Alum Rock site established in August 1992,
EPA believes that the data submitted by the BAAQMD provides an adequate demonstration that the San Francisco Bay Area
attained the ozone NAAQS during the 19901992 period. Moreover, monitoring data from all sites in the Bay Area
SLAMs network continues to show attainment in 1993 and so far in 1994. 

In order for EPA to take final action approving the San Francisco Bay Area redesignation request, monitoring data
from all 23 sites in the BAAQMD's SLAMs network must continue to demonstrate attainment up to the time of final action.
Thus, EPA proposes to approve the San Francisco Bay Area redesignation only if the monitoring data from the entire
SLAMs network continues to demonstrate attainment. If the monitoring data records a violation of the NAAQS before
final action is taken on this proposal, the proposed approval of the redesignation will be withdrawn and a proposed
disapproval substituted for the proposed approval. 

In addition to the demonstration discussed above, EPA required completion of air network monitoring requirements
set forth in 40 CFR part 58. This included a quality assurance plan revision and a monitoring network review to determine
the adequacy of the ozone monitoring network. The BAAQMD fulfilled these requirements to complete documentation
for the air quality demonstration. The BAAQMD has also committed to continue monitoring in this area in accordance
with 40 CFR part 58. 

EPA agreed with the BAAQMD recommendation in its network review concerning the need for one additional ozone monitor
in the area south of San Jose. As a result, the BAAQMD established an additional State and Local Air Monitoring Site
(SLAMS) at the San Martin site in Santa Clara County in April 1994. EPA will review data from this new monitoring station
as part of its review of the 1994 ozone season. 





