 

Retention and disposal:



Microfilm and microfiche are retained in metal cabinets in DMC for 25 years. CARS records are retained until termination
of debt collection (payment in full, write off, compromise or waiver). All other automated storage media retained
and disposed of in accordance with disposition authorization approved by the Archivist of the Untied States. DMC
generally forwards all substantive paper documents to VA regional offices for storage in claims files or loan files.
Those documents are retained and disposed of in accordance with the appropriate system of records. Information provided
to HUD for CAIVRS is stored on magnetic tape. The tapes are returned to VA for updating each month. HUD does not keep separate
copies of the tapes.



System manager(s) and address:



Director, Debt Management Center (389/00), U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, Bishop Henry Whipple Federal Building,
1 Federal Drive, Ft. Snelling, MN 55111.



Notification procedure:



An individual who wishes to determine whether a record is being maintained in this system under his or her name or other
personal identifier, or wants to determine the contents of such record, should submit a written request to the system
manager indicated above.



Record access procedures:



Individuals seeking information regarding access to and contesting of VA records may write, call or visit the nearest
VA regional office. Address locations are listed in VA Appendix 1.



Contesting record procedures:



See record access procedures, above.



Record source categories:



The records in this system are derived from two other systems of records as set forth in ``Categories of records in the
system'', above, persons indebted to the United States by virtue of their participation in programs administered
by VA, dependents of those persons, fiduciaries for those persons (VA or court appointed), other Federal agencies,
States and local agencies, private collection agencies, consumer reporting agencies, State, local and county courts
and clerks, other third parties and other VA records.




<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9427268 Filed 11294; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 832001
</BILLING>







