 

7.3.2Upscale Calibration Drift Test. At each 24-hour 
interval, after the zero calibration value has been checked and 
any optional or required adjustments have been made, check and 
record the COMS response to the upscale calibration value 
established under the optical and zero alignment procedure of 
section 7.2.1. The upscale calibration value established in 
section 7.2.1 shall be used each 24-hour period. From the 
initial and final upscale readings, calculate the upscale calibration 
value drift for each 24-hour period. Then, calculate the 
arithmetic mean, standard deviation, and confidence coefficient 
of the 24-hour CD and the 95 percent confidence interval using 
equations 13, 14, and 15. Calculate the sum of the absolute 
value of the mean and the absolute value of the confidence 
coefficient, and report this value as the 24-hour calibration 
value drift. At the conclusion of the 336-hour operational test 
period, record and report the 336-hour accumulated drift. 

7.3.3Calibration Stability Test. Immediately following or 
during, the operational test period, conduct a calibration 
stability test over a 24-hour period. During this period, there 
will be no unscheduled maintenance, repair, adjustment, zero and 
calibration adjustments, exposed optical and other instrument 
surface cleaning, or optical realignment performed. Record the 
initial zero and upscale calibration opacity values and operate 
the monitor in a normal manner. After each 1-hour period, record 
the monitor adjusted zero and upscale opacity values. Subtract 
the initial zero and upscale calibration values from each 1-hour 
adjusted value and record the difference. None of these differences 
shall exceed +2 percent opacity. Figure 18 may be used 
for the recording of the results of this test. 
7.3.4Retesting. If the COMS fails to meet the 
specifications for the tests conducted under the operational test 
period, make the necessary corrections and restart the opera- 
tional test period. Depending on the correction made, it may be 
necessary to repeat some or all design and other preliminary 
tests. 


8. Equations 


8.1Arithmetic Mean. Calculate the mean of a set of data as follows: 




where: 




<IMPORT>



E:GRAPHICSEP25NO94.002


</IMPORT>



n = Number of data points. 
n 


S

x

i

 = Algebraic sum of the individual measurements, x

i

. i=1 



8.2Standard Deviation. Calculate the standard deviation S

d

 
as follows: 





<IMPORT>



E:GRAPHICSEP25NO94.003


</IMPORT>



8.3Confidence Coefficient. Calculate the 2.5 percent 
error confidence coefficient (one-tailed), CC, as follows: 





