 

(h) 

Changes in use

_(1) 

Conversion to personal use. 

An 
asset in a general asset account becomes ineligible for 
general asset account treatment if a taxpayer uses the asset 
in a personal activity during a taxable year. Upon a 
conversion to personal use, the taxpayer must remove the 
asset from the general asset account as of the first day of 
the taxable year in which the change in use occurs and must 
make the adjustments to the general asset account described 
in paragraph (e)(3)(iii)(C)(

2

) through (

4

) of this section. 

(2) 

Other changes in use. 

[Reserved]. 

(i) 

Identification of disposed or converted asset. 

A 
taxpayer may use any reasonable method that is consistently 
applied to the taxpayer's general asset accounts for 
purposes of determining the unadjusted depreciable basis of 
a disposed or converted asset in a transaction described in 
paragraph (e)(3)(iii) (disposition of an asset in a 
qualifying disposition), (e)(3)(iv) (transactions subject to 
section 168(i)(7)), (e)(3)(v) (anti-abuse rule), (g) (assets 
subject to recapture), or (h)(1) (conversion to personal 
use) of this section. 

(j) 

Effect of adjustments on prior dispositions. 

The 
adjustments to a general asset account under paragraph 
(e)(3)(iii), (e)(3)(iv), (e)(3)(v), (g), or (h)(1) of this 
section have no effect on the recognition and character of 
prior dispositions subject to paragraph (e)(2) of this 
section. 

(k) 

Election

_(1) 

Irrevocable election. 

If a taxpayer 
makes an election under this paragraph (k), the taxpayer 
consents to, and agrees to apply, all of the provisions of 
this section to the assets included in a general asset 
account. Except as provided in paragraph (c)(1)(ii)(A), 
(e)(3), (g), or (h)(1) of this section, an election made 
under this section is irrevocable and will be binding on the 
taxpayer for computing taxable income for the taxable year 
for which the election is made and for all subsequent 
taxable years. An election under this paragraph (k) is made 
separately by each person owning an asset to which this 
section applies (for example, by each member of a 
consolidated group, at the partnership level (and not by the 
partner separately), or at the S corporation level (and not 
by the shareholder separately)). 

(2) 

Time for making election. 

The election to apply 
this section shall be made on the taxpayer's timely filed 
(including extensions) income tax return for the taxable 
year in which the assets included in the general asset 
account are placed in service by the taxpayer. 

(3) 

Manner of making election. 

In the year of 
election, a taxpayer makes the election under this section 
by typing or legibly printing at the top of the Form 4562, 
``GENERAL ASSET ACCOUNT ELECTION MADE UNDER SECTION 
168(i)(4),'' or in the manner provided for on Form 4562 and 
its instructions. The taxpayer shall maintain records (for 
example, ``General Asset Account 

#

1 - all 1995 additions in 
asset class 00.11 for Salt Lake City, Utah facility'') that 
identify the assets included in each general asset account, 
that establish the unadjusted depreciable basis and 
depreciation reserve of the general asset account, and that 
reflect the amount realized during the taxable year upon 
dispositions from each general asset account. (But see 
section 179(c) and 1.1795 for the recordkeeping 
requirements for section 179 property.) The taxpayer's 
recordkeeping practices should be consistently applied to 
the general asset accounts. If Form 4562 is revised or 
renumbered, any reference in this section to that form shall 
be treated as a reference to the revised or renumbered form. 

(l) 

Effective date. 

This section applies to 
depreciable assets placed in service in taxable years ending on or after October 11, 1994. For depreciable assets
placed in service after December 31, 1986, in taxable years ending before October 11, 1994, the Internal 
Revenue Service will allow any reasonable method that is 
consistently applied to the taxpayer's general asset 
accounts. 



PART 602_OMB CONTROL NUMBERS UNDER THE PAPERWORK REDUCTION 
ACT 





Par. 4. 

The authority citation for part 602 continues 
to read as follows:





Authority:

 26 U.S.C. 7805. 



602.101(c) 

[Amended] 





Par. 5. 

Section 602.101(c) is amended by adding the 
entry ``1.168(i)1....15451331'' in numerical order to the 
table. 



<SIGNER>
Margaret Milner Richardson,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Commissioner of Internal Revenue.



Approved: September 9, 1994 


</SIGNJOB>
<SIGNER>
Leslie Samuels,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant Secretary of the Treasury.





</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9424949 Filed 10794; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 483001U
</BILLING>


