 

[(bl+el)
2]&times;[br^er]

 

where

 

bl = the hyperinflationary currency amount of liabilities at 
the beginning of the balance sheet period. 

el = the hyperinflationary currency amount of liabilities at 
the end of the balance sheet translation period. 
br = one dollar divided by the number of hyperinflationary 
currency units that equal one dollar at the beginning 
of the balance sheet period. 
er = one dollar divided by the number of hyperinflationary 
currency units that equal one dollar at the end of the 
balance sheet period. 


(B) 

Separate calculation. 

The calculation shall be made 
separately for interest-bearing liabilities described in 
paragraph (e)(3)(vii) of this section (Step 7) and for each of 
the classes of non-interest-bearing liabilities described in 
paragraph (e)(3)(viii) of this section (Step 8). 
(C) 

Weighting to prevent distortion. 

Where a distortion 
would result from averaging the amount of liabilities at the 
beginning and end of a balance sheet period, as might be the case 
where a taxpayer incurs or retires a substantial liability, the 
taxpayer must use a different method that more clearly reflects 
the average amount of liabilities weighted to reflect the time 
the liability was outstanding during the balance sheet period. 
(vii)

 Step 7_adjust dollar income and expense by DASTM gain 
or loss from interest-bearing liabilities

_(A) 

In general. 

The 
taxpayer shall apply the amount of DASTM gain on interest-bearing 
liabilities computed under paragraph (e)(3)(vi) of this section 
(Step 6) to reduce interest expense generated by such liabilities 
(

e.g., 

prior to the application of 1.8619T or its successor 
regulation). To the extent DASTM gain on such liabilities 
exceeds interest expense, it shall be sourced or otherwise 
classified in the same manner that interest expense is allocated 
and apportioned under 1.8619T or its successor regulation. The 
amount of DASTM loss on interest-bearing liabilities computed 
under paragraph (e)(3)(vi) of this section (Step 6) shall be 
allocated and apportioned in the same manner that interest 
expense is allocated and apportioned under 1.8619T or its 
successor regulation (without regard to the exceptions to 
fungibility in 1.86110T or its successor regulation). For 
purposes of this section, an interest-bearing liability is a 
liability that requires payment of periodic interest (whether 
fixed or variable), has original issue discount, or would have 
interest imputed under subtitle A. 
(B) 

Allocation of DASTM gain or loss from interest-bearing 
liabilities that generate related person interest expense. 

DASTM 
gain or loss from interest-bearing liabilities that generate 
related person interest expense (as provided in section 
954(b)(5)) shall be allocated for purposes of subtitle A 
(including sections 904 and 952) in the same manner that the 
related person interest expense of that debt is required to be 
allocated under the rules of section 954(b)(5) and 1.9045(c)(2). 
(C) 

Modified gross income method. 

In applying the modified 
gross income method described in 1.8619T(j) or its successor 
regulation, gross income shall be adjusted for any DASTM gain or 
loss from assets as provided in paragraph (e)(3)(v) of this 
section (Step 5) and any DASTM gain or loss with respect to 
short-term, non-interest-bearing trade payables as provided in 
paragraph (e)(3)(viii)(A) of this section. 
(viii) 

Step 8_adjust dollar income and expense by DASTM 
gain or loss from non-interest bearing liabilities_

(A) 

Short-term, non-interest-bearing trade payables. 

The taxpayer shall 
allocate DASTM gain or loss on short-term non-interest-bearing 
trade payables for purposes of subtitle A (including sections 904 
and 952) to the same category or type of gross income as the cost 
or expense to which the trade payable relates. For this purpose, 
a short-term, non-interest-bearing trade payable is a non-interest-bearing liability with a term of 183 days or
less that 
is incurred to purchase property or services to be used by the 
obligor in an active trade or business. 
(B) 

Excise tax payables. 

The taxpayer shall allocate 
DASTM gain or loss on excise tax payables for purposes of 
subtitle A (including sections 904 and 952) to the same category 
or type of gross income as would be derived from the activity to 
which the excise tax relates. 
(C) 

Other non-interest-bearing liabilities

_(

1

) 

In 
general. 

Except as provided in paragraphs (e)(3)(viii)(A), 
(e)(3)(viii)(B), and (e)(3)(viii)(C)(

2

) of this section, DASTM 
gain or loss on non-interest-bearing liabilities shall be 
allocated under paragraph (e)(3)(ix) of this section (Step 9). 




