 

Also, the current heading for part 92 reads as follows: ``Importation of Certain Animals and Poultry and Certain Animal
and Poultry Products; Inspection and other Requirements for Certain Means of Conveyance and Shipping Containers
Thereon.'' We are proposing to amend this heading to reflect the fact that part 92 also deals with the importation of
birds, and to remove excess wording. As amended, the heading for part 92 would read as follows: ``Importation of Certain
Animals, Birds, and Poultry, and Certain Animal, Bird, and Poultry Products; Requirements for Means of Conveyance
and Shipping Containers.'' 


Executive Order 12866 and Regulatory Flexibility Act 


This proposed rule has been reviewed under Executive Order 12866. The rule has been determined to be not significant
for purposes of Executive Order 12866, and, therefore, has not been reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget.

In accordance with 5 U.S.C. 603, we have performed an initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis regarding the impact
of this proposed rule on small entities. This proposed action may have a significant economic impact on a substantial
number of small entities. However, we do not currently have all the data necessary for a comprehensive analysis of
the effects of this rule on small entities. Therefore, we are inviting comments concerning potential impacts. In
particular, we are interested in determining the number and kind of small entities that may incur benefits or costs
from implementation of this proposed rule. 


Regulatory Authority 


In accordance with 21 U.S.C. 111113, 114a, 115, 117, 120, 123, and 134a, the Secretary of Agriculture has the
authority to promulgate regulations and take measures to prevent the introduction into the United States and the
interstate dissemination within the United States of communicable diseases of livestock and poultry, and to pay
claims growing out of the destruction of animals. Animal health regulations promulgated by the Department under
this authority include those regarding END and chlamydiosis in 9 CFR part 82, and those regarding payment of claims
in 9 CFR part 53. 


Background 


Chlamydiosis 


Sporadic outbreaks of chlamydiosis in commercial poultry flocks have occurred in the United States over the past
decade. APHIS, working with State cooperators, has successfully eliminated chlamydiosis on each occasion. This
proposed rule includes only minor changes related to chlamydiosis, specifically the addition of a requirement for
a permit or special permit to move certain items interstate. We believe that these documents are necessary to allow
the Department to better monitor the interstate movement of the items moved. However, the economic impact from these
requirements would be negligible. 


Statement of Need for Regulatory Changes Regarding END 


From the time the southern California END emergency eradication program reached its successful conclusion in 1974
(see discussion below), the U.S. poultry and egg industries have become increasingly vertically integrated. This
vertical integration has led to further concentration of poultry and egg production in specific geographic regions
of the United States. With large numbers of poultry facilities operating in close proximity to each other, there is
an increased opportunity for another major END outbreak. Current END regulations were drafted prior to the increased
level of industry concentration, and we believe they require revisions to reflect the changes that have taken place.
Current value of the domestic poultry and egg industry is estimated to be approximately $14.9 billion. Therefore,
we believe the proposed changes to the existing END regulations are necessary due to the dynamic nature of the disease
and its continued potential to devastate an important sector of U.S. agriculture. 
Exotic birds are capable of transmitting the END virus to commercial poultry and egg flocks. Under current provisions,
APHIS routinely euthanizes entire shipments of imported birds when the END virus is detected. In the past two decades,
the domestic exotic bird industry has changed. Domestic production has intensified for those exotic species that
can be readily bred in captivity. Legal importation annually supplies the U.S. bird market with a significant number
of exotic species. The estimated value of this industry ranges between $300,000 to $500,000 annually. The actual
value of the exotic bird industry would be much higher if the value of smuggled shipments could be included in the total.
Illegal importation of exotic bird species continues to be an avenue for the introduction of END into the United States.



Proposed Rule Changes to END Regulations 


In the absence of an END outbreak, the proposed regulatory changes would have a negligible impact on the domestic poultry
and exotic bird industries. Proposed END revisions would strengthen APHIS's ability to prevent the interstate spread
of END in the event of a domestic outbreak, and in some cases relieve certain restrictions. The proposed changes include
new requirements for removing an area from quarantine; specific provisions for moving pet birds that are not known
to be infected with or exposed to END out of a quarantined area; new provisions regarding the interstate movement of
manure and litter from a quarantined area; and new provisions regarding the interstate movement of cages, coops,
and equipment from a quarantined area. A brief overview of the proposed END regulations is as follows: 





