 

If a Medicaid eligible patient requires an emergency admission to a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric inpatient
unit of a general hospital, we would require that hospital staff assess the patient's condition and certify the need
for inpatient care and then initiate appropriate treatment as soon as possible following admission. If an individual
does not apply for Medicaid until after admission, the assessment and certification of the need for inpatient care
would be made by hospital or facility staff within 7 days following the application for Medicaid. 

The formal inpatient plan of treatment developed in accordance with proposed 483.202(b) would have to be implemented
within 7 days following admission or application for Medicaid if the individual remains in the hospital that long.
The inpatient plan would need to be compatible with the individual's comprehensive services plan developed as specified
in 441.45(b). 

No emergency admissions would be allowed for psychiatric residential treatment facilities (PRTFs). PRTFs provide
less medically intensive and less extensive services than psychiatric hospitals or psychiatric units of general
hospitals and are not generally equipped or staffed to deal with acute situations; if an acute situation arises during
a PRTF stay, the patient would generally need to be transferred to an acute care facility. 

We would revise 441.153, Team certifying need for services, concerning the team that makes the certification
that inpatient care is necessary, by deleting the requirement that different types of teams make the certification
depending on when the individual becomes eligible for Medicaid. We instead propose that, whenever possible, the
certification would be made by a team composed of representatives of the agencies providing services to the individual
in order to ensure that these services are coordinated and that all possible alternatives to inpatient care are considered.


The stress placed on interdisciplinary planning in this regulation is based on the premise that inpatient psychiatric
services should be used only when medically necessary, and that those who are responsible for provision of all services
to mentally ill individuals will arrange services in the individual's best interest, and arrange for services in
the community whenever possible. When inpatient psychiatric care is provided, the stay should be as brief as possible,
and focused on improving the individual's condition as quickly as possible to the point that he or she can be maintained
with community-based services. Although it may be difficult to arrange for the necessary interagency coordination
in States that have not already developed a coordinated approach, it is counterproductive to provide services in
a fragmented manner that does not recognize the total service needs of the child or adolescent. Even when a State is
not able to utilize interagency teams for certification of the need for inpatient care upon the effective date of this
regulation, we expect that all States will move toward improving coordination of interrelated services. 

If inpatient psychiatric care is determined to be necessary, an interdisciplinary approach would also ensure that
all service providers are aware of the need to arrange for or to accommodate service delivery in the new setting. The
school system, for example, will need to arrange for or coordinate the provision of educational services in the inpatient
setting. We would not require that team members meet in person to discuss cases if they find it more convenient to communicate
via a teleconference or other means. 

We would retain the regulatory requirement for physician participation in the certification process (441.153(c)(1)),
consistent with section 1905(h) of the Act, which requires that the team certifying the need for care include a physician.
The physician may be a representative of one of the service agencies. 




