 

7. If a Fund implements any amendment to its rule 12b1 plan (or, if presented to shareholders, adopts or implements
any amendment of a non-rule 12b1 shareholder services plan) that would increase materially the amount that
may be borne by the Target Class shares under the plan, existing Purchase Class shares will stop converting into Target
Class unless the Purchase Class shareholders, voting separately as a class, approve the proposal. If the Purchase
Class shareholders fail to approve the proposal, the directors shall take such action as is necessary to ensure that
existing Purchase Class shares are exchanged or converted into a new class of shares (``New Target Class''), identical
in all material respects to Target Class as it existed prior to implementation of the proposal, no later than the date
such shares previously were scheduled to convert into Target Class. If deemed advisable by the directors to implement
the foregoing, such action may include the exchange of all existing Purchase Class shares for a new class (``New Purchase
Class''), identical to existing Purchase Class shares in all material respects except that New Purchase Class will
convert into New Target Class. New Target Class or New Purchase Class may be formed without further exemptive relief.
Exchanges or conversions described in this condition shall be effected in a manner that the directors reasonably
believe will not be subject to federal taxation. In accordance with condition 5, any additional cost associated with
the creation, exchange, or conversion of New Target Class or New Purchase Class shall be borne solely by the Adviser
and the Underwriter. Purchase Class shares sold after the implementation of the proposal may convert into Target
Class shares subject to the higher maximum payment, provided that the material features of the Target Class plan and
the relationship of such plan to the Purchase Class shares are disclosed in an effective registration statement.
8. The directors of the Company will receive quarterly and annual statements concerning distribution and shareholder
servicing expenditures complying with paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of rule 12b1, as it may be amended from time to
time. In the statements, only expenditures properly attributable to the sale or servicing of a particular class of
shares will be used to justify any distribution or servicing fee charged to that class. Expenditures not related to
the sale or servicing of a particular class will not be presented to the directors to justify any fee attributable to
that class. The statements, including the allocations upon which they are based, will be subject to the review and
approval of the independent directors in the exercise of their fiduciary duties.
9. Dividends paid by a Fund with respect to each class of shares, to the extent any dividends are paid, will be calculated
in the same manner, at the same time, on the same day, and will be in the same amount, except that fee payments made under
12b1 plans relating to each respective class of shares, will be borne exclusively by that class and except that
any other class-specific expenses, including transfer agency fees relating to a particular class will be borne exclusively
by such class.
10. The methodology and procedures for calculating the net asset value and dividends and distributions of the classes
and the proper allocation of expenses between the classes has been reviewed by an expert (the ``Independent Examiner'')
who has rendered a report to the applicants, which has been provided to the staff of the SEC, stating that such methodology
and procedures are adequate to ensure that such calculations and allocations will be made in an appropriate manner.
On an ongoing basis, the Independent Examiner, or an appropriate substitute Independent Examiner, will monitor
the manner in which the calculations and allocations are being made and, based upon such review, will render at least
annually a report to the Funds that the calculations and allocations are being made properly. The reports of the Independent
Examiner shall be filed as part of the periodic reports filed with the SEC pursuant to sections 30(a) and 30(b)(1) of
the Act. The work papers of the Independent Examiner with respect to such reports, following request by the Funds which
the Funds agree to make, will be available for inspection by the SEC staff upon the written request for such work papers
by a senior member of the Division of Investment Management or of a Regional Office of the Commission, limited to the
Director, an Associate Director, the Chief Accountant, the Chief Financial Analyst, an Assistant Director and any
Regional Administrators or Associate and Assistant Administrators. The initial report of the Independent Examiner
is a ``Special Purpose'' report on the ``Design of a System'' as defined and described in SAS No. 44 of the AICPA, and
the ongoing reports will be ``reports on policies and procedures placed in operation and tests of operating effectiveness''
as defined and described in SAS No. 70 of the AICPA, as it may be amended from time to time, or in similar auditing standards
as may be adopted by the AICPA from time to time.
11. The applicants have adequate facilities in place to ensure implementation of the methodology and procedures
for calculating the net asset value and dividends and distributions of the classes of shares and the proper allocation
of expenses between such classes of shares, and this representation has been concurred with by the Independent Examiner
in the initial report referred to in condition (10) above and will be concurred with by the Independent Examiner, or
an appropriate substitute Independent Examiner, on an ongoing basis at least annually in the ongoing reports referred
to in condition (10) above. Applicants will take immediate corrective action if this representation is not concurred
in by the Independent Examiner, or appropriate substitute Independent Examiner.
12. The prospectuses of the Funds will contain a statement to the effect that a salesperson and any other person entitled
to receive compensation for selling or servicing Fund shares may receive different levels of compensation for selling
one particular class of shares over another in a Fund.


