 

(2) The railroad, system wide, has a quarterly power brake defect ratio, as defined in 232.5, for the most recently
completed calendar quarter of greater than three percent on outbound trains inspected by the FRA (at the same location
as the inspection conducted by the railroad) after the railroad has completed a Class 1 test. 

(3) More than one block of previously tested cars is added to the train. 

(4) The railroad does not have a single car test program in place that meets all the requirements of this part. 

(b) 

1,500-mile train movements. 

A conventional passenger train may be operated up to 1,500 miles from a point where it receives a Class 1 brake system
test if all of the following conditions are met: 

(1) A record of all brake tests performed on the train is available to the train crew. 

(2) A Qualified Train Brake System Supervisor, meeting the qualification requirements of 232.205, performs
frequent spot checks of the Class 1 brake tests. 

(3) The railroad, system wide, has a quarterly power brake defect ratio, as defined in 232.5, for the most recently
completed calendar quarter of less than three percent on outbound trains inspected by Federal or State Inspectors
(at the same location as the inspection conducted by the railroad) after the railroad has completed a Class 1 brake
system test. 

(4) The train configuration remains unchanged for the entire trip except for, at most, the addition of a single block
of previously tested cars (where the previous Class 1 test was performed by a qualified brake system inspector as defined
in 232.207 or 232.209) that has been disconnected from a source of compressed air for less than four hours.


(5) The railroad can demonstrate that it has a high-quality single car test program which meets all the requirements
of this part. Each car in the train shall be stencilled with the date that the next single car test is due, in accordance
with subpart G of this part, and no car shall be past due for a single car test. 

(6) If the train is to proceed beyond 1,500 miles, a new class 1 brake test shall be performed. 

(c) 

2,500-mile train movements. 

A conventional passenger train may be operated up to 2,500 miles from a point where it receives a Class 1 brake system
test if all of the following conditions are met: 

(1) All the requirements stated in paragraph (b) of this section necessary to qualify the train to travel 1,500 miles
between required train brake system tests are met. 

(2) The train configuration remains unchanged for the entire trip except for, at most, the changing of motive power
and when motive power is changed a Class 2 test is performed. 

(3) The railroad informs FRA in writing, prior to movement of the train, of its intention to operate a train up to 2,500
miles between required Class 1 train brake systems tests. For each train, the information provided to FRA shall include:


(i) The nature of the service to be provided; 

(ii) The type of equipment to be used; 

(iii) The frequency of the service, schedule and estimated annual mileage for the equipment used; 

(iv) Origin and destination of the train; 

(v) Train number; and 

(vi) A description of how the criteria to qualify the train will be met. 

(4) If the train is to proceed beyond 2,500 miles, a new class 1 brake test shall be performed. 

(d) 

3,500-mile train movements. 

A conventional passenger train may be operated up to 3,500 miles from a point where it receives a Class 1 brake system
test if all of the following conditions are met: 

(1) All the criteria stated in paragraph (c) of this section necessary to qualify a train to travel 2,500 miles between
required train brake system tests are met. 

(2) The train is equipped with reliable brake-pad thickness sensors that are in current calibration, that are operational,
and that provide a warning to the train brake control system when brake pads reach the wear limit. 

(3) The train is equipped with reliable brake-application force sensors that are in current calibration, that are
operational, and that provide a warning to the train brake control system when brake application force is not adequate
for effective brakes. 

(4) The train brake system is computer controlled, and the computer is capable of conducting automated tests and monitoring
of the train brake system. 

(5) The railroad uses the brake system sensors and controlling computer to conduct an automated initial terminal
inspection of the train. 

(6) The automated tests are supplemented with human inspection to do spot check verification of the results of the
automated tests. 

(7) The onboard computer controlling the brake system continuously monitors and reports the status of the train brake
system. 

(e) A railroad that opts to operate a train up to 1,500 miles, 2,500 miles, or 3,500 miles between required Class 1 brake
system tests shall maintain adequate test records on each such train to demonstrate that the conditions specified
in paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) of this section have been met. These records shall be made available to FRA upon request.




232.411 

General requirements of Class 2 train brake system tests for conventional passenger trains. 



Class 2 brake tests shall be performed only to test the train brake system of trains that have changed configuration
and do not require a Class 1 brake test. Class 2 tests shall be performed in lieu of the Class 1 test only under the following
conditions: 

(a) Where a locomotive or a caboose is changed, or where a block of cars is cut off from the rear end or head end of a train
and the configuration of the train is otherwise unchanged. 

(b) Where blocks of cars that are eligible for further travel since receiving their last Class 1 test and have not been
off air for more than four hours are added to a train eligible for further travel since its last Class 1 test. 

(c) Where a train, providing repetitive service, eligible for further travel before requiring a Class 1 test completes
a cycle of that repetitive service. 



232.413 

Required tasks of Class 2 train brake system tests for conventional passenger trains. 



(a) Class 2 train brake system tests for passenger trains shall include the following: 

(1) The train brake system shall be charged to within 15 psi of the feed valve setting on the locomotive, but not less
than 85 psi at the rear of the train. 






