 

(g) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (f) of this section, or any other provisions of this part, any requirement
for the payment or obligation of funds by the Department established by this part shall be subject to the availability
of appropriated funds, and no provision herein shall be interpreted to require obligation or payment of funds in violation
of the Anti-Deficiency Act (31 U.S.C. 1341). 


765.22 

Appeals procedures. 


(a) Any appeal by a licensee of any Department determination subject to the requirements of this part, shall invoke
the appeals process specified in paragraph (b) of this section. 
(b) A licensee shall file an appeal of any Department determination subject to the requirements of this part with the
Office of Hearings and Appeals, U.S. Department of Energy, 1000 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20585.
Any appeal must be filed within 45 days from the date the licensee received notice, actual or constructive (i.e., publication
in the 

Federal Register

), of the Department's determination. Appeals will be governed by, and must comply in full with, the procedures set
forth in 10 CFR part 205, subpart H. The decision of the Office of Hearings and Appeals shall be the final decision of
the Department. A licensee must file an appeal in order to exhaust its administrative remedies, and the receipt of
an appellate decision is a prerequisite to seeking judicial review of any determination made under this part. 


765.23 

Annual report. 


The Department shall prepare annually a report summarizing pertinent information concerning claims submitted
in the previous calendar year, the status of the Department's review of the claims, determinations made regarding
the claims, amounts paid for claims approved, and other relevant information concerning this reimbursement program.
The report will be available to all interested parties upon written request to the Department's Uranium Mill Tailings
Remedial Action Project Office, 2155 Louisiana NE., suite 10000, Albuquerque, NM 87110 and will also be available
in the Department's Freedom of Information Reading room, 1000 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC. 


Subpart D_Additional Reimbursement Procedures 


765.30 

Reimbursement of costs incurred in accordance with a plan for subsequent remedial action. 



(a) This section establishes procedures governing reimbursements of costs of remedial action incurred in accordance
with a plan for subsequent remedial action approved by the Department as provided in this section. Costs otherwise
eligible for reimbursement in accordance with the terms of this part and incurred in accordance with the plan shall
be reimbursed in accordance with the provisions of subpart D and subpart C. In the event there is an inconsistency between
the requirements of subpart D and subpart C, the provisions of subpart D shall govern reimbursement of such costs of
remedial action. 
(b) A licensee who anticipates incurring costs of remedial action after December 31, 2002 may submit a plan for subsequent
remedial action. This plan may be submitted at any time after January 1, 2000, but no later than December 31, 2001. Reimbursement
of costs of remedial action incurred after December 31, 2002 shall be subject to the approval of this plan by the Department.
This plan shall describe: 
(1) All applicable requirements established by NRC pursuant to UMTRCA, or where appropriate, by the requirements
of an Agreement State, included in a reclamation plan approved by NRC or an Agreement State which have not yet been satisfied
in full by the licensee, and 
(2) The total cost of remedial action required at the site, together with all necessary supporting documentation,
segregated into actual costs incurred to date, costs incurred or expected to be incurred prior to December 31, 2002
but not yet approved for reimbursement, and anticipated future costs. 
(c) The Department shall review the plan for subsequent remedial action to verify conformance with the NRC- or Agreement
State-approved reclamation plan or other written authorization, and to determine the reasonableness of anticipated
future costs, and shall approve, approve with suggested modifications, or reject the plan. During its review, the
Department may request additional information from the licensee to clarify or provide support for any provision
or estimate contained in the plan. The Department may also consult with NRC or an Agreement State concerning any provision
or estimate contained in the plan. Upon approval, approval with modifications, or rejection of a plan, the Department
shall inform and explain to the licensee its decision. 
(d) If the Department rejects a plan for subsequent remedial action submitted by a licensee, the licensee may appeal
the Department's rejection or prepare and submit a revised plan. The licensee may continue to submit revised plans
for subsequent remedial action until the Department approves a plan, or September 30, 2002, whichever occurs first.
A failure by a licensee to receive approval from the Department of a plan prior to December 31, 2002 will preclude that
licensee from receiving any reimbursement for costs of remedial action incurred after that date. 




