 

Section 2_Description of the Project 



A description of the industrial application to include the kind of efficient electric motor system [drive, motor,
and load] the proposed project is intended to address. Estimates of the energy, environmental, and economic costs
and benefits that might reasonably be expected to result from an assumed successful demonstration [relative to the
present or conventional system], should be presented. Also, extrapolated costs and benefits of the demonstrated
system if it were to be replicated in other similar applications, within the proposer's corporate facilities should
be estimated. 



Section 3_Facility Description 



A description of the facility where the demonstration will occur to include: 





(a) Geographic location; 

(b) The type of product produced or service provided (SIC code, if known); 

(c) The approximate number of people employed at the facility; 

(d) Approximate annual electricity costs. 

(e) The approximate demographics of the motors and drives at the facility (number, range of sizes, types of motors
and drives, typical driven load, etc.). 



Section 4_Technical Approach of Demonstration 



A description of the technical approach of how and where the demonstration will be implemented within the facility
should be explained. The level of complexity of the project should be described. Only technical information that
supports the technical validity and the likelihood of success of the demonstration project should be provided. Also,
a rough description of the technique and methodology to be employed to measure and evaluate the performance of the
demonstration should be provided. 



Section 5_Project Team Qualifications 



The qualifications and role of each participating project team member, company or organization should be described.
A description of key project personnel (project manager, engineering staff, consultants, etc.) qualifications
including relevant skills, work experience, and education should be briefly summarized. 



Section 6_Project Overall Estimated Cost and Resources 



The overall project cost should be estimated along with the approximate cost-share breakdown by all parties providing
resources to the project. 



Section 7_Letter of Intent 



Appropriate upper management within the industrial end-user company must provide a letter of intent to support the
demonstration project. This letter will show evidence that the company upper management (e.g., Vice President,
Engineering Director/Manager, Plant Manager, etc.) is aware, endorses, and is supportive of the project at the proposed
facility, and the company will provide some level of resources to the project, if selected. 



Section 8_MOTOR CHALLENGE Application Forms 



Each participating proposing Showcase Demonstration team member company or organization must join the MOTOR CHALLENGE
program by submitting an appropriately completed application. Applications can be obtained by calling the MOTOR
CHALLENGE hotline number at 18008622086. This section should contain all completed application
forms. 



Availability of Federal Funds 



Approximately $2 million in FY 1995 of Federal funds is expected to be available to support the activities, authorized
pursuant to Section 2101 of the Energy Policy Act of 1992, 42 U.S.C 13451, in support of the Showcase Demonstrations.
These Federal funds will be managed through the DOE Office of Industrial Technologies' Electric Motor Systems program.
Subject to the availability of appropriated funds, up to 25 proposals may be selected as Showcase Demonstrations
in accordance with the evaluation criteria stated below. All selected Showcase Demonstration projects will receive
no Federal financial assistance, but will be provided technical assistance by DOE as stipulated above. 



Technical Evaluation Criteria and Review Process 



Preliminary-proposals and final proposals will be reviewed and technically evaluated by the Review Panel of DOE-selected
experts. The preliminary-proposal evaluation is to preliminarily accept a comprehensive set of projects for which
detailed engineering and final proposals will be prepared as Showcase Demonstration projects. As mentioned above,
other technically-interesting preliminary-proposals that are not selected as Showcase Demonstrations may be
selected as Case Study Briefs. 



Preliminary-Proposal Technical Evaluation Criteria 



All preliminary-proposals submitted in response to this notice will be technically evaluated by four major categories
as follows: 

(Category 1) Overall technical merit. The overall technical merit will consider such factors as: 

(a) The technical description of the proposed Showcase Demonstration project that supports the practicality and
likelihood that the project will achieve success and the benefits claimed; 

(b) The description provided by the proposer as to how the demonstration's performance will be measured. That is,
the proposer must illustrate that reliable and defendable performance measurement techniques will be employed
to ascertain the project's costs and benefits. 

(Category 2) Economic significance if the project were to be successfully replicated within the company and throughout
the United States. Factors to be evaluated that will influence the ability of the Showcase Demonstration to impact
the market are: 

(a) The estimated benefit/cost of the demonstration and some indication of cost-effectiveness (e.g., life-cycle
cost, payback, internal return on investment) of the proposed electric motor and drive system technologies to be
employed. That is, the life-cycle cost advantages of the technology to be demonstrated relative to conventional
technology or systems that would accomplish the same process output, function, or duty; 





