 

At any age, preexisting physical as well as mental disorders of the individual may play a significant role in the manifestation
of a toxic response following exposure to a potentially toxic substance. Both types of disorders compromise the system
in some way so that either the defense mechanisms of the organism are not able to deal with the toxic substance or are
not able to repair themselves quickly. In addition to the basic altered biology, for individuals with a physical or
mental disorder who are under some form of medical intervention, the combination of therapeutic drugs and toxic substances
may have an interactive effect on the nervous system. For example, due to the delicate electrochemical balance of
the nervous system, mental disorders may be exacerbated by exposure to a toxic substance. 


2.5.2. Blood-Brain and Blood-Nerve Barriers 


The bioavailability of a specific chemical to the nervous system is a function of both the target tissue and the chemical.
The brain, spinal cord, and peripheral nerves are surrounded by a series of semipermeable tissues referred to as the
blood-brain and blood-nerve barriers (Katzman, 1976; Peters et al., 1991). In the central nervous system, the blood-brain
barrier is composed of tight junctions formed by endothelial cells and astrocytes. These tight junctions and cellular
interactions forming the barrier restrict the free passage of most bloodborne substances. By doing this, they create
a finely controlled extracellular environment for the nerve cells. Certain regions of the brain and nerves are directly
exposed to chemicals in the blood because the barrier is not present in some areas of the nervous system. For example,
it is absent in the circumventricular area, around the dorsal root ganglion in the peripheral nervous system, and
around the olfactory nerve, which may allow chemicals to penetrate directly from the nasal region to the frontal cortex.

The existence of these blood-brain and blood-nerve barriers suggests that proper functioning of the nervous system
is dependent on control of the substances to which nerve cells are exposed. The term ``barrier,'' however, is somewhat
of a misnomer. Although water-soluble and polar compounds enter the brain poorly, lipophilic substances readily
cross the barrier. In addition, a series of specific transport mechanisms exist through which required nutrients
(hormones, amino acids, peptides, proteins, fatty acids, etc.) reach the brain (Pardridge, 1988). If toxicants
are lipid soluble or if they are structurally similar to substances that are normally transported into the brain,
they can achieve high concentrations in brain tissue. It has been proposed that one reason why the developing nervous
system may be differentially sensitive to some toxicants is that the blood-brain barrier is less effective than in
an adult. The effectiveness of the blood-brain barrier may also be changed by chemical-induced physiological events
such as metabolic acidosis and nutritional deprivation. 


2.5.3. Metabolism 


The central nervous system has a very high metabolic rate and, unlike other organs, the brain depends almost entirely
on glucose as a source of energy and raw material for the synthesis of other molecules (Damstra and Bondy, 1980). The
absence of an alternative energy source makes the CNS critically dependent on an uninterrupted supply of oxygen as
well as the proper functioning of enzymes that metabolize glucose. Substances can be toxic to the nervous system if
they perturb neuronal metabolism. Without glucose, nerve cells usually begin to die within minutes. Despite its
relatively small size, the energy demands of the brain require 14 percent of the heart's output and consumes about
18 percent of the oxygen absorbed by the lungs. 


2.5.4. Limited Regenerative Ability 


The nervous system has a combination of special features not found in other organ systems. It is composed of a variety
of metabolically active neurons and supporting cell types that interact through a multitude of complex chemical
mechanisms. Each cell type has its own functions and vulnerabilities. At the time of puberty, the system is fully developed
and neurogenesis (the birth of new neurons from cell division of precursor cells called neuroblasts) ceases. This
is in marked and significant contrast to almost all other tissues, where cell replacement is continual. 
It is this loss of neurogenesis that limits the nervous system's ability to recover from damage and influences the
plasticity of the system. Neurons are unable to regenerate following damage; therefore, they are no longer able to
perform their normal functions. Toxic damage to the brain or spinal cord that results in cell loss is usually permanent.
If nerve cell loss is concentrated in one of the CNS's functional subsystems, the outcome could be debilitating; for
example, a relatively small loss of neurons that use acetylcholine as their neurotransmitter may produce a profound
disturbance of memory. A relatively minor insult concentrated in a subsystem that relies on dopamine as its neurotransmitter
may drastically impair motor coordination. However, in response to injury, neurons are able to show considerable
plasticity both during development and after maturation. Damage to the nervous system alters connectivity between
the surviving neurons, permitting functional adjustments to occur to compensate for the damage. Such responsiveness
may, in and of itself, have profound consequences for neurological, behavioral, and related body functions. 
After damage to axons in the peripheral nerves, if the neurons are not damaged, the axons have the ability to regenerate
and to attempt to reach their original target site. This is the basis, for example, of the eventual return of sensation
and muscle control in a surgically reattached limb. Neurons in the CNS also have the ability to regenerate interrupted
axons; however, they have a much more difficult task in reaching their original targets due to both the presence of
scar tissue formed by proliferating glia and to the increased complexity of the connectivity in the CNS. 

