 

FSIS does agree, however, with the comments regarding the benefits of fat and protein content information provided
by nutrition labeling. Since the products that typically contain mechanically separated poultry, e.g., poultry
sausages, are composed of this ingredient as the majority of their formulation, the nutrition labeling for such product
will primarily reflect the protein and fat contributed by the mechanically separated poultry component. For this
reason, a minimum protein content and a maximum fat content requirement for poultry products produced by mechanical
separation are not needed, given the implementation of the Department's nutrition labeling regulations on July
6, 1994 (58 FR 632). The nutrition labeling regulations require the declaration of protein and fat on the labeling
(i.e., the Nutrition Facts panel) of most multi-ingredient meat and poultry products. Nutrition labeling is now
required on most processed products purchased by consumers in retail stores, and this, together with the Department's
voluntary nutrition labeling program established for retail store information on single-ingredient raw products,
makes FSIS believe that consumers will have sufficient information on protein and fat for most products purchased
for consumption at home. 
FSIS further believes that the need to establish a fat and protein requirement is minimized because current regulatory
controls will limit the amount of skin or fat that may be used in formulating poultry products with mechanically separated
poultry. According to the poultry regulations, viz., 9 CFR 381.117, raw materials used to manufacture boneless poultry,
e.g., ``mechanically separated chicken'' and ``mechanically separated turkey,'' must be labeled to reflect the
presence of skin and attached fat when the proportions of skin and attached fat are in excess of that which occurs naturally
on a whole carcass. Therefore, products currently labeled as ``mechanically separated chicken'' or ``mechanically
separated turkey'' contain no more skin with attached fat than that which occurs naturally on a whole carcass, for
which there is no maximum fat content established. Furthermore, like all other animal products, poultry (e.g., whole
carcasses and parts of carcasses) is composed of water, fat, protein, and inorganic matter (i.e., ash). If the fat
content is controlled, the proportion of the other components, including protein, should remain the same as that
which occurs naturally. 
F. 

Bone Particle Size

. Fourteen commenters addressed the issue of bone particle size in poultry product produced by mechanical separation.
Twelve of the 14 commenters disagreed with restricting the size of the bone particles present in poultry product produced
by mechanical separation to a maximum of less than 1.5 millimeter (mm) in the greatest dimension. Furthermore, commenters
sought clarification of the quantity of particles of acceptable dimension that would be permitted. The commenters
also stated that there is no justification for requiring standardized bone particle size limitations; such a criteria
will result in increased analytical costs to the processor without improving food safety. Other commenters cited
the 1979 report on ``Health and Safety Aspects of the Use of Mechanically Deboned Poultry'' which states that over
90 percent of the bone particles found in mechanically deboned 
poultry are less than 150 microns (0.15 mm) in size and only 1 percent were greater than 400 microns (0.4 mm). 
FSIS believes that a bone particle size limitation augments the bone solids content restriction, and is a meaningful
indication of a poultry deboning operation that effectively controls bone breakage. The 1979 health and safety report
recommended that bone particle size be controlled to ensure that equipment type or processing does not result in unacceptably
large bone fragments in mechanically deboned poultry. FSIS agrees with this recommendation and continues to support
its tentative position of restricting the bone particle size in poultry products produced by mechanical separation.
However, FSIS is in agreement with the comments that reflected a need to clarify the parameters for such a restriction.
In order to simplify such a requirement for mechanically separated poultry products, FSIS is proposing that at least
98 percent of the bone particles present in mechanically separated poultry should have a maximum size no greater than
1.5 mm and no bone particles should be greater than 2.0 mm in their greatest dimension. These parameters are similar
to the requirements for bone particle size for MS(S), a similar livestock product. 





