 

33. AAI and the Plan submit that they cannot rely on Rule 17a7 because they are not affiliated persons of the Fund
or the Money Market Portfolio or the Total Return Portfolio 

solely by reason of

 having a common investment adviser or affiliated investment advisers, common directors, and/or common officers.
AAI and the Plan also note that since the proposed purchase of Fund shares by the Plan involves the purchase and sale
of securities for securities, the proposed transaction does not meet the condition of Rule 17a7 that the transaction
be a purchase or a sale for no consideration other than cash payment against prompt delivery of a security for which
market quotations are readily available.
34. AAI and the Plan assert that where, as here, an investment company would comply in substance with, but cannot literally
meet all of the conditions of, Rule 17a7, the Commission should consider the extent to which the investment
company meets the Rule 17a7 or other similar conditions, and issue an order if the protections of Rule 17a7
would be provided in substance. AAI and the Plan maintain that although the transactions will conform in all material
respects with the substance of all but one of the conditions enumerated in Rule 17a7, the terms of the proposed
transactions_including the consideration to be received by the Fund_are reasonable, fair, and do not involve overreaching
by investment company affiliates.
35. AAI and the Plan submit that the proposed transactions would offer to the Fund the same degree of protection from
overreaching that Rule 17a7 offers to investment companies involved in purchase or sale transactions with
their affiliates. For example, the Plan could not ``dump'' undesirable securities on the Fund, transfer investment
securities from the Fund, or effect the proposed transactions at a price that is disadvantageous to the Fund. In addition,
although the transactions will not be for cash, each will be effected based upon (i) the independent market price of
the Plan's investment securities valued as specified in Rule 17a7(b), and (ii) the net asset value per share
of the Money Market Portfolio or the Total Return Portfolio, valued in accordance with the procedures disclosed in
the Fund's registration statement and as required by Rule 22c1 under the 1940 Act. AAI and the Plan represent
that no brokerage commission, fee, or other remuneration will be paid to any party in connection with the proposed
transactions. In addition, although the board of directors of the Fund will not adopt specific procedures to govern
the proposed transactions, it will scrutinize and specifically approve by resolution each such transaction, including
the price to be paid for the Fund's shares and the nature and quality of the securities offered in payment for such shares.
36. AAI and the Plan represent that the proposed sale of additional shares is consistent with the investment policy
of both the Money Market Portfolio and the Total Return Portfolio of the Fund, as recited in the Fund's registration
statement, and the sale of shares for investment securities, as contemplated by the proposed transactions, is also
consistent with these investment policies provided that (i) the shares are sold at net asset value, and (ii) the securities
are of the type and quality that each portfolio would have acquired with the sale proceeds had the shares been sold for
cash. As recited in the conditions listed below, the Fund's board of directors will examine the portfolios of the Plan's
money market and balanced portfolios and only approve the proposed transactions if they, including a majority of
those directors who are not interested persons of the Fund, or interested persons of such persons, determine that
(i) and (ii) would be met.
37. The proposed transactions, as described herein, are consistent with the general purposes of the 1940 Act as stated
in the Findings and Declaration of Policy in Section 1 of the 1940 Act. The proposed transactions do not present any
of the conditions or abuses that the 1940 Act was designed to prevent.
38. AAI and the Plan maintain that the terms of the proposed transactions are fair and reasonable to the Plan as well
as to the Fund, and protect the Plan and the Fund from overreaching by their respective affiliates.

