 

The team members must generally be independent, i.e., they may not be employees of the inpatient facility being considered
for admission of the individual. If the inpatient facility is a public facility, an individual who is employed by the
governmental component responsible for administration of the inpatient facility would not be considered independent.
If inpatient care is required on an emergency basis, however, or the individual applied for Medicaid after admission,
certification may be made by employees of the inpatient facility. 
In some States, it may not currently be feasible to use service agency representatives to form the review team. HCFA
plans to provide guidance on this issue in the State Medicaid Manual. In such circumstances, the State would need to
arrange for another type of review group. The State could establish its own review teams or contract with an independent
review organization to determine whether admissions are necessary. An organization's team would need to meet any
State registration requirements and would have to have physician participation in the determination of the necessity
of inpatient psychiatric services, as required by statute. These teams or organizations would also be required to
be aware of and consider the total service needs of each individual (441.153). 
The rules in 441.154 and 441.155 concerning ``active treatment'' and ``plan of care'' would be revised
and incorporated into the rules concerning conditions of participation at 483.202. We believe that it is important
to incorporate these critical requirements into a condition of participation so that they will be subject to survey
procedures. These requirements are discussed in a later section of this preamble. 
Section 441.156, Team developing individual plan of care, would be deleted. The process for developing the inpatient
plan of treatment would be specified in 483.202(b), Active treatment program. 
A new 441.158, Care settings, would be added to describe the settings to be used for providing this inpatient
benefit. One setting is a psychiatric hospital, the setting that has been authorized under the statute since the psychiatric

L

21 benefit was first established. We would specify psychiatric units in general hospitals as a second setting that
States can use to provide acute care. Acute psychiatric care could be provided in either of these settings when the
need for such care is certified as specified in 441.152. These settings would be used when an individual has
an episode for which acute care is required, and when it is determined that this most restrictive type of care is necessary
to stabilize the patient's acute condition. 
A third possible setting for the psychiatric

L

21 benefit would be a PRTF. The PRTF would be a new category of institutional provider under the Medicaid program and
would be limited to the provision of the psychiatric

L

21 benefit under section 1905(a)(16) of the Act. PRTFs would provide care when an individual does not require acute
care, but does require supervision and active treatment on a 24-hour inpatient basis to attain a level of functioning
that allows subsequent treatment in a less restrictive setting. 
The PRTF setting is being specified as a new category of Medicaid provider in order to establish an alternative inpatient
setting which provides care more similar to community-based care than the care provided in psychiatric hospitals
or general hospitals. To ensure that PRTFs are community-oriented, we propose to require that these facilities coordinate
their educational activities with school curricula in their communities (483.212(a)(3)). In developing
this proposed rule we considered the possibility of limiting the size of facilities to 30 or fewer beds in order to enable
the facilities to be more appropriate in a community setting, but we are not including a proposed limit in the proposed
rule. We nevertheless welcome comments and suggestions on this subject. 



