 

1. Introduction


1.1. Background 





Over the years, agencies and programs have been established to deal with hazardous 
substances, with a focus on deleterious long-term effects, including noncancer endpoints such 
as neurotoxicity (Reiter, 1987). Recent evidence indicates that exposure to neurotoxic agents 
may constitute a significant health problem (WHO, 1986; OTA, 1990; chapter 2). Table 11 
lists the four Federal regulatory agencies with authority to regulate either exposure to or use 
of chemicals and that require data reporting on assessment of hazards. Regulatory bodies 
vary greatly in their mandate to require approval of chemicals prior to entering the 
marketplace and to regulate subsequent exposure (Fisher, 1980) (Table 12). The 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) cannot require chemical testing by 
the manufacturer whereas all other agencies can. Only the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) have authority for premarketing 
testing of chemicals (i.e., FDA for drugs and food additives and EPA for pesticides). EPA 
can, under some circumstances, require premarket testing of industrial and agricultural 
chemicals. The Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) regulates a number of 
consumer products including household chemicals and fabric treatments. Laws administered 
by CPSC require cautionary labeling on all hazardous household products whether the hazard 
is based on acute or chronic effects. These laws also provide the authority to ban hazardous 
products and to ask for data in support of product labeling.




<TABLE>






Table 

11._

Major Regulatory Agencies 


1Agency 
1Statute and sources covered




Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
Food, Drug, and Cosmetics Act for food 
additives; color in cosmetics; medical devices; 
animal drugs of medical and feed additives.


A unit of the Department of Health and 
Human Services with authority over the 
regulation of medical and veterinary drugs; 
foods and food additives; cosmetics 



Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
(OSHA) 
Occupational Safety and Health Act covers 
toxic chemicals in the workplace. 
A unit of the Department of Labor that 
regulates workplace conditions 



Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Independent agency (i.e., not part of a Cabinet 
department); administers a number of diverse 
laws concerned with human health and the 
environment

Toxic Substances Control Act requires 
premanufacture evaluation of all new 
chemicals (other than foods, food additives, 
drugs, pesticides, alcohol, tobacco); allows 
EPA to regulate existing chemical hazards not 
sufficiently controlled under other laws. 




 
Clean Air Act requires regulation of hazardous 
air pollutants. 
 
Federal Water Pollution Control Act 
governs toxic water pollutants.


 
Safe Drinking Water Act covers drinking 
water contaminants. 


 
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and 
Rodenticide Act covers pesticides.

 
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
covers hazardous wastes.


 
Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries 
Act covers ocean dumping.


Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) 
Regulates a variety of consumer products 
including household chemicals and fabric 
treatments 
Federal Hazardous Substances Act covers 
``toxic'' household products.



Consumer Product Safety Act covers 
 dangerous consumer products.



 
Poison Prevention Packaging Act covers 
packaging of dangerous children's products. 


 
Lead-Based Paint Poison Prevention 
Act covers use of lead paint in federally 
assisted housing.



</TABLE>


