 



Response. 

Public sidewalks and public sidewalk curb ramps that meet the provisions of this section allow persons with disabilities
to make the choice of whether to use them or not. This is consistent with other applications of the ADA, which clearly
prohibit discrimination based upon assumptions about an individual's abilities. Therefore, even under extreme
site conditions, access must be provided. 



14.2.4(2)Types of Public Sidewalk Curb Ramps



Paragraph (2) requires that a new street crossing be served by a perpendicular public sidewalk curb ramp and provides
an exception allowing a parallel public sidewalk curb ramp or a combination of the two types where right-of-way width
cannot accommodate a perpendicular public sidewalk curb ramp. Diagonal public sidewalk curb ramps, including depressed
corners, and built-up (e.g., projected) public sidewalk curb ramps are permitted only in alterations. 



Comment. 

A variety of public sidewalk curb ramp details and standards for their application were submitted by commenters.
Detailed technical comments were received from the U.S. Department of Transportation and several of its regional
divisions and from the transportation departments of four States. Many of these comments recommended that exceptions
be provided for various conditions in existing developed rights-of-way. Commenters from public works agencies
noted that a perpendicular public sidewalk curb ramp and landing for a six-inch curb height would require at least
10 feet of public sidewalk width and recommended that other alternatives be permitted. However, most indicated that
public pedestrian rights-of-way already established in central business districts and commercial areas were sufficiently
wide to accommodate a perpendicular public sidewalk curb ramp and landing. Other jurisdictions indicated that they
provide similar or greater right-of-way width in intensively developed zones. One county submitted a copy of the
standard details and specifications for public sidewalk curb ramps developed jointly by APWA and AGC that showed
a minimum landing of 48 inches connecting to a perpendicular public sidewalk curb ramp as a basic standard. Perpendicular
public sidewalk curb ramps were greatly preferred by people with disabilities, including people with mobility impairments
and those with vision impairments. Parallel public sidewalk curb ramp construction was suggested as a secondary
option. However, parallel public sidewalk curb ramps were preferred to perpendicular public sidewalk curb ramps
without landings or with 36 inch landings when right-of-way width is limited. 



Response. 

A 10 to 15 foot right-of-way between curb face and property line is common in existing commercial districts. A 12 foot
minimum can be easily accommodated in new land use planning as a first step in standardizing public sidewalk and street
crossing details in areas of significant pedestrian activity. Public sidewalk curb ramps must be perpendicular
to the curb where right-of-way width permits their installation. Parallel public sidewalk curb ramps or combinations
of parallel and perpendicular public sidewalk curb ramps are permitted where right-of-way width may be narrower,
as in residential neighborhoods and other low pedestrian volume zones. Other alternatives suggested by commenters,
such as diagonal and built-up public sidewalk curb ramps, will be permitted in alterations. No substantive change
has been made to this requirement. 
 


Comment. 

A diverse group of commenters recommended that a separate public sidewalk curb ramp be required for each crossing
direction (e.g., crosswalk) rather than a single diagonal public sidewalk curb ramp serving two perpendicular crossings.
One city is discontinuing the installation of diagonal public sidewalk curb ramps in response to the concerns of pedestrians.
Several commenters with vision impairments submitted accounts of difficulty with diagonal public sidewalk curb
ramps and blended intersections. Other comments noted that diagonal public sidewalk curb ramps at intersections
require that a turn be made to use either crosswalk. This is time-consuming for many and makes it difficult to complete
a street crossing in the time allotted by crossing signals. Diagonal public sidewalk curb ramps may also require persons
using wheelchairs to travel in lanes of moving traffic as they leave the public sidewalk. Depressed corners, as proposed
in Figure 58(a) of the NPRM, were considered both hazardous and difficult to drain. Many commenters recommended that
each street crossing in a narrow right-of-way be served by a parallel public sidewalk curb ramp instead of a perpendicular
public sidewalk curb ramp without a landing. Negotiating two consecutive parallel public sidewalk curb ramps was
preferred over negotiating the cross slope of a perpendicular public sidewalk curb ramp that did not have a landing.



Response. 

Public sidewalk curb ramps that are perpendicular to a street crossing provide direct access to the crosswalk and
do not require pedestrians to cross into perpendicular traffic lanes. The interim final rule prohibits diagonal
public sidewalk curb ramps and depressed corners in new construction. Diagonal public sidewalk curb ramps are, however,
permitted in alterations. 



14.2.4(3)Width 



Paragraph (3) requires public sidewalk curb ramps to have a minimum width of 36 inches. Few comments were received
on this section and no substantive changes were made. 



