 

The agency is proposing to define ``certification number'' in 123.3(a) as a unique combination of letters
and numbers assigned to a shellfish processor by a shellfish control authority, usually the State. These numbers
are used to identify the processor on tags and labels and in recordkeeping required under proposed 123.28.
States issue certification numbers to processors who receive shellfish from safe sources, keep requisite records
of shellfish purchases and sales, and operate in accordance with CGMP and the other certification requirements of
the State. This system of State issued numbers is used to identify the approximately 2,000 State certified shellfish
dealers that are included on the Interstate Certified Shellfish Shippers List. 

The agency is proposing in 123.3(b) to define ``cooked, ready-to-eat fishery product'' as a fishery product
that is subjected by a commercial processor to either a cooking process before being placed in a final container, or
to pasteurization in the final container, or to both. Cooked, ready-to-eat products undergo a heat treatment by a
processor that results in the coagulation of the protein. Because their organoleptic qualities suggest that they
are fully cooked, and thus ready-to-eat, these products will likely be eaten without any further heat treatment by
the consumer sufficient to eliminate pathogenic microorganisms and preformed toxins. 

As defined, cooked, ready-to-eat fishery products include products that must be stored either frozen or refrigerated.
Products such as canned seafoods that are subjected to a cooking process after being placed in a final container, while
technically considered cooked, ready-to-eat products, are not included in the definition because they are virtually
sterile in the final container. As used in these proposed regulations, the term applies to cooked, ready-to-eat products
that do not receive a heat treatment in the final container by the processor sufficient to destroy all pathogens and
create a shelf-stable product that does not need refrigeration. 

The agency is proposing in 123.3(c) to define ``critical control point'' for purposes of these regulations
as a point in a food process where there is a high probability that improper control may cause, allow, or contribute
to a hazard in the final food. This is a modification of the definition of the same term in 110.3(e). Under that
definition, a ``critical control point'' is a point where an improper control could cause, allow, or contribute to
``filth in the final food or decomposition in the final food'' as well as to a ``hazard'' in the final food. Clearly,
that definition is intended to apply both to human food safety and to certain quality issues that would not normally
cause illness. In this document, FDA is proposing to require the identification of critical control points for safety
only and is encouraging, but not requiring, the identification of certain critical control points for hazards not
normally related to safety. The modification of the part 110 definition being proposed here represents the least
revision necessary to achieve that purpose. 

The agency is proposing to define ``critical limit'' in 123.3(d) as a maximum or minimum value to which a physical,
biological, or chemical parameter must be controlled at a critical control point to minimize the risk of occurrence
of the identified hazard. This definition is consistent with that of NACMCF, which defined ``critical limit'' as
``a criterion that must be met for each preventive measure associated with a critical control point'' (Ref. 34, p.
186), but FDA's proposed definition is somewhat more explanatory. Critical limits can be either maximum values,
such as the maximum amount of histamine that can be allowed in a fish, or minimum values, such as the minimum temperature
needed during a cooking step to kill pathogens. 

The proposed definition states that control is for the purpose of minimizing risk. While complete prevention of a
hazard is obviously the most desirable of all possible outcomes, the proposed definition recognizes that, in reality,
complete prevention cannot always be ensured. A processor can minimize a microbiological hazard with a cooked, ready-to-eat
product by proper cooking, but the hazard could still occur if the product is contaminated or otherwise abused elsewhere
in the distribution system or in the home. This aspect of the definition is consistent with the view of NACMCF, which
states that: ``Each CCP [critical control point] will have one or more preventive measures that must be properly controlled
to assure prevention, elimination or reduction of hazards to acceptable levels'' (Ref. 34, p. 196). 

The agency is proposing in 123.3(e) to define ``fish'' and broadly to encompass the range of seafood products
that are processed or marketed commercially in the United States. Thus, the term ``fish'' includes all fresh or saltwater
finfish, molluscan shellfish, crustaceans, and other forms of aquatic animal life. Birds are specifically excluded
from the definition because commercial species of birds are either nonaquatic or, as in the case of aquatic birds such
as ducks, regulated by USDA. Mammals are also specifically excluded because no aquatic mammals are processed or marketed
commercially in this country. 

``Fishery products'' in proposed 123.3(f) are any edible human food product derived in whole or in part from
fish, including fish that has been processed in any manner. This definition reflects the tentative conclusion of
the agency to propose mandatory HACCP requirements at this time to control hazards associated with processing and
importing seafood products intended for human consumption. The proposed definition includes products that contain
ingredients other than seafood in keeping with the scope of FDA's regulatory authority. The control of hazards is
as important for products that contain ingredients other than fish as it is for products consisting of fish alone.


