 


Monday


December 12, 1994





Part III


Department of Health and Human Services





Food and Drug Administration





Supplements to New Drug Applications, Abbreviated New Drug Applications, or Abbreviated Antibotic Applications
for Nonsterile Drug Products; Draft Guideline; Notice










Federal Register

/Vol. 59, No. 237/Monday, 
December 12, 1994/Notices 











<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Food and Drug Administration</USBUREAU>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 93D0403]</RINDOCK>


Supplements to New Drug Applications, Abbreviated New Drug Applications, or Abbreviated Antibiotic Applications
for Nonsterile Drug Products; Draft Guideline


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is publishing a draft guideline entitled ``Draft Guideline on Supplements
to NDA's, ANDA's, or AADA's for Nonsterile Drug Products.'' This draft guideline is intended to help distinguish
between manufacturing changes that require prior approval through a supplement to an approved new drug application
(NDA), abbreviated new drug application (ANDA), or abbreviated antibiotic application (AADA), manufacturing
changes that require a supplement but that may be made prior to approval of the supplement, and those manufacturing
changes that need only to be described in an annual report. The draft guideline covers certain changes in the method
of manufacture that involve equipment changes, reprocessing of drug products that fail to meet specifications,
and changes made to the physical facility. The draft guideline also advises manufacturers of their statutory obligation
to comply with the current good manufacturing practice regulations regardless of whether or not they submit a supplement
to an application. 


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Written comments by March 14, 1995.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Submit written comments on the draft guideline to the Dockets Management Branch (HFA305), Food and Drug Administration,
rm. 123, 12420 Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD 20857. 


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Walter A. Brown, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (HFD323), Food and Drug Administration, 7500 Standish
Pl., Rockville, MD 20855, 3015941089.

 
</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 FDA regulations, in 314.70 (21 CFR 314.70), require applicants to notify FDA about each change in condition
established in an approved NDA, ANDA, or AADA. Applicants notify FDA of such changes through a supplemental application
and, depending on the type of change, may or may not need FDA approval before the change may be implemented (see 314.70(b)
and (c)). Examples of changes to a drug product that require prior FDA approval include: (1) Adding or deleting an ingredient
or otherwise changing the composition of the drug product; (2) relaxing the limits for a specification; (3) establishing
a new regulatory analytical method or deleting a specification or regulatory analytical method; (4) changing the
method of manufacturing of the drug product, including changing or relaxing an in-process control; (5) using a different
facility or establishment; and (6) establishing a new procedure for reprocessing a batch of the drug product that
fails to meet specifications (see 314.70(b)(2)). Examples of changes to a drug product that may be made before
FDA approval of a supplemental application include adding a new specification or test method or changing the methods,
facilities, or controls to provide increased assurance that the drug will have the characteristics of identity,
strength, quality, and purity which it purports or is represented to possess (see 314.70(c)(1)). 


The regulations also permit applicants to make some changes, including, but not limited to, changes to comply with
an official compendium or an editorial or minor change in labeling, without submitting a supplemental application;
instead, these changes are described in an annual report (see 314.70(d)).
FDA has prepared the draft guideline to help distinguish between some manufacturing changes that require prior approval
through a supplement to an approved NDA, ANDA, or AADA, some changes that require a supplement but that may be made prior
to approval of the supplement, and some changes that ordinarily may be described only in an annual report. The guideline
covers changes in the method of manufacture that involve certain equipment changes, reprocessing of drug products,
and certain changes made to the physical facility. For example, the draft guideline explains that changing to equipment
of different design or operating principles from previously utilized equipment would require prior FDA approval,
but changing to equipment of the same design and operating principles from the same or a different manufacturer could
be described in the annual report.
FDA is making this draft guideline available for public comment before issuing a final guideline. If, following receipt
of comments, the agency concludes that a guideline will assist firms in complying with the supplement regulations
at 314.70, FDA will prepare a final guideline and will announce its availability in the 

Federal Register

. 
A person may follow the guideline or may choose to use alternative procedures even though they are not provided for
in the guideline. If a person chooses to use alternative procedures, that person may wish to discuss the matter further
with the agency to prevent an expenditure of money and effort on activities that FDA may later determine to be unacceptable.
Guidelines are generally issued under 10.90(b) (21 CFR 10.90(b)), which provides for the use of guidelines
to establish procedures or standards of general applicability that are not legal requirements but that are acceptable
to FDA. The agency is now in the process of revising 10.90(b). Therefore, this draft guideline is not being issued
under the authority of 10.90(b), and it does not create or confer any rights, privileges, obligations, or benefits
for or on any person, nor does it operate to bind FDA in any way.
Interested persons may, on or before March 14, 1995, submit to the Dockets Management Branch (address above) written
comments on the draft guideline. Two copies of any comments are to be submitted, except that individuals may submit
one copy. Comments are to be identified with the docket number found in brackets in the heading of this document. The
draft guideline and received comments may be seen in the office above between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.

The text of the draft guideline follows:


Draft Guideline on Supplements to NDA's, ANDA's, or AADA's for Nonsterile Drug Products 


I. Purpose


This guideline informs interested persons of certain practices and procedures for notifying the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) of changes in approved applications for nonsterile drug products. The information may be useful to persons
seeking to comply with certain regulations on supplements and other changes to an approved application (314.70
(21 CFR 314.70)).


II. Introduction


Guidelines are generally issued under 21 CFR 10.90, and, as such, state principles and practices of general applicability
that are not legal requirements but are acceptable to FDA. However, FDA is now in the process of revising 10.90(b).
This guideline is not, therefore, being issued under the authority of 10.90(b), and it does not create or confer
any rights, privileges, obligations, or benefits for or on any person, nor does it bind FDA in any way.
The agency advises that this guideline represents its current position on the requirements for filing supplements
to applications set forth at 314.70. If a person chooses to depart from the practices and procedures set forth
in this guideline, that person may wish to discuss the matter further with FDA to prevent an expenditure of money and
effort on activities that FDA may later determine to be unacceptable.
This guideline may be amended from time to time if FDA determines that an amendment would be useful based on its experience
in using this guideline, through its regulatory efforts, and through comments submitted by interested persons.


III. Background


Applicants with an approved application must notify FDA about each change in an approved application that is beyond
any variation already provided for in that application (see 314.70). The purpose of this guideline is to help
clarify the provisions of 314.70 in order to distinguish between those manufacturing changes that need to
be submitted as a preapproval supplement (i.e., a supplement that 
requires FDA approval before the change is made) to the approved new drug application (NDA), abbreviated new drug
application (ANDA), or abbreviated antibiotic application (AADA), those that require a supplement but that may
be made prior to approval of the supplement, and those that only need to be described in the annual report.
The applicant may wish to consider this guideline when deciding whether to submit a preapproval supplement, a supplement
for a change that may be implemented prior to approval of the supplement, or an annual report for the following changes
that may affect the manufacture of nonsterile drug products:


1. A change in the equipment that affects the method of manufacture, 
2. A change in reprocessing a batch that fails to meet specifications, or 
3. The use of different facilities. 


Regardless of whether a supplement or an annual report is filed, the manufacturer in making such changes must conform
to the current good manufacturing practice (CGMP) requirements of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C.
351(a)(2)(B)) regulations (21 CFR parts 210 and 211). Therefore, changes affecting the method of manufacture, such
as changed equipment, new reprocessing procedures, or the use of different facilities, require validation under
the CGMP regulations before the drug product may be shipped.


IV. Guidance


A. 

Changes in Methods of Manufacture That Involve Changes of Equipment (314.70(b)(2)(v))

.


1. Changes That Require Filing a Preapproval Supplement.


(i) Changing to equipment of different design or operating principles from previously utilized equipment (e.g.,
changing from a V blender to a ribbon blender).
(ii) Changing to equipment that changes the basic methodology of manufacturing (e.g., changing from a tray dryer
to a fluid bed dryer or spray dryer).


2. Changes That Ordinarily May be Described Only in the Annual Report.


(i) Changing to equipment of the same design and operating principles from the same or a different manufacturer.
(ii) Changing to the same equipment with a different capacity; however, the capacity should not exceed 10 times the
test batch size. (See Office of Generic Drugs Policy and Procedure Guide 

#

2290 (revised), dated September 13, 1990, on scale-up batch size production requirements for nonantibiotic,
solid, oral dosage form drug products.)
Usually changes in volume require a change and validation of parameters such as mixing time and speed. Such validation
studies should reflect no change in product formulation or quantitative composition. The applicant should also
perform comparative multiple-point dissolution profiles for solid oral dosage forms as part of the validation.


B. 

Reprocessing of Drug Products That Fail to Meet Specifications (314.70(b)(2)(x))

.


1. Changes that Require Filing a Preapproval Supplement; Establishing New Procedures for Reprocessing of Drug Products
That Fail to Meet Specifications.


(i) Applicants should submit proposed, detailed reprocessing procedures when requesting authorization to reprocess.
Applicants may propose such procedures as part of their original applications or they may submit them as preapproval
supplements.
(ii) Reprocessing procedures submitted with the original application normally cover only procedures which can
be anticipated reasonably, are not materially influenced by the type of drug involved (i.e., there is no definite
or potential effect on the manufacturing process or performance characteristics of the drug), and are ones with which
the applicant has experience. Preapproval supplement submissions may also cover such procedures, but are more likely
to cover a deficiency where the type of drug may have a material influence, and the reprocessing may be product specific
or specific to the problem causing the need for the reprocessing. (See Office of Generic Drugs Policy and Procedure
Guide 

#

2390, dated August 9, 1990.) 
(A) Reprocessing procedures submitted in an original application should be accompanied by supporting data.
(B) The applicant may choose to submit the reprocessing information after approval of the NDA, ANDA, or AADA; however,
the supplement regulations require that the reprocessing procedures 
and the supporting data be approved by FDA prior to release for shipment of products made with the new procedure.
(C) Examples of supporting data needed for reprocessing procedures may include, but are not limited to:
(

1

) A copy of the full investigative report pertaining to the out-of-specification result including all corrective
actions.
(

2

) Full analytical data and results regarding the reprocessed material.
(

3

) A 3-month accelerated stability study, including multipoint dissolution profiles, conducted before the drug
product is released into commerce, with a commitment to conduct long-term studies and submit the resulting data to
FDA.
(

4

) Data previously generated for similar products, such as data to allow adjustment for appearance and physical parameters
for other tablets or capsules.
(iii) Applicants may reprocess a drug product using a procedure approved in an NDA, ANDA, or AADA, but the CGMP regulations
require that the resulting product not be shipped until there is validation of the specific reprocessing procedures
for that drug product.


2. Changes That Ordinarily May be Described Only in the Annual Report.


The repetition of one step a single time per batch in the approved sequence of the manufacturing process does not require
a supplemental application and may be described in the next annual report. For example, where in-process material
does not meet specifications, a firm could repeat the pertinent step, such as the filtering, drying, milling, or blending
procedure. Such reprocessing must be done in conformance with the CGMP regulations. 


FDA notes the following limitations and caveats regarding the repetition of one step of the manufacturing process.
(i) The repeated step should be done within the manufacturing parameters and the variations provided for in the approved
formulation.
(ii) The output should conform to established specifications based on 
in-process testing.
(iii) The repetition of one step should be a random and infrequent event. If a manufacturer finds that a step must be
consistently repeated to meet specifications, this constitutes a change in the manufacturing process and requires
a preapproval supplement.


C. 

Changes Made to the Physical Facility (314.70(b)(1)(v), (b)(2)(vi), and (c)(3))

.


1. Changes That Require Filing a Preapproval Supplement (314.70(b)(1)(v) and (b)(2)(vi)).


(i) A preapproval supplement must be filed for changes regarding the use of a different, separate facility or establishment
to manufacture the drug substance, where: 
(A) ``[T]he manufacturing process in the new facility or establishment differs materially from that in the former
facility or establishment'' (314.70(b)(1)(v)(

a

)), or
(B) ``[T]he new facility or establishment has not received a satisfactory * * * CGMP inspection within the previous
2 years covering that manufacturing process'' (314.70(b)(1)(v)(

b

)).
(ii) Use of a different, separate facility or establishment for the manufacture of the drug product (314.70(b)(2)(vi)).
(iii) The addition to, or relocation of structures within, any portion of the existing facility or establishment
used to manufacture a drug product or drug substance that results in a materially different manufacturing process.


2. Changes That Require Filing a Supplement, but Which May be Made Before Receiving FDA Approval (314.70(c)(3)).


The manufacturer must file a supplement for the use of a different, separate facility or establishment to manufacture
the drug substance. However, that change may be implemented prior to FDA approval where:


(i) ``[T]he manufacturing process in the new facility or establishment does not differ materially from that in the
former facility or establishment'' (314.70(c)(3)), and
(ii) The new facility or establishment has received a satisfactory CGMP inspection covering the manufacturing process
within the previous 2 years.


3. Changes That Ordinarily May be Described Only in the Annual Report (314.70(d)).


The following changes are examples of those that generally do not adversely affect product processing or plant utility
systems, do not usually require prior notice to FDA, are generally not considered to create ``different facility
or establishment'' and therefore may be described in the next annual report. 
(i) Relocating processing areas or structures within, or through addition to, any portion of the existing facility
or establishment used to manufacture the drug product or drug substance where:
(A) The manufacturing process in the changed facility or establishment does not differ materially from that in the
former facility or establishment, and 
(B) The changed facility or establishment has received a satisfactory CGMP inspection within the previous 2 years
covering the manufacturing process related to the portion of the facility that was changed.
(ii) Relocating equipment within the approved facility or establishment.
(iii) Relocating nonprocessing rooms or areas within the approved facility or establishment.
(iv) Adding new interior partitions or walls to increase control over the environment. For example, the separation
of processing areas to prevent cross-contamination.
(v) Replacing or adding new surfaces to enhance cleaning.
(vi) Replacing or adding improved lighting.




Dated: November 23, 1994.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
William K. Hubbard,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Interim Deputy Commissioner for Policy.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9430405 Filed 12994; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>


