 

With respect to the comments regarding the lack of Federal standards for determining when mining-related use requires
the inclusion of a road within the permit area, the definitions of ``affected area'' and ``surface coal mining and
reclamation operations'' provide guidance in these instances.

OSM has modified its regulations in accordance with court decisions to provide guidance to States and other interested
parties for determining when roads will be regulated as part of a surface coal mining operation. OSM, pursuant to court
order in 

In re Permanent Surface Mining Regulation Litigation (In re Permanent), 

620 F. Supp. 1519, 158182 (D.D.C. 1985), 

modified sub. nom., National Wildlife Federation 

v. 

Hodel

, 839 F.2d 694 (DC Cir. 1988), modified its interpretation of the extent to which SMCRA applied to public roads. Specifically,
OSM suspended the Federal regulatory definition of ``affected area'' to the extent that it excluded public roads
that are included in the Federal regulatory definition of ``surface coal mining operations'' (51 FR 41952, November
20, 1986). OSM stated that ``[t]he suspension will have the effect of including in the `affected area' 

all lands affected by the construction of new roads or the improvement or use of existing roads to gain access to the
site of the regulated activities or for haulage

'' (51 FR 41952, 41953, emphasis added).

In determining which mining-related roads are subject to regulation, OSM currently relies on the applicable language
of the Federal definitions of ``surface coal mining operations'' at section 701(28) of SMCRA and 30 CFR 700.5. This
may require, in appropriate circumstances, that OSM and State regulatory authorities issue, and surface coal mine
operators obtain, permits for certain public roads (56 FR 58846, 58848, November 22,1991).

With respect to the comment on the scope of OSM's oversight authority in primacy States to review the States' case-by-case
determinations on roads, OSM will not respond here. This issue is pertinent to Utah's implementation of its statute
and rules and OSM's oversight of Utah's actions in accordance with section 201 of SMCRA, but is not pertinent to this
State program amendment.



9. Proper Interpretation of ``Affected Area''



A commenter asserted that OSM has failed to consider the extent to which a broad interpretation of the term ``affected
area'' may conflict with other regulations that define which public roads are entitled to environmental protection.
As an example, the commenter cited section 522(e)(4) of SMCRA, which states that no surface coal mining operations
shall be permitted within 100 feet of the outside right-of-way line of any public road, and the definition of ``public
road'' at 30 CFR 761.5, which implements section 522(e)(4) of SMCRA and lists the following criteria a road must meet
in order to qualify as a public road: the road has been designated as a public road by the State or local law, it is maintained
with public funds, there is substantial, or more than incidental, public use, and the road meets applicable road construction
standards. The commenter continued that OSM should not apply one definition of ``public road'' for the purpose of
implementing the SMCRA section 522(e) prohibitions and another definition for determining whether a road falls
within the scope of ``surface coal mining operations'' subject to permitting requirements. The commenter concluded
that OSM should avoid construing the definition of ``affected area'' in a manner that would conflict with other statutory
and regulatory requirements.

OSM does not agree with these comments. As discussed below, OSM is constrained by the court's decision in 

In re Permanent

 in how it regulates roads.

The Federal definition of ``affected area'' once included a ``substantial (more than incidental) public use'' criterion,
as the current definition of ``public roads'' also does. However, paragraph (c) of the Federal definition of ``affected
area'' at 30 CFR 701.5, in which OSM previously interpreted the term ``affected area'' as not applying to roads for
which `'there is substantial (more than incidental) public use,'' was successfully challenged in 

In re Permanent. 

As a result, and as stated above in response to comment IV.A.8., OSM modified its interpretation of the extent to which
SMCRA applied to public roads and suspended the definition of ``affected area'' ``to the extent that it excludes public
roads that are included in the definition of ``surface coal mining operations'' (51 FR 41952, 41953, November 20,
1986). The Federal definition of ``public road'' at 30 CFR 761.5 was not challenged and the ``substantial (more than
incidental) public use'' criterion in that definition remains in force in the context of lands unsuitable for mining.



