 

V. Implementation Date 

 

The Commission is setting April 3, 1995 as the implementation date for both the amendments to Rule 10b10 and
Rule 11Ac13. Thus, for orders received or trades effected on or after April 3, 1995, all customer confirmation
statements must contain the new disclosures required by Rule 10b10, as modified today. For all new accounts
opened on or after April 3, 1995, the disclosures required by Rule 11Ac13 will be in effect. For existing accounts,
the disclosures required by Rule 11Ac13 should be made to customers beginning with the first commercially
reasonable date after April 3, 1995, but in no event, later than April 3, 1996. For example, if a firm provides annual
disclosure statements in January of each year, the disclosures should be made beginning with the January 1996 account
statement. If the firm provides quarterly statements, the disclosures should be made beginning with the July 1995
account statement. 

 The April 3, 1995 date was selected to provide firms with four months to make the necessary systems and forms changes
to prepare for the implementation. 

 

VI. Competition Findings 

 

Section 23(a)(2) of the Act
<FOOTCITE>50</FOOTCITE>
 requires the Commission in adopting rules under the Act, to consider the anti-competitive effects of such rules,
if any, and to balance any impact against the regulatory benefits gained in terms of furthering the purposes of the
Act. The Commission believes the proposed Rules will enhance competition among brokers, dealers, and market centers,
consistent with the goals of Section 11A and 23(a) of the Act. Several commenters raised concerns that the Rules, as
proposed, would require substantial systems changes and therefore, would increase the costs of doing business which
would be passed on to customers. The Commission has modified the portion of proposed Rule 10b10(a)(7)(iii)(B)
requiring individualized confirmation disclosure of and the amounts of monetary payment for order flow received.
The Rule, as adopted, may eliminate the need for individualized disclosures and for the quantification of payment
for order flow. The Commission intends to evaluate these issues further in connection with its Companion Release
soliciting comment on amendments to Rule 10b10 and Rule 11Ac13(a)(2).
<FOOTCITE>51</FOOTCITE>
 The Commission has considered Rule 11Ac13 and amendments to Rule 10b10 in light of the standard cited
in Section 23(a)(2) and believes that adoption of the Rules, as modified, will not impose any burden on competition
not necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the purposes of the Act. 

 

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
50

</FOOTNAME>
15 U.S.C. 78w(a)(2). 

 
</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
51

</FOOTNAME>


See

 Companion Release, 

supra

 note 5. 

 </FOOTNOTE>


VII. Conclusion 

 

The Commission believes that Rule 11Ac13 and amendments to Rule 10b10(a)(7))iii) and 10b10(e)
will provide relevant, uniform disclosure to customers regarding details of their order executions. It is the Commission's
view that the Rule and Rule amendments will enhance investor protection and further competition for retail orders
by enabling customers to evaluate better the markets to which their orders are routed. The Commission further believes
that broker-dealers can make the necessary systems and forms changes to comply with the Rules, as amended, with limited
resource and systems changes. The Commission recognizes, however, that the extent and nature of the modifications
depends upon the current capabilities of each firm. Nevertheless, the Commission recommends that, as necessary,
broker-dealers that need to make systems changes evaluate their progress as the implementation date approaches
and make adjustments as appropriate to ensure a smooth transition to the enhanced disclosure of payment for order
flow. 

 

VIII. Summary of Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis 

 

The Commission has prepared a Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (``FRFA'') regarding Rules 10b10 and
11Ac13, in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 604. The FRFA notes the potential costs of operational and procedural changes
that may be necessary to comply with the Rule. A copy of the FRFA may be obtained by contacting Jill W. Ostergaard, Attorney,
Branch of the National Market System, Office of Market Supervision, Division of Market Regulations, Securities
and Exchange Commission, 450 Fifth Street NW. , Mail Stop 51, Washington, DC 20549. 




