 

The Exchange believes that the proposed rule change is consistent with section 6(b) of the Act, in general, and furthers
the objectives of section 6(b)(4), in particular, in that it provides for the equitable allocation of reasonable
dues, fees, and other charges among CBOE members and other persons using the CBOE's facilities.


(B) 

Self-Regulatory Organization's Statement on Burden on Competition


The CBOE does not believe that the proposed rule change will impose any burden on competition.


(C) Self-Regulatory Organization's Statement on Comments on the Proposed Rule Change Received From Members, Participants
or Others


No written comments were solicited or received with respect to the proposed rule change.


III. Date of Effectiveness of the Proposed Rule Change and Timing for Commission Action


Because the foregoing rule change establishes or changes a due, fee or other charge imposed by the Exchange, it has
become effective pursuant to section 19(b)(3)(A) of the Act and subparagraph (e) of Rule 19b4 thereunder.
At any time within 60 days of the filing of the proposed rule change, the Commission may summarily abrogate such rule
change if it appears to the Commission that such action is necessary or appropriate in the public interest, for the
protection of investors, or otherwise in furtherance of the purposes of the Act.


IV. Solicitation of Comments


Interested persons are invited to submit written data, views and arguments concerning the foregoing. Persons making
written submissions should file six copies thereof with the Secretary, Securities and Exchange Commission, 450
Fifth Street, NW., Washington, DC 20549. Copies of the submission, all subsequent amendments, all written statements
with respect to the proposed rule change that are filed with the Commission, and all written communications relating
to the proposed rule change between the Commission and any person, other than those that may be withheld from the public
in accordance with the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 552, will be available for inspection and copying in the Commission's
Public Reference Section, 450 Fifth Street, NW., Washington, DC 20549. Copies of such filing will also be available
for inspection and copying at the principal office of the CBOE. All submissions should refer to the file number in the
caption above and should be submitted by May 27, 1994.



For the Commission, by the Division of Market Regulation, pursuant to delegated authority.


<SIGNER>
Jonathan G. Katz,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Secretary.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9410888 Filed 5594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 801001M
</BILLING>


