 

IV. Agreement



In order to achieve satisfactory cleanup of the HMC site, NRC and EPA agree to do the following:

1. The Parties shall cooperate with each other in the oversight of reclamation and remedial activity at the HMC site.

2. EPA will review the amendments to the site reclamation plan (``the plan'') and will provide comments to NRC. NRC
will review and, if necessary, require revisions to the plan to assure conformance to 10 CFR part 40, Appendix A, as
amended, prior to approving the plan via license amendments. NRC will provide EPA with copies of all license amendments
which affect the site closure plan prior to issuance for comment. If no comments are received within 30 calendar days,
NRC will issue the amendment.

3. If EPA determines that remedial actions are deficient or unsatisfactory, then EPA shall provide notice to NRC of
the deficiency. NRC shall assume the lead role for notification to HMC, except for such notification as EPA might statutorily
be required to provide in certain events. The notification shall specify a time period within which regulatory compliance
is expected to be achieved. Should compliance not be achieved in this time period, EPA will assume the lead for taking
or seeking any enforcement action within its area of regulatory responsibility and NRC will assume the lead for any
enforcement actions necessary within its area of regulatory responsibility. Both Parties reserve all rights under
this MOU to take whatever actions are determined to be necessary, including the conduct of remedial actions within
and outside the disposal area, in order to fulfill their regulatory requirements. In any event, no actions affecting
site remediation will be taken by either Party without prior consultation with the other Party.


4. Both Parties shall appoint a facility coordinator who shall be responsible for oversight of the implementation
of this MOU and the activities required herein. The facility coordinators shall be appointed by each Party within
seven (7) days of the effective date of this MOU. Each Party has the right to appoint a new facility coordinator at any
time. Such a change shall be accomplished by notifying the other Party, in writing, at least five (5) days prior to the
appointment, of the name, telephone number, and mailing address of said facility coordinator.

5. The Parties will meet periodically at the request of either Party and at least semiannually insofar as it is necessary
to accomplish the objectives of this MOU. The facility coordinators should communicate with each other on a routine
basis by telephone.

6. The Parties will provide technical advice and any necessary regulatory consultation to one another upon request.

7. The Parties will generally provide each other with copies of all official correspondence and documents related
to remedial actions at the site. The Parties will also normally provide copies of other information upon request.
In the event that one of the Parties does not wish to furnish certain specific information, documents, or correspondence
to the other, then said material shall be identified to the other Party along with the reasons for withholding it.

8. Whenever notice or information is required to be forwarded by one party to another under the terms of this MOU, it
shall be given by and directed to the individuals at the addresses specified as follows:


EPA: Director, Hazardous Waste Management Division (6H), U.S. EPA, Region 6, 1445 Ross Avenue, suite 1200, Dallas,
Texas 752022733.

NRC: Director, Uranium Recovery Field Office, Region IV, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, P.O. Box 25325, Denver,
Colorado 80225.




9. Routine communications may be exchanged verbally, in person, or by telephone between the Parties to facilitate
the orderly conduct of work contemplated by this MOU. 

10. EPA enforcement documentation provided under this MOU will be kept as exempt material by EPA and NRC, to the extent
legally possible, according to the policies and procedures under 40 CFR part 2 and 10 CFR part 2.790, respectively.

11. The Parties shall notify each other of any pending visits to the HMC property which relate to the site closure plan.
To the extent that they are otherwise authorized to do so, either Party and their consultants may, at their option,
accompany the other Party on such visits.





V. Agency Responsibilities



A. NRC Responsibilities



1. NRC will ensure that the owners/operators of the HMC uranium mill implement an approved reclamation plan that meets
all relevant NRC requirements, including 10 CFR part 40, Appendix A, as amended. The reclamation plan will require
HMC to assure long-term stability of the tailings, reduce gamma radiation to background levels, and diminish radon
exhalation to appropriate regulatory standards. If any part of such plan is not complied with by HMC, NRC will take
whatever actions it deems appropriate to ensure compliance.

2. NRC will ensure that the owners/operators of the HMC uranium mill implement a compliance monitoring program for
hazardous constituents that meets all relevant NRC requirements, including 10 CFR part 40, Appendix A, for the establishment
of ground water protection standards and points of compliance. NRC will verify implementation by HMC of any required
compliance monitoring and/or ground water corrective action at the HMC uranium mill site resulting from the establishment
of ground water protection standards as soon as such is reviewed and accepted by NRC. If any ground water requirements
are not complied with by HMC, NRC will take appropriate action to ensure compliance.

3. NRC will direct HMC to provide both Parties with copies of major work product submittals as they become available.
Such work products will include a reclamation plan and any other plans and specifications for assessment, remediation,
and monitoring, including all analytical data.

4. NRC agrees to provide EPA with progress reports on HMC's remediation, semiannually.

5. NRC will assist in the development of information to support EPA's deletion of the site from the NPL upon completion
of the remedial action, if appropriate.



B. EPA Responsibilities



1. EPA will provide formalized review, consultation, and comment throughout the entire project.




