 

In older adults the normal aging process alters the response to neurotoxicants. Both 
pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic changes may underlie altered sensitivities to the 
neurotoxic effects of drugs and chemicals. An example well known in geriatric medicine is 
the apparent increase in sensitivity of the elderly to the toxic effects of anxiolytics (Salzman, 
1981). Decreases in biotransformation rate and renal elimination of parent drug and active 
metabolites, not related to disease processes, may partially account for the increased 
vulnerability (Friedel, 1978). Chronic disease states in older persons may result in decreased 
functional capabilities and increased vulnerability to neurotoxic effects. Chronic diseases 
also may prompt pharmacotherapy that may impair neurobehavioral function. 
Cardiovascular, psychopharmacologic, and antineoplastic medications may result in patterns 
of neurobehavioral impairment not typically seen in younger individuals.

 


3.5.2. Methodologic Considerations 



Standardized methods are being developed for pediatric neurotoxicity assessment. 
Neurobehavioral functions emerge during developmental phases from neonatal stage through 
secondary school, and nervous system insult may be reflected not only in impairment of 
emergent functions, but also as delays in the appearance of new functions. Both the severity 
and type of deficit are affected by the dose and duration of exposure (Nelson, 1991b), and 
different sensitivities to chemical effects may be exhibited at different stages of nervous 
system development. Early episodes of exposure may produce structural damage to the 
nervous system that may not be developmentally expressed in behavior for several months or 
years. 

The selection of appropriate testing methods and conditions is more important when 
assessing children because of shorter attention spans and increased dependence on parental 
and environmental supports. In addition, because of the increasing complexity of functional 
capabilities during early development, only a few tests appropriate for infants can be validly 
readministered to older children. Given the complexity of these variables, the task of 
devising sensitive, reliable, and valid assessment instruments or batteries for pediatric 
populations will be challenging. 

Assessment methods in older adults must be capable of distinguishing chemical and 
drug effects from the effects of aging processes and chronic disease states (Crook et al., 
1983). Assessment methods must be valid and reliable with repeated administration across a 
significant portion of the lifespan, and take into consideration the time (days, months, or 
years) that may intervene between exposure/insult and the expression of neurotoxicity as 
functional impairment. Research on nonexposed populations to develop age-appropriate 
normative scores for neurobehavioral functions will be important for the interpretation of 
assessment instruments. 

Environmental exposure to neurotoxic chemicals and drugs is correlated with 
socioeconomic and ethnic status. Assessment methods will therefore have to be adapted to 
diverse ethnic, cultural, and language groups. While gender differences in early 
development have been noted, differential responses of males and females to neurotoxicants 
have been less well explored and should receive attention. 



3.6. Issues in Human Neurotoxicology Test Methods 



3.6.1. Risk Assessment Criteria for Neurobehavioral Test Methods 



The value of human neurobehavioral test methods for quantitative risk assessment is 
related to the number of the following criteria that can be met: 

a. Demonstrate sensitivity to the kinds of neurobehavioral impairment produced by 
chemicals; that is, able to detect a difference between exposed and nonexposed populations in 
field studies or between exposure and nonexposure periods in human laboratory research or 
within exposed populations over time. 

b. Show specificity for neurotoxic chemical effects and not be unduly responsive to a 
host of other nonchemical factors, and show specificity for the neurobehavioral function 
believed to be measured by the test method. 
c. Demonstrate adequate reliability (consistency of measurement over time) and 
validity (concordance with other behavioral, physiologic, biochemical, or anatomic measures 
of neurotoxicity). 
d. Show graded amounts of neurobehavioral change as a function of exposure 
parameter, absorbed dose, or body burden along some ordinal or continuous metric (dose 
response). 
e. For representative classes or subclasses of CNS/PNS-active chemicals, identify 
single effects or patterns of impairment across several tests or functional domains that are 
reasonably consistent from study to study (structure-activity). 
f. Be amenable to the development of a procedurally similar counterpart that can be 
used to assess homologous behaviors in animals. 








