 

(3) Is responsible for unauthorized livestock use; 

(4) Intentionally misrepresents a material fact to an authorized officer on an application for a grazing permit or
during the permit term by making a false statement or by failing to disclose relevant information; or

(5) Is convicted for violation of Federal laws or regulations or State laws concerning animal control, protection
of air, water, soil, vegetation, fish, wildlife, or other environmental values related to the grazing use authorized
by the permit. 

(c) An authorized officer may suspend or modify a permit, in whole or in part, for the following purposes: 

(1) To conform with changes in statute, court order, regulation, Executive order, forest plans, rangeland project
decisions, or other management needs. 

(2) To respond to a permittee(s) request, provided that the requested modification is consistent with the forest
plan and applicable rangeland project decisions. 

(3) To alter the amount of grazing permitted, the time or duration of grazing use, or the allotment(s) to be used because
of resource condition(s). The authorized officer shall give a permittee one year's notice, expect in an emergency
or when agreed to by the permittee. 

(d) When an authorized officer believes that cancellation, suspension, or modification of a permit may be warranted,
the officer shall notify the permittee in writing that such action is being considered. The permittee shall be accorded
a reasonable opportunity to respond, not to exceed 30 days. The officer shall consider any response submitted by or
on behalf of the permittee. If the authorized officer decides that the permit action is appropriate, the decision
becomes effective on the date the decision is issued, unless specified otherwise in the written decision. 



222.11 

Grazing permit fees and other charges. 



Authorized officers shall establish grazing fees and charges for livestock grazing use in accordance with this section
and the rules in subpart C_Grazing Fees of this part. 

(a) An authorized officer may assess a service charge for processing the following actions related to a grazing permit:

(1) Actions initiated by a permittee or applicant;

(2) Actions arising under 222.10; or 

(3) Actions related to willful unauthorized use. 

(b) Unauthorized use is a violation of the terms and conditions of the grazing permit. Except as otherwise provided
in this section, the authorized officer shall charge permittees and other livestock owners for any unauthorized
use. Charges for unauthorized use are in addition to grazing fees assessed for authorized grazing use as prescribed
in subpart C of this part.

(c) The authorized officer shall determine whether unauthorized use is willful or nonwillful. If willful, the authorized
officer shall check agency records and check with other federal agencies to determine whether the permittee, applicant,
or affiliate (if any) has been responsible for other incidents of willful unauthorized grazing use in the 36 months
preceding the subject incident and, therefore, is subject to the higher rate charge of paragraph (d)(3) of this section.


(d) The basic charge for unauthorized use will be the average monthly animal unit month (AUM) grazing fee rate for the
17 Western States published annually by the National Agricultural Statistical Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Charges for unauthorized use are as follows:

(1) 

Nonwillful unauthorized use. 

Livestock owners responsible for nonwillful unauthorized use shall be charged the unauthorized use rate unless
the authorized officer waives the charge. The charge for nonwillful unauthorized use may be waived if the authorized
officer finds that all of the following apply; 

(i) The unauthorized use was not due to the negligence of the livestock operator; 

(ii) Forage consumed by the unauthorized livestock was insignificant; 

(iii) There has been no damage to the land, resources or improvements resulting from the unauthorized use; and

(iv) The waiver is in the best interest of the United States. 

(2) 

Willful unauthorized use.

 Except as provided in paragraph (d)(3) of this section, livestock owners responsible for willful unauthorized use
shall be charged two times the unauthorized use rate, and they also shall be charged for all resource and property damage
resulting from the unauthorized use and for all reasonable expenses incurred by the United States in detecting, investigating,
and resolving such unauthorized use.

(3) 

Repeated willful unauthorized use

. Livestock owners responsible for repeated willful unauthorized use shall be charged three times the unauthorized
use rate, and they also shall be charged for all resource and property damage resulting from the unauthorized use and
all reasonable expenses incurred by the United States in detecting, investigating, and resolving such unauthorized
use. 



222.12 

Information collection requirements. 



(a) This subpart contains information requirements as defined by the Paperwork Reduction Act and implementing regulations
at 5 CFR part 1320, which, along with the forms listed in this section, have been assigned OMB Control Number 05960003.


(b) Applicants or permittees must submit such information as may be reasonably necessary for the authorized officer
to determine whether all applicable requirements under this subpart are satisfied. 

(1) A person or entity desiring a grazing permit must submit an application (222.7), using one of the following
forms: 

(i) FS22002, Application for Temporary Grazing Permit-Part 1. 

(ii) FS220016, Application for Term Grazing Permit.

(iii) FS220017, Application for Term Private Land Grazing Permit. 

(2) A permittee desiring a refund, credit, or transfer of grazing fees (222.11) must complete Form FS22001,
Refund, Credit, or Transfer Application.

(3) A permittee desiring to waive a term permit to the Forest Service (222.8) should complete Form FS220012,
Waiver of Term Grazing Permit.

(4) A permittee desiring to have the Forest Service hold a term grazing permit in escrow in favor of a lender (222.8)
must complete Form FS220013, Escrow Waiver of Term Grazing Permit Privileges.



