 

* * * * * 



(iv) 

Contract cost breakdown. 

In any case where the loan approval official feels it appropriate, and prior to the award or approval of any contract
in which there is an identity of interest as defined in 1924.4 (i) of this subpart, the contractor and any subcontractor,
material supplier or equipment lessor sharing an identity of interest must provide the applicant and FmHA with a trade-item
cost breakdown of the proposed contract amount for evaluation. The cost of any surety as required by 1944.222
(h) and (i) of subpart E of part 1944 of this chapter and 1924.6 (a)(3) of this subpart, or cost certification
as required by paragraph (e)(1)(v) of this section, will be included in the proposed contract amount and shown under
General Requirements on Form FmHA 192413, which is available in all FmHA offices. FmHA personnel will be responsible
for reviewing the estimates on Form FmHA 192413 to determine if the dollar amounts total correctly, to assure
that costs are categorized under their appropriate columns, and to confirm that the estimated costs for all line items
are reasonable and customary for the State. 

(v) 

Cost certification. 

Whenever the State Director determines it appropriate, and in all situations where there is an identity of interest
as defined in 1924.4 (i) of this subpart, the borrower, contractor and any subcontractor, material supplier,
or equipment lessor having an identity of interest must each provide certification using Form FmHA 192413
as to the actual cost of the work performed in connection with the construction contract. The construction costs,
as reported on Form FmHA 192413, must also be audited, in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, by
a CPA, or LPA licensed on or before December 31, 1970. In addition, certain agreed upon procedures (available in any
FmHA office) will be performed in accordance with Attestation Standards. In some cases, FmHA will contract directly
with a CPA or LPA for the cost certification. In that event, documentation necessary to have the costs of construction
certified by an FmHA contractor that they were the actual costs of the work performed, as reported on Form FmHA 192413,
will be provided. Funds which were included in the loan for cost certification and which are ultimately not needed
because FmHA contracts for the cost certification will be returned on the loan. FmHA personnel will utilize Exhibit
M of this subpart (available in any FmHA office) and Form FmHA 
192426, ``Cost Certification Worksheet,'' to assist in the evaluation of the cost certification process.


(A) Prior to the start of construction, the borrower, contractor and any subcontractor, material supplier, or equipment
lessor sharing an identity of interest must submit, to the CPA or LPA, the accounting system that the borrower, contractor,
subcontractor, material supplier or equipment lessor and/or the CPA or LPA proposes to set up and use in maintaining
a running record of the actual cost. In order to be acceptable, the borrower must provide a written assertion that it
has an accounting system that is suitably designed to provide for a trade-item basis comparison of the actual cost
as compared to the estimated cost submitted on Form FmHA 192413. Costs pertaining to a specific line item will
be set up in the accounting system for that particular account. For instance, only costs of materials, supplies, equipment,
and labor associated with concrete will be shown in the concrete account. The accounting system must also restrict
costs to those pertaining to a specific project so that costs from multiple projects will not be co-mingled. The independent
CPA or LPA shall report on the borrower's assertion in accordance with the Standards for Attestation Engagements
of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA). The borrower's and the CPA or LPA's reports on
the accounting system shall be provided to FmHA by the borrower. 

(B) Prior to final payment to anyone required to cost certify, a trade-item breakdown showing the actual cost compared
to the estimated cost must be provided to the owner and FmHA. Form FmHA 192413 is the form of comparative breakdown
that must be used, and contains the certifications required of the applicant and contractor prior to final payment.
The amounts for builder's general overhead, builder's profit, and general requirements, respectively, shall not
exceed the amounts represented on the estimate of cost breakdown provided in accordance with paragraph (e)(1)(iv)
of this section for any contractor, subcontractor, material supplier, or equipment lessor having or sharing an identity
of interest with the borrower. The amounts for general overhead, builder's profit, and general requirements must
be established prior to FmHA approving the construction contract and will not be changed during the course of construction.
This applies to all contractors, subcontractors, material suppliers, or equipment lessors having or sharing an
identity of interest with the applicant. Contract change orders will be processed to adjust the contract amount downward
prior to the final payment to the contractor, if necessary, to assure that the amounts shown in the certificate of actual
costs do not exceed the amounts represented in the contract cost breakdown. Reduction in the builder's profit, and
general overhead if needed, will counterbalance any increase reflected in the contract costs. Any funds remaining
as a result of hard cost savings will be applied to the account as an extra payment or used for eligible loan purposes
approved by FmHA as long as the improvements are genuinely needed and will enhance marketability of the project. All
increases or decreases of 15 percent or more in line item costs will require documentation as to the reason for the increases
and/or decreases. The State Director may require documentation for increases and/or decreases of less than 15 percent,
if he/she determines it necessary. This information will be required with the cost certification. 




