 

(3) The applicant's conviction record under Federal or State laws relating to the manufacture, distribution, or
dispensing of controlled substances.
(4) Compliance with applicable State, Federal, or local laws relating to controlled substances.
(5) Such other conduct which may threaten the public health and safety.''
It is well established that these factors are to be considered in the disjunctive, i.e., the Deputy Administrator
may properly rely on any one or a combination of factors, and give each factor the weight he deems appropriate. 

Henry J. Schwarz, Jr., M.D.,

 54 FR 16422 (1989).
The administrative law judge found that all of the factors listed in 21 U.S.C. 823(f) are relevant. Respondent surrendered
his state controlled substance license and the State of Utah has recommended that he not apply for reinstatement for
a period of time. Respondent admitted to wrongfully obtaining Demerol for his own use, and he pled guilty to five felony
counts relating to controlled substances. As to factor (5), the administrative law judge found that the public health
and safety are not at risk, since the Respondent has made progress in his rehabilitation and both the criminal plea
agreement and medical board agreement require that the Respondent comply with numerous conditions to ensure that
he will not suffer a relapse in his recovery.
The DEA has consistently held that it does not have statutory authority under the Controlled Substances Act to register
a practitioner unless that practitioner is authorized by the state to dispense controlled substances. DEA has consistently
held that termination of a registrant's state authority to handle controlled substances requires that DEA revoke
the registrant's DEA Certificate of Registration. 

Bobby Watts, M.D.,

 53 FR 11919 (1987). Based on the foregoing, the Deputy Administrator concludes that the Respondent's registration
must be revoked. 21 U.S.C. 824(a) (2), (3) and (4).
As an additional issue, the administrative law judge found that the Respondent presented evidence that the local
community has suffered by the lack of Respondent's ability to practice in the hospital emergency room. The Respondent
and the San Juan County Hospital entered into a protocol in which the Respondent would be able to write hospital patient
prescriptions for controlled substances under the hospital's DEA number. This agreement is contingent on the successful
application to the Deputy Administrator of the DEA by the hospital for a waiver of the provisions of 21 CFR 1301.76(a),
which precludes the hospital from employing an individual with access to controlled substances if that individual
has been convicted of a controlled substance related felony. The San Juan County Hospital requested that the Deputy
Administrator grant a waiver to allow the employment of the Respondent. The administrative law judge recommended
that such a waiver be granted by the Deputy Administrator pursuant to his authority under 21 CFR 1307.03.
The Government filed an exception to the recommendation of the administrative law judge that a waiver of 21 CFR 1301.76(a)
be granted contending that since the Respondent has no underlying state controlled substance license nor a DEA registration,
he should not be permitted to handle controlled substances under any circumstance. The Respondent, in response to
the Government exception, presented a letter from the Utah Attorney General's office permitting the Respondent,
with the appropriate DEA exemption, to order controlled substances for hospital patients, until such time as the
Utah State Division of Occupational and Professional Licensing arrived at a formal opinion on this issue.
The Deputy Administrator disagrees with the administrative law judge's recommendation with regard to a waiver or
exemption from regulations and agrees with the Government's contention that such a waiver should not be granted.
In fact, on December 7, 1993, DEA previously denied the request of San Juan Hospital that it be granted an exemption
from the regulations to allow the Respondent's employment with access to controlled substances.
The Deputy Administrator adopts the findings of fact, conclusions of law, and recommended ruling of Administrative
Law Judge Tenney, except as otherwise noted herein. Accordingly, the Deputy Administrator of the Drug Enforcement
Administration, pursuant to the authority vested in him by 21 U.S.C. 823 and 824 and 28 CFR 0.100(b) and 0.104 (59 FR
23637), hereby orders that DEA Certificate of Registration, AW1662609, previously issued to Steven E. Warren, M.D.,
be, and it hereby is, revoked, and that any pending applications for registration, be, and they hereby are, denied.
This order is effective July 12, 1994.



Dated: July 5, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Stephen H. Greene,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Administrator.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9416738 Filed 71194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 441009M
</BILLING>

