 

Terpenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons based on isoprene subunits. They have good 
solvent properties and could replace MCF in some coating and ink products. Terpenes, such 
as d-limonene, cost about seven times more than MCF, and are commercially available from 
chemical distributors. Manufacturers can use terpenes in existing equipment with minor 
changes. 
Monochlorotoluene and chlorobenzotrifluorides are also of commercial interest as 
solvent substitutes for adhesives, coatings, and inks. These compounds can be used either in 
isolation or in various mixtures, depending on desired chemical properties. The Agency 
recently received information on these formulations, and will issue a SNAP determination for 
these substitutes in the next set of listing decisions. 
b. 

Water-based formulations.

 
Water-based coatings contain water rather than conventional solvents. Primary uses of 
these coatings include coating of furniture, aluminum siding, hardboard, metal containers, 
appliances, structural steel, and heavy equipment. Water-based coatings are priced roughly 20 
to 30 percent more than methyl chloroform-based coatings. 
Water-based inks use water and other co-solvents such as alcohols and alkyl acetates 
to dissolve resins, binders, and pigments instead of conventional solvents. Water-based inks 
accounted for 55 percent of the flexographic inks and 15 percent of the gravure inks used in 
the U.S. in 1987. Water-based inks are priced roughly 10 percent less than methyl 
chloroform-based inks. 
Water-based adhesives currently account for about 45 percent of the world adhesive 
market. Water-based adhesives will likely dominate the market to replace MCF in general 
consumer uses and in areas where a rigid bond is not needed. Water-based adhesives_especially water-based latexes,
which are stable dispersions of solid polymeric material in an 
essentially aqueous medium_can effectively replace MCF use in the flexible foams sector 
because of the flexibility of the bond they provide. Water-based latex adhesives have the 
potential to penetrate 8590 percent of the MCF-based adhesive market in flexible foams 
applications. They still pose some problems, however, including: 
&bull;Long set and dry times; newer developments seem to be solving this problem; 
&bull;Deterioration during storage especially if frozen; and 
&bull;The production of bacteria-contaminated waste water. 
Water-based replacements have not proven effective in binding high density laminates or hardwood flooring principally
because moisture enhances the chances of warping. In cases where MCF is used for door assemblies or sealants, water-based
urethane adhesives containing polyisocyanates can be used. 
c. 

High-solid formulations.

 
High-solids coatings resemble conventional coatings in appearance and use, except 
high-solids coatings contain less solvent and a greater percentage of resin. High-solids 
coatings are currently used on appliances, metal furniture, and farm and road construction 
equipment. High-solids coatings are priced 20 to 30 percent higher than methyl chloroform-based coatings, yet the
buyer receives more usable paint because the coatings contain less 
solvent, thus reducing the volume of coatings required. 
High-solids adhesives can reduce the amount of solvent used in adhesives by 
increasing the percentage of solids in the formulation. Adhesives formerly containing 3050 
percent solids contain about 80 percent solids after reformulation. High-solids adhesives 
have good performance characteristics, including initial bond strength, and can be applied 
using existing equipment at normal line speeds with minimal modification. For bonding 
rubber assemblies, high solid adhesive films are often too thick, resulting in limited versatility 
and generally poor performance. High-solids formulations, however, are already used widely 
in the flexible foams, hardwood flooring, and high-pressure laminates industries. The solvent 
of choice in these industries remains MCF, but with a decreased portion of solvent in the 
formulations, so that less solvent is consumed overall. High-solids formulations are only a 
transitional replacement until adequate substitutes are found that do not contain MCF. 
d. 

Alternative process substitutes.

 
Powder adhesives, the first category of alternative process substitutes, are composed of 
one-part epoxies, urethanes, and natural resins. These adhesives are often supplied as 
powders that require heat to cure. They are generally applied in one of three ways: (1) By 
sifting the powder onto preheated substrates, (2) by dipping a preheated substrate into the 
powder, and (3) by melting the powder into a paste or liquid and applying it by conventional 
means. Since high temperatures are required to activate and thermoset powder adhesives, 
their ability to replace MCF-based formulations will depend on the characteristics of the 
substrates being bonded: If the materials being bonded are heat sensitive, heat-activated 
powder adhesives cannot be used. 
Powder coatings have no solvent, containing only resins and pigments in powder form. 
Typically, the powder is electrostatically applied and the coated object is heated above the 
powder's melting point, so that the resin fuses into a continuous film. Powder coating is a 
mature technology and is used on various types of metal products such as appliances, concrete 
reinforced bars, automobiles, steel shelving, lawn and farm equipment, and some furniture. 
The elevated temperatures necessary to melt the coatings, however, restrict the use of powder 
coatings on plastic and wood products. Powder coatings are priced comparably to methyl 
chloroform-based coatings. 
Hot melt adhesives are 100 percent solid thermoplastic binders that can be used to 
replace MCF formulations in applications that require a rigid bond. Hot melts currently 
account for about 20 percent of the adhesives market, and they, along with water-based 
adhesives, will likely benefit most from the move away from MCF-based adhesive 
formulations. Hot melts are now used instead of MCF formulations in laminating 
applications, especially those involving the lamination of flexible foam products. They can 
also replace MCF-based adhesive formulations in the original equipment manufacturer's 
(OEM) production of high-pressure laminates and possibly in the installation of hardwood 
flooring. The potential ability of hot melt adhesives to replace MCF-based formulations in 
the flexible foams sector is limited to 1015 percent penetration because of the need for 
flexible bonds in most furniture and bedding applications. 
Thermoplastic plasma spray coatings are powder coatings that melt in transit towards 
the object to be coated propelled by a pressurized inert gas, such as Argon. An electric arc 
strips electrons from the plastic particles fusing them together as they move through the 
applicator gun. Thermoplastic plasma spray coatings can be used to coat large and small 
objects of metal, wood, plastic, or fiberglass. 




