 

(i) 

Contractor agreement

. If the contractor agrees with the report findings and recommendations, the contractor should be provided 60 days
from the original notification date to correct any identified deficiencies or submit a corrective action plan showing
milestones and actions to eliminate the deficiencies. 

(ii) 

Contractor disagreement

. If the contractor disagrees with the report findings and recommendations, the contractor's response should contain
the rationale for each area of disagreement. 

(4) 

Evaluation of contractor's response

. The ACO, in consultation with the auditor, will evaluate the contractor's written response and determine whether_


(i) The compensation system contains deficiencies which need correction; 

(ii) Any deficiencies are significant enough to result in the disallowance of costs or suspension of payments under
public vouchers; and 

(iii) Proposed corrective actions are adequate to correct the deficiencies. 

(5) 

Contracting officer responsibility

. (i) When the ACO determines that there is a significant compensation system deficiency, the ACO may disallow, or
suspend payment of, costs claimed on public vouchers in accordance with 42.803. The disallowance or suspension of
payment shall remain in effect until the ACO determines that the contractor's corrective action plan is adequate.


(ii) When a compensation system report indicates that there is a significant deficiency, the ACO should ensure that
the effect or the deficiency(ies) is (are) considered in the review of the contractor's estimating system pursuant
to 15.811. 

(6) 

Notification of determination

. The ACO shall notify the contractor and the auditor of the determination and any decision to disallow costs or suspend
payments under public vouchers. The notice shall identify the deficiencies requiring correction and indicate acceptance
or rejection of the contractor's corrective action plan. 

(7) 

Monitoring contractor's corrective action

. The auditor and ACO will monitor the contractor's progress toward correction of deficiencies. If the contractor
fails to make adequate progress toward corrective action, the ACO shall take further appropriate action to ensure
that the contractor corrects the deficiency(ies). Actions which should be considered by the ACO include, but are
not limited to, bringing the issue to the attention of higher level management, disapproval of the contractor's cost
estimating system, and/or recommendations concerning award of future contracts. 

 


<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9424931 Filed 10794; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 682034M 
</BILLING>



