 

PART 1_INCOME TAXES 





Paragraph 1. 

The authority citation for part 1 continues to 
read in part as follows:

 




Authority:

 26 U.S.C. 7805 ***

 




Par. 2. 

Section 1.75203 is amended by adding the text of paragraph 
(b) to read as follows: 



1.75203 

Limitation on the application of section 7520. 



* * * * * 



(b) 

Other limitations on the application of section 7520

_ 
(1) 

In general

_(i) 

Ordinary beneficial interests. 

For purposes 
of this section: 

(A) An 

ordinary annuity interest

 is the right to receive a 
fixed dollar amount at the end of each year during one or more 
measuring lives or for some other defined period. A standard 
section 7520 annuity factor for an ordinary annuity interest 
represents the present worth of the right to receive $1.00 per 
year for a defined period, using the interest rate prescribed 
under section 7520 for the appropriate month. If an annuity 
interest is payable more often than annually or is payable at the 
beginning of each period, a special adjustment must be made in 
any computation with a standard section 7520 annuity factor. 

(B) An 

ordinary income interest

 is the right to receive the 
income from, or the use of, property during one or more measuring 
lives or for some other defined period. A standard section 7520 
income factor for an ordinary income interest represents the 
present worth of the right to receive the income from $1.00 for a 
defined period, using the interest rate prescribed under section 
7520 for the appropriate month. 

(C) An 

ordinary remainder or reversionary interest

 is the 
right to receive an interest in property at the end of one or 
more measuring lives or for some other defined period. A 
standard section 7520 remainder factor for an ordinary remainder 
or reversionary interest represents the present worth of the 
right to receive $1.00 at the end of a defined period, using the 
interest rate prescribed under section 7520 for the appropriate 
month. 

(ii) 

Certain restricted beneficial interests. 

A 

restricted 
beneficial interest

 is an annuity, income, remainder, or 
reversionary interest that is subject to a contingency, power, or 
other restriction, whether the restriction is provided for by the 
terms of the trust, will, or other governing instrument or is 
caused by other circumstances. In general, a standard section 
7520 annuity, income, or remainder factor may not be used to 
value a restricted beneficial interest. However, a special 
section 7520 annuity, income, or remainder factor may be used to 
value a restricted beneficial interest under some circumstances. 
See 

Example 2

 in 1.75203(b)(4), which illustrates a situation 
where a special section 7520 actuarial factor is needed to take 
into account the shorter life expectancy of the terminally ill 
measuring life. See 1.75201(c) for requesting a special factor 
from the Internal Revenue Service. 

(iii) 

Other beneficial interests. 

If, under the provisions 
of 1.75203(b), the interest rate and mortality components 
prescribed under section 7520 are not applicable in determining 
the value of any annuity, income, remainder, or reversionary 
interest, the actual fair market value of the interest 
(determined without regard to section 7520) is based on all of 
the facts and circumstances if and to the extent permitted by the 
Internal Revenue Code provision applicable to the property 
interest. 

(2) 

Provisions of governing instrument and other limitations 
on source of payment

_(i) 

Annuities. 

A standard section 7520 
annuity factor is not to be used to determine the present value 
of an annuity for a specified term of years or the life of one or 
more individuals unless the effect of the trust, will, or other 
governing instrument is to ensure that the annuity will be paid 
for the entire defined period. In the case of an annuity payable 
from a trust or other limited fund, the annuity is not considered 
payable for the entire defined period if, considering the 
applicable section 7520 interest rate, the annuity is expected to 
exhaust the fund before the last possible annuity payment is made 
in full. For this purpose, it must be assumed that it is 
possible for each measuring life to survive until age 110, 
because every standard section 7520 life annuity factor is 
calculated on the basis of that assumption. If it is determined 
that the trust or other fund from which an annuity is to be paid 
may exhaust before the end of the defined period of the annuity, 
it will be necessary to calculate a special section 7520 annuity 
factor that takes into account the facts and circumstances that 
may exhaust the trust or fund. 

(ii) 

Income and similar interests

_(A) 

Beneficial enjoyment.

 
A standard section 7520 income factor for an ordinary income 
interest is not to be used to determine the present value of an 
income or similar interest in trust for a term of years or for 
the life of one or more individuals unless the effect of the 
trust, will, or other governing instrument is to provide the 
income beneficiary with that degree of beneficial enjoyment of 
the property during the term of the income interest that the 
principles of the law of trusts accord to a person who is 
unqualifiedly designated as the income beneficiary of a trust for 
a similar period of time. This degree of beneficial enjoyment is 
provided only if it was the transferor's intent, as manifested by 
the provisions of the governing instrument and the surrounding 
circumstances, that the trust provide an income interest for the 
income beneficiary during the specified period of time that is 
consistent with the value of the trust corpus and with its 
preservation. In determining whether a trust arrangement 
evidences that intention, the treatment required or permitted 
with respect to individual items must be considered in relation 
to the entire system provided for in the administration of the 
subject trust. Similarly, in determining the present value of 
the right to use tangible property (whether or not in trust) for 
one or more measuring lives or other specified period of time, 
the interest rate component prescribed under section 7520 and 
1.75201 is not to be used unless, during the specified period, 
the beneficiary is entitled to that degree of use, possession, 
and enjoyment of the property that an outright owner would be 
entitled to exercise during a similar period of time. 




