 

On June 16, 1989, the then Director of the BEP telephoned the complainant informing him of his removal from the operation
of the vending facility in the Texas Supreme Court Building. This action was followed by a written notification to
Mr. Graham detailing the reasons for his removal: failure to pay sales taxes as required by section 10 of the Texas Business
Enterprise Operations Manual; lack of proper standards of conduct and behavior as required by section 12(F) of the
manual; and endangering the SLA's investment in a facility per section 15.8(A). Mr. Graham was informed that his license
to operate a Business Enterprise Vending Facility was revoked effective July 15, 1989. The complainant was also informed
of his right to an administrative review. Subsequently, on September 28, by telegram to the Texas Commission for the
Blind, Mr. Graham requested an administrative review or full evidentiary hearing. 

The evidentiary hearing occurred on October 24, 1989, and on November 28, 1989, the hearing officer sustained the
actions of the Texas Commission for the Blind. Subsequently, Mr. Graham requested the Secretary of Education to convene
an arbitration panel to overturn the hearing officer's decision and the SLA's final agency action. A hearing of this
matter was held on February 14, 1992. 


Arbitration Panel Decision 


The arbitration panel addressed two major concerns. The first issue was whether Mr. Graham had been denied due process,
and the second issue was whether the revocation of his vendor's license constituted an appropriate response to his
violation of the Texas Business Enterprise Operations Manual. 

The arbitration panel reviewed section 16 of the Texas Commission for the Blind's BEP Operations Manual regarding
resolution of vendor dissatisfaction. The procedures provide for, first, an administrative review. If the vendor's
dissatisfaction is not resolved, the second step is a full evidentiary hearing. If the vendor is still dissatisfied,
the vendor may request that an arbitration panel be convened to resolve the dispute. 

The panel ruled that Mr. Graham did not receive an informal administrative review. However, the panel felt that the
absence of such a review did not constitute harm to the due process rights of the complainant for several reasons. The
SLA postponed the revocation of Mr. Graham's license, taking into consideration his injuries from the accident.
After the notice of license revocation on July 15, 1989, Mr. Graham responded in a telegram on September 28, 1989, with
a request for either an informal administrative review or a formal evidentiary hearing. During testimony at the arbitration
hearing, complainant acknowledged that his request was deliberate in that he did not specify which type of hearing
he was seeking. However, Mr. Graham stated he was aware of the SLA rules regarding the two types of hearings. 


The panel ruled that the Texas Commission for the Blind acted appropriately in granting the complainant's request
for an evidentiary hearing. The panel further noted that the Texas BEP Operations Manual states that revocation of
a vendor's license is not final until after a full evidentiary hearing. 

The panel concluded that the SLA did not have to wait indefinitely for a hearing request from complainant and that the
SLA's process did not harm Mr. Graham's due process rights. 


Concerning the SLA's proper termination of the vendor's license, the panel ruled that documents and testimony clearly
established the vendor's sales tax delinquency, as well as his behavior on June 15, 1989. 


Therefore, the majority of the panel ruled that the SLA's decision to revoke Mr. Graham's license rather than put him
on probation was reasonable and justified. The action taken by the SLA resulted from complainant's delinquent sales
tax liability and his inappropriate verbal and physical behavior on June 15, 1989, toward the State Comptroller's
office agent. The complainant's conduct constituted multiple violations of the SLA's Operations Manual. One panel
member dissented but declined to write a dissenting opinion. 

The views and opinions expressed by the panel do not necessarily represent the views and opinions of the U.S. Department
of Education. 





Dated: October 19, 1994. 
 


<SIGNER>
Judith E. Heumann, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant Secretary for Special Education and Rehabilitative Services. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9426360 Filed 102494; 8:45 am] 


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 400101P 
</BILLING>





