 

Appendix_Requirements for ``Vacancy Reduction Plan'' 
in 24 CFR 968.407 



Section 968.407_Vacancy Reduction Plan 



(a) 

Submission of plan. 

Each PHA to which this subpart applies, in accordance with 968.403, shall submit a vacancy reduction plan.
The plan shall contain the elements identified in paragraph (b) of this section, and shall be organized so that each
of the elements can be identified, reviewed, and funded separately. 

(b) 

Contents of plan. 

The format of a plan submitted for funding under this program will be defined in NOFAs to be published periodically
in the 

Federal Register

. Each vacancy reduction plan submitted by a PHA under paragraph (a) of this section shall include statements: 

(1) Identifying all vacant dwelling units administered by the PHA, including unmarketable units, and explaining
the reasons for the vacancies. Units may be grouped together when explaining the reasons for the vacancies; 

(2) A description of the turnover rate of units for the past two years, including the number of units vacated and reoccupied
per development per year and the average number of days required to return a unit to occupancy. If the turnover rate
is increasing, the plan should identify each cause of the increase. 

(3) Describing the actions to be taken by the PHA during the following five years to eliminate the vacancies. The PHA
shall: 

(i) State project-specific actions that it is taking or intends to take that will eliminate vacancies, such as modernization,
demolition, unit redesign or conversion, density reduction, disposition, modification of occupancy policies,
site and security improvements, and other physical or management improvements; and 

(ii) For each project identified, set out a schedule for completing the actions identified in paragraph (b)(3)(i)
of this section and removing the dwelling units from the PHA's inventory of vacant units. If the timing of any action
is dependent upon a HUD approval or decisionmaking process, the schedule for the PHA action may be presented in terms
of a specified time period following completion of the HUD process. For each action, the schedule shall include the
number of vacancies that will be eliminated by the end of each 12-month period after the PHA begins to receive assistance
under this subpart. 

(iii) For units vacated during the last two years, when the PHA has been unable to return these units to occupancy within
30 days from the date the units become vacant, the plan shall describe actions planned to achieve at least a 30-day turnover
rate. 

(4) Identifying any impediments that will prevent elimination of the vacancies within the five-year period; 

(5) Identifying any vacant units funded for modernization, major reconstruction, demolition, or disposition activities;


(6) Identifying any vacant dwelling units that are eligible for modernization, major reconstruction, demolition,
or disposition, but have not been funded or approved for these activities and are not likely to be funded or approved
for at least three years. The statement shall include an estimate of the amount of assistance necessary to complete
the modernization, major reconstruction, demolition, or disposition of these units; 

(7) Identifying any vacant units not identified under paragraphs (b)(5) and (b)(6) of this section. The statement
shall include a description of any appropriate activities relating to elimination of the vacancies in these units
and an estimate of the amount of assistance necessary to carry out the activities identified under this paragraph;


(8) Setting forth an agenda for implementation of management improvements during the first fiscal year beginning
after submission of the plan. If the timing of any improvement is dependent upon a HUD approval or decisionmaking process,
the schedule for the improvement may be presented in terms of a specified time period following completion of the HUD
process. The agenda should include any management improvements recommended by the assessment team pursuant to 968.410
and an estimate of the amount of assistance necessary to implement the management improvements; and 

(9) Of any other information that the Secretary shall deem appropriate, as provided in the applicable NOFA. Such information
may include budget documents, in the case of any PHA that is applying for funds under a NOFA. 

(c) 

Housing standards. 

To the extent that a plan involves modernization, reconstruction, or rehabilitation activities that have not been
funded or approved previously and are not planned to be undertaken using Comprehensive Grant Program funds, the plan
must reflect cost estimates that, at a minimum, are based on: 

(1) For individual work items funded under the program, compliance with modernization standards, as set forth in
HUD Handbook 7485.2, as revised; and 

(2) For each vacant unit on which funds are expended, compliance of the unit with the Housing Quality Standards, as
set forth in 24 CFR 882.109 and as amended by the regulations concerning lead-based paint in public housing in 24 CFR
part 35. 





<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9414282 Filed 61094; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 421033P
</BILLING>

