 

3.3.3. Neurochemical Methods 


One of the major difficulties in risk assessment is estimating exposure parameters and 
the dose or body burden actually absorbed by the individual. In epidemiologic studies, the 
actual absorption and bioavailability of a chemical from an exposure are frequently unknown. 
Measurement of chemical concentrations in biologic fluids or tissues is one way to 
measure more precisely the concentration at the site(s) of toxic effect. In epidemiologic 
studies, this has been possible only for chronic exposure and for acute exposure to chemicals 
with long biologic half-lives in the body, such as lead, other metals, and bromides. Blood 
lead levels show correlations with neurobehavioral impairment, but blood lead levels are 
representative correlates of toxicity only for relatively acute doses. In children, for example, 
the majority of lead-related impairment is the result of chronic, rather than acute, absorption. 
The cumulative amount of lead sequestered in tissues (such as deciduous teeth) may be a 
more representative indicator of the area under the time-concentration curve. 
For chemicals with half-lives in the body too short for estimating absorbed dose, the 
biochemical products from the chemical or from the physiologic effects of the chemical may 
serve as an index of exposure. Serum enzyme concentrations (cholinesterase) and esterases 
in other tissues (lymphocyte target esterase) have been employed in field studies to detect 
pesticide exposure, while vanillylmandelic acid (product of catecholamine neurotransmitter 
biotransformation) and erythrocyte protoporphyrin concentrations have been used with 
varying success in differentiating between lead-exposed and control workers. The addition of 
similar ``exposure biomarker'' measures to laboratory studies may allow the development of 
quantitative estimates of absorbed dose under various exposure conditions. 
The measurement of metabolic products of neurotoxic agents may be extremely useful 
in risk assessment; an example comes from cancer risk assessment. Human data from the 
early 1970s on saturation of microsomal methylene chloride biotransformation to carbon 
monoxide (Stewart et al., 1972), along with subsequent animal carcinogenesis data garnered 
in the 1980s, provided a quantitative basis for a physiologically based pharmacokinetic model 
of methylene chloride cancer risk assessment (Andersen et al., 1991). The information on 
human CO pathway kinetics provided the homologous key that allowed extrapolation of risk 
from animals to humans on a comparative physiologic basis rather than using default 
assumptions. 


3.3.4. Imaging Techniques 


A number of recently developed computerized imaging techniques for evaluating brain 
activity and cerebral/peripheral blood flow have added valuable information to the neurologic 
diagnostic process. These imaging methods include thermography, positron emission 
tomography, passive neuromagnetic imaging (magnetoencephalography), magnetic resonance 
imaging, magnetic resonance spectroscopy, computerized tomography, doppler 
ultrasonography, and computerized EEG recording/analysis (brain electrical activity 
mapping). The research application of these invasive and noninvasive quantitative methods 
has primarily been in neurology, schizophrenia research, drug abuse, AIDS research and 
toxic encephalopathy (Hagstadius et al., 1989). Although the equipment for brain imaging is 
expensive and not portable, neuroimaging techniques promise to be valuable clinical and 
laboratory research tools in human neurotoxicology. 


3.3.5. Neuropathologic Methods 


Neuropathologic examination of nervous system tissue has been used to confirm data 
from clinical testing and to contribute to the understanding of mechanisms of action of 
neurotoxicity. Peripheral nerve biopsies have confirmed chemically induced peripheral 
neuropathies and evaluated rates of recovery (Fullerton, 1969). Postmortem examination of 
nervous tissue also has elucidated the neuropathological effects of carbon disulfide, 
clioquinol, and doxorubicin (Spencer and Schaumburg, 1980). 


3.3.6. Self-Report Assessment Methods 


Self-report measures relevant to neurotoxicity risk assessment consist of histories of 
symptoms, events, behaviors, and environmental conditions. Information is obtained by 
face-to-face interviews, structured interviews (often conducted for diagnostic purposes), 
medical histories, questionnaires, and survey instruments. 
Self-report instruments are the only means for measuring some symptoms and all 
interoceptive states, such as pain and nausea. Self-reports also are used to obtain information 
on behaviors and events (e.g., exposure conditions) especially when practical, legal, or 
ethical limitations prevent direct observation. 
Subjective symptoms elucidated from self-report instruments are responsive to dose. 
Hanninen et al. (1979) found that subjective symptoms were positively correlated with blood 
lead levels in exposed workers. Subjective pain estimations are correlated with dose and 
type of centrally and peripherally acting analgesics, and anxiety scores on a variety of scales 
are responsive to the size of the anxiolytic dose. 





