 

e. 

Implications of Options 1, 2 and 3.

 Options 1, 2 and 3 represent a significant change from the Agency's approach in other drinking water regulations.
The principal advantage to these options is the reduced cost to systems. However, there are potential disadvantages
in terms of policy implications to adopting any of these options which should be addressed and debated with public
participation. EPA recognizes that there may be concern over the decision not to require PWSs to treat their water
centrally but to allow them to supply water at levels that may exceed the sulfate MCL, and to rely on the provision of
Alternative Water at the consumer's end to ensure ultimate compliance. A disadvantage of these three options is that
it is possible that some members of sensitive subpopulations may still drink untreated tap water from the distribution
system and thus, not be protected. Consumers may be unaware of the need to request Alternative Water, or may find it
too burdensome to do so. While EPA believes that this strategy conforms with the requirements and intent of the Safe
Drinking Water Act, EPA requests comment on this issue.

Options 1, 2 and 3 also require more assertive action by the public to ensure protection, especially those served by
a CWS. This is true for Option 1, where adults in the target population would be required to contact the CWS for Alternative
Water, which would then be delivered. Even more assertive action is needed for Option 3, since informed adults would
have to obtain Alternative Water themselves. For Options 2 and 3, in transient systems, an adult wishing Alternative
Water might not readily find it, as there would be no requirement to have it available, except for infants. The Agency
is requesting comment on whether this need for assertive action would be appropriate, or whether such a strategy is
reasonable, given the unique aspects of sulfate.

Option 2 is based on the premise that diarrhea is not an adverse effect in adults. Until now, the Agency has considered
some effects as adverse which, by themselves, are not harmful, but are precursors of adverse effects. Examples are
(a) developmental effects, such as an extra embryonic rib which is later resorbed; (b) benign tumors; (c) reduction
in maternal weight gain, even with no observable fetal effect; and (d) marginal cholinesterase inhibition. In comparison
to these effects, the long-term effects of sulfate ingestion appear to be nil, and acclimation occurs in a short period
of time. The other effects mentioned are only detected with scientific measurement, while diarrhea or loose stools
are readily observed by the person ingesting sulfate. EPA requests comment on whether transient bouts of diarrhea
should be considered an adverse health effect or simply an inconvenience in adults.

In addition, EPA requests comment on whether, given the available information, a conclusion can be made that experiencing
transient bouts of diarrhea resulting from ingestion of sulfate in drinking water is not an adverse effect in any segment
of the population (adults or infants) within the meaning of the Safe Drinking Water Act.

EPA also recognizes that the provisions of this regulation are more difficult to enforce than central treatment.
Indeed, it is for similar reasons that EPA has always prohibited Alternative Water as a means of compliance. While
PWSs already have the legal option to use a POE device to comply with any MCL if certain requirements are followed, the
requirements for using bottled water or POU devices have been applicable only to temporary situations to prevent
unreasonable risk to health. Adoption of any of the proposed options would also mean that individuals in the target
population would drink bottled water on a temporary basis. However, the extent to which bottled water quality (i.e.,
compliance with all MCLs) can be assured varies from State to State. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA), which
is responsible for overseeing bottled water quality, is continuing to adopt standards which ensure truthful labeling.
However, production and sales of bottled water have increased dramatically in recent years, and FDA does not have
a complete inventory of domestic bottled water plants. FDA inspects the known plants, on average, every three to four
years, or more frequently if problems arise (GAO, 1992). A few States have stricter standards than FDA (NY, CA, PA,
CT) and require all bottled water plants to register with the State and conform to State requirements.

Similarly, POU devices are not subject to EPA certification. Since the proposed rule gives the States full authority
to decide whether or not an alternative option would be allowed, each State would presumably base its decision on the
extent to which it believes implementation is practicable. EPA requests comment on whether it is appropriate to allow
use of bottled water and POU devices for sulfate MCL compliance.

f. 

Option 4.

 Because the proposed option (1) and its variations (2) and (3) represent a significant change in regulatory approach,
and in order to fully consider the issues raised, EPA considered another, more conventional option. Option 4 was considered
in the event EPA determines that Alternative Water may not be as effective as central treatment in enabling small systems
to comply with the sulfate MCL. Option 4 would not directly allow the use of Alternative Water as a means of compliance
with the MCL.

In Option 4, systems would need to obtain a variance from the sulfate MCL under the provisions of SDWA section 1415.
As a condition of receiving a variance, systems would be required to provide Alternative Water to their target populations,
just as in Option 1. Therefore, the relief under Option 4 would be similar to the relief under Option 1 but would be provided
through a different statutory mechanism.




