 

_Intensive visits of several days duration to public defender or legal aid organizations representing at least two
different organizational approaches to provision of legal services. Participants might be divided into two or more
small groups for this portion of the program. For example, those focused on criminal defense might spend a few days
with a large-city public defender's office and then travel to a smaller community which provides public defenders
through a system of appointing private-practice attorneys. Those participants interested primarily in legal aid
in civil cases might visit a single city to observe the various organizations providing legal aid such as legal aid
societies, NGOs devoted to civil rights or public interest practice, and law school clinical programs;
_Formal training in such areas as trial advocacy skills, for the benefit of the visiting attorneys and to demonstrate
training techniques they might establish for colleagues in their home countries;
_A concluding session to evaluate the study tour, make plans for the follow-up visit of American specialists to Africa,
develop a framework for institutional linkages between African public defender/legal aid organizations and American
counterpart institutions, and discuss needs for the specialized support materials to be provided with grant funds.





Phase Two: 

One or more American attorneys specializing in criminal defense or legal aid services would visit each of the target
countries for consultations, workshops or other activities with local counterparts. In planning these follow-up
activities, the grantee should work closely with the African participants in the U.S. study tour and with U.S. Information
Service personnel in Africa to ensure that the activities are tailored to meet the needs of the African countries.
Ideally, the Americans and their African partners would use this phase to involve many more African lawyers and to
design or launch projects which continue after this phase.


Additional Guidelines and Restrictions


USIA is interested in supporting programs which will lay the groundwork for new and continuing relationships between
American and African legal institutions. Proposals which are overly ambitious and those which are very general will
not be competitive. Therefore, institutions should provide strong evidence of their ability to accomplish a few
tasks exceptionally well.
Bureau grants are not given to support projects whose focus is limited to technical issues, or for research projects,
developing publications for dissemination in the United States, individual student exchanges, film festivals,
or exhibits. Neither does the Office of Citizen Exchanges provide scholarships or support for long-term (a semester
or more) academic studies. Competitions sponsored by other Bureau offices are also announced in the 

Federal Register

 and may have different application requirements as well as different objectives.


Programmatic Considerations


Pursuant to the legislation authorizing the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs, programs must maintain
a nonpolitical character and should be balanced and representative of the diversity of American political, social
and cultural life.
USIA will give priority to proposals from U.S. organizations with relevant institutional contacts in the countries
involved in the projects described above. Partner institutions are encouraged to provide cost-sharing or significant
in-kind contributions such as local housing and transportation, interpreting, translating and other local currency
costs. These institutions are also encouraged to assist with the organization of various program activities.
The grantee will be responsible for most arrangements associated with this program. These include selecting speakers,
themes, and topics for discussion; organizing a coherent progression of activities; making all arrangements associated
with the African follow-up portion of the program; providing international and domestic travel arrangements for
all participants; making lodging and local transportation arrangements for visitors; orienting and debriefing
participants; preparing any necessary support materials; and working with host institutions and individuals to
achieve maximum program effectiveness.
At the start of the U.S. portion of a program, the grantee should conduct an orientation session for the visiting delegation
which addresses substantive details of the program as well as geographic, historical, and cross-cultural factors
which they should consider to enhance program success.
At the conclusion of each phase, the grantee institution will conduct participant evaluations and submit to E/P a
progress report. Upon conclusion of the program the grantee will be required to submit a report to E/P summarizing
results of the entire program including project outcomes, anticipated follow-on activities, and any resulting
institutional linkages.
Program monitoring and oversight will be provided by appropriate USIA elements. Per Diem support from host institutions
during an internship component is strongly encouraged. However, for all programs which include internships, a nonprofit
grantee institution which receives funds from corporate or other cosponsors should then use those monies to provide
food, lodging, and pocket money for the participants. In no case could the intern receive a wage or be hired by the sponsoring
institution. Internships should also have an American studies/values orientation component at the beginning of
the exchange program in the U.S. Grantee institutions should try to maximize cost-sharing in all facets of their program
design, and to stimulate U.S. private sector (foundation and corporate) support.
USIS officers in participating countries will facilitate the issuance of visas and other program-related materials.

