 

A. Applicability 



1. Description of the Source Category 



The proposed rule would apply to each aerospace manufacturing and rework facility that is a major source, as defined
under section 112(a) of the Act. A major source is one that emits or has the potential to emit, considering controls,
9.1 megagrams per year (Mg/yr) (10 tpy) or more of any hazardous air pollutant or 22.7 Mg/yr (25 tpy) or more of any combination
of hazardous air pollutants for all activities conducted at the facility. An aerospace facility is defined as a facility
that produces in any amount an aerospace vehicle or component, or a facility that reworks (or repairs) these vehicles
or components. Aerospace operations at any major source that conduct both aerospace and non-aerospace work would
be subject to the proposed standards, regardless of the relative proportion of aerospace and non-aerospace work
at the facility. 

While the proposed rule applies only to major sources, the EPA requests comment on whether all or some of its requirements
should be applied to non-major sources. The Agency solicits available information from state and local air pollution
control agencies and others on the nature, number and location of non-major aerospace facilities, the quantities
and types of hazardous air pollutants they emit, the impact of these emissions on health and the environment, and the
extent to which these emissions already are controlled. Comments also are requested on the economic and other impacts
that would result from applying requirements of the proposed rule to these smaller sources. 

In general, aerospace facilities are covered by the SIC codes listed in Table 2. However, facilities classified under
other SIC codes may be subject to the proposed standards if the facility meets the definition of a major source and the
definition of an aerospace facility. 

Based on information obtained through the Federal Aviation Administration and the U.S. Department of Commerce_Bureau
of the Census, there are an estimated 2,869 aerospace facilities that will be subject to the proposed standards. Of
this number, 1,395 manufacture or rework commercial products, and 1,474 manufacture or rework military products.
The combined HAP emissions from these facilities are estimated to be over 189,000 Mg/yr (208,000 tpy). 
In addition to these facilities, there are numerous subcontractors that manufacture or rework aerospace vehicles
or components. The subcontractors may work directly for the 




<TABLE>







Table 

2._Aerospace Manufacturing SIC Codes



1SIC Code 
1Description




3720 
Aircraft and Parts.

3721 
Aircraft.

3724 
Aircraft Engines and Engine Parts.

3728 
Aircraft Parts and Equipment.

3760 
Guided Missiles, Space Vehicles, and Parts.

3761 
Guided Missiles and Space Vehicles.

3764 
Space Propulsion Units and Parts.

3769 
Space Vehicle Equipment.




1
Aerospace Rework SIC Code
0




4581 
Airports, Flying Fields, and Services.

</TABLE>
 


OEM or rework facilities, or indirectly through first line subcontractors. Since many of these subcontractors perform
various types of work, they are often classified under non-aerospace SIC codes. Consequently, an estimate of the
number of subcontractors cannot be made. One company alone, however, employs the services of over 5,000 subcontractors.




2. Affected Sources 



The proposed rule would limit organic HAP emissions from the following sources at aerospace facilities: cleaning
operation, primer application operation, topcoat application operation, depainting operation, chemical milling
maskant application operation, and the handling and storage of waste. The proposed rule would also limit inorganic
HAP emissions from primer, topcoat, and depainting operations. 

Organic HAP emissions from primer, topcoat, and chemical milling maskant application operations occur from the
evaporation of the solvent contained in the coatings. These emissions occur during the application of the coatings
on aerospace vehicles or parts, which may take place in large open areas, such as hangars, or in partially or fully enclosed
spaces, such as within spray booths. 

Organic HAP emissions from cleaning and depainting operations occur from the evaporation of the volatile portion
of the cleaning solvents or chemical strippers. Cleaning emissions are nearly always fugitive in nature and occur
at essentially every processing step. Emissions from depainting are typically fugitive in nature since the operation
is carried out within a large hangar or in open tanks. 





