 

(iii) All wolves found in the wild within the boundaries of this paragraph (i)(7) after the first releases will be considered
nonessential experimental animals. In the conterminous United States, a wolf that is outside an experimental area
(as defined in paragraph (i)(7) of this section) would be considered as endangered (or threatened if in Minnesota)
unless it is marked or otherwise known to be an experimental animal; such a wolf may be captured for examination and
genetic testing by the Service or Service-designated agency. Disposition of the captured animal may take any of the
following courses: 
(A) If the animal was not involved in conflicts with humans and is determined likely to be an experimental wolf, it will
be returned to the reintroduction area. 
(B) If the animal is determined likely to be an experimental wolf and was involved in conflicts with humans as identified
in the management plan for the closest experimental area, it may be relocated, placed in captivity, or killed. 
(C) If the animal is determined not likely to be an experimental animal, it will be managed according to any Service-approved
plans for that area or will be marked and released near its point of capture. 
(D) If the animal is determined not likely to be a wild gray wolf or if the Service or agencies designated by the Service
determine the animal shows physical or behavioral evidence of hybridization with other canids, such as domestic
dogs or coyotes, or of being an animal raised in captivity, it will be kept in captivity or killed. 
(8) The reintroduced wolves will be monitored during the life of the project, including by the use of radio telemetry
and other remote sensing devices as appropriate. All released animals will be vaccinated against diseases and parasites
prevalent in canids, as appropriate, prior to release and during subsequent handling. Any animal that is sick, injured,
or otherwise in need of special care may be captured by authorized personnel of the Service or Service-designated
agencies and given appropriate care. Such an animal will be released back into its respective reintroduction area
as soon as possible, unless physical or behavioral problems make it necessary to return the animal to captivity or
euthanize it. 

(9) The status of the experimental population will be reevaluated within the first 3 years, after the first year of
releases of wolves, to determine future management needs and if further reintroductions are required. This review
will take into account the reproductive success and movement patterns of the individuals released in the area, as
well as the overall health and fate of the experimental wolves. Once recovery goals are met for downlisting or delisting
the species, a rule will be proposed to address downlisting or delisting. 
(10) The Service does not intend to reevaluate the ``nonessential experimental'' designation. The Service does
not foresee any likely situation which would result in changing the nonessential experimental status until the gray
wolf is recovered and delisted in the northern Rocky Mountains according to provisions outlined in the Act. However,
if the wolf population does not demonstrate positive growth toward recovery goals for 2 consecutive years, the affected
States and tribes, in cooperation with the Service, would, within 1 year, identify and initiate wolf management strategies,
including appropriate public review and comment, to ensure continued wolf population growth toward recovery levels.
All reintroduced wolves designated as nonessential experimental will be removed from the wild and the experimental
status and regulations revoked when (i) legal actions or lawsuits change the wolves status to endangered under the
Act or (ii) within 90 days of the initial release date, naturally occurring wolves, consisting of two breeding pairs
that for 2 consecutive years have each successfully raised two offspring, are discovered in the experimental population
area. The naturally occurring wolves would be managed and protected as endangered species under the Act. 



Dated: November 15, 1994.


<SIGNER>
George T. Frampton, Jr., 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks. 





</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9428746 Filed 111894; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 431055P
</BILLING>



