 

The Exchange proposes to trade cash-settled, European-style Index options (

i.e.

, exercises are permitted at expiration only). The Exchange also proposes that Israeli Index options will have trading
hours from 9:30 a.m. to 4:10 p.m. EST. As with other index options traded on the Amex, the options on the Index will expire
on the Saturday following the third Friday of the expiration month (``Expiration Friday''). The last trading day
in an option series will normally be the second to last business day preceding the Saturday following the third Friday
of the expiration month (normally a Thursday). Trading in expiring options will cease at the close of trading on the
last trading day.
 
The Index value for purposes of settling a specific Israeli Index option will be calculated based upon the primary
exchange regular way opening sale prices for the component securities.
<FOOTCITE>4</FOOTCITE>
 In the case of NM securities, the first reported sale price will be used. As trading begins in each of the Index's component
securities, its opening sale price is used in the calculation. Once all of the component stocks have opened, the value
of the Index is determined and that value is used as the settlement value of the option. If any of the component stocks
do not open for trading on the last trading day before expiration, then the prior day's last sale price is used in the
calculation. 
 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
4

</FOOTNAME>
In the case of ADRs, the primary exchange refers to the primary exchange for the ADR and not the underlying security.
Telephone conversation between Claire McGrath, Special Counsel, Derivative Securities, Amex, and Stephen Youhn,
Derivative Products Regulation, SEC, on Aug. 19, 1994. 
 
</FOOTNOTE>


The Exchange plans to list options series with expirations in the three near-term calendar months and in the two additional
calendar months in the March cycle. In addition, longer term option series having up to thirty-six months to expiration
may be trade. In lieu of such long-term options on a full-value Index level, the Exchange may instead list long-term,
reduced-value put and call options based on one-tenth (1/10th) the Index's full-value. In either event, the interval
between expiration months for either a full-value or reduced-value long-term option will not be less than six months.

 


Eligibility Standards for Index Components 
 


The Index's component securities all have major business interests in Israel, and have been selected on the basis
of their market capitalization, trading liquidity, and representation of Israeli business industries. The Amex
believes the components represent the largest and most liquid of all Israeli securities trading in the U.S., and that
the Index tracks closely the performance of larger broad market Israeli indexes, such as the Oscar Gruss Israel Index,
which contains all of the more than 50 Israeli securities currently traded in the U.S. This index is carried in the Israeli
press as well as by Bloomberg L.P., a major U.S. data vendor. 
 
In choosing among Israeli stocks that meet the minimum criteria set forth in Exchange Rule 901C, the Exchange will
select stocks that: (1) have a minimum market value in U.S. dollars of at least $75 million, except that for each of the
lowest weighted component securities in the Index that in the aggregate account for no more than 10% of the weight of
the Index, the market value may be at least $50 million; (2) have an average monthly trading volume in the U.S. markets
over the previous six month period of not less than 500,000 shares (or ADRs); (3) have at least 85% of the numerical Index
value and at least 80% of the total number of component securities meeting the current criteria for standardized option
trading set forth in Exchange Rule 915; and (4) are reported securities that trade on either the NYSE, Amex (subject
to the limitations of Rule 901C), or are NM securities. 
 
The Amex will ensure that no more than 20% of the weight of the Index is represented by ADRs overlying foreign securities
that are not subject to comprehensive surveillance sharing agreements.
<FOOTCITE>5</FOOTCITE>
 Currently, no Index components have the majority of their trading volume occurring on an exchange with which the Amex
does not currently have in place an effective surveillance sharing agreement. 
 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
5

</FOOTNAME>


See 

Amendment No. 2. 
 
</FOOTNOTE>


Exchange Rules Applicable to Stock Index Options 
 


Amex Rules 900C through 980C will apply to the trading of regular and long-term contracts based on the Index. These
Rules cover issues such as surveillance, exercise prices, and position limits. Surveillance procedures currently
used to monitor trading in each of the Exchange's other index options will also be used to monitor trading in options
on the Index. The Index is deemed to be a Stock Index option under Rule 901C(a) and a Stock Index Industry Group under
Rule 900C(b)(1). With respect to Rule 903C(b), the Exchange proposes to list near-the-money (

i.e.

, within ten points above or below the current index value) options series on the Index at 21/2 point strike (exercise)
price intervals when the value of the Index is below 200 points. In addition, the Exchange proposes to establish, pursuant
to Rule 904C(c), a position limit of 7,500 contracts on the same side of the market. 


