 




<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 50482]</RINDOCK>




<DOCTITLE>Wolf Creek Nuclear Operating Corp.; Notice of Issuance of Environmental Assessment and Finding of No Significant
Impact</DOCTITLE>


The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is considering issuance of an exemption from the requirements
of 10 CFR part 50, Appendix E, Section IV.F.2 to Wolf Creek Nuclear Operating Corporation, (the licensee), for operation
of the Wolf Creek Generating Station, Unit 1, located in Coffey County, Kansas. 


Environmental Assessment


Identification of Proposed Action


Section IV.F.2 of Appendix E to 10 CFR Part 50 states ``Each license at each site shall annually exercise its emergency
plan.'' By letter dated March 8, 1994, the licensee requested an exemption from the requirements of 10 CFR Part 50,
Section IV.F.2, that would delay the exercise scheduled for 1994 until early 1995. The delay was requested in order
to allow for the approval and implementation of revised emergency classification criteria submitted to the NRC by
letter dated December 15, 1993, and to avoid conflict with the seventh refueling outage currently scheduled to begin
in September 1994. 
Section 50.12(a)(2)(v) of Title 10 of the Code of Federal Regulations provides an example of a special circumstance
for which the NRC will consider granting exemptions that involve cases providing only temporary relief from the applicable
regulation and for which the licensee has made good faith efforts to comply with the regulation. The licensee completed
an annual exercise in December 1993 and had scheduled the 1994 exercise for June 29, 1994. The proposed exemption would
delay the 1994 exercise until early 1995, approximately fourteen months after the 1993 exercise, and would not affect
the requirement to conduct the normally scheduled 1995 annual exercise.


The Need for the Proposed Action


The proposed exemption provides temporary relief to delay an annual emergency exercise in order to provide the licensee
an opportunity to implement revised emergency classification procedures and avoid conflict with a scheduled refueling
outage. The transition to the revised emergency action levels includes NRC review and additional training of licensee
personnel. Although these activities are expected to be completed during 1994, scheduling of the exercise for late
1994 would result in its coinciding with activities associated with the seventh outage. Both activities, the exercise
and refueling outage, are resource intensive and therefore, it is undesirable to schedule them for the same time period.



Environmental Impacts of the Proposed Action 


The Commission has completed its evaluation of the proposed exemption and concludes that granting of the temporary
relief does not affect the configuration of plant systems or any manner of their operation. The proposed exemption
is limited to a delay in the conduct of an annual emergency exercise such that the interval between the 1993 exercise
and the delayed exercise is extended to approximately fourteen months. The delay in the exercise does not constitute
a significant degradation in emergency planning and would therefore not result in an increase in radiological consequences
in the event of a major accident involving the release of radioactive materials. Accordingly, the Commission concludes
that this proposed action would result in no significant radiological evironmental impact. 
With regard to potential nonradiological impacts, the proposed exemption only involves the action of emergency
plan exercises. It does not affect nonradiological plant effluents and there are no other nonradiological environmental
impact associated with the proposed exemption. 


Alternatives to the Proposed Action


Since the Commission concluded that there are no significant environmental impacts that would result from the proposed
action, any alternatives with equal or greater environmental impacts need not be evaluated. The principal alternative
would be to deny the requested exemption and require the licensee to conduct an emergency exercise during the 1994
calendar year. Conducting an exercise prior to implementation of the revised emergency action levels would reduce
potential benefits since key event classification procedures would be superseded shortly following the exercise.
Conducting the exercise late in 1994 would result in conflicts with the planning and execution of the seventh refueling
outage. 


Alternate Use of Resource


This action does not involve the use of any resources not previously considered in the Final Environmental Statement
in the Wolf Creek Generating Station dated June 1982. 


Agencies and Persons Consulted


The NRC staff reviewed the licensee's request and consulted with the Kansas State official. The State official had
no comments regarding the NRC's proposed action.


Finding of No Significant Impact


The NRC staff has determined not to prepare an environmental impact statement for the proposed exemption.
Based upon the foregoing environmental assessment, the Commission concludes that the proposed action will not have
a significant effect on the quality of the human environment.
For further details with respect to this action, see the request for exemption dated March 8, 1994, which is available
for public inspection at the Commission's Public Document Room, The Gelman Building, 2120 L Street, NW., Washington,
DC 20555, and at the Local Public Document Rooms, Emporia State University, William Allen White Library, 1200 Commercial
Street, Emporia, Kansas 66801 and the Washburn University School of Law Library, Topeka, Kansas 66621.



Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 19th day of May 1994.



For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.


<SIGNER>
James E. Lyons,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Director, Project Directorate IV2, Division of Reactor Projects III/IV, Office of Nuclear Reactor
Regulation.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9412728 Filed 52494; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 759001M
</BILLING>


