 




Federal Register

/Vol. 59, No. 2/Tuesday, January 4, 1994/Rules and Regulations





<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</USDEPT>




<USBUREAU>Food and Drug Administration</USBUREAU>


<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 93N0481]</RINDOCK>



<RINDOCK>RIN 0905AB67</RINDOCK>


Food Labeling: Health Claims and Label Statements; Folate and Neural Tube Defects


<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Notice.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is announcing that, in accordance with the Nutrition Labeling and Education
Act of 1990 (the 1990 amendments), as amended by the Dietary Supplement Act of 1992 (the DS act), the regulation proposed
on October 14, 1993 (58 FR 53254), to authorize the use of a health claim about the relationship between folate and the
risk of neural tube defects (NTD's) is now considered a final regulation for dietary supplements of vitamins, minerals,
herbs, and other similar nutritional substances (dietary supplements). The proposed regulation set out the information
that must be included in such a health claim to ensure that it is an accurate representation of the effect of intake of
folic acid on the risk of NTD's, and that any claims that are made are understandable, informative, and not misleading.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

The final regulation will become effective on July 1, 1994.


</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

Judith W. Riggins, Office of Policy (HF23), Food and Drug Administration, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD
20857, 3014432831.


or


Jeanne I. Rader, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFS175), Food and Drug Administration, 200
C St. SW., Washington, DC 20204, 2022055375.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:


I. Background


FDA is announcing that, in accordance with section 3(b)(1)(A)(ii), (b)(1)(A)(x), and (b)(2) of the 1990 amendments
as amended by the DS act (Pub. L. 102571), the regulation proposed on October 14, 1993 (58 FR 53254), to authorize
the use of a health claim about the relationship between folate and the risk of NTD's is now considered a final regulation
for dietary supplements of vitamins, minerals, herbs, and other similar nutritional substances (dietary supplements).


II. Passage of 1990 Amendments


The 1990 amendments to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the act) (Pub. L. 101535) gave the Secretary
of Health and Human Services (the Secretary), and by delegation FDA, the authority to issue regulations authorizing
health claims on the labels and in the labeling of foods. Section 403(r)(1)(B) of the act (21 U.S.C. 343(r)(1)(B))
provides that a product is misbranded if it bears a claim that characterizes the relationship of a nutrient to a disease
or health-related condition, unless the claim is made in accordance with procedures and standards established under
section 403(r)(3) and (r)(5)(D) of the act (21 U.S.C. 343(r)(3) and (r)(5)(D)). 
The 1990 amendments also directed the Secretary to determine through rulemaking whether claims regarding 10 nutrient-disease
relationships met the requirements of the act. The relationship of folic acid and NTD's was among those 10 topics (section
3(b)(1)(A)(x) of the 1990 amendments). 


III. Chronology of Regulatory and Other Activities Related To Folate and Ntd's


A. The 1991 Proposed Rule


In the 

Federal Register

 of November 27, 1991 (56 FR 60537), FDA proposed to not authorize a health claim on folic acid and NTD's. The agency tentatively
concluded that the available evidence did not establish that the standard that FDA had proposed for health claims
for dietary supplements under section 403(r)(5)(D) of the act was met, that is, that there was not significant scientific
agreement, based on the totality of publicly available scientific evidence, that the claim is valid. 


B. The Public Health Service Recommendations


In September 1992, the Public Health Service (PHS) issued a recommendation that all women of childbearing age in the
United States who are capable of becoming pregnant should consume 0.4 milligram (mg) of folic acid/day for the purpose
of reducing their risk of having a pregnancy affected with spina bifida or other NTD's. The recommendation was based
on data suggesting that folic acid, when given at a high dose (4 mg), can reduce the risk of recurrence of NTD's and on
a synthesis of information from studies that used multivitamins containing folic acid at dose levels from 0 to 1,000
micrograms/day. The PHS recommendation identified approaches and identified outstanding issues, including the
appropriate intake of folate, the potential role of other nutrients in reduction of risk of NTD's, safety concerns,
and the ``folate-preventable'' fraction of NTD's. 


C. The Dietary Supplement Act of 1992


In October 1992, the DS act was enacted. This statute imposed a moratorium on FDA's implementation of the 1990 amendments
with respect to dietary supplements until December 15, 1993. The DS act directed FDA to issue proposed rules to implement
the 1990 amendments with respect to dietary supplements by June 15, 1993, and to issue final rules based on these proposals
by December 31, 1993. The DS act also amended the so-called ``hammer'' provision of the 1990 amendments, section 3(b)(2)
of the 1990 amendments, to provide that if the agency did not meet the established December 31, 1993, timeframe for
issuance of final rules, the proposed regulations would be considered final regulations. 


D. The 1993 Final Rules for Health Claims for Foods in Conventional Food Form


On January 6, 1993 (58 FR 2606), FDA published a final rule to not authorize a health claim for folic acid and NTD's. However,
the agency reaffirmed its support of the PHS recommendation that all women of childbearing age in the United States
who are capable of becoming pregnant should consume 0.4 mg of folic acid daily to reduce their risk of having a pregnancy
affected with spina bifida or other NTD's. The agency noted, however, that unresolved questions about the safe use
of folate remained. The agency concluded that it could not authorize a health claim until these questions were resolved.
Because of the DS act, FDA took no final action with respect to the use of a health claim on folic acid and NTD's on dietary
supplements.


E. The 1993 Proposal to Authorize a Health Claim on Folic Acid and NTD's


On October 14, 1993, FDA published a proposed rule to authorize the use of a health claim about the relationship of folate
and NTD's on the labels of foods in conventional food form and dietary supplements (58 FR 53254). FDA provided 60 days
for comment on this proposed action. The comment period closed on December 13, 1993. 
Section 3(b)(2) of the 1990 amendments, as amended by section 202(a)(2)(B)(ii) of the DS act, provides that if the
Secretary does not promulgate final regulations on any of the health claims applicable to dietary supplements in
a timely manner, the proposed regulations shall be considered final regulations but not until December 31, 1993.
FDA did not issue a final regulation on the use of a health claim on folic acid and NTD's on dietary supplements by December
31, 1993. Therefore, FDA is issuing this document announcing that by operation of the law, the proposal to authorize
a health claim about the relationship of folate and NTD's published in the 

Federal Register

 of October 14, 1993, is now considered a final regulation applicable to the labels and labeling of dietary supplements
only. The agency proposed that 21 CFR part 101 be amended as follows:


PART 101_FOOD LABELING


2. Section 101.71 

Health claims: claims not authorized

 is amended by removing paragraph (c) and by redesignating paragraphs (d) through (f) as (c) through (e), respectively.



3. New 101.79 is added to subpart E to read as follows:


101.79 

Health claims: folate and neural tube defects. 


(a) 

Relationship between folate and neural tube defects

_(1) 

Definition

. Neural tube defects are serious birth defects of the brain or spinal cord that can result in infant mortality or serious
disability. The birth defects anencephaly and spina bifida are the most common forms of neural tube defects and account
for about 90 percent of these defects. These defects result from failure of closure of the covering of the brain or spinal
cord during early embryonic development. Because the neural tube forms and closes during early pregnancy, the defect
may occur before a woman realizes that she is pregnant.
(2) 

Relationship

. The available data show that diets adequate in folate may reduce the risk of neural tube defects. The strongest evidence
for this relationship comes from an intervention study by the Medical Research Council of the United Kingdom that
showed that women at risk of recurrence of a neural tube defect pregnancy who consumed a supplement containing 4 milligrams
(mg) (4,000 micrograms (&mu;g)) folic acid daily had a reduced risk of having a child with a neural tube defect. (Products
that contain this level of folic acid are drugs.) In addition, based on its review of a Hungarian intervention trial
that used a multivitamin and multimineral preparation containing 800 &mu;g (0.8 mg) of folic acid, and its review
of the observational studies that reported use of multivitamins containing 0 to 1,000 &mu;g of folic acid, the Food
and Drug Administration concluded that most of these studies had results consistent with the conclusion that folate,
at levels attainable in usual diets, may reduce the risk of neural tube defects. 
(b) 

Significance of folate

_(1) 

Public health concern

. Neural tube defects occur in approximately 0.6 of 1,000 live births in the United States (i.e., about 2,500 cases
among 4 million live births annually). Neural tube defects are believed to be caused by many factors. The single greatest
risk factor for a neural tube defect-affected pregnancy is a personal or family history of a pregnancy affected with
a such a defect. However, about 90 percent of infants with a neural tube defect are born to women who do not have a family
history of these defects. The available evidence shows that diets adequate in folate may reduce the risk of neural
tube defects but not of other birth defects.
(2) 

Populations at risk

. Prevalence rates for neural tube defects have been reported to vary with a wide range of factors, including genetics,
geography, socioeconomic status, maternal birth cohort, month of conception, race, nutrition, and maternal health,
including maternal age and reproductive history. Women with a close relative (i.e., sibling, niece, nephew) with
a neural tube defect, those with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, and women with seizure disorders who are being
treated with valproic acid or carbamazepine are at significantly increased risk compared with women without these
characteristics. Rates for neural tube defects vary within the United States, with lower rates observed on the west
coast than on the east coast.
(3) 

Those who may benefit

. Based on a synthesis of the results of several observational studies, the Public Health Service has estimated that
about 50 percent of neural tube defect-affected pregnancies in the United States (e.g., about 1,250) may be averted
annually if all women consume adequate amounts of folate daily (i.e., 0.4 mg) throughout their childbearing years.
(c) 

Requirements

. The label or labeling of food in conventional food form or dietary supplements may contain a folate/neural tube defect
health claim provided that:
(1) 

General requirements

. The health claim for a food or supplement meets all of the general requirements of 101.14 for health claims,
except that a food or dietary supplement may qualify to bear the health claim if it meets the definition of the term ``good
source.'' 
(2) 

Specific requirements

_(i) 

Nature of the claim

_(A) 

Relationship

. A health claim that women who are capable of becoming pregnant and who consume adequate amounts of folate daily during
their childbearing years may reduce their risk of having a pregnancy affected by spina bifida or other neural tube
defects may be made on the label or labeling of foods in conventional food form or of dietary supplements provided that:
(B) 

Specifying the nutrient

. In specifying the nutrient, the claim shall use the terms ``folate,'' ``folic acid,'' ``folacin,'' ``folate, a
B vitamin,'' ``folic acid, a B vitamin,'' or ``folacin, a B vitamin.'' 
(C) 

Specifying the condition

. In specifying the health-related condition, the claim shall identify the birth defects as ``neural tube defects,''
``birth defects, spina bifida, or anencephaly,'' ``birth defects of the brain or spinal cord anencephaly or spina
bifida,'' or ``spina bifida or anencephaly, birth defects of the brain or spinal cord;''
(D) 

Multifactorial nature

. The claim shall state that neural tube defects have many causes and shall not imply that folate intake is the only recognized
risk factor for neural tube defects. 
(E) 

Prevalence

. In specifying the prevalence of neural tube defects among women in the general population, the claim shall state
that such birth defects ``which, while not widespread, are extremely significant'' or ``* * * birth defects * * * that,
while not widespread, are extremely significant.'' 
(F) 

Reduction in risk

. The claim shall not attribute any specific degree of reduction in risk of neural tube defects, including mention
of the Public Health Service estimate that 50 percent of neural tube defects may be averted annually, to maintaining
an adequate folate intake throughout the childbearing years. The claim shall state that some women may reduce their
risk of a neural tube defect pregnancy by maintaining adequate intakes of folic acid during their childbearing years.

(G) 

Safe upper limit of daily intake

. Claims on fortified foods in conventional form and on dietary supplements that contain more than 25 percent of the
RDI for folate (100 &mu;g per serving or per unit) shall state that 1 mg folate per day is the safe upper limit of intake
(e.g., ``Folate consumption should be limited to 1,000 &mu;g per day from all sources.'') 
(H) 

The claim

. The claim shall not state that a specified amount of folate (e.g., 400 &mu;g in a dietary supplement) is more effective
in reducing the risk of neural tube defects than a lower amount (e.g., 100 &mu;g in a breakfast cereal or from diets rich
in fruits and vegetables). 
(ii) 

Nature of the food

_(A) 

Requirements

. The food or supplement shall meet or exceed the requirements for a good source of folate as defined in 101.54;
(B) 

Diets adequate in folate

. The claim shall identify diets adequate in folate by using phrases such as ``* * * diets that include 2 to 4 servings
per day of fruits) including citrus fruits and juices), 3 to 5 servings of vegetables (including dark green leafy vegetables
and legumes), 6 to 11 servings of enriched grain products (such as breads, rice, and pasta) and fortified cereals.
Such diets provide many essential minerals and vitamins, including folate. Women who do not eat well-balanced diets
or who may be concerned about their diets may choose to obtain folate from dietary supplements.''; or ``Adequate amounts
of folate, a B vitamin, can be obtained from diets rich in fruits, including citrus fruits and juices, vegetables,
including dark green leafy vegetables and legumes, enriched grain products, including breads, rice, and pasta,
fortified cereals, or a dietary supplement.''; or ``Adequate amounts of folate, a B vitamin, can be obtained from
diets rich in fruits, dark green leafy vegetables and legumes, enriched grain products, fortified cereals, or from
dietary supplements.''
(C) 

Dietary supplements

. Dietary supplements shall meet the United States Pharmacopeia (U.S.P.) standards for disintegration and dissolution,
except that if there are no applicable U.S.P. standards, the folate in the dietary supplement shall be shown to be bioavailable
under the conditions of use stated on the product label. 
(iii) 

Limitation

. The claim shall not be made on foods in conventional food form or dietary supplements that contain more than 100 percent
of the RDI for vitamin A as retinol or preformed vitamin A or vitamin D. 
(iv) 

Nutrition labeling

. The nutrition label shall include information about the amount of folate in the food. This information shall be declared
after the declaration for iron if only the levels of vitamin A, vitamin C, calcium, and iron are provided, or in accordance
with 101.9(c)(8) and (c)(9) if other optional vitamins or minerals are declared.
(3) 

Optional information

_(i) 

Risk factors

. The claim may specifically identify risk factors for neural tube defects;
(ii) 

Relationship between folate and neural tube defects

. The claim may include statements from paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section that summarize the relationship between
folate and neural tube defects and the significance of the relationship except for information specifically prohibited
from the claim. 
(iii) 

Personal history of a neural tube defect-affected pregnancy

. The claim may state that women with a history of a neural tube defect pregnancy should consult their physicians or
health care providers before becoming pregnant. 
(iv) 

Daily value

. The claim may identify the daily value level of 400 &mu;g of folate per day as the target intake goal. 
(d) 

Model health claims

. The following are examples of model health claims that may be used in food labeling to describe the relationship between
folate and neural tube defects:
(1) 

Example 1

. Women who consume adequate amounts of folate, a B vitamin, daily throughout their childbearing years may reduce
their risk of having a child with a neural tube birth defect. Such birth defects, while not widespread, are very serious.
They can have many causes. Adequate amounts of folate can be obtained from diets rich in fruits, dark green leafy vegetables
and legumes, enriched grain products, fortified cereals, or a supplement. Folate consumption should be limited
to 1,000 &mu;g per day from all sources.
(2) 

Example 2

. Women who consume adequate amounts of folate daily throughout their childbearing years may reduce their risk of
having a child with a birth defect of the brain and spinal cord. Such birth defects, while not widespread, are very serious.
They can have many causes. Adequate amounts of folate, a B vitamin, can be obtained from diets rich in fruits, dark green
leafy vegetables and legumes, enriched grain products, fortified cereals, or a supplement. Women who have had a child
with a spinal cord birth defect should consult a physician before becoming pregnant. Folate consumption should be
limited to 1,000 &mu;g per day from all sources.
(3) 

Example 3

. Women who take steps to ensure that their folate intake is adequate throughout their childbearing years may reduce
their risk of having a child with a neural tube defect. Such birth defects, while not widespread, are very serious.
They can have many causes. Adequate amounts of folate, a B vitamin, can be obtained from diets rich in citrus fruits
and juices, dark green leafy vegetables and legumes, enriched grain products such as breads, rice, and pasta, fortified
cereal, or a supplement. Folate consumption should be limited to 1,000 &mu;g per day from all sources.
(4) 

Example 4

. Women who take steps to ensure that their folate intake is at least 400 &mu;g daily throughout their childbearing
years may reduce their risk of having a child with spina bifida or anencephaly, birth defects of the brain or spinal
cord that, while not widespread, are very serious. These birth defects can have many causes. Adequate amounts of folate,
a B vitamin, can be obtained from diets rich in fruits, including citrus fruits and juices, vegetables, including
dark green leafy vegetables and legumes, enriched grain products, including breads, rice, and pasta, fortified
cereals, or from a supplement. Women who have had a pregnancy affected with a neural tube defect should consult a physician
before becoming pregnant. Folate consumption should be limited to 1,000 &mu;g per day from all sources.



(5) 

Example 5

. Some women who consume the Daily Value of folate (400 &mu;g) throughout their childbearing years may reduce their
risk of having a child affected with spina bifida or anencephaly, birth defects of the brain or spinal cord that, while
not widespread, are very serious. These birth defects can have many causes. Women of childbearing age should choose
well-balanced diets that include 2 to 4 servings per day of fruits (including citrus fruits and juices), 3 to 5 servings
of vegetables (including dark green leafy vegetables and legumes), 6 to 11 servings of enriched grain products (such
as breads, rice, and pasta) or fortified cereals throughout their childbearing years. Such diets provide many essential
minerals and vitamins, including folate. Women who may be concerned about their diets may choose to obtain folate
from a supplement. Folate consumption should be limited to 1,000 &mu;g per day from all sources.






(e) 

Effective date

. For fortified foods, this regulation is effective on the date the food additive regulation on the use of folic acid
that was proposed on October 14, 1993, becomes effective.




The 1990 amendments state that FDA is to promptly publish notice of the new status of the proposed regulations in the


Federal Register

. This notice is issued in response to that requirement. The agency emphasizes, however, that this regulation is deemed
to be a final regulation only with respect to dietary supplements.



The agency notes that this document is part of a separate rulemaking contemplated by Congress if the final regulation
was not issued by December 31, 1993. This rulemaking bears a separate docket number from the one assigned to the October
14, 1993 rulemaking to distinguish it from that rulemaking, which is ongoing. The agency intends to continue its rulemaking
with respect to folic acid and neural tube defects and to issue a final rule as quickly as possible.



In this regard, FDA recognizes that clarification with respect to the legal status of claims about folic acid and NTD's
on foods in conventional food form is appropriate. FDA advises that, given the PHS recommendation and the results
of FDA's preliminary review of the evidence on this claim, at this time it has no intention of taking action against
foods in conventional food form that are naturally high in folate that bear a claim on this nutrient-disease relationship,
so long as the claim fully complies with the provisions of the regulation that has become final for dietary supplements
by operation of law.
However, for foods fortified with folic acid, the agency has more significant concerns. As explained in the health
claim proposal on folic acid and NTD's (58 FR 53254 at 53288) and the proposal to amend the food additive regulation
on folic acid that published in the 

Federal Register

 on October 14, 1993 (58 FR 53312), there appears to be a rather narrow range of safe use of folic acid in food. Based on
this tentative view, FDA would be very concerned, at least until it reached a final determination in those proceedings,
if manufacturers began adding folic acid to their products, or increasing the amount of folic acid in their products,
to qualify for a claim. Therefore, FDA strongly discourages the use of a health claim about folic acid and NTD's on any
such fortified products pending the issuance of a final rule on this nutrient-disease relationship. 
As stated above, FDA intends to issue a final rule in the proceeding on a health claim on folic acid and NTD's that it began
on October 14, 1993, in the near future. FDA is in the process of evaluating the comments that it has received in that
proceeding, including the results of an advisory committee meeting held on October 14 and 15. FDA will attempt to resolve
the issues in that ongoing proceeding as soon as possible.



Dated: December 23, 1993.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
David A. Kessler,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Commissioner of Food and Drugs.

</SIGNJOB>
<SIGNER>
Donna E. Shalala,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Secretary of Health and Human Services.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9331817 Filed 122993; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>


