 

(1) Labeling iron-containing products with statements warning that accidental ingestion by children can be lethal.


(2) Packaging changes for iron-containing products with 30 mg or more iron per dosage unit, including packaging these
products in child-resistant unit-dose (e.g., blister) packages and not offering such products in packaging that
is not child- resistant (no exempt sizes). 

(3) Reformulating iron-containing products that resemble candy and that have a sweet outer coating to discourage
consumption of large amounts by small children. 

(4) Requiring prescription status for iron products, reducing the number of units per package, and closer monitoring
of the iron status of pregnant women to determine whether iron supplementation is really needed. 

(5) Multi-ethnic educational efforts to increase public awareness of the dangers associated with iron and patient
counseling by obstetricians, gynecologists, and pharmacists, because many poisonings involve iron-containing
drug products. 

Several participants at the conference commended the trade associations for their voluntary programs. However,
some participants urged that child-resistant unit-dose blister packaging, an element not included in the voluntary
industry programs, be implemented as a significant measure to reduce the incidence of iron poisonings. The participants
in the conference called upon industry, government, and the healthcare community to undertake efforts, including
cooperative efforts, to address this problem. 



E. The Scope and Purpose of this Document 



The purpose of this document is to: (1) Propose requirements designed to reduce the risk of pediatric poisonings from
the accidental ingestion of iron-containing products, (2) solicit additional information concerning the issue,
raised in the petitions, of reformulating iron-containing products to avoid the resemblance to candy and to avoid
use of a sweet outer coating, and (3) describe the efforts that FDA intends to undertake to respond to the need for public
education concerning iron poisonings, reinforcing the NDMA/CPSC education campaign. 

As stated above, the agency believes that the new requirements that it is proposing, in conjunction with CPSC's existing
requirements for CRP for iron-containing products (see section II.B. of this document), will significantly reduce
the risk of accidental pediatric iron poisoning. FDA and CPSC have worked together closely in coordinating their
respective efforts toward this goal, and the two agencies intend to continue to work in close cooperation. 



II. Regulation of Iron-Containing Products



A. Regulation by FDA 



1. Types of Iron-Containing Products Addressed in this Proposal 



This proposal addresses iron-containing products available as dietary supplements and as prescription drug products.


FDA defined ``dietary supplement'' as a food, not in conventional food form, that supplies a component to supplement
the diet by increasing the total dietary intake of that component (59 FR 425, January 4, 1994). 

Section 201(f) of the act (21 U.S.C. 321(f)) defines ``food'' as: (1) Articles used for food or drink for man or other
animals; (2) chewing gum, and (3) articles used for components of any such article. In 

Nutrilab Inc. 

v. 

Schweiker, 

713 F.2d 335, 338 (7th Cir. 1983), the court noted that taste, aroma, or nutritive value were the primary reasons why
people consume food. The 

Nutrilab 

court said that in section 201(f)(1) of the act, the statutory definition of ``food'' includes the common sense definition
of food: ``When the statue defines `food' as `articles used for food, it means that the statutory definition of food'
includes articles used by people in the ordinary way most people use food_primarily for taste, aroma, or nutritive
value.'' Other courts have followed suit. (See 

United States 

v. 

Undetermined Quantities of Cal-Ban 3000, 

776 F. Supp. 249, 254255 (E.D.N.C.1991); 

American Health Products Co. 

v. 

Hayes, 

574 F. Supp. 1498, 15081509 (S.D.N.Y. 1983), aff'd 744 F.2d 912 (2d Cir. 1984).) 

Types of iron-containing products that meet the definition of a dietary supplement and are regulated as foods include
products intended for use primarily to supplement the dietary intake of iron (iron supplements) and multi-vitamin/mineral
supplements that contain iron. Products intended for use as iron supplements generally contain 30 mg or more or iron
per dosage unit, while multi-vitamin/mineral supplements generally contain 18 mg or less of iron per dosage unit.


Under section 201(g)(1) of the act, drugs are defined as: 




(A) Articles recognized in the official United States Pharmacopeia, official Homeopathic Pharmacopeia of the United
States, or official National Formulary, or any supplement to any of them; and (B) articles intended for use in the diagnosis,
cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in man or other animals; and (C) articles (other than food)
intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of man or other animals; and (D) articles intended for use
as a component of any articles specified in clause (A), (B), or (C).


