 

&bull;Plan to identify, train, and involve neighborhood residents in 
program activities. (5 points) 
&bull;Plan to direct health education activities to neighborhood 
residents. (5 points) 



2. 

Collaboration 

(25 total points) 


(a) Extent to which the applicant demonstrates that proposed activities 
are being conducted in conjunction with, or through, organizations 
with known and established ties in the identified neighborhood. 
Evidence of support and participation from appropriate community-
based or neighborhood-based organizations in the form of memoranda 
of understanding or other agreements of collaboration. (15 points) 
(b) Extent to which the applicant documents established collaboration 
with appropriate governmental agencies responding to childhood lead 
poisoning prevention issues such as environmental health, housing, 
medical management, etc. through specific commitments for 
consultation, employment, or other activities, as evidenced by the 
names and proposed roles of these participants and letters of 
commitment. Absence of letters describing specific participation will 
result in a reduced rating under this factor. (10 points) 




3.

 Applicant Capability and Commitment to Lead Hazard Control

 (25 total points) 


Capability of the applicant to initiate and carry out the lead-based paint 
testing and hazard-reduction and control program successfully within the 
time frames set forth in the application. Proposed staff skills must match 
the proposed program of work described. Elements to consider include: 
(a) Demonstrated knowledge and experience of the proposed project 
director or manager in planning and managing large and complex 
interdisciplinary programs involving housing rehabilitation, public 
health, and environmental management. The percentage of time the 
project manager will be devoted to this project is a significant factor, 
and must be indicated. (10 points) 
(b) Demonstrated knowledge and experience of the staff assigned to this 
project in carrying out these undertakings, including the percentage of 
time each person will devote to the project. (5 points) 
(c) Institutional capacity, demonstrated by the experience and continuing 
capability of the jurisdiction to initiate and implement similar 
environmental and housing projects. Applicant should describe 
previous related efforts and the current capacity of its agencies. 
(10 points) 




4.

 Evaluation Plan

 (20 total points) 


The applicant's plan that describes the evaluation of 

each

 program 
component and the overall strategy in evaluating the impact of the primary 
prevention effort. 




5. 

State Certification and Accreditation Program

 (5 total points) 


Applicants are advised that an operational State Certification and 
Accreditation Program acceptable to HUD and EPA is an essential 
prerequisite for implementing lead hazard reduction activities. States and 
eligible applicants within States that have an operational State Certification 
and Accreditation Program will be awarded FIVE points. 



6. 

Budget Justification and Adequacy of Facilities

 (Not Scored) 


The budget will be evaluated for the extent to which it is reasonable, clearly 
justified, and consistent with the intended use of grant funds. 


Executive Order 12372 Review 


Applications are subject to Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs as 
governed by Executive Order (E.O.) 12372. E.O. 12372 sets up a system for State 
and local government review of proposed Federal assistance applications. 
Applicants should contact their State Single Point of Contact (SPOC) as early as 
possible to alert them to the prospective applications and to receive any necessary 
instructions on the State process. For proposed projects serving more than one 
State, the applicant is advised to contact the SPOC of each affected State. A 
current list of SPOCs is included in the application kit. If SPOCs have any State 
process recommendations on applications submitted to CDC, they should send 
them to Henry S. Cassell, III, Grants Management Officer, Grants Management 
Branch, Procurement and Grants Office, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC), 255 East Paces Ferry Road, NE., Atlanta, GA 30305, no later than 60 days 
after the application deadline. The Program Announcement Number and Program 
Title should be referenced on the document. The granting agency does not 
guarantee to ``accommodate or explain'' State process recommendations it receives 
after that date. 


Public Health System Reporting Requirement 


This program is subject to the Public Health System Reporting Requirements. 
Under these requirements, all community-based nongovernmental applicants must 
prepare and submit the items identified below to the head of the appropriate State 
and/or local health agency(s) in the program area(s) that may be impacted by the 
proposed project no later than the receipt date of the Federal application. The 
appropriate State and/or local health agency is determined by the applicant. The 
following information must be provided: 
A. A copy of the face page of the application SF 424. 
B. A summary of the project that should be titled ``Public Health System Impact 
Statement'' (PHSIS), not to exceed one page, and include the following: 
1. A description of the population to be served; 





