 

CPSC provides for testing for special packaging in 16 CFR 1700.20. This regulation establishes test protocols to
evaluate child-resistant effectiveness and adult accessibility to such packaging. Recently, CPSC proposed to
amend 16 CFR 1700.20 to establish new test protocols under which CRP is evaluated (55 FR 40856, October 5, 1990, and
59 FR 13264, March 21, 1994). 

In establishing these regulations, CPSC considered the degree and nature of the hazard to children from accidental
acute overdose of dietary supplements and drugs containing iron. It found that special packaging is required to protect
children from serious injury from ingesting iron-containing drugs and dietary supplements. This finding was based
on: (1) Data from FDA's National Clearing House for Poison Control Centers (no longer in operation) and NEISS, which
showed that products containing iron are frequently ingested by children under the age of 5 years; (2) published human
experience data, symptomatology associated with many of the National Clearinghouse for Poison Control Centers
ingestion reports, and data from death certificates, which showed that the accidental ingestion of 250 mg or more
of iron has caused death or serious illness; and (3) the fact that iron-containing drugs and dietary supplements are
normally stored in their original containers, and that many accidental ingestions of these products result from
children gaining access to the contents of the original container (43 FR 17335, April 21, 1978). 



III. Proposed Regulation



A. Labeling 



1. Review of Labeling Issues in Citizen Petitions 



As noted in section I.D.1. of this document, the AG and NDMA petitions agreed that iron-containing products should
bear label warning statements. However, these petitions did not agree on what the warning should state, or on how it
should appear on the label. 

In requesting the labeling provisions described in section I.D.1. of this document, the AG petition stated that the
hazard presented by iron-containing products is the result, in part, of the perception that they are nontoxic household
products. Thus, according to this petition, they are likely to be left within easy reach of children and not kept properly
secured. The petition also noted that these products are extremely attractive to children because of their typical
candy-like appearance and sweet outer coating and pointed to case reports that illustrate how children ingest iron
tablets in large quantities (see Table 4). 

The AG petition stated that the recent increase in iron poisoning deaths among children might reflect an increase
in the extension of primary health care, especially prenatal care. It noted: ``While more doctors are prescribing
prenatal iron supplementation to more women, there has been no concomitant increase in warnings regarding their
potentially lethal effects.'' 

The AG petition also noted that, while more women were using iron-containing products, the labeling of these products
does not reflect the dangers inherent in their misuse: 





While labeling for a few multi-vitamins containing iron bears the statement that iron can be harmful in large doses,
most iron supplements bear only the non-specific phrase, ``Keep out of reach of children.'' Few, if any, packages
of iron supplements contain the word ``WARNING'' or ``CAUTION,'' words universally accepted as denoting danger,
to alert the user to the dangers of iron overdose. Further, the meager statements that do exist are, for the most part,
printed in the same color and type size as other material on the label and therefore fail to catch anyone's attention.
The statements are often obscured within other small print on the labeling and are neither prominent nor specific
enough to reach parents with a warning about these pills' potential fatal effect on children. Consumers who have no
knowledge of iron's hazards before purchasing iron supplements will not gain that knowledge by purchasing the product
and examining the label. 





The AG petition presented data showing that many iron-containing products commonly available do not carry any label
information conveying the need to keep the product out of the reach of children or conveying any message specific to
iron poisoning. A summary, which was included as part of the AG petition, of the label information found on 25 commonly
available iron-containing products revealed that 10 of the 25 did not include information on the label that the product
should be kept away from children, and that 17 did not contain information stating that iron could be harmful. Six of
the products had no cautionary information at all, and none of the products that did have cautionary information used
the terms ``WARNING'' or ``CAUTION,'' to accompany the statements on the label. 

NDMA, in its petition, stated that its proposed warning label was more appropriate than that proposed in the AG petition
because its warning goes beyond awareness in its focus and extends its message to include information that is preventive
in nature, i.e., ``Close tightly,'' and treatment oriented, i.e., ``In case of accidental overdose seek professional
assistance immediately.'' 

NDMA also argued for allowing for flexibility in the manner in which the warning statement is to be applied to the label.
The petition stated:




It has been the experience of NDMA members in implementing the Association's Label Readability Guidelines that such
factors as contrast, color, type size, substrate, paragraphing, etc. are inter-related in a complex way on labeling,
such that goal- oriented flexibility is perhaps the most important principle in assuring prominence to special label
language. That is to say, specifying a box, when boxed labeling may already be stipulated under NLEA regulations,
is not necessarily as good a way to ensure prominence to label language as is a more flexible approach whose goal is to
ensure that the language is conspicuous, prominent and clearly distinguishable from other labeling. 




2. Agency Response 



FDA considered the following questions in evaluating and responding to the labeling issues raised in the citizen
petitions: (1) Should label warning statements that alert users to the potential dangers that iron-containing products
pose to young children be required on these products? (2) If so, what legal authority does the agency have to require
such statements on food and drug products? (3) What should the warning be required to state? and (4) How should the warning
appear on the label? 




