 

1. Categories of Payors



36. Pursuant to section 9(f), we proposed to establish three classes of regulatory fee payments, standard, small
and large, based upon the size of the payment required by the Schedule. The time for submitting the fee would be determined
by the class of fee payment. Persons making ``large'' fee payments for Fiscal Year 1994 would be eligible to complete
their fee payment in two installments. Moreover, we stated that consideration would be given to allowing four installment
payments for Fiscal Year 1995 and thereafter. We proposed, however, that small fee payments be remitted when an application
for a license of a facility subject to the fee is filed and the payment amount is the fee due for the entire term of the license
or other authorization. We proposed that regulatees subject to a standard fee are to submit the fee in a single, annual
payment. The specific date for the payment of a standard fee would be announced by public notice and published in the


Federal Register

 well before the payment's due date.
<FOOTCITE>14</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
14

</FOOTNAME>
GTE has urged that we allow licensees that transfer or assign licenses during FY 1994 to pro-rate their fee payments
for the subject licenses on the basis of the amount of time the license was held by each party. The law authorizing section
9 was enacted in August 1993 and we believe that the negotiation between the parties to a transfer or assignment that
occurred this fiscal year would ordinarily have included consideration of expenses related to the payment of regulatory
fees. The party holding the license on the date the fees are due will be the party responsible for its payment.

</FOOTNOTE>


37. Brown and Schwaninger (BS) states that Congress intended to establish only two, not three, categories of
regulatory fees_large fees and small fees_because section 9(f) enumerates only two such categories of fee payments.
BS contends that Congress would have included in section 9 explicit authority to establish a third category
if it had intended to provide such authority. In the absence of any language in section 9 indicative of a third category,
BS contend that we are precluded from adopting a standard fee category and collecting standard fees. Instead,
BS reasons that our authority under section 9 is limited to determining that a particular fee is either large,
and establishing an installment plan, or the fee is small and collecting it in advance for a number of years not to exceed
the term of the license.
38. We reject BS's interpretation of section 9(f). In section 9(a), the general authority provision, Congress
broadly empowered us ``to assess and collect regulatory fees....'' Subsection 9(f) requires
only that our rules include specific provisions providing for advance payments in the case of small fees and installment
payments for larger ones. Nothing in that section, or in logic, compels a conclusion that every fee must necessarily
fall within a category of either ``large'' or ``small.'' Section 9(f) is simply silent regarding any other substantive
aspect of our fee collection system, including whether other categories of fee payments may be established. Moreover,
our conclusion that some regulatees are subject to payment of neither large nor small fees and, consequently, are
only subject to a single annual regulatory ``standard'' fee payment, in no way conflicts with Congress' directive
to include specific consideration of those payors of large and small fees. Therefore, we adopt our proposal to establish
three categories of regulatory fees.


2. Installment Payments



39. In the NPRM, we proposed that some fees would be classified as ``large'' fees and, therefore, eligible for payment
by installment. For FY 1994, we identified the following fee amounts in the specified categories as eligible for payment
on the installment plan.


<TABLE>



1Regulatory fee category
1Large fee



VHF and UHF Commercial Television Station
Above $12,000.
Cable Television System
Above $18,500.
Inter-Exchange Carrier
Above $500,000.
Local Exchange Carrier
Above $700,000.

</TABLE>



40. Several parties urge that we expand significantly our proposed installment payment eligibility standards.
GTE and Sprint request that we establish an installment fee benchmark of $250,000 for all classes of services that
are not allowed to make installment payments under our proposal. The Broadcasting Association argues that all mass
media licensees should be eligible for installment payments and the New Jersey Broadcasting Association (New Jersey
Association) argues that all radio broadcasting licensees, or in the alternative, licensees encountering financial
hardship should be permitted to make installment payments. GE American Communications, Inc. contends that licensees
of satellite space stations should be afforded installment payment eligibility.


