 

A Section 7 evaluation pursuant to the Endangered Species Act was conducted for the hunt. The refuge is in the breeding
range of bald eagles. Eagles also use the refuge regularly for feeding; however, they will have migrated south by the
time the firearms deer season opened in November. The refuge is in the peripheral range of the gray wolf; however, no
wolves have ever been seen on the refuge. The tight controls of the hunt will make the chance illegal take of a gray wolf
unlikely. While western prairie fringed orchids have been found in Polk County, no populations have been identified
on the refuge. Even if such a population were discovered, they would be dormant during the hunting season. The proposed
action is not likely to adversely affect any Federally listed or proposed for listing threatened or endangered species
or their critical habitats. 
Pursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), an environmental assessment was conducted and a Finding
of No Significant Impact (FONSI) was made regarding the proposed hunt. Detroit Lakes Wetland Management District
and refuge staff, along with input from local Minnesota Department of Natural Resources representatives, were primarily
responsible for the development of the alternatives reviewed in making the FONSI conclusion. Refuge objectives
and Service concerns guided the process. Public needs and expectations were also taken into consideration during
the development of the alternatives. 
The annual cost of this hunting program will be approximately $3,000. Within the annual DLWMD budget of $676,000,
the necessary funds will be available for the development, operation and maintenance of this program pursuant to
the Refuge Recreation Act. 


2. Ohio River Islands National Wildlife Refuge 


The Service will open Ohio River Islands National Wildlife Refuge to the hunting of migratory game birds, upland game
hunting, and big game hunting. Established in 1990, the refuge became the first national wildlife refuge in West Virginia.
The refuge consists of 9 islands in the Ohio River. The acquisition boundary stretches 362 river miles from Shippingport,
Pennsylvania to Manchester, Ohio and includes four states (Pennsylvania, Ohio, West Virginia and Kentucky). The
refuge was established under the authority of the Fish and Wildlife Act of 1956. The refuge's primary purpose is for
the development, advancement, management, conservation, and protection of fish and wildlife resources. This purpose
was further defined by the objectives stated in the refuge's management plan to include (1) the management and protection
of wildlife habitat, (2) the management and protection of wildlife populations, and (3) to allow appropriate public
uses including, but not limited to, hunting, fishing, trapping, wildlife observation and environmental education.






