 

16. Current TCPA obligations primarily apply to the originator of the unwanted message, 

e.g.,

 telemarketers. Unless a CMRS provider also engages in telemarketing or sends unsolicited facsimiles or other unwanted
communications, the statute generally does not apply to it. In so far as small CMRS providers act as originators of
unsolicited voice or facsimile transmissions, the Commission tentatively concludes that forbearance for such
providers would not adequately protect consumers' privacy interests under the second prong of the Section 332 test.
Moreover, the decision to undertake telemarketing services would be a voluntary business judgment on the part of
a CMRS provider. Such telemarketing is not a necessary part of what is generally regarded as CMRS. The Commission also
sees no public interest benefit under the third prong of the test in permitting CMRS providers, even small ones, to
undertake such activities without complying with TCPA. The Notice seeks comment on these tentative views.

17. 47 U.S.C. 228 incorporates the Telephone Disclosure and Dispute Resolution Act (TDDRA), which governs pay-per-call
services (also known as ``audiotext'' or ``900'' services), and imposes obligations in interexchange carriers,
local exchange carriers and common carriers in general. Pursuant to the Act and our implementing regulations, local
exchange carriers must offer subscribers, where technically feasible, an option to block access to 900 services.
They must also tariff the terms and conditions for such blocking.

18. TDDRA also imposes additional obligations on all common carriers. (a) 800 Service. With certain exceptions,
information service charges cannot be assessed against callers to 800 and other toll-free numbers. Common carriers
must enforce this obligation by contract or tariff. (b) Collect Calls. Common carriers may not transmit collect information
services that are either at a per-call or per-time-interval charge that is greater than, or in addition to, the charge
for the transmission of the call, or have not been affirmatively accepted by the called party. (c) Payment. Common
carriers are prohibited from disconnecting or interrupting service for failure to remit pay-per-call or similar
service charges. Common carriers may not recover the cost of complying with TDDRA requirements from ratepayers.

19. The Commission seeks comment on the extent to which the local exchange carrier obligation to permit subscribers
to block access where technically feasible should apply to CMRS, and whether there are particular types of CMRS providers
for which such an obligation would be particularly difficult. Would local exchange carriers provide blocking for
customers of CMRS providers that interconnect with the public switched network? Additional TDDRA obligations,
including restrictions on disconnection or on transmission of collect pay-per-call charges, are imposed on carriers
who bill and collect for 900 services, which is not a common carrier service. The Commission asks for comment on whether
this type of voluntary business activity is not essential to provision of CMRS and hence, would not justify forbearance
for any type of CMRS.

20. In analyzing application of any of the above TDDRA obligations, commenters are asked to address the three parts
of the section 332 forbearance test. In connection with the third prong, the Commission asks whether Section 228 obligations
would impose exceptional costs on certain types of CMRS and whether forbearance in such cases would significantly
diminish statutory protections to the public. Parties should also address the effect forbearance would have on the
TDDRA objectives of promoting the legitimate development of pay-per-call services and protecting consumers from
fraudulent and deceptive practices.



II. CMRS Providers Meriting Further Forbearance



21. Turning to the question of which types of CMRS providers merit further forbearance, the Commission asks as a threshold
matter whether any further forbearance is merited, noting that application of Title II is not expected to create any
undue burden on any CMRS provider, or on CMRS competition generally. To the extent that regulatory obligations impose
fixed costs, however, they would place relatively greater burdens on small providers who have less of a revenue base
and other resources to support them. The Commission seeks comment on whether there are technical or operational limitations
inherent in the services these small businesses provide that may make application of certain of the statutory provisions
in question not in the public interest. The Commission also recognizes the public interest in maintaining opportunities
for small businesses and the role that further forbearance might play in reducing the cost of doing business for them.
The Notice thus seeks comment on whether the size of the provider may be a basis for defining CMRS eligibility for further
forbearance. Finally, the Notice seeks comment on whether to consider an analysis of a CMRS provider's customer base
as another possible factor in determining the appropriateness of further forbearance. Certain types of providers,
particularly small providers, may serve predominantly business customers who require more advanced communications
services and may have relatively greater bargaining power than CMRS customers that make personal use of the service.
As a result the differing needs of business and individual customers could affect the analysis of whether forbearance
would reduce benefits to customers. In addition, the Commission asks whether it should distinguish between medium
to large business customers, and small businesses.



