 

(iv) Earth barricades meeting the previously identified requirements may be modified by substituting a retaining
wall, preferably of concrete, for the slope on one side. The other side shall have slope and thickness sufficient to
ensure that the width of earth required for the top is held firmly in place.
(v) Other barriers, such as earth-filled steel bin barricades for explosives-loaded aircraft, may also be used.
(3) 

Location of barricades

. The distance between the foot of the barricade and the stack of ammunition or explosives or the buildings containing
explosives represents a compromise. The shorter the distance, the shorter the height and length required for the
barricade. However, it may be necessary to extend the distance to provide access for maintenance and vehicles. If
it is impracticable to locate the barricades near the stack of ammunition or explosives or building containing explosives,
barricades may be located adjacent to the facility to be protected.
(4) 

Earth cover for magazines and barricades

. (i) Earth cover material for magazines and barricades shall be relatively cohesive (solid or wet clay and similar
types of soil are too cohesive and should not be used), free from unsanitary organic matter, trash, debris, and stones
heavier than 10 pounds or larger than 6 inches in diameter. The larger stones should be limited to the lower center of
fill and never used for earth cover over magazines. Compaction and surface preparation shall be provided, as necessary,
to maintain structural integrity and avoid erosion. Where cohesive material cannot be used, as in sandy soil, the
barricade or the earth cover over magazines should be finished with a suitable material to ensure structural integrity.



(ii) The earth fill or earth cover between earth-covered magazines may be either solid or sloped, in accordance with
the requirements of other construction features, but a minimum of 2 feet of earth cover shall be maintained over the
top of each magazine and a minimum slope of 2/3 (rise/run) starting directly above the spring line of each arch shall
be maintained. To reduce erosion and facilitate maintenance operations, future constructions should have a slope
of 2 horizontal to 1 vertical.
(b) 

Application of Q/D to earth-covered magazines

. (1) For application of quantity/distances, magazines shall not have been structurally weakened to the extent that
they could not be expected to prevent propagation of explosives. The specified thickness and slope of the earth cover
shall be maintained.
(2) Normally, earth-covered magazines shall not be constructed to face door-to-door. They should face in the same
direction with the long axes parallel to each other. In special cases where topographic or other important considerations
would result in different orientations, they shall be sited in accordance with 184.54.
(c) 

Policy on protective construction

. The present ``state of the art'' in protective construction is such as to permit any calculated level of protection
from explosion communication between adjacent bays or buildings, personnel protection against death or serious
injury from incidents in adjacent bays or buildings, and protection of vital and expensive equipment installations.
Therefore, the major obstacles in facility planning should be:




(1) Protection against explosion communication between adjacent bays or buildings and protection of personnel
against death or serious injury from incidents in adjacent bays or buildings. In situations where the protection
of personnel and facilities would be greatly enhanced or costs significantly reduced by having separate buildings
to limit explosion propagation rather than using protective construction and separation of explosive units within
one building, planning should reflect this fact.
(2) Provision of protection for vital and expensive equipment, if the additional cost is warranted.
(3) When an appropriate degree of protection can be provided either by hardening a target building or constructing
a source building to suppress/explosion effects, these factors may be taken into account and the distances/required
by the standard Q/D tables reduced. The rationale or test results justifying the reduction shall accompany AE
site and general construction plans proposing reduced distances based on protective construction, when submitted
through the ACO for PCO approval.


184.45


Specific siting requirements.



(a) 

Rail and truck holding yards

. (1) Generally, rail holding yards should be laid out on a unit car/group basis with each unit car/group separated
by the applicable aboveground magazine distance.
(2) If the rail holding yard is formed by two parallel ladder tracks connected by diagonal spurs, the parallel tracks
and the diagonal spurs shall be separated by applicable aboveground magazine distances for the unit/group/quantities
of high explosives.



(3) If the rail holding yard is a ``Christmas tree'' arrangement, consisting of a ladder track with diagonal dead-end
spurs projecting from each side at alternate intervals, the spurs should be separated by the applicable aboveground
magazine distance for the net quantity of high explosives in the cars on the spurs.
(4) Generally, truck holding yards should be laid out on a unit truck/group basis with each group separated by the applicable
aboveground magazine distances.
(5) Both rail and truck holding yards shall be separated from other facilities by the applicable Q/D criteria.
(6) In addition to the temporary parking of railcars, trucks or trailers containing ammunition and explosives, holding
yards also may be used to interchange truck trailers or railcars between commercial carrier and the contractor and
to conduct visual inspections.
(b) 

Classification yards

. (1) To protect the classification yard from external explosions, separation distances shall, at least, be the applicable
magazine distance.
(2) Specific quantity/distance separation is not required from the classification yard to targets other than explosive
locations when the classification yard is used exclusively for the following:


(i) Receiving, dispatching, classifying, and switching of cars.
(ii) Interchanging of trucks, trailers, railcars, or MILVANS between the common carrier and the establishment.
(iii) Conducting external inspection of motor vehicles and railcars, or opening of free-rolling doors of railcars
for the purpose of removing documents and making a visual inspection of the cargo.
(3) If the yard is used at any time for any purpose other than listed in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, such as placing
or removal of dunnage or explosive items into or from cars, Q/D tables apply. See 184.42(b)(1) through (b)(7).
(c) 

Railcar and motor vehicle inspection stations

. (1) Specific quantity/distance separations are not required for inspection stations; however, they should be
as remote as practicable from hazardous or populated areas. The following activities may be performed at the inspection
station after railcars or motor vehicles containing ammunition and explosives are received from the delivering
carrier, before further routing within the installation:
(i) Visual inspection of railcar and motor vehicle exteriors.
(ii) Visual inspection of the cargo in vehicles (trucks, trailers, railcars, MILVANS, and so forth) that have passed
the external inspection previously indicated.







