 







<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Federal Aviation Administration</USBUREAU>



<CFRNO>14 CFR Part 39 </CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 94NM174AD; Amendment 399087; AD 942503] </RINDOCK>


Airworthiness Directives; Fokker Model F28 Series Airplanes 


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Federal Aviation Administration, DOT. 


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Final rule; request for comments. 



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 This amendment adopts a new airworthiness directive (AD) that is applicable to all Fokker Model F28 series airplanes.
This action requires a revision to the Airplane Flight Manual that prohibits takeoff in certain icing conditions
unless either a tactile inspection is performed or specific takeoff procedures are followed. This amendment is prompted
by several accidents in which Fokker Model F28 series airplanes lost aerodynamic lift when attempting takeoff with
ice contamination on their wings. The actions specified in this AD are intended to prevent degradation of aerodynamic
lift during takeoff when icing conditions exist. 



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Effective December 21, 1994.

 


Comments for inclusion in the Rules Docket must be received on or before February 6, 1995.



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Submit comments in triplicate to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Transport Airplane Directorate, ANM103,
Attention: Rules Docket No. 94NM174AD, 1601 Lind Avenue, SW., Renton, Washington 980554056.




Information concerning this amendment may be examined at the FAA, Transport Airplane Directorate, Rules Docket,
1601 Lind Avenue, SW., Renton, Washington 980554056. 



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Timothy J. Dulin, Aerospace Engineer, Standardization Branch, ANM113, FAA, Transport Airplane Directorate,
1601 Lind Avenue, SW., Renton, Washington 980554056; telephone (206) 2272141; fax (206) 2271320.




</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 The FAA has received reports of at least three accidents involving Fokker Model F28 series airplanes in which the probable
cause has been attributed to wing ice contamination prior to takeoff. The FAA has determined that airplanes with wings
that do not have leading edge high lift devices, such as the Fokker Model F28 series airplanes, are particularly susceptible
to loss of lift when attempting to take off with minimal amounts of ice accumulation (contamination) on the wings.
Further, the FAA finds that airplanes with this configuration account for a disproportionate number of the total
number of accidents attributable to wing ice contamination. In light of this, the FAA has determined that, for airplanes
with this configuration, an extra degree of protection is necessary beyond reliance solely on operation in accordance
with the current requirements specified in section 121.629 (``Operation in icing conditions''), amendment 121231,
of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR 121.629). 



The FAA has determined that one acceptable (interim) method of addressing icing problems associated with airplanes
having this configuration is a physical (tactile) and visual check of the leading edge and upper wing surfaces to verify
that there is no accumulation of ice, frost, and snow prior to takeoff. The FAA previously issued AD 931101
[amendment 398593 (58 FR 33898, June 22, 1993)], which requires such a tactile check of McDonnell Douglas Model
DC910 series airplanes; those airplanes, like the Model F28, do not have leading edge high lift devices.
The intent of checks such as these is to prevent takeoff with wing ice contamination, which can result in the degradation
of wing lift, and can result in the airplane stalling at lower than normal angles-of-attack during takeoff. 

Additionally, the Rijksluchtvaartdienst (RLD), which is the airworthiness authority for the Netherlands, issued
Netherlands Airworthiness Directive (BLA) 93167/2 (A), dated April 29, 1994, applicable to Fokker Model
F28 series airplanes operating in the Netherlands. This BLA describes an ``alternative'' takeoff procedure that
can be followed to improve stall margins whenever icing conditions exist. [This ``alternative'' takeoff procedure
was developed in response to the U.S. National Transportation Safety Board's (NTSB) Safety Recommendation A93023.]
The ``alternative'' takeoff procedure requires the availability of 120 percent of the minimum takeoff distance
for the actual gross weight. Additionally, the 20 percent increase in takeoff distance must be accounted for in the
obstacle clearance analysis. The BLA specifies that the ``alternative'' takeoff procedure is an 

optional

 procedure that is available for use when sufficient runway length and obstacle clearance margin are available. 

The FAA has reviewed and approved this ``alternative'' takeoff procedure as an interim measure that will acceptably
address the problems associated with takeoff and operation of Model F28 series airplanes in icing conditions. Although
the RLD has classified the procedure as 

optional

, the FAA has determined that it must be mandated as one method to ensure that these airplanes have adequate lift to effect
a safe takeoff when icing conditions exist. 

As indicated previously, the FAA has determined that the accomplishment of these types of additional actions is necessary
in order to provide an extra degree of protection for Model F28 series airplanes, beyond that provided by the current
operating requirements specified in part 121 of the FAR. 

Fokker has advised the FAA that it is currently developing a modification to the thermal anti-ice system on all Fokker
Model F28 series airplanes. This modification would allow the thermal anti-ice system to operate on the ground, which
would prevent reformation of ice on the wing leading edges after ground equipment has been used to properly de-ice/anti-ice
the airplane, and would minimize the effect of undetected ice/frost/snow contamination. Fokker has indicated that
this proposed modification will be similar to the one required by AD 931101 for McDonnell Douglas DC910
series airplanes. (That AD requires a modification of the wing leading edge bleed air anti-ice system on so that it
can operate on the ground to prevent the reformation of ice after de-icing procedures have been accomplished.) However,
because this proposed modification for Model F28 series airplanes currently is under development, any associated
modification instructions or required parts are not available at this time. 

This airplane model is manufactured in the Netherlands and is type certificated for operation in the United States
under the provisions of section 21.29 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR 21.29) and the applicable bilateral
airworthiness agreement. The FAA has determined that AD action is necessary for products of this type design that
are certificated for operation in the United States. 

Since an unsafe condition has been identified that is likely to exist or develop on other airplanes of the same type
design registered in the United States, this AD is being issued to prevent degradation of the aerodynamic lift during
takeoff due to wing ice contamination, which could result in the airplane stalling at lower than normal angles-of-attack
during takeoff. This AD requires a revision to the Limitations Section of the FAA-approved Airplane Flight Manual
(AFM), which requires that, whenever icing conditions exist, one of the following actions must be accomplished:


1. A physical (tactile) check to detect ice, frost, and snow accumulation on the leading edge and upper wing surfaces
must be performed prior to takeoff. (This check is similar to that required by AD 931101 for McDonnell
Douglas Model DC910 series airplanes). Or 




</SUPPLEM>
