 

A. The Guidelines do not prescribe the type of product for grab bars, or the structural strength for grab bars. The Guidelines
only state that the necessary reinforcement must be placed ``so as to permit later installation of 

appropriate

 grab bars.'' (Emphasis added.) In determining what is an appropriate grab bar, builders are encouraged to look to
the 1986 ANSI A117.1 standard, the standard cited in the Fair Housing Act. Builders also may follow State or local standards
in planning for or selecting appropriate grab bars. 


Requirement 7_Usable Kitchens and Bathrooms 


25. Counters and Vanities 


Q. It appears from Figure 2(c) of the Guidelines (under Requirement 5) that there is a 34 inch height requirement for
kitchen counters and vanities. Is this true? 
A. No. Requirement 7 addresses the requirement for usable kitchens and bathrooms so that a person in a wheelchair can
maneuver about the space. The legislative history of the Fair Housing Act makes it clear that the Congress intended
that the Act affect ability to maneuver within the space of the kitchen and bathroom, but not to require fixtures, cabinetry
or plumbing of adjustable design. Figure 2(c) of the Guidelines is illustrating the maximum side reach range over
an obstruction. Because the picture was taken directly from the ANSI A117.1 1986 standard, the diagram also shows
the height of the obstruction, which, in this picture, is a countertop. This 34 inch height, however, should not be
regarded as a requirement. 


26. Showers 


Q. Is a parallel approach required at the shower, as shown in Figure 7(d) of the Guidelines? 
A. Yes. For a 36
&rsquo;
&rsquo; x 36
&rsquo;
&rsquo; shower, as shown in Figure 7(d), a person in a wheelchair would typically add a wall hung seat. Thus the parallel
approach as shown in Figure 7(d) is essential in order to be able to transfer from the wheelchair to the shower seat.



27. Tub Controls 


Q. Do the Guidelines set any requirements for the type or location of bathtub controls? 
A. No, except where the specifications in Requirement 7(2)(b) are used. In that case, while the type of control is not
specified, the control must be located as shown in Figure 8 of the Guidelines. 


28. Paragraph (b) Bathrooms 


Q. If an architect or builder chooses to follow the bathroom specifications in Requirement 7, Guideline 2, paragraph
(b), where at least one bathroom is designed to comply with the provisions of paragraph (b), are the other bathrooms
in the dwelling unit required to have reinforced walls for grab bars? 
A. Yes. Requirement 6 of the Guidelines requires reinforced walls in bathrooms for later installation of grab bars.
Even though Requirement 6 was not repeated under Requirement 7_Guideline 2, it is a separate requirement which must
be met in all bathrooms. The same would be true for other Requirements in the Guidelines, such as Requirement 5, which
applies to usable light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other environmental controls; Requirement
4 for accessible route; and Requirement 3 for usable doors. 


29. Bathroom Clear Floor Space 


Q. Is it acceptable to design a bathroom with an in-swinging 2
&rsquo;10
&rsquo;
&rsquo; door which can be retrofitted to swing out in order to provide the necessary clear floor space in the bathroom?

A. No. The requirements in the Guidelines must be included at the time of construction. Thus, for a bathroom, there
must be sufficient maneuvering space and clear floor space so that a person using a wheelchair or other mobility aid
can enter and close the door, use the fixtures and exit. 


30. Lavatories 


Q. Would it be acceptable to use removable base cabinets beneath a wall-hung lavatory where a parallel approach is
not possible? 
A. Yes. The space under and around the cabinet should be finished prior to installation. For example, the tile or other
floor finish must extend under the removable base cabinet. 


31. Wing Walls 


Q. Can a water closet (toilet) be located in an alcove with a wing wall? 
A. Yes, as long as the necessary clear floor space shown in Figure 7(a) is provided. This would mean that the wing wall
could not extend beyond the front edge of a lavatory located on the other side of the wall from the water closet. 


32. Penalties 


Q. What types of penalties or monetary damages will be assessed if covered multifamily dwellings are found not to be
in compliance with the Fair Housing Act? 
A. Under the Fair Housing Act, if an administrative law judge finds that a respondent has engaged in or is about to engage
in a discriminatory housing practice, the administrative law judge will order appropriate relief. Such relief may
include actual and compensatory damages, injunctive or other equitable relief, attorney's fees and costs, and may
also include civil penalties ranging from $10,000 for the first offense to $50,000 for repeated offenses. In addition,
in the case of buildings which have been completed, structural changes could be ordered, and an escrow fund might be
required to finance future changes. 
Further, a Federal district court judge can order similar relief plus punitive damages as well as civil penalties
for up to $100,000 in an action brought by a private individual or by the U.S. Department of Justice. 




<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9415501 Filed 62794; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 421028P
</BILLING>


