 

Fishery Resource Disaster



Although West Coast (Washington, Oregon, and California) salmon stocks experience annual fluctuations in abundance,
stock abundances in the last few years have been exceptionally low. West Coast salmon species are coho, chinook, chum,
sockeye, and pink salmon. Landings of chinook and coho, have declined significantly, from roughly 6.2 million fish
in 1988 to 2 million fish in 1993. Chinook salmon fisheries in the ocean waters off Washington and Oregon north of Cape
Falcon were closed in 1994 by the Federal Government. Other salmon fisheries in the ocean waters off central and southern
Oregon and northern California are at reduced levels and are closed to fishing for coho. Additional information regarding
the declines in chinook and coho can be found in the ANPR and the notice of the proposed program, and is not repeated here.

Despite increasingly stringent management measures enacted in recent years to protect these salmon stocks, they
have reached a critical stage of depletion, due in part to environmental conditions unfavorable to salmon survival
that include: (1) An extended drought in California, in combination with the already depressed condition of northern
California stocks; (2) less than normal snowpack throughout the western United States; (3) drought followed by extensive
flooding in the State of Washington; and (4) poor upwelling, due to an extreme El Ni&ntilde;o ocean warming event during
19921993, all of which are believed to have been responsible for extremely poor salmon survival.



Comments and Responses



During the comment period, thirty-three comment letters were received including several that had multiple signatures.
Almost all of the comments were from Oregon and California. Almost all comments recommended the need for direct grants
while the majority of comments were recommending reduction in the total Washington State targeted-state distribution
and for elimination of the Washington State permit buyout program. Other major comment areas concerned loosening
of the eligibility criteria, and recommendations for improvements in the Habitat Restoration and the Data Collection
Jobs Programs.



Direct Assistance to Impacted Salmon Fishermen





Comment: 

Many respondents requested that direct assistance be provided to eligible salmon fishermen for a variety of needs
including family related expenses and vessel maintenance and moorage.



Response: 

NOAA has decided not to provide direct assistance to impacted salmon fishermen for a number of reasons. Direct aid
is inconsistent with other Federal actions such as the aid granted to distressed New England fishermen or to distressed
Northwest timber workers. DOL Disaster Unemployment Assistance is available in all three states. Special administrative
mechanisms would need to be established which would slow relief and increase administrative expense. Another key
consideration is that direct aid, unlike the jobs and permit buyout programs, would do little to improve the prospects
for an overcapitalized salmon fishery.



State Funding Targets



Comments were received concerning the state funding targets. Several comments acknowledged that Washington State
may have suffered the greatest impact but did not agree that Washington's share should be as high as 55 percent, particularly
if the share was based on information concerning the private recreational harvests and associated impacts. Alternative
suggestions were to divide the aid equally between the three states; to allocate 40 percent to Washington State and
30 percent each to the other states; or to base the allocations on the apportionment guidelines used for other purposes
under the IFA.



Comment: 

Targeted state distributions between the states should be changed.



Response: 

After careful review of such factors as potential salmon fishing employment, commercial revenues and recreational
expenditures, NOAA has chosen to maintain the state funding targets at 55 percent to Washington, 22.5 percent to the
Oregon, and 22.5 percent to California as proposed. These percentages are established as targets that allow some
flexibility and not as rigid allocations, since no data can conclusively apportion the relative economic impact
among the three states.



