 

C. Benefits


This proposed action will reduce the amount of illness that derives from consumption of seafood (safety benefits)
and may have significant nutrition benefits that result from increased consumption of seafood. The increased consumption
will result from a decrease in consumer anxiety associated with the consumption of seafood. In addition, there may
be significant cost savings (benefits) in other areas as a result of adoption of this proposed rule.
The existence of a national, mandatory, HACCP-based inspection system for seafood should have a beneficial, although
nonquantifiable effect on both the industry and the Federal government. FDA knows from experience that continuing
concerns about the adequacy of the current Federal regulatory system for seafood place a financial stress on industry,
which must constantly defend itself from criticism, and on regulatory agencies such as FDA, which must divert resources
in order to respond to the Congress and the media. While public interest in food safety is healthy and desirable, the
extreme interest in seafood safety, which has manifested itself in over 10 congressional hearings and over 20 pieces
of legislation in the past 5 years, demonstrates how a system that is less than fully adequate from the public's standpoint
can cause a steady diversion of both public and private resources that is likely to continue in the absence of a system
that overcomes current inefficiencies and shortcomings.
Finally, there will be an additional benefit to firms wishing to export seafood to those countries which require federally
monitored HACCP. The latter two benefits have not been quantified, and FDA requests comments on how this might be done.
The agency followed three steps to quantify the safety benefits of HACCP for processors: (1) Identify all significant
hazards associated with seafood safety and establish the baseline number of incidents of each hazard in the U.S. population;
(2) estimate the reduction in the number of incidents of each hazard that HACCP is expected to accomplish; and (3) quantify
the benefit of the reduced illnesses and deaths. In all three steps, FDA acknowledges that there is substantial uncertainty.
First, to establish a baseline number of illnesses, FDA reviewed both reported data to the CDCP, which provides a lower
bound on the actual number of cases, and an earlier FDA risk assessment that estimated an upper-bound number of cases.
Using information about the probable amount of underreporting for each type of illness, FDA constructed a likely
baseline number for each type of illness by inflating these numbers between zero and 1,000 times the amount reported.
Thus, for example, while it is likely that nearly all cases of neurotoxic shellfish poisoning (NSP) are reported to
CDCP, it is likely that 

Campylobacter jejuni

 is underreported by approximately 100 times the actual number of cases. This approach for estimating cases yielded
an estimated 33,000 cases of illness from seafood per year. However, FDA acknowledges that even a reasonably precise
estimate of the number of illnesses cannot be determined with the existing foodborne disease reporting mechanisms
in this country.
In the second step, FDA used a panel of internal experts to determine the number of illnesses the proposed regulations
are likely to reduce.
<FOOTCITE>1</FOOTCITE>
 For example, it is not likely to reduce any cases of NSP because they are primarily associated with recreational fishing.
On the other hand, it is likely to reduce over 50 percent of scombroid poisoning because most of the mishandling of seafood
comes either at the catch or processing stages. This action will not reduce any cases that are a result of consumer or
retailer mishandling but, as explained earlier in this document, problems at the retail level are addressed through
mechanisms outside of this proposed regulation. FDA has estimated that between 5,000 and 19,000 cases of seafood
illness and death will be reduced by the proposed action annually.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
1

</FOOTNAME>
Memorandum to Richard A. Williams, Jr., November 17, 1993.
</FOOTNOTE>


In the third step, FDA used economic valuation techniques to quantify the effect of reducing the range of cases of seafood
illness. This technique combines costs of illness, such as hospital costs, with the costs of pain and suffering in
a reduced health state to estimate the cost of each hazard. Thus, for example, NSP, with very mild symptoms, has a low
cost per case ($270), whereas 

Vibrio vulnificus,

 with a high probability of death, has a very high cost ($1.3 million per case). Using this methodology, the total safety
benefits of the proposed option are valued between $15 and $75 million per year.


