 







<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Office of the Secretary</USBUREAU>


Reports, Forms, and Recordkeeping Requirements 


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Department of Transportation (DOT), Office of the Secretary. 


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice. 



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 This notice lists those forms, reports, and recordkeeping requirements imposed upon the public which were transmitted
by the Department of Transportation to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) for its approval in accordance with
the requirements of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. Chapter 35). 


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 December 15, 1994.

 
</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Written comments on the DOT information collection requests should be forwarded, as quickly as possible, to Edward
Clarke, Office of Management and Budget, New Executive Office Building, Room 10202, Washington, D.C. 20503. If you
anticipate submitting substantive comments, but find that more than 10 days from the date of publication are needed
to prepare them, please notify the OMB official of your intent immediately. 


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Copies of the DOT information collection requests submitted to OMB may be obtained from Susan Pickrel or Annette Wilson,
Information Management Division, M4, Office of the Secretary of Transportation, 400 Seventh Street, S.W.,
Washington, D.C. 20590, (202) 366735. 


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 Section 3507 of Title 44 of the United States Code, as adopted by the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, requires that
agencies prepare a notice for publication in the 

Federal Register

, listing those information collection requests submitted to OMB for approval or renewal under that Act. OMB reviews
and approves agency submissions in accordance with criteria set forth in that Act. In carrying out its responsibilities,
OMB also considers public comments on the proposed forms and the reporting and recordkeeping requirements. OMB approval
of an information collection requirement must be renewed at least once every three years. 


Items Submitted to OMB for Review 


The following information collection requests were submitted to OMB on December 15, 1994: 



DOT No: 4016 
OMB No: 2133515 
Administration: Maritime Administration 
Title: Determination of Fair and Reasonable Guideline Rates for Carriage of Dry Bulk Preference Cargoes in Less than
Shipload Lots on U.S.-flag Liner Vessels 
Need for Information: Section 901(b)(1) of the Merchant Marine Act of 1936, as amended, requires that at least 50 percent
of Government-sponsored cargo be shipped on U.S.-flag vessels to the extent such vessels are available at fair and
reasonable rates. 
Proposed Use of Information: The information will be used to calculate fair and reasonable guideline rates for U.S.-flag
commercial vessels carrying preferences cargoes. 
Frequency: On occasion, annually 
Burden Estimate: 176 hours 
Respondents: Ship operators 
Form(s): None 
Average Burden Hours Per Response: 5 hours and 30 minutes reporting 




DOT No: 4017 
OMB No: 2137034 
Administration: Research and Special Programs Administration 
Title: Hazardous Materials Shipping Papers 
Need for Information: The Department of Transportation has the legal authority under the Transportation Act of 1974
(Public Law 9333) to establish criteria for the transportation of hazardous materials in commerce. 
Proposed Use of Information: Shipping papers are used in transportation to identify the presence of hazardous materials,
their quantity, and identification. The information will be used to promote transportation safety by assuring that
carriers are properly loaded and to identify hazardous cargo to emergency response personnel in case of incident.

Frequency: Each shipment (hazardous materials) 
Burden Estimate: 6,288,750 hours 
Respondents: Shippers and carriers 
Form(s): None 
Average Burden Hours Per Response: 2 minutes and 25 seconds reporting. 




DOT No: 4018 
OMB No: 2137510 
Administration: Research and Special Programs Administration 
Title: RAM Transportation Requirements 
Need for Information: Title 49 CFR Parts 173.22(c), 177.825 and 173, Subpart I, prescribe the information collection
and recordkeeping requirements for the transportation of radioactive materials. 
Proposed Use of Information: The data will be used to maintain a centralized source for information as to which routes
have been designated by various states for use in transporting radioactive materials. 
Frequency: On occasion 
Burden Estimate: 12,711 hours 
Respondents: State governments, carriers and shippers of radioactive materials 
Form(s): None 
Average Burden Hours Per Response: 14 hours and 18 minutes reporting; 6 hours and 25 minutes recordkeeping 




DOT No: 4019 
OMB No: 2137575 
Administration: Research and Special Programs Administration 
Title: Bulk Packaging Marking Requirements 
Need for Information: The Hazardous Materials Regulations (49 CFR Parts 17180) authorize the general marking
requirements for bulk packaging. 
Proposed Use of Information: The information will be used to communicate appropriate hazard warning to emergency
response personnel. 
Frequency: Each bulk package of hazardous materials 
Burden Estimate: 247,000 hours 
Respondents: Shippers and carriers 
Form(s): None 
Average Burden Hours Per Response: 5 minutes reporting 




DOT No: 4020 
OMB No: New 
Administration: Federal Aviation Administration 
Title: Advisory Circular 36G, Noise Levels for U.S. Certificated and Foreign Aircraft 
Need for Information: Title 14 CFR Part 36 prescribes aircraft noise certification standards. 
Proposed Use of Information: The information will be used to verify/supplement existing FAA data for use in the publication
of AC 36G, the revised version of AC 361F. 
Frequency: One time 
Burden Estimate: 375 hours 
Respondents: Aircraft manufacturers 
Form(s): None 


</SUPPLEM>
