 

A commenter notes that the OTC recommendation for the NMOG standard is not consistent with California's NMOG standard
for light-duty trucks 37515750 lbs. This appears to have been an oversight on the part of the OTC. As the letter
from Mr. Carhart shows, the OTC intended separate fleet averages for both classes of light-duty vehicles. Consistent
with the discussion above, EPA interprets the recommendation to recommend NMOG fleet averages identical to California's
NMOG averages for light-duty vehicles 03750 lbs. and for light-duty vehicles 37515750 lbs.

EPA does not intend at this time to delineate each portion of the California LEV program that is required for satisfaction
of the requirements of section 177. Such determinations will be made in the review of each state plan or in guidance
to be issued by EPA later. However, EPA notes that the April 15 letter from Bruce Carhart stated that the following specific
portions of the program have been included in the OTC recommendation: The NMOG banking and trading provisions, the
relevant exemptions for small and intermediate manufacturers, provisions for hybrid electric vehicles,
<FOOTCITE>73</FOOTCITE>
 and reactivity adjustment factors as necessary for California certification.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
73

</FOOTNAME>
CARB's LEV program provides for the development and use of hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) as part of the LEV fleet
in California. HEVs are expected to incorporate an electric motor and an auxiliary power unit, such as a combustion
engine, to allow for the efficient operation of the vehicle's propulsion system as well as its other systems, like
lighting. CARB provides for three different classifications of HEVs in its statutory formula used to calculate a
manufacturer's fleet average NMOG value. Additionally, HEVs are tested differently from LEVs. See Title 13, California
Code of Regulations, section 1960.1 

et. seq.



</FOOTNOTE>


5. The NMOG Fleet Average



As discussed in the April 26, 1994 NPRM, EPA believes that the OTC's incorporation of the NMOG fleet average does not
violate section 177. Even if the identicality provision of section 177 does not require inclusion of the NMOG fleet
average, manufacturers have provided no clear argument regarding why inclusion of the NMOG average, which is identical
to the NMOG average promulgated by California, violates section 177. Given that identicality with California standards
is a primary goal of section 177, any argument that such an identical provision is forbidden by section 177 is dubious
on its face. Section 177 was designed to provide manufacturers with assurance that they would not be forced to produce
several different types of vehicles to comply with different state emission standards. Manufacturers have provided
no evidence that incorporation of the NMOG fleet average will in any way cause manufacturers to produce different
vehicles than those certified for use in California.

Moreover, as the Second Circuit articulated in the New York case in the context of the ZEV sales requirement, the fleet
average requirement does not violate the requirement of section 177 that states shall not prohibit the sale of California
cars. While the NMOG average requires that a certain number of lower-emitting vehicles must be sold in a state to assure
compliance, it does not prevent any California-certified car from being sold. Moreover, as the Second Circuit realized,
a finding that the fleet average violated section 177 would in effect nullify section 177 for all practical purposes
with regard to the LEV program and any other program that uses any sort of averaging or other flexible approach.

EPA believes that it may be appropriate for the states in the OTC to enforce the NMOG fleet average provisions through
a regionwide averaging system. EPA has received comments supporting such an enforcement program. EPA intends to
issue guidance after this recommendation is approved (if it is finally approved) addressing the legal and policy
issues implicated by such a program.



6. Averaging, Banking, and Trading



One commenter noted that as California's LEV program includes a banking program and, as California's LEV program
will start prior to model year 1999, when the state programs under the OTC recommendation would begin, a manufacturer
may have banked credits under the California program by the time the 1999 model year begins.

EPA does not believe this raises any question regarding consistency with section 177. Once again, the state regulations
do not require the manufacture of a ``third vehicle''; nor do they prevent the sale of California certified vehicles
in the state, though a slightly different mix of vehicles might be required in the first model year for a manufacturer
who takes advantage of California's banking program. This amounts to a business decision by the manufacturer, and
it does not create any inconsistency. Moreover, a determination that such a situation would be inconsistent with
section 177 would render section 177 a nullity for any program that includes banking, because section 177's lead time
requirements make it very difficult for states to begin their programs at the same time California begins its program.



7. Applicability of Section 177 in States Without Plan Provisions Approved Under Part D



A comment notes that section 177 applies only to states with plan provisions approved under part D. All states in the
OTR have such approved plan provisions. All states except for Vermont currently contain nonattainment areas with
associated plans. Vermont has approved plan provisions approved under part D related to earlier nonattainment problems.
See 40 CFR 52.2370(c)(10).



V. SIP Call 


A. Explanation of Proposed SIP Call



EPA recognizes that the timing of its action is critical for the states' SIP planning purposes. EPA intends to take
final action on the OTC's LEV recommendation in November 1994. Under section 184(c)(5), EPA is to issue a SIP call under
section 110(k)(5) upon approval. EPA intends that final action approving the OTC recommendation would also entail
the SIP call under section 110(k)(5), thus triggering the states' obligation to submit SIP revisions to include the
OTC LEV (or LEV-equivalent) program within one year, or in November 1995. Under any circumstances, and regardless
of EPA's final action on the OTC LEV recommendation, the states are not precluded from adopting and submitting a LEV
SIP revision at any time consistent with sections 177 and 209 of the Act, as they have always had the independent authority
to do. 





