 

In addition, CBOE Rule 30.50, Interpretation .04 requires that the standards of Rule 9.10(a) regarding discretionary
orders be applied to index warrants. It requires a branch office manager or registered options principal to approve
and initial a discretionary order in index warrants on the day entered. Also, prior to commencement of trading, the
Exchange would distribute a circular to its members calling attention to specific risks associated with warrants
calling attention to specific risks associated with warrants on the Index if the Exchange is required to do so by Commission
policy.



2. Statutory Basis



The listing and trading of warrants on the Nikkei 300 is consistent with Section 6(b) of the ACt in general and furthers
the objectives of Section 6(b)(5) of the Act in particular because it will help remove impediments to a free and open
securities market and facilitate transactions in securities because the Index warrants will provide investors
a means by which to hedge investments in the Japanese equity market and provide a surrogate instrument for trading
in the Japanese securities market.



B. Self-Regulatory Organization's Statement on Burden on Competition



The proposed rule amendments will not impose any burden on competition.



C. Self-Regulatory Organization's Statement on Comments on the Proposed Rule Change Received from Members, Participants
or Others



Comments were neither solicited nor received.



III. Date of Effectiveness of the Proposed Rule Change and Timing for Commission Action



Within 35 days of the publication of this notice in the 

Federal Register

 or within such other period (i) as the Commission may designate up to 90 days of such if it finds such longer period to
be appropriate and publishes its reasons for so finding or (ii) as to which the self-regulatory organization consents,
the Commission will:

(A) by order approve the proposed rule change, or

(B) institute proceedings to determine whether the proposed rule change should be disapproved.



IV. Solicitation of Comments



Interested persons are invited to submit written data, views and arguments concerning the foregoing. Persons making
written submissions should file six copies thereof with the Secretary, Securities and Exchange Commission, 450
Fifth Street, NW., Washington, DC 20549. Copies of the submission, all subsequent amendments, all written statements
with respect at the proposed rule change that are filed with the Commission, and all written communications relating
to the proposed rule change between the Commission and any person, other than those that may be withheld from the public
in accordance with the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 552, will be available for inspection and copying at the Commission's
Public Reference Section, 450 Fifth Street, NW., Washington, DC 20549. Copies of such filing will also be available
for inspection and copying at the principal office of the CBOE. All submissions should refer to File No. SRCBOE9432
and should be submitted by November 15, 1994.




For the Commission, by the Division of Market Regulation, pursuant to delegated authority.



<SIGNER>
Margaret H. McFarland,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Secretary.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9426351 Filed 101994; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 801001M
</BILLING>

