 

Comments were received on the failure to include any discussion of certain emissions reduction or carbon sequestration
approaches specifically applicable to the agricultural sector. In response to these comments, additional text
has been added on windbreaks and shelterbelts, changes to grazing land, and the production of biomass for fuel. The
failure of the document to address other agricultural activities which affect greenhouse gases or carbon sequestration
is not intended to preclude data submissions on those activities, including energy efficiency improvements. 



7. Adjusted Electricity Emissions Factors by State 



Substantial and detailed comment was received on the draft Appendix C, ``Adjusted Electricity Emissions by State,''
which appeared in all draft sector supporting documents. After consideration of the comments received, Appendix
C has been revised to employ a simpler methodology and the inclusion of nonutility generation emissions. A summary
of the methodology used for the table appears together with the table in Appendix C. The published data on fuel use and
technologies used are identified. 

In response to comments that the draft failed to include nonutility generation, emissions factors for nonutility
generation have been added, together with weighted combined emissions factors for utility and nonutility generation.
Where the reporter utilizing the table knows whether the power is utility or nonutility generated, the appropriate
factor should be used. The combined factor is intended for use when the reporter is unable to make this identification.


In keeping with the flexibility of the program, reporters are encouraged to use emissions factors specifically applicable
to the project being reported. Where a utility-specific factor is available, for example, it will incorporate actual
fuel mix and dispatching modes which are not differentiated within a State factor provided in Appendix C. The inclusion
of revised Appendix C is in keeping with the programmatic goal of maximum participation, by providing a method for
estimating emissions and reductions when other data are not easily available. 



III. Administrative Requirements 



A. Regulatory Review 



DOE has determined that this is not a significant regulatory action because it does not meet the criteria which define
such actions under Executive Order 12866, 58 FR 51735, and is therefore not subject to regulatory review. Accordingly,
the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) has informed DOE that no clearance of the guidelines and supporting materials
is required. 





