 




<CFRNO>9 CFR Parts 92 and 94 </CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 921073] </RINDOCK>



<RINDOCK>RIN 0579AA62 </RINDOCK>


Llamas and Alpacas 


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, USDA.

 
</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Final rule.

 

</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 We are removing from the regulations certain health certification requirements and requirements concerning quarantine
upon arrival in the United States for llamas and alpacas from Chile and all other countries declared free of foot-and-mouth
disease and rinderpest on or after September 28, 1990. This action appears warranted to relieve unnecessary and burdensome
restrictions.


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE:

 November 16, 1994.


</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Dr. Michael David, Senior Staff Veterinarian, Import-Export Animals Staff, National Center for Import-Export,
Veterinary Services, APHIS, USDA, room 761, Federal Building, 6505 Belcrest Road, Hyattsville, MD 20782, (301)
4367511. 

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 
Background 


The regulations in 9 CFR part 92 and 94 (referred to below as the regulations) impose restrictions on the importation
into the United States of specified animals and animal products to prevent the introduction of various livestock
and poultry diseases into the United States. 
The regulations in 92.435 set forth health certification and quarantine requirements for llamas and alpacas
imported into the United States from Chile and any other country where foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) or rinderpest
has been known to exist and that was declared free of those diseases on or after September 28, 1990. These countries_Austria,
Belgium, Chile, France, Germany, Hungary, The Netherlands, Poland, Republic of Korea, and Spain_are listed in 94.1(d)(1).
Section 92.435 includes the requirements that llamas and alpacas from countries listed in 94.1(d)(1) undergo
quarantine-upon-arrival for at least 40 days at the high-security Harry S Truman Animal Import Center (HSTAIC).

On August 5, 1993, we published in the 

Federal Register

 (58 FR 4164341645, Docket No. 921071) a proposal to amend the regulations by removing 
92.435, ``Llamas and alpacas,'' and by deleting 94.1(d) and the related cross-references throughout
part 92. 
We solicited comments concerning our proposal for a 60-day period ending October 4, 1993. In response to a number of
comments, we published a notice in the 

Federal Register

 on September 28, 1993 (58 FR 5052750528, Docket No. 921072) extending the comment period to November
18, 1993. We received 413 comments by that date. They were from llama breeders and associations, veterinarians, State
departments of agriculture, and members of Congress. Of these, 355 comments were opposed to the proposed rule, and
58 supported the proposed rule. All of the comments received in opposition to the proposal concerned the importation
of llamas and alpacas from Chile; none of the comments addressed any concern with llamas or alpacas imported from other
countries listed in 94.1(d)(1) of the regulations. We considered all of the comments we received. They are
discussed below by topic. 
One of the most common concerns of commenters was that this rule would allow the indiscriminate importation of llamas
and alpacas from Chile without certification, testing, or quarantine, thus risking exposure of U.S. livestock not
only to FMD, but to tuberculosis, brucellosis, Johne's disease, bluetongue, vesicular stomatitis, and other viral
and parasitic diseases. 
As stated above, under 92.435, llamas and alpacas from Chile and other countries listed in 94.1(d)(1)
have been required to undergo a preembarkation quarantine, testing for a variety of livestock diseases, and postentry
quarantine in the United States at the Harry S Truman Animal Import Center (HSTAIC). This final rule removes 92.435
from the regulations. 
However, the absence of 92.435 in the regulations does not mean that llamas and alpacas will be imported into
the United States indiscriminately. Currently, other ruminants, except ruminants from Canada and Mexico, undergo
a 60-day isolation period in their country of origin prior to export, to ensure that the animals are free of disease
and are not exposed to disease within those 60 days. Llamas and alpacas imported from Chile and other countries listed
in 94.1(d)(1) will likewise undergo quarantine in the country of origin for 60 days prior to export. In accordance
with 92.411, which contains the requirements for quarantine of ruminants upon their arrival in the United
States, the llamas and alpacas will be quarantined upon arrival at the port of entry. Ports designated for the importation
of ruminants requiring quarantine upon arrival are listed in 92.403. Paragraph (b) of 
92.411 requires that quarantine of llamas and alpacas must be for a minimum of 15 days, counting from the date
of arrival at the port of entry in the United States. Currently, llamas and alpacas that are not imported through HSTAIC
are quarantined for 30 days upon arrival in the United States. Llamas and alpacas imported from Chile and other countries
listed in 94.1(d)(1) will also undergo the same 30-day quarantine. 
APHIS will also continue to test llamas and alpacas imported from countries that have been listed in 94.1(d)(1)
for diseases of concern and will continue to require treatment for endo- and ecto-parasites. Section 92.404 of the
regulations, ``Import permits for ruminants and for ruminant specimens for diagnostic purposes; and reservation
fees for space at quarantine facilities maintained by APHIS,'' provides that in order to import a ruminant, an importer
must apply for and obtain an APHIS import permit stating certain information, such as the number of ruminants to be
imported, the country of origin, individual ruminant identification, and the proposed date of arrival. Section
92.404 further provides that ``(a)dditional information may be required in the form of certificates concerning
specific diseases to which the ruminants are susceptible, as well as vaccinations or other precautionary treatments
to which the ruminants or ruminant test specimens have been subjected. Notice of any such requirement will be given
to the applicant in each case.'' 
Accordingly, APHIS requires ruminants that are to be imported into the United States to be tested for certain diseases,
according to the specific disease concerns in the animals' country of origin. Llamas and alpacas imported from countries
that have been listed in 94.1(d)(1) will be governed by this same provision. Documentation of test results
and treatments will have to be included on a certificate, which is required to accompany the llamas and alpacas (see
92.405, ``Certificate for ruminants.''). APHIS does not list in the regulations all the tests required for
importation of ruminants because disease concerns vary by country and species. 
In short, APHIS is committed to preventing the introduction of communicable diseases of livestock into the United
States. Given the FMD-free status of Chile and other countries that have been listed in 94.1(d)(1), we have
determined that post-entry quarantine at HSTAIC for llamas and alpacas from these countries is not necessary. However,
under the regulations in part 92, subpart D, llamas and alpacas imported from Chile and other countries that have been
listed in 94.1(d)(1) will continue to be quarantined, and will be tested for all diseases of concern. Removing
92.435 from the regulations enables importers to import llamas and alpacas under conditions appropriate
to the disease status of the animals' country of origin. 
Another concern of commenters was that Chile is surrounded by countries where FMD exists. Commenters contended that
Chile has no reliable veterinary infrastructure to prevent the illegal movement of animals into the country, and,
therefore, passage of this rule will encourage smuggling of llamas and alpacas from neighboring Bolivia and Peru
(both countries in which FMD exists) into Chile, for subsequent importation into the United States. 
We believe that Chile has demonstrated its ability and willingness to prevent such smuggling. In 1989, a team from
APHIS visited Chile to evaluate its veterinary infrastructure, border controls, laboratory capabilities, and
surveillance and reporting system. Based on this first-hand observation, the team found Chile's veterinary and
animal health systems to be sound. As a result, APHIS declared Chile free from FMD in 1990. Chile's FMD-free status
has been recognized by the Office of International Epizootics (OIE) since 1988, as well. Chile has remained FMD-free
for over 7 years, despite the fact that neighboring countries continue to experience difficulties with controlling
the disease. Chile could not remain FMD free under these circumstances if Chile did not have an effective veterinary
infrastructure and surveillance system. 
While no country's borders are completely impenetrable, Chile has demonstrated the effectiveness of its program
to control the movement of animals across its borders with neighboring Argentina, Bolivia, and Peru. Surveillance
along Chile's borders is a cooperative effort between Chile's national veterinary service, the Federal police,
customs officials, and international police. Chile prohibits the importation of FMD-susceptible animals from
countries where FMD exists. Any animal found crossing the border from Argentina, Bolivia, or Peru (all countries
in which FMD exists) is shot and buried on-site. In addition to its border control system, Chile also maintains a series
of internal checkpoints along its roadways and highways. Recent FMD outbreaks in Peru and Argentina have not spilled
over into Chile, demonstrating the success of Chile's efforts against incursion of FMD from its neighbors. 
Some commenters suggested that Chile should be regionalized and llamas and alpacas should be imported into the United
States only from areas south of the Atacama desert. As previously discussed in this rulemaking document, many commenters
were concerned that it is difficult to control the movement of llamas and alpacas from neighboring countries across
Chile's borders. According to commenters, the Atacama desert, located in north-central Chile and covering most
of the Antofagasta region, would serve as a natural barrier through which movement of animals would be more easily
controlled than on the borders shared by Chile, Bolivia, and Peru. 


</SUPPLEM>
