 

Many do not possess the basic academic and occupational skills necessary for the workplace or to pursue further education.


The Departments of Labor and Education have made the development of a school-to-work system a high priority. The ``School-to-Work
Opportunities Initiative'' builds on earlier work of the two Departments as well as exemplary programs at the State
and local levels. The ``School-to-Work Opportunities Act of 1994'' was developed by the Departments of Labor and
Education and was signed into law by the President on May 4, 1994.


This legislation provides a broad framework for effective school-to-work strategies and seed money for statewide
and local implementation of school-to-work systems. During Fiscal Year 1994, the Departments are using pre-existing
legislative authority to begin developmental activities.

As envisioned, States and localities will have considerable flexibility to design and implement programs which
fit their individual circumstances and unique needs. However all programs will share some basic components:


1. 

Work-based learning

 that provides a planned program of job training and experience, paid work experience, workplace mentoring and instruction
in workplace competencies and in a broad variety of elements of an industry.


2. 

School-based learning

 that provides career exploration and career counseling, instruction in a career major (selected no later than the
11th grade), a program of study that is based on high academic and skill standards and typically involves at least one
year of post secondary education, and periodic evaluations to identify students' academic strengths and weaknesses.


3. 

Connecting Activities

 that coordinate involvement of employers, schools and students, matching students and work-based learning opportunities,
and training teachers, mentors, and counselors.


Students, upon successful completion, will receive a high school diplomas, or its equivalent; a certificate or diploma
from a post-secondary institution, if appropriate; and a skill certificate.


At the State level, the Governor, the chief state school officials and state agency officials responsible for job
training and employment, economic development, post secondary education and other appropriate offices will collaborate
in the planning and development of the state school to work system. At the local level, partnerships that consist of
employers, secondary and post secondary education institutions, labor organizations and other local community
and business leaders will design and administer school-to-work programs.


The Departments of Labor and Education are supporting State and local developmental and implementation activities
by providing grants and through research, evaluation, technical assistance and other support activities. For those
States who are ready to move beyond developmental activities, the two Departments are making available a limited
number of larger, multi-year implementation grants. States will be selected to receive these grants through a competitive
process with an anticipated award date of July 1994.


Employers must play a critical role in designing and implementing school to work strategies. Successful programs
will require the active involvement of the business community. Employers, in partnership with labor, must define
the skill requirements for jobs, participate equally in the governance of the program, offer quality learning experiences
for the students at the worksite, and provide jobs for students and graduates.


Thus, development of an effective school-to-work ``system'' requires the active involvement of a substantial portion
of this nation's business community. Accomplishing this objective is a daunting and challenging task. Employers
must be convinced that it is in their best interest to participate in such arrangements.


Employers who agree to participate may need assistance in developing the capacity to transform their workplaces
into quality learning environments a well as assuming other partnership roles. Experience to date suggests that
a multitude of approaches are needed to effectively mobilize this nation's business community.


State Officials involved in school-to-work transition have indicated that this is an area where federal assistance
is needed. Accordingly, applicants interested in this portion of the solicitation shall explain how they intend
to accomplish the following objectives:


1. Create awareness among the business community about the ``School-to-Work Opportunities Initiative'' in general
and, more specifically the business role in developing and administering the system;


2. Build demand among the business community to participate in local partnerships;


3. Develop capacity of business to participate as an active partner in local school-to-work opportunities program;


4. Broker the formation of coalitions of business and of local partnerships among business, education, labor (where
appropriate) and community organizations to develop and administer local school-to-work opportunities programs.







