 

Section 77.7Civil and Criminal Enforcement; Represented Persons



As addressed in the discussion of 77.3, individuals and organizations who are neither defendants nor arrestees
are not ``parties'' within the meaning of this rule, and the general prohibition on 

ex parte

 contacts therefore does not apply. This section makes clear that attorneys for the government are authorized to communicate,
directly or indirectly, with a represented person unless the contact is prohibited by some other provision of federal
law. These communications are subject, however, to the restrictions set forth in 77.8 and 77.9. Furthermore,
proposed changes to the United States Attorneys' Manual included in this commentary will provide additional guidance
to Department attorneys in such situations. 




Section 77.8Represented Persons and Represented Parties; Plea Negotiations



This section prohibits government attorneys from initiating or engaging in negotiations of certain specified legal
agreements with any individual who the government attorney knows is represented by counsel, without the consent
of that individual's counsel. Even when substantive discussions with a represented party or represented person
are permissible under these regulations, it ordinarily would be improper for a government attorney to initiate or
negotiate a plea agreement, settlement, immunity agreement or any other disposition of a claim or charge in the absence
of the individual's counsel. The one exception to this prohibition occurs when the communication is initiated by
the represented person or represented party and the procedural safeguards provided for in 77.6(c) are satisfied.


The Department believes that this section is vitally important for the preservation of the attorney-client relationship.
One of the primary purposes informing Rule 4.2 and DR 7104 is that an individual represented by counsel should
be protected from overreaching by an attorney for an adversary. The Department believes the risk of such overreaching
is greatest during negotiations over plea agreements, settlements and other key legal agreements. The training,
experience and knowledge of the law possessed by an attorney is particularly valuable in such situations. 

The prohibition contained in this section includes all discussions of the terms of a particular plea agreement, settlement
agreement or other agreement covered by the section. However, this section does not prohibit an attorney for the government
from responding to questions regarding the nature of such agreements, potential charges, potential penalties or
other subjects related to such agreements during an otherwise permissible discussion. Nevertheless, an attorney
for the government should take care in such situations not to go beyond providing information on these and similar
subjects and should generally refer the represented person to his or her counsel for further discussion of these issues.
The government attorney should also make it clear that he or she will not negotiate any agreement with respect to the
disposition of criminal charges, civil claims or potential charges or claims or immunity without the presence or
consent of counsel.
 


Section 77.9Represented Persons and Represented Parties; Respect for Attorney-Client Relationships



When an attorney for the government communicates with a represented party pursuant to one or more of the exceptions
listed in 77.6, or with a represented person pursuant to 77.7, the communication is nevertheless subject
to the restrictions of this section. 



Paragraph (a): 

Deference to Attorney-Client Relationship





DR 7104(A)(1) and Rule 4.2 protect a represented party's right, if he or she so chooses, to communicate with
his or her adversary only through counsel. The rules do not compel one to make that choice, and the represented party
may elect to speak directly with the government despite his or her attorney's advice not to do so. As a further protective
measure, federal courts have recognized that it is improper for an attorney for the government to disparage counsel
for the represented party or otherwise to seek to disrupt the relationship between that party and his attorney. See,
e.g., 

United States

 v. 

Morrison

, 449 U.S. 361, 362, 367 (1981); 

United States

 v. 

Weiss

, 599 F.2d 730, 740 (5th Cir. 1979); id. at 74041 (Godbold, J., specially concurring). This paragraph codifies
those basic principles by prohibiting communications that: (1) Attempt to elicit information regarding lawful
defense strategies; (2) disparage the represented party's counsel; or (3) otherwise disrupt the attorney-client
relationship. These prohibitions apply in every phase of criminal and civil enforcement investigations and proceedings.


However, the paragraph also accommodates an important exception to this prohibition. Courts have held that a government
attorney may not permit legal proceedings to go forward if he or she is aware of a conflict of interest between a represented
party and his or her lawyer. See 

United States

 v. 

Iorizzo

, 786 F.2d 52, 59 (2d Cir. 1986). Under these circumstances, the attorney for the government ordinarily should move
to disqualify the lawyer involved, if legal proceedings have already commenced. If it is not feasible to move for disqualification
or otherwise challenge the representation, this paragraph allows an attorney for the government to communicate
with the represented individual for the limited purpose of apprising the represented individual of the perceived
conflict. However, any substantive discussion of the subject matter of the representation is permissible only insofar
as it is authorized by some other provision of this rule. 

In order to ensure that this provision is used only in rare circumstances, the rule would require prior authorization
for such communications from the Attorney General, the Deputy Attorney General, the Associate Attorney General,
an Assistant Attorney General or a United States Attorney. The authorization should be in writing if at all possible.
Furthermore, before providing approval, the authorizing officer must find: (1) A substantial likelihood of a conflict;
and (2) that it is not feasible to obtain a court order on the matter. 


Paragraph (b): Attorney-Client Meetings



The attendance of an undercover agent or a cooperating witness at lawful meetings of an individual and his or her attorneys
is ordinarily an improper intrusion into the attorney-client relationship. The courts have recognized, however,
that such attendance occasionally will be required when the operative is invited to participate and his or her refusal
to do so would effectively reveal his or her connection to the government. See, e.g., 

Weatherford

 v. 

Bursey

, 429 U.S. 545, 557 (1977); 

United States

 v. 

Ginsberg

, 758 F.2d 823, 833 (2d Cir. 1985); 

United States

 v. 

Mastroianni

, 749 F.2d 900, 906 (1st Cir. 1984). As the First Circuit has noted, a contrary rule ``would provide the defense with
a quick and easy alarm system to detect the presence of any informants, simply by inviting all known associates of defendants
to a supposed defense strategy meeting.'' 

Mastroianni

, 749 F.2d at 906. 




