 

Under section 110(m), USEPA may apply sanctions to any portion of the state it determines is reasonable and appropriate.
During the 24 months following the finding, USEPA may not impose the sanctions statewide if one or more political subdivisions
within the state is principally responsible for the deficiency that is the basis for sanctions. USEPA has proposed
criteria for determining when a political subdivision is principally responsible (57 FR 44534, September 28, 1992).
The criteria provide that a political subdivision is principally responsible if: (1) It has the legal authority to
perform the required activity; (2) it has traditionally performed, or has been delegated the responsibility to perform,
the required activity; (3) it has received, where appropriate, adequate funding, or authority to obtain funding,
from the state to perform the required activity; (4) it has agreed to perform (and has not revoked the agreement), or
is required by state law to accept responsibility for performing, the required activity; and (5) it has failed to perform
the required activity. A ``political subdivision'' is defined as the representative body that is responsible for
adopting and/or implementing air pollution controls for any combination of political subdivisions created by,
or pursuant to, Federal or State law. If no political subdivision meets all 5 criteria, USEPA may use its discretion
to determine whether it is reasonable and appropriate to apply sanctions on a statewide basis. 

In this notice, USEPA is proposing to use the above proposed criteria to determine if it may impose sanctions statewide
for Illinois because of the failure to comply with the I/M committal SIP revision adopting an I/M program. USEPA believes
that the first criterion has not been met by any political subdivision. Only the Illinois General Assembly, composed
of representatives from all portions of the State of Illinois, has the authority to revise the state statute to provide
for a basic and enhanced I/M program meeting the CAA and USEPA requirements. Once the legislature has acted, only state
government agencies can adopt any implementing regulations. While individual air pollution control districts
or air quality management districts may request implementation of the state I/M program within their districts once
that program is adopted, this authority is meaningless unless the State has first established an appropriate program
through legislation and regulations. Since the State legislature has not enacted the legislation required to provide
the legal authority for an 
I/M program meeting the CAA and USEPA requirements an I/M program meeting such requirements is not available to areas
within the State that require the program. 

Since no political subdivision within the State has met the first criterion, USEPA believes that no political subdivision
is principally responsible for the failure to have an I/M program that meets final USEPA regulations. Therefore,
USEPA is not prohibited from imposing sanctions statewide. As noted above, the State legislature bears the ultimate
responsibility to adopt the requisite legislative authority and IEPA, not the individual air quality districts,
must subsequently adopt adequate regulations. Since the State does bear the ultimate responsibility, USEPA believes
that it is reasonable and appropriate for USEPA to impose the highway sanction on the entire State. 

The 2:1 offset sanction requirements apply only to new or modified major stationary sources located in or to be located
in areas that are required to have a permit program pursuant to section 173. Thus, USEPA is proposing to impose the 2:1
emission offset sanction only in those areas in which it will have an effect, i.e., the following ozone nonattainment
counties: Cook, Lake, Kane, DuPage, Will, McHenry, Madison, Monroe, St. Clair, Grundy (Aux Sable and Gooselake Townships
only), and Kendall (Oswego Township only). The 2:1 emission offset would apply to all new or modified major stationary
sources of VOC and NO

x

 that are locating to or located in each of these areas. USEPA proposes to impose the offset sanctions in the manner described
in the proposed action on the sequencing of sanctions (58 FR 51270, 5127551277 (October 1, 1993)). 



C. Removal of Discretionary Sanctions 



USEPA is proposing to temporarily lift (i.e., toll)

4

 the highway and offset sanctions imposed under section 110(m) upon the passage by the Illinois General Assembly and
signature by the Governor of legislation which USEPA preliminary determines provides legal authority for a basic
and enhanced I/M program meeting the requirements of the CAA and the I/M regulations. USEPA proposes to notify the
State of this tolling by a letter to the Governor and the public by a notice published in the notice section of the 

Federal Register

. The section 110(m) sanctions would not be completely lifted until the State submits a complete enhanced I/M program.
USEPA will take action to completely lift section 110(m) sanctions upon a determination that the State has submitted
a complete enhanced I/M program. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


4

</FOOTNAME>
 As a general rule, an Agency must go through rulemaking to remove or alter a requirement imposed through rulemaking.
While USEPA intends to issue a notice tolling the 110(m) sanctions upon the occurrence of the events described, USEPA
will use the good cause exception to the otherwise applicable requirement for proposed rulemaking. EPA believes
there is good cause to toll the sanctions once the state takes the action which cures the deficiency that resulted in
imposition of sanctions. See 5 U.S.C. 553(b)(B). Therefore, no proposed action for removal will be issued.
Consistent with USEPA's intent to impose discretionary sanctions only on those areas that lack legislative authority,
USEPA believes that it is in the public interest to remove, at least temporarily, these discretionary sanctions as
expeditiously as possible once the State of Illinois has enacted legislative authority. 

</FOOTNOTE>


As an alternative, if EPA takes final action disapproving Illinois's committal SIP prior to taking final action imposing
sanctions, EPA proposes that such disapproval be the basis for imposing the discretionary sanctions. In such case,
the sanctions would be tolled in the same manner; however, if the disapproval is the final basis for imposing the sanctions
such sanctions would not be completely lifted until EPA formally approves an enhanced 
I/M program for the State of Illinois. In such a case, EPA would take action to lift the sanctions at the same time as EPA
took final action approving the State's I/M program. 

USEPA's action imposing or tolling the section 110(m) sanctions will in no manner affect USEPA's obligation to impose
mandatory sanctions under section 179(a) where one mandatory sanction shall apply 18 months after USEPA's finding
of failure to submit a complete SIP and the second mandatory sanction shall apply 6 months later. Sanctions under section
179(a) apply to the areas for which the deficiency exists. If the State does not adopt and submit to USEPA a complete
submittal providing for an I/M program within the 18-month and additional 6-month periods, the sanctions will automatically
apply on those areas of the State that were required to have but do not have such a complete I/M program under the amended
Act. See 58 FR 51270 (October 1, 1993). Moreover, if EPA takes final action disapproving Illinois's I/M committal
SIP, a second sanctions clock will be triggered and Illinois must not only submit an I/M program, but EPA must also approve
that program within the relevant time frames to stop the mandatory sanctions clock and avoid sanctions based on the
final disapproval. 




