 

20. 

Protected Service Areas. 

In addition to receive site protection, ITFS applicants can request interference protection for a service area.
<FOOTCITE>5</FOOTCITE>
 We provide such protection only at an applicant or licensee's request. Generally, such protection benefits the wireless
cable lessee, because the protected service area ensures interference protection within an area where receive sites
are not specified, or extended protection over an area where receive sites are not currently located. Moreover, the
protection is afforded only during the hours that the wireless cable entity is using the channels.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
5

</FOOTNAME>
Sections 74.903 (d) and (e) of the Commission's Rules.

</FOOTNOTE>


21. Protected service areas are intended to provide a measure of protection to wireless cable lessees, in order to
promote the inauguration of new or improved wireless cable service. However, the protected service area has frequently
been used in ways that we had not contemplated. Specifically, applicants for new facilities often request and receive
interference protection that restricts an existing licensee from seeking certain modifications to its facilities.
In addition, otherwise grantable ITFS applications in adjacent communities often obtain interference protection,
causing them to become mutually exclusive with a previously filed application. At the same time, an existing facility
that has not requested such protection often, upon learning that an application for a nearby operation has been filed,
requests interference protection and thereby obstructs the new applicant. We believe that these practices may be
an abuse of our processing system driven by certain wireless cable lessees, designed to prevent or dilute competition.
Further, this practice significantly impacts our processing and delays the inauguration of new or improved service
to the public. Moreover, such practices unfairly disrupt existing operations and already-proposed facilities.

22. In order to hasten service to the public, then, we propose to modify our application of interference protection.
Specifically, we propose to apply such protection only prospectively. Thus, it would be effective only with regard
to applications filed after the protection request. Commenters are invited to address whether our proposal would
sufficiently diminish the disruption and delay resulting from the current method of granting interference protection.
We also seek comment on a particular application of the proposed rule. Specifically, if two applications submitted
during the same filing window, otherwise grantable, are mutually exclusive only because both applicants request
a protected service area, we propose to consider them as mutually exclusive. We invite comments on this proposal.

23. 

Receive-Site Interference Protection. 

Pursuant to 74.903 (d) and (e) of the Commission's Rules, an ITFS licensee, permittee, or applicant may request
interference protection for its receive sites. The rule does not expressly limit the distance a receive site may be
from the transmitter in order to receive such protection. As a result, we have received numerous applications in which
interference protection has been requested for receive sites that appear to be beyond the reasonable coverage ability
of an educational institution. We believe that such requests are an abuse of our processes, designed to increase artificially
the service area of the wireless cable lessee. We also believe that the elimination of this practice would significantly
increase the efficiency of our processing of applications, thereby hastening service to the public.

24. Given an ITFS facility's height, power, frequency, and mode of transmission, our experience suggests that it
is generally unlikely that an educational institution would reasonably serve a receive site that is more than 35 miles
from the transmitter. Thus, absent a showing of unique circumstances, we propose to provide protection only for those
receive sites 35 miles or less from the transmitter. Further, we propose that an applicant not be able to claim eligibility
for a license by use of any receive site more than 35 miles from the transmitter. Applicants are invited to address this
proposal.

25. 

Major Modifications. 

We classify applications to modify an existing ITFS facility or to amend a pending application as either major or minor,
attaching different procedural rules to each.
<FOOTCITE>6</FOOTCITE>
 We generally define major modifications as those that significantly impact an existing or proposed facility. Pursuant
to the window proposal, the Commission will accept major amendments and applications for major modifications only
during an open window period.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
6

</FOOTNAME>
Section 74.911 of the Commission's Rules, 47 CFR 74.911.

</FOOTNOTE>


26. However, the current definition of minor changes, we believe, does not realistically take into account the impact
that the proposed change would have on the facility in question, nearby facilities, or proposed facilities.
<FOOTCITE>7</FOOTCITE>
 Applicants frequently submit applications for changes that would substantially affect the operations of such facilities,
yet we now treat many of these changes as minor. Accordingly, we propose to reclassify certain changes as major. Consequently,
we would accept amendments and applications for such changes only during a window filing period. We believe that this
action would more accurately reflect the impact of a proposed change.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
7

</FOOTNAME>
Section 74.911 classifies a small number of specified changes as major and defines all other changes as minor.

</FOOTNOTE>


27. We have had an informal policy of considering proposals to relocate a facility's transmitter site by 10 miles or
more as a major change. We now propose to modify our rules to make this policy formal. In addition, we propose to reclassify
as a major change any application or amendment involving: (1) Any polarization change; (2) the addition of any receive
site that would experience interference from any licensee or applicant on file prior to the submission of the amendment;
(3) an increase in the EIRP in any direction by more than 1.5 dB;
<FOOTCITE>8</FOOTCITE>
 (4) an increase of 25 feet or more in the transmitting antenna height; or (5) any change that would cause interference
to any previously proposed application or existing facility. We note that by limiting the opportunity to file the
above types of applications, adoption of the proposal would appear to somewhat diminish a licensee or applicant's
flexibility to respond to changing needs and circumstances. At the same time, however, we believe that adoption of
the proposed rules would make our classification of changes more consistent. By doing so, we believe, we would enhance
the efficiency of the window filing system. Thus, it appears that the benefits gained from the rule would outweigh
the costs. We seek comment on our analysis. Finally, we propose to exempt from the new rule any change that resolves
mutually exclusive applications without creating new frequency conflicts.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
8

</FOOTNAME>
Thus, TPO would no longer be the deciding factor in determining whether a change is major.


</FOOTNOTE>

