 




<DOCTITLE>Advisory Committees; Notice of Meetings</DOCTITLE>


<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Notice.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

This notice announces forthcoming meetings of public advisory committees of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
This notice also summarizes the procedures for the meetings and methods by which interested persons may participate
in open public hearings before FDA's advisory committees.



MEETINGS: 

The following advisory committee meetings are announced:



Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory Committee



Date, time, and place

. June 7, 1994, 8 a.m., Holiday Inn_Silver Spring, Plaza Ballroom, 8777 Georgia Ave., Silver Spring, MD.


Type of meeting and contact person

. Open public hearing, 8 a.m. to 9 a.m., unless public participation does not last that long; open committee discussion,
9 a.m. to 1 p.m.; closed committee deliberations, 1 p.m. to 6 p.m.; Nancy T. Cherry or Stephanie A. Milwit, Scientific
Advisors and Consultants Staff (HFM21), Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration,
1401 Rockville Pike, Rockville, MD 20852, 3015941054.


General function of the committee

. The committee reviews and evaluates data on the safety and effectiveness of vaccines intended for use in the diagnosis,
prevention, or treatment of human diseases.


Agenda_Open public hearing

. Interested persons may present data, information, or views, orally or in writing, on issues pending before the committee.
Those desiring to make formal presentations should notify the contact person before May 31, 1994, and submit a brief
statement of the general nature of the evidence or arguments they wish to present, the names and addresses of proposed
participants, and an indication of the approximate time required to make their comments.


Open committee discussion

. The committee will participate in a general discussion of the clinical development of, and trial design issues for,
vaccines for the prevention of Lyme disease. 


Closed committee deliberations

. The committee will review trade secret and/or confidential commercial information relevant to pending investigational
new drug (IND) applications or product licensing applications. This portion of the meeting will be closed to permit
discussion of this information (5 U.S.C. 552b(c)(4)). 



Anesthetic and Life Support Drugs Advisory Committee



Date, time, and place

. June 9, 1994, 8:30 a.m., and June 10, 1994, 8 a.m., conference rms. D and E, Parklawn Bldg., 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville,
MD. 


Type of meeting and contact person

. Open public hearing, June 9, 1994, 8:30 a.m. to 9:30 a.m., unless public participation does not last that long; open
committee discussion, 9:30 a.m. to 5 p.m.; open committee discussion, June 10, 1994, 8 a.m. to 9 a.m.; closed committee
deliberations, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Isaac F. Roubein, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (HFD7), Food and
Drug Administration, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857, 3014433741.


General function of the committee

. The committee reviews and evaluates data on the safety and effectiveness of marketed and investigational human
drugs for use in the field of anesthesiology and surgery.


Agenda_Open public hearing

. Interested persons may present data, information, or views, orally or in writing, on issues pending before the committee.
Those desiring to make formal presentations should notify the contact person before May 31, 1994, and submit a brief
statement of the general nature of the evidence or arguments they wish to present, the names and addresses of proposed
participants, and an indication of the approximate time required to make their comments.


Open committee discussion

. On June 9, 1994, the committee will discuss: (1) The labeling of succinylcholine chloride injection (neuromuscular
blocking agent) new drug applications (NDA's) 8453, Burroughs Wellcome and Co.; 8845, Abbott Laboratories;
8847, Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.; and 80997, Organon, Inc.; and (2) adverse experience associated with
the administration of 5 percent lidocaine for spinal anesthesia, NDA 20098/S04, Astra Pharmaceutical
Products, Inc. On June 10, 1994, the committee will hear a progress report on the metabolism of lidocaine by human liver
tissues. 


Closed committee deliberations

. The committee will review trade secret and/or confidential commercial information relevant to NDA 19627
and IND 40,069. This portion of the meeting will be closed to permit discussion of this information (5 U.S.C. 552b(c)(4)).


Science Advisory Board to the National Center for Toxicological Research



Date, time, and place

. June 14, 1994, 1 p.m., and June 15, 1994, 9 a.m., Bldg. 12, conference rm., National Center for Toxicological Research
(NCTR), Jefferson, AR.


Type of meeting and contact person

. Open committee discussion, June 14, 1994, 1 p.m. to 5 p.m.; open board discussion, June 15, 1994, 9 a.m. to 1:30 p.m.;
open public hearing, 1:30 p.m. to 2:30 p.m., unless public participation does not last that long; closed board deliberations,
2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m.; Ronald F. Coene, NCTR (HFT10), Food and Drug Administration, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville,
MD 20857, 3014433155.


General function of the board

. The board advises on establishment and implementation of a research program that will assist the Commissioner of
Food and Drugs to fulfill regulatory responsibilities. 


Agenda_Open public hearing

. Interested persons may present data, information, or views, orally or in writing, on issues pending before the committee.
Those desiring to make formal presentations should notify the contact person before June 1, 1994, and submit a brief
statement of the general nature of the evidence or arguments they wish to present, the names and addresses of proposed
participants, and an indication of the approximate time requested to make their comments.


Open board discussion

. The board will conduct a review of the Science Advisory Board's Site Visit Team draft reports on two research programs
of the center: (1) Biochemical and Molecular Markers Program, and (2) Transgenics Program. The board will engage
in discussions on these reports and come to a final conclusion on the recommendations to be made to the Director concerning
these center programs. The center will also provide progress reports on the recommendations of two previously reviewed
research programs: (1) The Nutritional Modulation of Risk and Toxicity Program, and (2) the Applied and Environmental
Microbiology Program. A final agenda will be available beginning June 7, 1994, from the contact person. 


Closed board deliberations

. On June 14, 1994, the board will discuss personal information concerning individuals associated with these review
programs, disclosure of which would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy. This portion
of the meeting will be closed to permit discussion of this information (5 U.S.C. 552b(c)(6)). 


Ear, Nose, and Throat Devices Panel of the Medical Devices Advisory Committee



Date, time, and place

. June 27, 1994, 9:30 a.m., and June 28, 1994, 8 a.m., Holiday Inn_Silver Spring, Plaza Ballroom, 8777 Georgia Ave.,
Silver Spring, MD.
A limited number of overnight accommodations have been reserved at the Holiday Inn. Attendees requiring overnight
accommodations must contact the hotel at 3015890800 and reference the FDA Panel meeting block. Reservations
will be confirmed at the group rate based on availability.


Type of meeting and contact person

. Open public hearing, June 27, 1994, 9:30 a.m. to 3 p.m., unless public participation does not last that long; open
committee discussion, 3 p.m. to 4:30 p.m.; closed committee deliberations, June 28, 1994, 8 a.m. to 10 a.m.; open public
hearing, 10 a.m. to 11 a.m., unless public participation does not last that long; open committee discussion, 11 a.m.
to 4:30 p.m.; Harry R. Sauberman, Center for Devices and Radiological Health (HFZ470), Food and Drug Administration,
1390 Piccard Dr., Rockville, MD 20850, 3015942080. If anyone who is planning to attend the meeting will
need any special assistance, as defined under the American with Disabilities Act, please notify the contact person.


General function of the committee

. The committee reviews and evaluates data on the safety and effectiveness of marketed and investigational devices
and makes recommendations for their regulation.


Agenda_Open public hearing

. Interested persons may present data, information, or views, orally or in writing, on issues pending before the committee.
Those desiring to make formal presentations should notify the contact person before June 5, 1994, and submit a brief
statement of the general nature of the evidence or arguments they wish to present, the names and addresses of proposed
participants, and an indication of the approximate time required to make their comments.


Open committee discussion

. The committee will discuss a proposed protocol for performing scientific and clinical evaluations of hearing aids
for the purpose of substantiating manufacturer performance claims.


Closed committee deliberations

. The committee will discuss trade secret and/or confidential commercial information. This portion of the meeting
will be closed to permit discussion of this information (5 U.S.C. 552b(c)(4)).


Dental Products Panel of the Medical Devices Advisory Committee



Date, time, and place

. June 28, 1994, 10:30 a.m., and June 29, 1994, 8 a.m., Quality Hotel, Maryland Ballroom, 8727 Colesville Rd., Silver
Spring, MD. 
A limited number of overnight accommodations have been reserved. Attendees requiring overnight accommodations
must contact the hotel at 3015895200 and reference the FDA Panel meeting block. Reservations will be
confirmed at the group rate based on availability.


Type of meeting and contact person

. Closed committee deliberations, June 28, 1994, 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; open public hearing, June 29, 1994, 8 a.m.
to 9 a.m., unless public participation does not last that long; open committee discussion, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.; Carolyn
A. Tylenda, Center for Devices and Radiological Health (HFZ410), Food and Drug Administration, 1390 Piccard
Dr., Rockville, MD, 3015943090.


General function of the committee

. The committee reviews and evaluates data on the safety and effectiveness of marketed and investigational devices
and makes recommendations for their regulation.


Agenda_Open public hearing

. Interested persons may present data, information, or views, orally or in writing, on issues pending before the committee.
Those desiring to make formal presentations should notify the contact person before June 15, 1994, and submit a brief
statement of the general nature of the evidence or arguments they wish 
to present, the names and addresses of proposed participants, and an indication of the approximate time required
to make their comments.


Closed committee deliberations

. The committee will discuss trade secret and/or confidential commercial information regarding pending and future
device submissions. This portion of the meeting will be closed to permit discussion of this information (5 U.S.C.
552b(c)(4)).


Open committee discussion

. The committee will discuss classification of bone filling and augmentation materials, and classification of dental
amalgam filling material and dental product ingredient labeling.
Each public advisory committee meeting listed above may have as many as four separable portions: (1) An open public
hearing, (2) an open committee discussion, (3) a closed presentation of data, and (4) a closed committee deliberation.
Every advisory committee meeting shall have an open public hearing portion. Whether or not it also includes any of
the other three portions will depend upon the specific meeting involved. The dates and times reserved for the separate
portions of each committee meeting are listed above.
The open public hearing portion of each meeting shall be at least 1 hour long unless public participation does not last
that long. It is emphasized, however, that the 1 hour time limit for an open public hearing represents a minimum rather
than a maximum time for public participation, and an open public hearing may last for whatever longer period the committee
chairperson determines will facilitate the committee's work.
Public hearings are subject to FDA's guideline (subpart C of 21 CFR part 10) concerning the policy and procedures for
electronic media coverage of FDA's public administrative proceedings, including hearings before public advisory
committees under 21 CFR part 14. Under 21 CFR 10.205, representatives of the electronic media may be permitted, subject
to certain limitations, to videotape, film, or otherwise record FDA's public administrative proceedings, including
presentations by 
participants.
Meetings of advisory committees shall be conducted, insofar as is practical, in accordance with the agenda published
in this 

Federal Register

 notice. Changes in the agenda will be announced at the beginning of the open portion of a meeting.
Any interested person who wishes to be assured of the right to make an oral presentation at the open public hearing portion
of a meeting shall inform the contact person listed above, either orally or in writing, prior to the meeting. Any person
attending the hearing who does not in advance of the meeting request an opportunity to speak will be allowed to make
an oral presentation at the hearing's conclusion, if time permits, at the chairperson's discretion.
The agenda, the questions to be addressed by the committee, and a current list of committee members will be available
at the meeting location on the day of the meeting.
Transcripts of the open portion of the meeting may be requested in writing from the Freedom of Information Office (HFI35),
Food and Drug Administration, rm. 12A16, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857, approximately 15 working
days after the meeting, at a cost of 10 cents per page. The transcript may be viewed at the Dockets Management Branch
(HFA305), Food and Drug Administration, rm. 123, 12420 Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD 20857, approximately
15 working days after the meeting, between the hours of 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday. Summary minutes of
the open portion of the meeting may be requested in writing from the Freedom of Information Office (address above)
beginning approximately 90 days after the meeting. 
The Commissioner has determined for the reasons stated that those portions of the advisory committee meetings so
designated in this notice shall be closed. The Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA) (5 U.S.C. app. 2, 10(d)), permits
such closed advisory committee meetings in certain circumstances. Those portions of a meeting designated as closed,
however, shall be closed for the shortest possible time, consistent with the intent of the cited statutes.
The FACA, as amended, provides that a portion of a meeting may be closed where the matter for discussion involves a trade
secret; commercial or financial information that is privileged or confidential; information of a personal nature,
disclosure of which would be a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy; investigatory files compiled for
law enforcement purposes; information the premature disclosure of which would be likely to significantly frustrate
implementation of a proposed agency action; and information in certain other instances not generally relevant to
FDA matters.
Examples of portions of FDA advisory committee meetings that ordinarily may be closed, where necessary and in accordance
with FACA criteria, include the review, discussion, and evaluation of drafts of regulations or guidelines or similar
preexisting internal agency documents, but only if their premature disclosure is likely to significantly frustrate
implementation of proposed agency action; review of trade secrets and confidential commercial or financial information
submitted to the agency; consideration of matters involving investigatory files compiled for law enforcement purposes;
and review of matters, such as personnel records or individual patient records, where disclosure would constitute
a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.
Examples of portions of FDA advisory committee meetings that ordinarily shall not be closed include the review, discussion,
and evaluation of general preclinical and clinical test protocols and procedures for a class of drugs or devices;
consideration of labeling requirements for a class of marketed drugs or devices; review of data and information on
specific investigational or marketed drugs and devices that have previously been made public; presentation of any
other data or information that is not exempt from public disclosure pursuant to the FACA, as amended; and, deliberation
to formulate advice and recommendations to the agency on matters that do not independently justify closing.
This notice is issued under section 10(a)(1) and (2) of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 U.S.C. app. 2), and FDA's
regulations (21 CFR part 14) on advisory committees.




Dated: May 17, 1994.

</SUMMARY>
<SIGNER>
Linda Suydam,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Interim Deputy Commissioner for Operations.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9412493 Filed 52094; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>

