 

3. Analysis 


The analysis of asbestos samples can be divided into two major 
parts: sample preparation and microscopy. Because of the 
different asbestos uses that may be encountered by the analyst, 
each sample may need different preparation steps. The choices 
are outlined below. There are several different tests that are 
performed to identify the asbestos species and determine the 
percentage. They will be explained below. 



3.1. Safety 


(a) Do not create unnecessary dust. Handle the samples in 
HEPA-filter equipped hoods. If samples are received in 
bags, envelopes or other inappropriate container, open 
them only in a hood having a face velocity at or greater 
than 100 fpm. Transfer a small amount to a scintillation 
vial and only handle the smaller amount. 
(b) Open samples in a hood, never in the open lab area. 
(c) Index of refraction oils can be toxic. Take care not to 
get this material on the skin. Wash immediately with soap 
and water if this happens. 
(d) Samples that have been heated in the muffle furnace or the 
drying oven may be hot. Handle them with tongs until they 
are cool enough to handle. 
(e) Some of the solvents used, such as THF (tetrahydrofuran), 
are toxic and should only be handled in an appropriate 
fume hood and according to instructions given in the 
Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS). 



3.2. Equipment 


(a) Phase contrast microscope with 10x, 16x and 40x 
objectives, 10x wide-field eyepieces, G22 Walton-Beckett 
graticule, Whipple disk, polarizer, analyzer and first 
order red or gypsum plate, 100 Watt illuminator, rotating 
position condenser with oversize phase rings, central stop 
dispersion objective, Kohler illumination and a rotating 
mechanicalstage. (See Figure 1). 
(b) Stereo microscope with reflected light illumination, 
transmitted light illumination, polarizer, analyzer and 
first order red or gypsum plate, and rotating stage. 
(c) Negative pressure hood for the stereo microscope 
(d) Muffle furnace capable of 600 
&cir;C 
(e) Drying oven capable of 50150 
&cir;C 
(f) Aluminum specimen pans 
(g) Tongs for handling samples in the furnace 
(h) High dispersion index of refraction oils (Special for 
dispersion staining.) 




n=1.550 
n=1.585 
n=1.590 
n=1.605 
n=1.620 
n=1.670 
n=1.680 
n=1.690 




(i) A set of index of refraction oils from about n=1.350 to 
n=2.000 in n=0.005 increments. (Standard for Becke 
line analysis.) 
(j) Glass slides with painted or frosted ends 1 x 3 inches 1mm 
thick, precleaned. 
(k) Cover Slips 22 x 22 mm, 

#

11/2 
(l) Paper clips or dissection needles 
(m) Hand grinder 
(n) Scalpel with both 

#

10 and 

#

11 blades 
(o) 0.1 molar HCl 
(p) Decalcifying solution (Baxter Scientific Products) 
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic Acid, 




Tetrasodium
0.7 g/l 
Sodium Potassium Tartrate
8.0 mg/liter 
Hydrochloric Acid
99.2 g/liter 
Sodium Tartrate
0.14 g/liter 




(q) Tetrahydrofuran (THF) 
(r) Hotplate capable of 60 
&cir;C 
(s) Balance 
(t) Hacksaw blade 
(u) Ruby mortar and pestle 



3.3. Sample Pre-Preparation 


Sample preparation begins with pre-preparation which may include 
chemical reduction of the matrix, heating the sample to dryness 
or heating in the muffle furnace. The end result is a sample 
which has been reduced to a powder that is sufficiently fine to 
fit under the cover slip. Analyze different phases of samples 
separately, e.g., tile and the tile mastic should be analyzed 
separately as the mastic may contain asbestos while the tile may 
not. 


(a) 

Wet Samples 


Samples with a high water content will not give the proper 
dispersion colors and must be dried prior to sample 
mounting. Remove the lid of the scintillation vial, place 
the bottle in the drying oven and heat at 100 
&cir;C to dryness 
(usually about 2 h). Samples which are not submitted to 
the lab in glass must be removed and placed in glass vials 
or aluminum weighing pans before placing them in the 
drying oven. 


(b) Samples With Organic Interference_Muffle Furnace 


These may include samples with tar as a matrix, vinyl 
asbestos tile, or any other organic that can be reduced by 
heating. Remove the sample from the vial and weigh in a 
balance to determine the weight of the submitted portion. 
Place the sample in a muffle furnace at 500 
&cir;C for 1 to 2 h 
or until all obvious organic material has been removed. 
Retrieve, cool and weigh again to determine the weight 
loss on ignition. This is necessary to determine the 
asbestos content of the submitted sample, because the 
analyst will be looking at a reduced sample.


 



Notes: 

Heating above 600 
&cir;C will cause the sample to 
undergo a structural change which, given sufficient 
time, will convert the chrysotile to forsterite. 
Heating even at lower temperatures for 1 to 2 h may 
have a measurable effect on the optical properties 
of the minerals. If the analyst is unsure of what 
to expect, a sample of standard asbestos should be 
heated to the same temperature for the same length 
of time so that it can be examined for the proper 
interpretation. 


(c) 

Samples With Organic Interference_THF 


Vinyl asbestos tile is the most common material treated 
with this solvent, although, substances containing tar 
will sometimes yield to this treatment. Select a portion 
of the material and then grind it up if possible. Weigh 
the sample and place it in a test tube. Add sufficient 
THF to dissolve the organic matrix. This is usually 
about 4 to 5 mL. Remember, THF is highly flammable. 


Filter the remaining material through a tared silver 
membrane, dry and weigh to determine how much is left 
after the solvent extraction. Further process the sample 
to remove carbonate or mount directly. 


(d) 

Samples With Carbonate Interference 



