 

This notice announces the availability of the Points to Consider document, which discusses FSIS policy for the food
safety assessment of transgenic animals and their progeny and sets forth voluntary guidelines regarding the presentation
of transgenic research animals and their progeny for slaughter for human food use at official establishments. For
the purpose of this Points to Consider document, which may be updated as needed, without notice, transgenic animals
are animals whose genetic composition has been changed by introducing selective genes (e.g., recombinant DNA),
whether or not the change physically manifests itself. This definition includes animals developed by antisense,
amplification, and deletion technologies. Individuals interested in performing transgenic animal research and
presenting such animals for slaughter may obtain the most recent copy of the Points to Consider document from the address
identified in footnote 1 in this notice prior to starting his or her research. 
Under 9 CFR 309.17 and 9 CFR 381.75, an investigator interested in presenting transgenic research animals for slaughter
should submit data or a summary evaluation of the data to FSIS. When assessing the human food safety of meat, meat food
products, and poultry products from transgenic research animals. FSIS may utilize the recommendations adopted
by the Transgenic Animal Working Group of the USDA's Agricultural Biotechnology Research Advisory Committee. These
recommendations are described in the Points to Consider document. 
Upon receipt of all the data or the summary evaluation of data, FSIS will review and assess the data or summary evaluation
of the data. The data or summary of the data must demonstrate that the research conducted on the transgenic research
animals will not result in the products of the transgenic research animals or their progeny being adulterated. Further,
the Administrator of FSIS, or the Administrator's designee, must approve the slaughter of transgenic research animals
at official establishments prior to slaughter. Transgenic research animals approved for slaughter at an official
establishment are subject to the same inspection procedures as other animals offered for slaughter at official establishments.



Done at Washington, DC on: March 11, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Terry L. Medley,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Administrator, Food Safety  Inspection Service.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 946240 Filed 31694; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 3410DMM
</BILLING>


