 

ATAC requested that Standard Nos. 106 and 116 be amended in two primary ways. First, the petitioner suggested that
Standard No. 106 be amended to require brake hose compatibility with a fluid with DOT 5 (silicone) brake fluid characteristics.
ATAC stated that the U.S. Army adopted DOT 5 silicone brake fluid as its standard operating fluid for its motor vehicles
with hydraulic brake systems. After replacing the brake fluid with DOT 5 fluid in some of its vehicles, the Army had
operational problems with aftermarket procured hydraulic brake system components. The Army believed it had traced
the problem to excessive swelling of elastomeric seals and cups within the hydraulic brake system master cylinder.
The swelling appeared to be caused by incompatibility problems between the DOT 5 brake fluid and brake system components
made of rubber. Since Standard No. 106 does not test brake hose and hose assemblies with a referee material brake fluid
representing DOT 5 (silicone) fluid, ATAC suggested amending Standard No. 106 to require brake hose compatibility
with a silicone fluid. 
Second, ATAC suggested that Standard No. 116 be amended to require that master and wheel cylinder cups made of ethylene
propylene diene monomer rubber (EPDM) be compatible with a DOT 3, DOT 4 and DOT 5 brake fluid referee material, and to
include specifications for these EPDM and other rubber components. The tests in Standard No. 116 that measure the
effect of brake fluid with rubber are run with SAE referee material SBR cups only. ATAC believed that the aftermarket
EPDM brake system components it encountered were incompatible with the DOT 5 brake fluid in its vehicles. 
The agency believed that the issues raised by ATAC warranted further consideration. Thus, NHTSA granted ATAC's petition.



Rationale for Termination 


Subsequent to its petition, ATAC provided further information to NHTSA indicating that its problem had been resolved.
Tests conducted by the Army at Fort Belvoir, Virginia, implied that there was some confusion as to what actually caused
the problem in the braking systems of the vehicles in question. Nevertheless, ATAC informed NHTSA that it solved its
problem by using only military specification (MIL spec) brake components and brake fluid in ATAC vehicles. ATAC indicated
that EPDM and SBR components that met the Army's MILC14055, ``Cup, Hydraulic Brake Actuating Cylinder,
Synthetic Rubber'' specification perform satisfactorily with silicone brake fluid. ATAC further indicated that
if MIL spec MILC14055 were used for parts procurement, it would avoid any problems of component deterioration
in the future. 
NHTSA supplemented this information with data for non-military motor vehicles. NHTSA believed that if brake fluid
compatibility problems similar to those experienced by ATAC were occurring in non-military vehicles, the public
would have reported some of these incidents to NHTSA's Auto Safety Hotline. The Hotline is a comprehensive database
that encompasses over 250,000 consumer calls, dating back to 1981, relating to vehicle and component performance
and complaints. Approximately 35,000 of these calls are about brake-related performance. NHTSA conducted a database
search for all complaints relating to brake fluid in passenger cars, light trucks, buses and heavy trucks, and found
no evidence of a safety problem. The agency found only 17 complaints that referred to ``brake fluid'' as the basis for
the complaint. The majority of the complaints referred to contamination problems (water, fuel, and other fluid intrusion
into the brake fluid).
Moreover, approximately 8 of the 17 complaints concerned vehicles that had traveled fewer than 50,000 miles. Because
of their relatively low mileage, NHTSA does not believe these vehicles had anything other than the original brake
fluid in them. Given the preponderance of vehicles manufactured with DOT 3 fluid over vehicles manufactured with
DOT 5 fluid, the agency believes the original brake fluid in the vehicles in question was DOT 3 fluid, not DOT 5 fluid.
There was one complaint referring to a problem with ``silicone'' brake fluid and brake system components, involving
an antique Jaguar car and a certain brand of silicone fluid. A single complaint in a database as encompassing as the
Hotline complaint file does not indicate the possible existence of a significant safety problem.
 
In conclusion, there is no evidence of a safety problem regarding the compatibility of silicone fluid and brake system
components. NHTSA believes that if there were a safety problem with brake fluid and component compatibility, evidence
of the problem would have appeared in the ten years since ATAC's petition was received by NHTSA. No such evidence has
manifested. Accordingly, the agency is terminating this rulemaking action. 






Authority:

 49 U.S.C. 322, 30111, 30115, 30117 and 30166; delegation of authority at 49 CFR 1.50.

 


Issued on: October 27, 1994. 


<SIGNER>
Barry Felrice,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Associate Administrator 
for Rulemaking.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9427261 Filed 11294; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 491059P
</BILLING>


