 

In addition, EPA believes that it has adequate information 
at this time to determine the appropriate credit accounting 
procedure. As described above, EPA has sufficient information 
now to make these determinations. Implementation of LIFO credit 
accounting has demonstrated to EPA's satisfaction that LIFO 
credit accounting does not fulfill the intention of the ABT 
program to provide engine manufacturers the flexibility and 
incentives needed to generate environmental benefits. 
Manufacturers generated credits in MY 1990 which they anticipated 
being able to use in MYs 19911993. At the same time, they have 
generated credits in MYs 1991 and 1992, which are valid to be 
used through MY 1996. However, because any credit usage that 
occurs in MYs 1991 and 1992 must, according to LIFO credit 
accounting, be offset first by the credits generated in MYs 1991 
and 1992, the result is that the credits which are valid until 
1996 are being withdrawn, while older credits, which are 
scheduled to expire in MY 1993, are sitting in the bank. Under 
LIFO credit accounting, if a manufacturer wanted to utilize the 
credits generated in MY 1990, they would be required to withdraw 
all the 1990 credits before generating new credits. Thus, there 
is little incentive to introduce cleaner technology until all the 
credits have been withdrawn. In addition, the PM standards are 
tightening after three model years, and manufacturers have little 
opportunity under LIFO credit accounting to both adjust to the 
1990 standard and generate credits for the 1994 standard change. 

Finally, a delay in this rulemaking would prolong the 
disincentives associated with LIFO credit accounting. 



Environmental Impact 



NRDC and MECA raised various concerns about the 
environmental impact of these changes, many of which were based 
on serious reservations about ABT programs in general. They were 
concerned that credits did not reflect real innovations in 
pollution control, but merely reflected the difference between 
certification levels and the level of the standard. Increased 
credits therefore provided no net benefit to the environment. In 
that context, they were concerned that application of these 
changes to the 1993 reports on the 1992 model year engines would 
significantly increase the number of credits available to engine 
manufacturers, and therefore ease the burden in complying with 
more stringent emissions standards applicable in model years 1994 
through 1996. This artificial extension of credit life would 
worsen air quality by allowing continued production of older, 
dirtier engines beyond that allowed without the credit accounting 
change. NRDC claimed that the proposal's theoretical arguments 
for the credit change have a weak analytical support, and do not 
support the suggested rule change. 





