 

Any vehicle with additional power system(s) or auxiliary engine(s) that might produce regulated pollutants (e.g.
hybrid vehicle or an electric vehicle with an auxiliary power source to run other vehicle systems) will be subject
to the testing requirements of Part 86 or Part 88 or future applicable regulations and might not qualify as a ZEV. A ZEV
with a heater will be considered a ZEV as long as the heater will not operate at an ambient temperature above 40
&cir;F and the heater's power/fuel source does not have evaporative emissions in use.

c. 

Other Issues

_i. 

Flexible- and Dual-Fuel HDEs. 

EPA is not promulgating a set of emission standards for flexible- and dual-fuel heavy-duty vehicles. (Flexible-
and dual-fuel vehicles are also commonly referred to as variable- and bi-fuel vehicles, respectively.) Section
243(d) of the Act prescribes emission standards for flexible- and dual-fueled light-duty vehicle and light-duty
trucks. EPA is establishing these standards today (see II.A.1.a). The directive of section 243(g) that ``nothing
in this section shall apply to heavy-duty engines'' makes it clear that section 243(d) does not require EPA to establish
flexible- and dual-fueled standards for heavy-duty engines.

Even if EPA has authority to promulgate such standards (a question which we do not answer here), EPA does not think it
is appropriate to exercise that authority at this time. As Natural Gas Vehicle Coalition suggested in their comments,
it is possible that similar standards could be implemented for HDEs in the same manner as prescribed in the statute
for light-duty vehicles and light-duty trucks. However, as described in the proposal, separate NMHC standards are
not necessary for flexible- or dual-fuel HDEs since similar behavior of NMHC (or the equivalent (NMHCE)) would be
expected for all fuel types. In addition, as discussed above, heavy-duty vehicles operated on conventional gasoline
and diesel fuel will be able to comply with the CFV standards by 1998, and thus, there is not a compelling technical reason
to have slightly higher standards for the vehicle when it is operated on clean alternative fuel. For all these reasons,
EPA is not adopting separate standards for flexible- or dual-fuel HDEs.

Section 241(2) defines clean alternative fuel for flexible- or dual-fuel vehicles and engines as the fuel(s) on which
such vehicles are certified to the CFV standards. EPA concludes from this statutory language that engines certified
on California gasoline or diesel fuel only will need to operate exclusively on that fuel in covered nonattainment
areas. (For single-fuel vehicles and engines, section 241(2) requires operation in covered areas on the fuel(s)
on which they ``comply'' with the CFV standards. As discussed above, EPA has determined that single-fuel HDEs certified
on California gasoline or diesel fuel comply with the HD CFV standard on federal fuels.)

ii. 

Optional LDT Certification. 

For a number of years, manufacturers have had the option of certifying their HDEs used in vehicles between 8501 and
10,000 lbs. GVWR using the LDT emission standards and provisions. This provision is found in 40 CFR 86.0851(b).
EPA finds no reason why the treatment of CFVs should be different than conventional vehicles in this regard, and thus
for consistency EPA will also make this option available for clean-fuel HDEs.

iii. 

Heavy-duty test procedures. 

While this action establishes NMHC + NOx standards for heavy-duty vehicles and engines, EPA regulations historically
have not included test procedures for the measurement of methane separate from other hydrocarbons, and thus the calculation
of NMHC emissions would not have been possible. Prior to today's regulations the heavy-duty test procedures only
measured the total amount of hydrocarbons (including methane), but did not separately measure the amount of any individual
hydrocarbons such as methane. Therefore, EPA is promulgating additional test procedures for the separate measurement
of methane and calculation methods for NMHC emissions, as discussed below. Test procedures for measurement of total
hydrocarbon (THC) emissions will be unchanged, and EPA will continue the current practice of using a flame ionization
detector (FID) for THC measurement. 



