 


Umbrella Program




Safe Futures: Partnerships to Reduce Youth Violence and Delinquency ($7,000,000)


Background





OJJDP's goals of preventing delinquency, creating community-based alternatives, and improving the juvenile justice
system are synthesized in the Safe Futures: Partnerships to Reduce Youth Violence and Delinquency Program. This
umbrella program will focus a variety of resources on implementation of a comprehensive delinquency prevention
and intervention program in order to enhance public safety and provide a continuum of care for at-risk and delinquent
youth. The program will fund a range of services designed to meet the multiple needs of young people in their communities
and support capacity-building at the local level to ensure the long-term sustanibility of youth-supporting efforts.
Programs services would range from prevention through aftercare for youth returning to their communities from out-of-home
placements.



The Safe Futures Program offers a ``concentration of effort'' approach to cities and rural areas much like the Administration's
Empowerment Zones/Enterprise Communities program. The effort builds a continuum of care based on the model presented
in OJJDP's Comprehensive Strategy for Serious, Violent, and Chronic Juvenile Offenders.

 Under this strategy, communities systemically assess the risk factors present in the environment that are known
to foster delinquent behavior in children. A community then develops a strategy to reduce identified risks for delinquency
and increase protective factors that promote healthy and productive behavior. In addition, the community develops
a full range of graduate sanctions, beginning with immediate interventions, that are designed to hold delinquent
juveniles accountable to the victim and the community, ensure community security, and provide a continuum of services
that responds appropriately to the needs of each juvenile offender. While many communities have begun this process
on their own, others throughout the country are engaged in the assessment process as a part of OJJDP's Title V Prevention
Program.



Under the Safe Futures Program, units of local government, or combinations thereof, will have the opportunity to:


&bull;
Build upon a comprehensive delinquency prevention and intervention plan developed by a community planning team.


&bull;
Focus resources and commitment on a geographical area or areas of substantial need.


&bull;
Coordinate and develop effective programs to fill in gaps in delinquency prevention, intervention, and treatment
services according to a community-developed comprehensive plan.




The Grant Program





Through a competitive process, OJJDP would select five units of local government or combinations thereof (three
urban, one rural, one Native American) that propose to establish a continuum of care for the jurisdiction's at-risk
and delinquency youth and their families. If the size of makeup of the applicant's local unit(s) does not make jurisdiction-wide
services practical or desirable, assistance resources may be focused on a localized identified area(s) or neighborhood(s).
The applicant would provide evidence of the following:


&bull;
A comprehensive delinquency prevention, intervention, and graduated sanction plan for their jurisdiction developed
by a broad spectrum of community leaders and residents.


&bull;
The presence of risk factors for delinquency in the selected area(s) or neighborhood(s), such as high rates of crime,
poverty, teenage pregnancy, child abuse and neglect, dysfunctional or single parent families, school drop-outs,
unemployment, or such other factors as the grantee identifies in the community.


&bull;
A needs assessment and a statement of the problem, describing the issues as they pertain to that community.


&bull;
A capacity and commitment to leverage state, local, and private resources and coordinate the necessary systemic
changes to both the juvenile justice and social service delivery systems in order to create an ongoing, comprehensive,
community-based system of care. The grantee would develop, and submit as part of the application process, memoranda
of understanding from those resources included in the continuum of care. These memoranda should demonstrate the
community's interest in solving the problems confronting the community.



The applicant must develop a proposal which either demonstrates the role each of these programs will plan as components
in a comprehensive plan, or shows that these program areas are currently in place in the selected community(ies).
The grant programs listed below are described in greater detail under each of the goal areas of the fiscal year 1995
Program Plan:




