 

Seven shallow monitoring wells were installed at locations to sample surficial groundwater in the coarse Fridley
Formation to determine the Glacial Drift Stratigraphy in the Site area. Heavy concentrations of PAHs were found in
the vicinity of the Retort building in an area where tanks were removed in mid-1979. A plume of PAH compounds was found
to extend to the southwest of the Retort area; however, the concentrations of PAH compounds decreased by more than
two orders of magnitude by the time the plume reached the southern boundary of the Onan property, which was likely due
to the attenuation of the PAH compound in the soil system. Phenolics were not present in the samples from the shallow
groundwater beneath the Onan property at concentrations above the detection limits with the one exception of 4-methylphenol
which was detected in the Retort area. 
 
The Hillside sand aquifer was sampled and found to contain insignificant levels of PAHs and no phenolics compounds.
An eight inch diameter bedrock well, uncovered in 1979 during earth moving activities, was investigated. Approximately
two feet of creosote sludge was discovered at the bottom of the well. All contaminated soil was excavated and placed
in a vault formed by slurry wall and a cap consisting of clean soil and a vegetative cover was constructed over the vault.

 
The direction of groundwater movement in the surficial groundwater system in the upper portion of the Fridley Formation
beneath the Onan property is southwesterly toward Rice and Norton Creeks. Water and sediment samples were collected
from two monitoring stations along Norton Creek and from three monitoring stations along Rice Creek. PAH samples
were measured above detection limits in the surface water and sediment samples from all sampling stations on Rice
and Norton Creeks, including stations upstream of the site, therefore it was impossible to attribute an impact from
the Site to the Creeks. 
 
At the Medtronic Property the waste water treatment lagoons were utilized for disposal of the waste waters generated
by operations. The waste waters contained quantities of creosote and PCP which subsequently contaminated soils
and groundwater beneath the primary and secondary wastewater treatment lagoons and a trench leading to the lagoons.
Both the trench and the lagoons were located on the Medtronics portion of the site, east of Old Central Avenue. Eight
shallow soil borings were installed along the waste water trench and around the primary and secondary waste water
treatment lagoons. High levels of PAHs and heterocyclics were found. Additionally, about 5000 gallons of free oil
were discovered in the vicinity of the primary waste water lagoon. 
 
As with the Site Investigations, remediation at the Boise Cascade Site was conducted separately within the individual
property boundaries. The following remedial actions were implemented at the Site: 
 
 
A slurry wall containment system was constructed around the former retort building. Visually contaminated soil
was excavated and placed in a vault formed by a slurry wall, and a cap was constructed over the vault. The excavated areas
were backfilled with clean soil. A subdrain system was installed in the former loading area to remove groundwater
from the coarse Fridley Formation and discharge it into the City of Fridley sanitary sewer system. A long-term monitoring
of groundwater, surface water, and air quality has been ongoing. 
 
At the Medtronics Property on the basis of the investigations above, Boise and Medtronics companies developed a Remedial
Action Plan (RAP) to excavate and dispose of visibly contaminated soils on the Medtronics portion of the site. The
following Remedial Actions were implemented at the Site: 
 
 
All the visibly contaminated soil in the two wastewater lagoons and in the trench that was used to convey wastewater
from the retort to the lagoons were excavated and disposed of in a hazardous waste facility that had interim status
pursuant to RCRA. Excavated areas were backfilled with clean soil. Groundwater that was in contact with and directly
beneath contaminated soil was collected, treated and disposed of into the City of Fridley sanitary sewer system.
About 5000 gallons of free oil discovered in the vicinity of the primary wastewater lagoon was collected and disposed
offsite. Long-term monitoring of groundwater, surface water, sediments, and air quality has been ongoing. A final
Close Out Report which documents completion of Site construction, was signed on September 30, 1992. 
 
EPA, with the concurrence of the State of Minnesota, has determined that all 
appropriate Fund-financed responses under CERCLA at the Boise 
Cascade/Onan/Medtronics Site have been completed, and no further Superfund 
response is appropriate in order to provide protection of human health and the 
environment. 


 


Dated: October 6, 1994. 


<SIGNER>
David A. Ullrich, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Regional Administrator, USEPA, Region V.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9426383 Filed 102594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050P
</BILLING>




