 

There is also growing societal concern regarding the problem of anti-social violent youth. While the juvenile justice
and adult correctional systems are dealing with the most severe adolescent actions, the child welfare foster care
system is also having to respond to the needs of youth whose behavior makes it impossible for them to remain with their
families or in their communities. 
Youth in the child welfare system are too often only marginally served by existing agencies and the service delivery
system. Most child welfare agencies are hard pressed to develop quality programs and services for this growing population
of older adolescents who have more complex challenges, and who are not as likely to be in residential care due to the
deinstitutionalization movement, the decriminalization of status offenders, and budgetary cutbacks targeting
group care institutions. 

The National Resource Center for Youth Development will help agencies develop the capacity to effectively meet the
needs of youth. This category of youth includes primarily individuals from the age of puberty through age 21. However,
this definition does not exclude consideration of the service needs of individuals who may be slightly younger or
older than the primary target population. In addition to meeting the minimum requirements detailed previously,
applicants need to: 
&bull;Describe a plan for collecting and disseminating educational and occupational related resource materials
and information on issues including, but not limited to, special education, post-secondary education including
vocational and two and four-year academic programs, school drop-out prevention, establishing and maintaining
family connections, illiteracy, job readiness, and effective parenting. 
&bull;Describe a plan for addressing adolescent access to health care, including substance abuse treatment and
prevention issues, specialized services for seriously emotionally disturbed (SED) youths, and related mental
health initiatives with particular attention paid to the psychological trauma related to witnessing and experiencing
violence. 

&bull;Describe strategies for dealing with youth sexuality issues with an emphasis on teen pregnancy and AIDS, and
propose how those techniques will be communicated to adolescents and to the staff of agencies serving youth. 
&bull;Describe a plan for showcasing innovative and successful transitional and independent living programs and
practices dealing with issues such as effective parenting and adolescent input into the design of such programs through
the sponsorship of national conferences. Describe how the Resource Center will go about communicating information
about exemplary transitional and independent living programs to public and private providers with an emphasis on
adaptation and replication. 
CFDA: 93.608 Child Welfare Research and Demonstration: Section 426 of the Social Security Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C.
626. 
9. 

Priority Area 1.01ENational Resource Center on Legal and Court Issues.

 Child welfare agencies administer child welfare programs within a framework of law. The passage of major pieces of
child welfare legislation has prompted continuous reassessment and redefinition of the relationship between State
child welfare agencies and the judiciary. Appropriate responses to confirmed cases of abuse and neglect, termination
of parental rights, and adoption proceedings are eventually settled in the courts. Periodic judicial review of foster
care cases is a Federal statutory requirement. It is not unheard of for judges in some jurisdictions to actually develop
case plans for individual clients, and give casework directives to agency staff. 

Legislatively mandated judicial involvement in the details of case practice has often forced agencies to analyze
and interpret legal issues, court decisions, and judicial pronouncements; determine their implications for programs
and practices; and review and revise their policies and procedures accordingly. Faced with an expanding statutory
and regulatory base, the legal staff of public child welfare agencies have gradually assumed a greater responsibility
for maintaining legal and regulatory compliance and consequently have acquired greater influence in shaping agency
activity. In addition, liability concerns are substantially influencing agency practice. 





