 

III. The Need for Regulations


A. The Current Inspection System Is Not Well-Suited to Seafood


Seafood processors are subject to periodic, unannounced, mandatory inspection by FDA. Seafood processors and importers
are also able to purchase inspection services from the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) of the U.S. Department
of Commerce. These inspection services have been primarily trade-related, such as grading.
Until recently, FDA's overall regulatory program for seafood received slightly over $20 million per year. Because
much of the program involves activities such as research, laboratory analyses, and technical assistance and training
to States, a substantial portion of it has tended to be invisible to the general public. Public interest and debate
tends to focus on the more visible aspects of regulation, primarily inspection. The congressional debate of the past
several years over the adequacy of the Federal regulatory program for seafood has been framed, more often than not,
in terms of the need for mandatory inspection. Traditionally, FDA inspected the equivalent of a quarter of its total
domestic inventory of seafood establishments per year.
Since 1990, however, FDA has received significant funding increases for seafood. The current budget of slightly
over $40 million has permitted the agency to increase the frequency of its inspections. It now inspects so-called
high risk processors at least once per year and all others at least biennially. (Because States also inspect processors,
the collective frequency is actually higher.)
Even so, because of seafood's unique characteristics (e.g., the fact that it is predominantly wild caught and presents
a wide range of possible hazards), it is questionable whether the current regulatory system, which was developed
for the general food supply, is best suited for the seafood industry. The current system provides the agency with a
``snapshot'' of conditions at a facility at the moment of the inspection. However, assumptions must be made about
conditions before and after that inspection on the basis of the ``snapshot,'' as well as about important factors beyond
the facility that have a bearing on the safety of the finished product. The reliability of these assumptions over the
intervals between inspections creates questions about the adequacy of the system, particularly, as the congressional
hearings on the subject over the past several years have shown, for seafood.
FDA's inspections are based upon the regulations on current good manufacturing practice in manufacturing, packing,
or holding human food at part 110 (21 CFR part 110). For the most part, these guidelines consist of broad statements
of general applicability to all food processing on sanitation, facilities, equipment and utensils, processes,
and controls. HACCP-type controls are listed as one of several options available to prevent food contamination (110.80(b)(13)(i))
but they are otherwise not integral to the guidelines.
Current Federal inspection and surveillance strategies verify the industry's knowledge of hazards and preventive
control measures largely by inference, i.e., whether a company's products are in fact adulterated, or whether conditions
in a plant are consistent with current good manufacturing practice (CGMP). Consequently, the current system places
the burden on the Government to prove that a problem exists rather than on the firm to establish for itself, for the regulator,
and for consumers, that adequate controls exist to ensure safety. The current approach is inefficient and, unless
Government inspections are conducted with some frequency, can lead to conditions that can elevate risk and erode
public confidence. It also has the potential to cause some inequities. While the same standards of adulteration apply
to all products in interstate commerce, processors and importers who use a system of preventive controls coupled
with adequate monitoring must compete against those who do not.
A survey conducted by FDA in 19921993 of manufacturers of ready-to-eat seafood products revealed conditions
that strongly suggest the need for a system that emphasizes preventive controls to ensure that products are safe by
design. Ready-to-eat products require special care in processing because they do not require, and are unlikely to
receive, any further cooking by consumers that would destroy pathogenic microorganisms. The survey focused on whether
preventive controls exist rather than on the results of expensive end-product sampling. The agency found that, in
significant measure, firms have not been employing the types of preventive processing steps necessary to ensure
a safe and wholesome product. Some of the preliminary results are as follows (Ref. 21).
1. Fifty-four percent of the firms that pasteurized products had not established the adequacy of their pasteurization
process to destroy pathogenic microorganisms such as the spores of 

C. botulinum,

 type E, which can cause significant illness and death in humans. The pasteurization process is not simple and must
be done with precision in order to consistently deliver a thermal process that will inactivate the spores of 

C. botulinum,

 type E and prevent recontamination of the product after it has been heat treated. The CGMP at part 110 state that pasteurization
must be adequate. Realistically, the only way for FDA to determine, or at least infer, the adequacy of the process now
is to analyze samples of finished product for the presence of pathogens.
2. Twenty-seven percent of the firms that pasteurized products did not have temperature-indicating devices on their
pasteurizers, and 35 percent did not have temperature-recording devices. Temperature monitoring is essential
to ensure that a thermal process is properly controlled. Part 110 addresses temperature indicating and recording
devices only for refrigeration, while pasteurization involves cooking. A temperature-recording device is important
for purposes of preventive control because it provides a continuous history of the cooking step.


