 

Because raw poultry furnish a rich medium for the potential growth of both beneficial and harmful microorganisms,
it has been assumed traditionally that a certain level of microbial activity on the surface tissues of raw poultry
was unavoidable. Consequently, poultry slaughter inspection activities have focused on the organoleptic detection
of poultry diseases or other abnormalities in carcasses and parts that would render the products adulterated or unwholesome.


Over the years, scientific and public concern about microbiological contamination of poultry products has expanded
from the processing of such products to conditions under which poultry are slaughtered, and even to preslaughter
poultry production. FSIS has encouraged the scientific community and the regulated industry to develop slaughtering
and processing methods and treatments that would yield raw poultry products that are as free as practicable of pathogenic
bacteria. The control of miscrooganisms on raw poultry has been given a high priority on FSIS's research agenda. 

Researchers estimate that from 6.5 million to 33 million Americans, or 3 to 14 percent of the population, become ill
each year from consumption of foods containing microorganisms. An estimated 9,000 of these illnesses result in death,
or 4 in 100,000 people. Chapter 4 of a 1985 report by the National Research Council/National Academy of Sciences, Meat
and Poultry Inspection: The Scientific Basis of the Nation's Program, recommended, in part, that the poultry inspection
program be refocused to place greater emphasis on microbiological and chemical testing.
<FOOTCITE>2</FOOTCITE>
 Since the issuance of that report, FSIS has given greater priority to microbiological and chemical testing. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
2

</FOOTNAME>
A copy of Chapter 4 of this report is available for public inspection in the office of the FSIS Hearing Clerk. Page 53
contains the referenced recommendation. 


</FOOTNOTE>


Among the diseases caused by foodborne microorganisms, the one receiving the most publicity in recent years has been
salmonellosis. This common human intestinal disorder was estimated to cost Americans approximately $1 billion
in 1987. 

Much of the concern about 

Salmonella

 in the food supply has focused on chicken. FSIS has encouraged and permitted the industry to use technologies such
as counterflow scalders, chlorinated inplant water, and ionizing radiation to reduce 

Salmonella

 and other pathogenic bacteria. 



Rhone-Poulenc, Inc., Petition 



FSIS has been petitioned by Rhone-Poulenc, Inc., Cranbury, New Jersey, to permit the use of food-grade TSP as a processing
aid in post-chill poultry slaughter operations.
<FOOTCITE>3</FOOTCITE>
 The petitioner requested the use of a treatment solution consisting of TSP dissolved in water to a concentration of
10 percent, plus or minus 2 percent (8 to 12 percent). The petitioner requested exposure of the poultry to the TSP treatment
solution for no more than 15 seconds, with the TSP treatment solution being maintained at 50
&cir; F., plus or minus 5
&cir; F. (45
&cir; F. to 55
&cir; F.). 




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
3

</FOOTNAME>
A copy of this petition is available for public inspection in the office of the FSIS Hearing Clerk. 

</FOOTNOTE>


The petitioner supplied data demonstrating that the use of TSP, under the parameters addressed above, is effective
in reducing the levels of bacteria, including pathogenic bacteria, found on raw, chilled poultry carcasses. Immediately
after chilling, poultry carcasses that have been passed for wholesomeness enter the TSP treatment system. Chilled
poultry carcasses are either sprayed with or dipped in the TSP treatment solution for no more than 15 seconds. The concentration
of TSP used in various studies conducted by or for the petitioner ranged from 8 to 12 percent in water, at temperatures
ranging from 45
&cir; F. to 55
&cir; F. 

Data from the petitioner included results of studies conducted by the Pennsylvania State Sensory Laboratory for
Rhone-Poulenc, Inc., on consumer acceptability of cooked poultry derived from TSP-treated poultry carcasses.
These studies show no significant difference in taste or appearance between cooked poultry from TSP-treated poultry
carcasses and cooked poultry from untreated poultry. 

The petitioner also provided study results concerning moisture pickup and residue findings in poultry carcasses
treated with TSP. According to these study results, the moisture pickup in TSP-treated poultry carcasses does not
exceed regulatory limits for moisture absorption as prescribed in 9 CFR 381.66(d)(5). Residue findings ranged from
^0.25 percent to 0.11 percent, showing that virtually no residue of the TSP solution remains on or in the treated poultry
carcasses. 



