 

FDA's legal authority under sections 201(n), 403(a)(1), and 701(a) of the act to require a warning statement on dry,
whole protein products was upheld in 

Council for Responsible Nutrition 

v. 

Goyan

, Food Drug Cosm. L. Rep. (CCH)  38,057 (D.D.C. 1980). In that case, the plaintiff asserted that the fatal consequences
arising from the use of dry, whole protein products while dieting were not the result of the customary or usual use of
these products, but rather, the result of unusual misuse of such products. Based on FDA's showing that the consumption
of dry protein products could occur in the course of a diet, and that, under certain circumstances in dieting, serious
adverse effects could arise from such use of these products, the court found that FDA properly invoked sections 201(n),
403(a)(1), and 701(a) of the act to impose a requirement that manufacturers warn consumers of the consequences that
could result from the use of such products.
The facts presented by the evidence on iron poisonings parallel those that led the agency to require a warning on protein
products. The use of iron-containing products in households where children are present is in no way an unusual practice.
Multi-vitamin/mineral supplements with iron are routinely taken by children, and products of this type specifically
intended for use by children are widely available and commonly sold. Iron supplements and adult vitamin/mineral
supplements with iron are frequently taken by pregnant women (often with a prescription) and other women of child-bearing
age because they require more iron than other adults (see discussion in section I.A. of this document). Yet, the evidence
on poisonings and deaths shows that the use of any type of iron-containing product in such households can readily lead
to accidental injury or death if children gain access to the products, even though the products are not intended to
be used by children or to be taken in the numbers in which iron-containing tablets or capsules are consumed when poisonings
occur. Thus, 

Council for Responsible Nutrition 

v. 

Goyan

 provides strong support for the agency's authority to require label warning statements concerning the risk of accidental
poisoning from iron-containing food products.
Based upon FDA's authority under sections 201(n), 403(a)(1), and 701(a) of the act, the agency proposes to require
that manufacturers of iron-containing dietary supplements (i.e., children's and adult's multi-vitamin/mineral
supplements that contain iron and products intended for use as iron supplements) disclose information about their
products in the form of a label warning statement that would appear on such products in the manner described below.



c. FDA's legal authority to require label warning statements for drugs

. The act authorizes FDA to regulate the marketing of drug products to ensure that such products are properly labeled.
To carry out the public health protection purposes of the act, FDA, among other things, monitors drug labeling to ensure
that it provides accurate information about drug products.
Under section 502(a) of the act (21 U.S.C. 352), a drug product is misbranded if its labeling is false or misleading
in any particular. The provisions of section 201(n) of the act concerning failure of the labeling to reveal material
facts are applicable to drugs as well as to foods in determining whether labeling is misleading. In addition, under
sections 505(d) and (e) of the act (21 U.S.C. 355(d) and (e)), FDA must refuse to approve a new drug application, and
may withdraw approval for a product, if the product's labeling is false or misleading in any particular.
These statutory provisions, together with section 701(a) of the act, clearly authorize FDA to promulgate a regulation
designed to ensure that patients using drugs will receive information that is material with respect to consequences
that may result from the use of a product. (See 

Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association 

v. 

Food and Drug Administration

, 484 F. Supp. 1179 (D. Del. 1980), aff'd per curiam, 634 F.2d 106 (3d Cir. 1980).)
The act also authorizes FDA to regulate the marketing of drug products to ensure that such products are safe and effective
for their intended uses. Iron-containing drug products are not safe for their intended use as currently labeled,
in part because the labeling fails to warn of iron-containing products' toxic effects in children. Adults are, therefore,
not aware of the need to prevent children from ingesting these products. Because the labeling fails to warn adequately
that these products may produce toxic effects in children, iron-containing products are not being used as intended;
that is, even though they are not intended for children, they are handled in a way that permits their ingestion by children.




