 

(5) Memorandum of Understanding between DOE, FBI, White House 
Military Office, and the U.S. Secret Service Regarding Nuclear Incidents Concerning 
the Office of the President and Vice President of the United States. 
(6) Joint Federal Bureau of Investigation, Department of Energy, and 
Department of Defense Agreement for Response to Improvised Nuclear Device 
Incidents. 


4. DOJ Specific Authorities 


(1) Title 42, U.S.C., 20112284 (Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as 
amended). 
(2) Title 18, U.S.C., 831 (Prohibited Transactions Involving Nuclear 
Materials). 


I. Department of State 
1. Summary of Response Mission 


The Department of State (DOS) is responsible for the conduct of relations 
between the U.S. Government and other governments and international organizations and for the protection of U.S.
interests and citizens abroad. 


In a radiological emergency outside the United States, DOS is responsible for coordinating U.S. Government actions
concerning the event in the country where it occurs (including evacuation of U.S. citizens, if necessary) and internationally.
Should the FRERP be invoked due to the need for domestic action, DOS will continue to hold this role within the FRPCC
structure. Specifically, DOS will coordinate foreign information-gathering activities and, in particular, conduct
all contacts with foreign governments except in cases where existing bilateral agreements permit direct agency-to-agency
cooperation. In the latter situation, the U.S. agency will keep DOS fully 
informed of all communications. 


In a domestic radiological emergency with potential international trans-boundary consequences, DOS will coordinate
all contacts with foreign governments and agencies except where existing bilateral agreements provide for direct
exchange of information. DOS is responsible for conveying the U.S. Government response to foreign offers of assistance.





2. Capabilities and Resources 



The State Department maintains embassies, missions, interest sections (in 
countries where the United States does not have diplomatic relations), and consulates throughout the world. The
State Department Operations Center is capable of secure, immediate, around-the-clock communications with diplomatic
posts. The diplomatic personnel stationed at a post are knowledgeable of local factors important to clear and concise
communication, and frequently speak the local language. The Ambassador is the President's personal representative
to the host government, and his country team is responsible for coordinating official contacts between the U.S. Government
and the host government or international organization. 



3. DOS References 




Task Force Manual for Crisis Management (rev. 11 January 1990). 


4. DOS Specific Authorities 



(1) Presidential Directive/NSC27 (PD27) of January 19, 1978. 
(2) 22 U.S.C. 2656. 
(3) 22 U.S.C. 2671(a)(92)(A). 


J. Department of Transportation 


1. Summary of Response Mission 


The Department of Transportation (DOT) Radiological Emergency Response 
Plan for Non-Defense Emergencies provides assistance to State and local governments when a radiological emergency
adversely affects one or more transportation modes and the States or local jurisdictions requesting assistance
have inadequate technical and logistical resources to meet the demands created by a radiological emergency. 



2. Capabilities and Resources 


DOT can assist Federal, State, and local governments with emergency 
transportation needs and contribute to the response by assisting with the control and protection of transportation
near the area of the emergency. DOT has capabilities to do the following: 

(1) Support State and local governments by identifying sources of civil 
transportation on request and when consistent with statutory responsibilities. 


(2) Coordinate the Federal civil transportation response in support of 
emergency transportation plans and actions with State and local governments. (This may include provision of Federally
controlled transportation assets and the controlling of transportation routes to protect commercial transportation
and to facilitate the movement of response resources to the scene.) 

(3) Provide Regional Emergency Transportation Coordinators and staff 
to assist State and local authorities in planning and response. 

(4) Provide technical advice and assistance on the transportation of 
radiological materials and the impact of the incident on the transportation system. 

(5) Provide exemptions from normal transportation hazardous materials 
regulations if public interest is best served by allowing shipments to be made in variance with the regulations. Most
exemptions are issued following public notice procedures, but if emergency conditions exist, DOT can issue emergency
exemptions by telephone. 


(6) Control airspace, including the imposition of Temporary Flight 
Restrictions and issuance of Notices to Airmen (NOTAMS), both to give priority to emergency flights and protect aircraft
from contaminated airspace. 


DOT is responsible for dealing with the International Atomic Energy Agency 
and foreign Competent Authorities on issues related to packaging and other standards for the international transport
of radioactive materials. If a transport accident involves international shipments of radioactive materials,
DOT will be the point of contact for dealing with the transportation authorities of the foreign country that offered
the material for transport in the United States. 




