 

<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Comments on this notice may be delivered or mailed, in triplicate, to the Federal Aviation Administration, Office
of the Chief Counsel, Attention: Rules Docket (AGC200), Docket No. 27965, 800 Independence Avenue, SW., Room
915G, Washington, DC 20591. Comments submitted must be marked: ``Docket No. 27965.'' Comments may be inspected in
Room 915G between 8:30 a.m. and 5 p.m. on weekdays, except Federal holidays.


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

Eugene Cunningham or Don Cotton, Office of Civil Aviation Security Policy and Planning, Federal Aviation Administration,
800 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20591; telephone (202) 2678701.

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
Comments Invited


Interested persons are invited to participate in the rulemaking by submitting such written data, views, or arguments
as they may desire. Comments relating to environmental, energy, federalism, or international trade impacts that
might result from adopting the proposals in this notice are also invited. Comments must include the regulatory docket
or notice number and be submitted in triplicate to the address above. All comments received, as well as a report summarizing
each substantive public contact with FAA personnel on this rulemaking, will be filed in the docket. The docket is available
for public inspection both before and after the comment closing date.
All comments received on or before the closing date will be considered by the Administrator before taking action on
this proposed rulemaking. Late-filed comments will be considered to the extent practicable. The proposals contained
in this notice may be changed in light of the comments received.
Commenters wishing the FAA to acknowledge receipt of their comments submitted in response to this notice must submit
a pre-addressed, stamped postcard with those comments on which the following statement is made: ``Comments to Docket
No. 27965.'' The postcard will be date-stamped by the FAA and returned to the commenter.


Availability of NPRM


Any person may obtain a copy of this NPRM by submitting a request to the Federal Aviation Administration, Office of
Public Affairs, Attention: Public Inquiry Center (APA200), 800 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC
20591, or by calling (202) 2673484. Requests must include the notice or docket number.
Persons interested in being placed on a mailing list for future rulemaking actions should request a copy of Advisory
Circular 112A, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking Distribution System, which describes the application procedure.


Background


The Security Regulatory Scheme


Sections 315 and 316 of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, as amended (FAAct) (49 U.S.C. app. 1356, 1357), require the
FAA to prescribe rules, as needed, to protect persons and property aboard aircraft against acts of criminal violence
and aircraft piracy, and to prescribe rules for screening passengers for weapons. To carry out the provisions of the
FAAct, the FAA has adopted rules requiring airport operators, air carriers, indirect air carriers, and foreign air
carriers to carry out various duties for civil aviation security. Part 107 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR)
(14 CFR part 107) applies to certain airport operators; part 108 (14 CFR part 108) governs certain air carriers. Part
109 (14 CFR part 109) applies to indirect air carriers, such as freight forwarders, who engage indirectly in air transportation
of property. Part 129 (14 CFR part 129) applies to the operation of foreign air carriers within the United States.
Parts 107, 108, 109, and 129 contain general requirements for promoting civil aviation security. Each airport operator,
air carrier, indirect air carrier, and foreign air carrier covered by these parts also has a security program that
is approved or accepted by the Administrator, containing information that specifies how airport operators and air
carriers perform their regulatory and statutory responsibilities. The security programs are available only to
persons with the need to know, as described more fully below.
Each air carrier's security program is a comprehensive document that details the full range of security procedures
and countermeasures that air carriers are required to perform under 108.5 of the FAR. This program includes
procedures for: (1) screening of passengers, carry-on baggage, checked baggage, and cargo; (2) using screening
devices (such as X-ray systems and metal detectors); (3) controlling access to aircraft and air carrier facilities;
(4) reporting and responding to bomb threats, hijackings, and weapons discovered during screening; (5) reporting
and protecting bomb threat information; (6) identifying special procedures required at airports with special security
needs; and (7) training and testing standards for crewmembers and security personnel.
The airport security program is a comprehensive document that details the full range of security procedures and countermeasures
that airport operators are required to perform under 107.3. Most programs include the: (1) Description of
the air operations area (AOA), each area on or adjacent to the airport that affects the security of the AOA, and air carrier
exclusive areas; (2) procedures to control access to the AOA; (3) alternate security procedures for use in emergency
and other unusual conditions; and (4) law enforcement support training and record maintenance programs in furtherance
of part 107. Programs for some airports include a description of the law enforcement support training program and
the system for maintaining records.
The indirect air carrier security program covers security procedures for cargo that is accepted for transport on
air carrier aircraft. In general, it requires indirect air carriers to carry out security procedures for handling
cargo that will be carried on air carrier aircraft.


</SUPPLEM>
