 

In order to be considered for a grant under this Announcement, an application must be submitted on the Standard Form
424 which has been approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under Control Number 03480043. A copy
has been provided (see Appendix B). Each application must be signed by an individual authorized to act for the applicant
and to assume responsibility for the obligations imposed by the terms and conditions of the grant award. 

Appendix C contains certification forms regarding drug free work place, debarment, and lobbying. Only the certification
regarding lobbying must be signed and returned with the application. Applications must be prepared in accordance
with the guidance provided in this Announcement. 



B. Application Submission 



One signed original and two copies of the grant application, including all attachments, are required. The program
announcement number (ACYFHS 

XXXX

) must be clearly identified on the application. Each application must be limited to no more than 50 double-spaced
pages of program narrative (not including the forms which make up the SF424 and resumes) including the one-page
project summary. If the application is more that 50 double-spaced pages, the other pages will be removed from the application
and not considered by the reviewers. 

The application must be paginated beginning with the Form 424 and also contain a table of contents listing each section
of the application with the respective pages identified. Only one application per applicant will be accepted. 



C. Application Consideration 




Applicants will be scored against the evaluation criteria described above. The review will be conducted in Washington,
D.C. 


The results of the competitive review will be taken into consideration by the Associate Commissioner, Head Start
Bureau, in recommending the project to be funded. The Commissioner of ACYF will make the final selection of the applicants
to be funded. An application may be funded in whole or in part, depending on the relative need for services, applicant
ranking, geographic location and funds available. 

The Commissioner may also elect not to provide funding to applicants experiencing problems in providing quality
services. 


Successful applicants will be notified through the issuance of a Financial Assistance Award which sets forth the
amount of funds granted, the terms and conditions of the grant, the effective date of the grant, the budget period for
which support is given, and the total project period for which support is provided. 


D. Checklist for a Complete Application 




The checklist below is for your use to ensure that your application package has been properly prepared. 



_One original, signed and dated application plus two 
copies. 
_Application length does not exceed 50 double-spaced pages 
_A complete application consists of the following items 
in this order: 
_Application for Federal Assistance (SF 424, REV.488); 
Narrative; 
_Staff Resumes; 
_A completed SPOC certification with the date of SPOC 
contact entered in line 16, page 1 of the SF 424, 
REV.488); 




