 

4. A new 674.5 is added to read as follows: 


674.5

Federal Perkins Loan program cohort default rate and penalties. 


(a) 

Default penalty

. If an institution's cohort default rate meets the following levels, a default penalty is imposed on the institution
as follows: 
(1) If the institution's cohort default rate equals or exceeds 15 percent, the institution must establish a default
reduction plan in accordance with 674.6. 
(2) If the institution's cohort default rate equals or exceeds 20 percent, but is less than 25 percent, the institution's
FCC is reduced by 10 percent. 
(3) If the institution's cohort default rate equals or exceeds 25 percent, but is less than 30 percent, the institution's
FCC is reduced by 30 percent. 
(4) If the institution's cohort default rate equals or exceeds 30 percent, the institution's FCC is reduced to zero.

(b) 

Cohort default rate

. (1) The term ``cohort default rate'' means, for any award year in which 30 or more current and former students at the
institution enter repayment on a loan received for attendance at the institution, the percentage of those current
and former students who enter repayment in that award year on the loans received for attendance at that institution
who default before the end of the following award year. 
(2) In determining the number of students who default before the end of the following award year, the Secretary excludes
any loans that, due to improper servicing or collection, would result in an inaccurate or incomplete calculation
of the cohort default rate. 
(3) For any award year in which less than 30 current and former students at the institution enter repayment on a loan
received for attendance at the institution, the ``cohort default rate'' means the percentage of those current and
former students who entered repayment on loans received for attendance at that institution in any of the three most
recent award years and who defaulted on those loans before the end of the award year immediately following the year
in which they entered repayment. 
(c) 

Defaulted loans to be included in the cohort default rate

. For purposes of calculating the cohort default rate under paragraph (b) of this section_
(1) A borrower must be included only if the borrower's default has persisted for at least_
(i) 240 consecutive days for loans repayable in monthly installments; or 
(ii) 270 consecutive days for loans repayable in quarterly installments; 
(2) A loan is considered to be in default if a payment is made by the institution of higher education, its owner, agency,
contractor, employee, or any other entity or individual affiliated with the institution, in order to avoid default
by the borrower; 
(3)(i) Any loan that is in default, but on which the borrower has made satisfactory arrangements to repay the loan,
or any loan that has been rehabilitated before the end of the following award year is not considered to be in default
for purposes of the cohort default rate calculation; and 
(ii) In the case of a student who has attended and borrowed at more than one institution, the student and his or her subsequent
repayment or default are attributed to the institution for attendance at which the student received the loan that
entered repayment in the award year; and 
(4) Improper servicing or collection means the failure of the institution to comply with subpart C of this part. 
(d) 

Locations of the institution

. (1) A cohort default rate of an institution applies to all locations of the institution as it exists on the first day
of the award year for which the rate is calculated. 
(2) A cohort default rate of an institution applies to all locations of the institution from the date the institution
is notified of that rate until the institution is notified by the Secretary that the rate no longer applies. 
(3) For an institution that changes status from a location of one institution to a free-standing institution, the
Secretary determines the cohort default rate based on the institution's status as of July 1 of the award year for which
a cohort default rate is being calculated. 
(4)(i) For an institution that changes status from a free-standing institution to a location of another institution,
the Secretary determines the cohort default rate based on the combined number of students who enter repayment during
the applicable award year and the combined number of students who default during the applicable award years from both
the former free-standing institution and the other institution. This cohort default rate applies to the new consolidated
institution and all of its current locations. 
(ii) For free-standing institutions that merge, the Secretary determines the cohort default rate based on the combined
number of students who enter repayment during the applicable award year and the combined number of students who default
during the applicable award years from both of the institutions that are merging. This cohort default rate applies
to the new, consolidated institution. 
(iii) For an institution that changes status from a location of one institution to a location of another institution,
the Secretary determines the cohort default rate based on the combined number of students who enter repayment during
the applicable award year and the number of students who default during the applicable award years from both of the
institutions in their entirety, not limited solely to the respective locations. 





