 




<DOCTITLE>Issuance of Decisions and Orders; Week of September 12 Through September 16, 1994 </DOCTITLE>



During the week of September 12 through September 16, 1994 the decisions and orders summarized below were issued with
respect to appeals and applications for other relief filed with the Office of Hearings and Appeals of the Department
of Energy. The following summary also contains a list of submissions that were dismissed by the Office of Hearings
and Appeals. 


Appeals 





David W. Loveless, 09/13/94, LFA0410

 


David W. Loveless filed an Appeal from a determination issued by the Robotics Technology Development Program (Robotics
Program) of the DOE's Office of Technology Development in response to a Request for Information submitted under the
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). Mr. Loveless sought information regarding the Westinghouse Idaho Nuclear Company
(WINCO) Remote Tank Inspection (RTI) robot, as well as other Westinghouse robotics programs. In considering the
Appeal, the DOE found that there was an inadequate search for materials. Accordingly the Appeal was granted and the
request was remanded for a further search.


 

William D. Lawrence, 09/14/94, LFA0409




William D. Lawrence filed an Appeal from a determination issued to him by the Deputy Director of the Office of Intergovernmental
Affairs of the DOE's Albuquerque Operations Office (Albuquerque Operations) in response to a Request for Information
submitted under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). Albuquerque Operations had withheld in its entirety an Equal
Employment Opportunity (EEO) counseling file under the deliberative process privilege of Exemption 5 and under
Exemption 6 of the FOIA. 

In considering the Appeal, the DOE found that most of the withheld material contained little or no deliberative material.
Accordingly, the DOE found that this material could not be withheld pursuant to Exemption 5 without some further justification
and reference to the policies articulated in the 1993 Memorandum of Attorney General Janet Reno concerning the FOIA.
The DOE did find that some of the material related to a potential settlement was correctly withheld under the ``executive''
privilege of Exemption 5. In considering withholdings under Exemption 6, the DOE found that Albuquerque Operations
had correctly withheld the identities, personal identifiers (such as names, home addresses, phone numbers, and
social security numbers), and information which would identify the EEO Complainant and witnesses on the grounds
that such information would be a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy without any offsetting public
interest. The DOE determined that Albuquerque Operations should either release the remaining material or explain
the basis for withholding. Finally, the DOE agreed with Albuquerque Operations that the EEO Counselor notes were,
in this case, not ``agency records'' because they were not placed in DOE files nor shown to other DOE personnel and were
kept or destroyed at the sole discretion of the EEO Counselor. Accordingly, the Appeal was granted in part, denied
in part, and remanded to Albuquerque Operations for a new determination in accordance with the guidance set forth
in the Decision and Order. 


