 

Similar to other facilities seeking upfront exclusions, this upfront exclusion (

i.e.,

 an exclusion based on information characterizing the process and waste) would be contingent upon the analytical
testing of the petitioned waste once stabilization is initiated at BSC's Sparrows Point facility. Specifically,
BSC will be required to collect representative samples of stabilized filter cake to verify that the stabilization
process is on-line and operating as described in the petition. The verification testing requires BSC to demonstrate
that the proposed stabilization process, once on-line, will generate a non-hazardous waste (

i.e.,

 a waste that meets the Agency's verification testing conditions).

From the evaluation of BSC's delisting petition, a list of constituents was developed for the verification testing
conditions. Tentative maximum allowable leachable concentrations for these constituents were derived by back
calculating from the delisting health-based levels through the proposed fate and transport model for a landfill
management scenario. These concentrations (

i.e.,

 ``delisting levels'') are the proposed verification testing conditions of the exclusion.

The Agency encourages the use of upfront delisting petitions because they have the advantage of allowing the applicant
to know what treatment levels for constituents will be sufficient to render specific wastes non-hazardous, before
investing in new or modified waste treatment systems. Therefore, upfront delistings will allow new facilities to
receive exclusions prior to generating wastes, which, without upfront exclusions, would unnecessarily have been
considered hazardous. Upfront delistings for existing facilities can be processed concurrently during construction
or permitting activities; therefore, new or modified treatment systems should be capable of producing wastes that
are considered non-hazardous, and managed as such sooner than otherwise would be possible. At the same time, conditional
testing requirements to verify that the delisting levels are achieved by the fully operational treatment systems
will maintain the integrity of the delisting program and will ensure that only non-hazardous wastes are removed from
Subtitle C control.

Finally, the Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments of 1984 specifically require the Agency to provide notice and an
opportunity for comment before granting or denying a final exclusion. Thus, a final decision will not be made until
all public comments (including those at public hearings, if any) on today's proposal are addressed.



II. Disposition of Delisting Petition



Bethlehem Steel Corporation, Sparrows Point, Maryland.



A. Petition for Exclusion



Bethlehem Steel Corporation (BSC), located in Sparrows Point, Maryland, is involved in the production of tin and
chromium plated parts and steel strip. BSC petitioned the Agency to exclude its chemically stabilized wastewater
treatment filter cake presently listed as EPA Hazardous Waste No. F006_``Wastewater treatment sludges from electroplating
operations except from the following processes: (1) Sulfuric acid anodizing of aluminum; (2) tin plating on carbon
steel; (3) zinc plating (segregated basis) on carbon steel; (4) aluminum or zinc-aluminum plating on carbon steel;
(5) cleaning/stripping associated with tin, zinc and aluminum plating on carbon steel; and (6) chemical etching
and milling of aluminum''. The listed constituents of concern for EPA Hazardous Waste No. F006 waste are cadmium,
hexavalent chromium, nickel, and cyanide (complexed) (see part 261, appendix VII).

BSC petitioned the Agency to exclude its stabilized filter cake because it does not believe that the waste, once generated,
will meet the criteria of the listing. BSC claims that its treatment process will generate a non-hazardous waste because
the constituents of concern in the waste are either not present or are in an essentially immobile form. BSC also believes
that the waste will not contain any other constituents that would render the waste hazardous. Review of this petition
included consideration of the original listing criteria, as well as the additional factors required by the Hazardous
and Solid Waste Amendments (HSWA) of 1984. See section 222 of HSWA, 42 U.S.C. 6921(f), and 40 CFR 260.22(d)(2)(4).
Today's proposal to grant this petition for delisting is the result of the Agency's evaluation of BSC's petition.



B. Background



On January 2, 1991, BSC petitioned the Agency to exclude its stabilized filter cake from the lists of hazardous wastes
contained in 261.31 and 261.32, and subsequently provided additional information to complete its
petition. Specifically, BSC requested that the Agency grant an upfront exclusion (

i.e.,

 an exclusion that applies to waste not presently generated) for dewatered filter cake that will be stabilized using
lime kiln dust and powerplant fly ash at its Sparrows Point facility.






