 

5. Funding 



Six commenters requested that the Department allow funding for activities conducted prior to grant award. Two of
these specifically made this suggestion to prevent lack of assistance where there are delays in funding that are not
the fault of the grantee_suggesting funding of activities beginning at the earlier of award approval or 30 days after
application submission, which is the date by which funds should have been awarded. One suggestion was to allow funding
for activities conducted prior to the grant award and after NOI submission because this would be consistent with other
HUD programs_specifically the Department's Section 202 (12 U.S.C. 1701q) program. Under the Section 202 program,
previous expenses must be fully documented and fall within application budget.

The Department has decided to allow reimbursement of funds back to the time when the applicant became eligible for
grant funds. For Resident Capacity grants this will be the time the owner files any Notice of Intent to Proceed. For
Predevelopment grants this will be the time the owner has indicated an intent to sell the property. This decision was
based in part on the increased resident notification period, which will inherently delay the time which grant funds
are awarded and received by the recipient. While grantees may be reimbursed for eligible activities, they undertake
these activities at their own risk. If a grant is not subsequently awarded, there will be no mechanism for compensating
the applicant. To qualify for reimbursement, activities performed prior to the grant award must be eligible activities
under the NOFA and must be clearly identified in the application submission package. 

One commenter requested that residents be informed when grant is awarded. The Department has adopted this requirement.


The Department has rejected a suggestion that the grants be competitive with quarterly awards, rather than ongoing
awards, in order to give residents more time to get applications and formally comment. The statute allows applications
on a rolling basis, and requiring a grantee to wait several months for an award could hinder a resident-supported purchase
for the property. 

One commenter was concerned that $200,000 would not be enough to cover predevelopment costs for most projects. This
funding limit is statutory, and the Department has no discretion to alter the limit. 

Four commenters sought clarification on what terminating the current grant program means. In order to ensure continuity
of the program, they suggest that: awardees under the September 3, 1992, NOFA should be able to apply for new funds as
soon as old funds are obligated; grantees should not be able to receive grants over the total of this NOFA; and, because
it is an ongoing process, grantees should not be required to expend all funds awarded in the 1992 NOFA. In this NOFA the
Department is allowing applications from grantees with active grants under the September 3, 1992, NOFA; however,
as awards are made by the intermediary, the previous awards shall be terminated. It is impractical for grantees to
report to both the HUD field office and the intermediary on ongoing grant status. The total grant award from both NOFAs
must not be greater than the total allowed in this NOFA. 

There were ten comments on the Department's method for funding technical assistance grants on a State-by-State basis.
One concern was that basing fund allocation solely on active Notices of Intent, plus active Plans of Action, will be
skewed, because this does not directly correlate with preservation sales activity. The Department should not include
cases where owners have not yet indicated an intention to sell; rather, funding for predevelopment grants should
be tied to the number of NOIs to sell plus binding sales commitments. Another suggested that the same allocation formula
should not be used for both Resident Capacity and Predevelopment grants. Several commented that the formula should
remain flexible to reflect actual activity levels in States, and suggested a hold-back so that funds could be reallocated
according to actual participation levels. Several others suggested a reallocation method between States. The Department
seriously considered using only Notices of Intent to Sell as the criteria for a State breakdown of funding. The Department
cannot use binding commitments as an indicator, because it will not have these in advance of the State-by-State allocation.
However, experience from the September 3, 1992, NOFA shows that an owner's Initial Notice of Intent is only a partial
indication of what an owner will actually do. Therefore, the Department will not change its method for allocation
by State. The Department has also decided not to maintain a holdback, but will reallocate funds between intermediaries
if levels of grant activity justify a reallocation. 



