 

Background 



The proposed rules are primarily aimed at further clarifying and relaxing existing REA regulations concerning post-loan
and system construction policies and procedures. Further clarification of REA policy would ease borrower reporting
requirements by clearly defining certain post-loan construction procedures, such as contract construction and
closeout procedures. 

In part 1744, subpart B is revised to explain what REA means by ``in the interests of the Government''. Also, definitions
sections of subpart B and subpart C are combined into a single list of definitions, located in subpart B. 

In part 1753, subpart B is revised to delete definitions which merely repeat those in subpart A. Also, a monthly construction
progress reporting requirement is deleted because it contains information reported elsewhere. 

Subparts F and I are revised to increase the maximum allowable dollar amount of the Form 773 contract. This requires
miscellaneous revisions throughout part 1753. 

Minor and technical corrections are made throughout part 1753. 

Appendices A through F are revised to change the requirement to distribute certain documents to REA. 

Specifically, Appendix A is amended by adding to the table the distribution of Seismic Safety Certifications, required
by 7 CFR part 1792, to the contractor and REA. 

Appendix B is amended by removing from the table the distribution of the Switching Diagram and Set of Drawings to REA,
and to delete reference to REA Form 744 which has been replaced by REA Form 754. 

Appendix C is amended by removing from the table the distribution of Final Key Maps and Final Central Office Area and
Town Detail Maps to REA, and to reduce to one copy the number of other final documents required for REA. 

Appendix D is amended to comply with the revisions proposed to Appendix C. 

Appendix E is amended by removing from the table the distribution of Detail Maps and Key Maps to REA. 

Appendix F is amended by adding to the table the distribution of REA Form 213, Buy American Certificate to REA. 



List of Subjects 



7 CFR Part 1744 



Accounting, Loan programs-communications, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Rural areas, Telephone.




7 CFR Part 1753 



Loan programs-communications, Telecommunications, Telephone. 




For reasons set forth in the preamble, 7 CFR chapter XVII is proposed to be amended as follows: 



PART 1744_POST-LOAN POLICIES AND PROCEDURES COMMON TO GUARANTEED AND INSURED TELEPHONE LOANS 



1. The authority citation for part 1744 continues to read as follows: 






Authority:

 7 U.S.C. 901 

et seq.

, 1921 

et seq.




 

2. In 1744.40, paragraph (a)(3) is revised to read as follows: 



1744.40 

Non-act purposes. 



(a) *** 

(3) Approval of the request is in the interests of the Government. Generally, it would not be in the Government's interest
if the accommodation or subordination is being requested to enable the borrower to avoid complying with such REA policies
or procedures, as competitive bid procedures or purchasing equipment acceptable to REA, under 7 CFR part 1753. 



* * * * * 


