 

3. 1993 Revised RfC 



The original RfC for Mn was revised, in part, because newer 
information supplied in conjunction with the resubmittal of the 
MMT waiver application by Ethyl indicated that the workers' 
exposure levels in the principal study had probably not increased 
over time, and thus the modifying factor could be ``eliminated'' 
(i.e., set equal to 1). Another reason for revising the original 
RfC was that more recent studies (Roels et al., 1992; Mergler et 
al., 1994) provided additional evidence of health effects in 
workers at relatively low airborne concentrations of Mn. 

Independently of their earlier study of Mn-exposed workers (Roels et al., 1987), Roels et al. (1992) conducted a cross-sectional
study of neurobehavioral and other endpoints in another group of workers from a different factory-namely, 92 male
alkaline-battery plant workers exposed to manganese dioxide (MnO

2

) dust_who were compared to a matched control group of 101 male workers without industrial Mn exposure. The geometric
mean 
occupational-lifetime integrated respirable dust concentration 
was 793 

m

g Mn/m3 &times; years (range: 40 to 4,433). The equivalent 
value for total dust was 3,505 

m

g Mn/m3 &times; years (range: 191 to 
27,465). The authors noted that the monitored concentrations 
were representative of the usual exposures of the workers because 
work practices had not changed during the last 15 years of the 
plant's operation. No data on particle size or chemical purity 
were provided in the report by Roels et al. (1992), but based on 
information provided by Roels et al. (1992) and Roels (1993), the 
median cut point for the respirable dust fraction was 5 

m

m 
aerodynamic diameter. The respirable fraction is more 
representative of the toxicologically significant particles 
(i.e., the smaller particles that are inhaled and deposit 
predominantly in the lower respiratory tract). Total dust 
measurements comprised the respirable dust as well as larger 
particles that deposit predominantly in the nose and throat 
region (via nasal breathing) and would be cleared more rapidly 
from the respiratory tract than the smaller particles retained in 
the lower regions. Therefore, the respirable dust measurements 
were considered to be a more accurate indicator of exposure in 
relation to the observed health effects. 

Manganese-exposed workers in the 1992 study by Roels et al. 
performed significantly worse than matched controls on several 
measures of neurobehavioral function, particularly visual 
reaction time, eye-hand coordination, and hand steadiness. 
Similar neurobehavioral impairments were also found in the 
earlier study by Roels et al. (1987) of a different occupational 
population exposed to mixed Mn oxides and salts at approximately 
the same levels of total dust (respirable dust was not measured). 
In addition, a recent study in Canada by Mergler et al. (1994) 
indicated that, among other effects, performance on tests of the 
ability to make rapid alternating hand movements, to maintain 
hand steadiness, and to perform other aspects of fine motor 
control was significantly worse, compared to matched controls, in 
workers who were exposed to even lower concentrations of 
respirable dust (35 

m

g Mn/m3 at the time of the study). If 
Mergler et al. had included information on integrated past 
exposure levels (which they have since provided to ORD in a 
preliminary form not yet submitted for publication), their study 
would have provided a fivefold lower LOAEL for the derivation of 
the RfC. In addition, reports of a Swedish study of Mn-exposed 
steel workers (Iregren, 1990; Wennberg et al., 1991, 1992) 
provided compelling evidence of comparable neurobehavioral 
impairments, including slower reaction time and finger-tapping 
speed. The median total dust concentration in the Swedish study 
was 140 

m

g Mn/m3, with respirable dust reported as constituting 
20 to 80% of individual workers' total dust exposures. Thus, the 
LOAEL from this study would be somewhat lower than that from 
Roels et al. (1992), but the less fully characterized exposure 
histories in the Swedish study made it more appropriate as a 
supporting (rather than principal) study for deriving the Mn RfC. 

Taken together, the above epidemiological studies provide a 
consistent pattern of evidence indicating that neurotoxicity is 
associated with low-level occupational Mn exposure. The fact 
that speed and coordination of motor function are especially 
impaired is particularly noteworthy, given its consistency with 
other epidemiological, clinical, and experimental animal evidence 
of higher concentration Mn intoxication. 

Differences among these studies in the duration of workers' 
exposure to Mn raise another issue of relevance to this 
discussion. In the Roels et al. (1992) study, the mean period of 
exposure was 5.3 years (range: 0.2 to 17.7 years). In the other 
studies, the mean durations of exposure were longer: 7.1 years 
in Roels et al. (1987), 9.9 years in Iregren (1990), and 16.7 
years in Mergler et al. (1994). The indications of lower LOAELs 
in the Canadian and Swedish studies suggest that neurobehavioral 
effects might occur at lower concentrations of Mn if the exposure 
periods were longer. In addition, the age of the workers may be 
an important factor in interpreting these findings. The oldest 
worker in the Roels et al. (1992) study was less than 50 years 
old; also, the average age in that study was only 31.3 years, 
versus 34.3 years in Roels et al. (1987), 43.4 years in Mergler 
et al. (1994), and 46.4 years in Iregren (1990). These points 
suggest that longer exposure and/or testing later in life might 
result in the detection of effects at lower concentrations than 
is possible after shorter periods of exposure and/or in younger 
workers. On the other hand, it is also evident from these 
studies that a much shorter period than a full lifetime of 
occupational Mn exposure may be sufficient to induce Mn 
neurotoxicity. 



