 

In addition, the Department notes that in Arthur D. Little's own ``cash 
flow'' model, long-run sales of appliances are seemingly unaffected by price; 
Arthur D. Little has assumed there is no consumer reaction to price, or in 
other words, a price elasticity of zero.
<FOOTCITE>13</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
13

</FOOTNAME>
This result may be found by examining Appendix C of the ADL report which contains the results of its cash flow model.
In it, two cases are discussed: a constant volume case and a variable volume case. The distinction between the two is
that in the former, production volume is assumed to be constant for each year, while in the latter, volume is constant
for each year until 1997 (two years before standards when, presumably, sales rise in anticipation of higher prices)
through 2003. The volume then goes back to the same constant level in 2004. Thus, the results indicate that consumers
respond to the coming price increase, but after six years, their demand falls back to the original level, despite the
higher price. Thus, aside from a short run effect over a six-year period, the price elasticity of demand is zero.

</FOOTNOTE>


This assumption would imply that manufacturers were completely free to 
set price at any level they wanted. 
Another area in which the Arthur D. Little report was critical of the 
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory-Manufacturer Impact Model was in the treatment of 
dynamic adjustment issues. As Arthur D. Little's report stated, ``To determine 
the impact on manufacturers, the Manufacturer Impact Model only examines two 
static cases *** and misses important changes in the health of the industry 
[during the adjustment period].'' (Association of Home Appliance 
Manufacturers, 

Id.

). 
The ``two static cases'' to which Arthur D. Little is referring are the 
base and standards cases. However, Arthur D. Little is incorrect in stating 
that these two cases are static. As is documented in the Technical Support 
Document, the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory-Manufacturer Impact Model also 
computes a short-run analysis, the sole purpose of which is to assess the 
dynamic impact of standards, in addition to computing the long-run analysis to 
determine the impacts after those dynamic impacts have been absorbed. The 
dynamic effect that is captured with the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory-Manufacturer Impact Model short-run analysis
is the extra price competition 
that may occur when the quantity demanded is suddenly reduced by the 
standards-induced price increase. This dynamic effect generally results in 
lower profitability over the short-run, as compared to over the long-run, 
especially at the higher standard levels as reported in Section IV below. 
This effect is completely ignored by the Arthur D. Little model with its zero 
price elasticity. However, Arthur D. Little does address a different dynamic 
effect which the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory-Manufacturer Impact Model does 
ignore. 
The dynamic effect addressed by Arthur D. Little is the forward time- 
shifting of appliance purchases in anticipation of a standards-induced price 
increase. The Department has been aware of this for some time, but has not 
incorporated it into the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory-Manufacturer Impact 
Model because of a lack of data on the extent of purchase time-shifting. 
Additionally, the Department believes that any effect of time-shifting 
is initially positive and then negative. When appliances are bought in 
advance of standards, the initial effect probably would be to improve profits 
and cash flow. When the quantity demanded falls temporarily after standards, 
the effect probably would be to hurt profits and cash flow. These two effects 
very nearly should cancel over time. The Department notes that this result is 
in sharp contrast to the dynamic effect that the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory- 
Manufacturer Impact Model does consider, which has a non-recoverable impact on 
the industry. Nonetheless, DOE agrees that time-shifting could bear further 
investigation and will evaluate whether the estimates supplied by Arthur D. 
Little on the magnitude of time-shifting can be of use. 






