 

6. Other Facilities 




In addition to facilities that are in business to manage wastes or recoverable materials received from other generators,
some facilities that provide support services may indirectly receive wastes or recoverable materials which are
potential organic HAP emission sources. Two types of such facilities have been identified by the EPA: (1) Facilities
where empty drums previously used to hold wastes or recoverable containing organics are cleaned and reconditioned
for reuse; and (2) truck terminal facilities at which tank trucks used for chemical waste or recoverable material
transport are cleaned and rinsed prior to being used to transport a new load. At both of these types of facilities, organic
HAP emissions can occur from the wastewater treatment system operated at the facility to treat the wastes and cleaning
solutions drained from drums or truck tanks as a result of the container cleaning operation. Wastewater treatment
operations are expected to be the primary source of organic HAP emissions at these types of facilities. 

The need for and frequency of cleaning a drum and tank truck depends on the type of service in which the container is used.
If drums and tank trucks are reused for the same type of product or wastes (i.e., dedicated service), the containers
do not need to be cleaned between each use. Only when a drum or tank truck is used for different types of products or wastes
(i.e, nondedicated service) is there frequent cleaning of the containers. Of the approximately 45 million drums
used annually in the United States, about 5.6 million are estimated to be in nondedicated service. Approximately
20,000 tank trucks of the nationwide total of 91,000 are estimated to be in nondedicated service. 



C. Nationwide Organic HAP Emissions 



The EPA estimated organic HAP emissions from typical or average size facilities in each of the off-site waste and recovery
operations facility segments described in the previous section of this notice using the best information available
to the Agency at the time the estimates were completed. The type, amount, and date of this information varied for each
of the different off-site waste and recovery operation facility segments. The estimate results are presented in
the BID for this proposed rulemaking. Based on these estimates, the EPA identified the following off-site waste and
recovery operations facility segments likely to include some individual facilities that are major sources of HAP
emissions as defined under CAA section 112: (1) Hazardous waste TSDF; (2) industrial waste landfills other than construction
and demolition debris landfills; (3) industrial wastewater treatment facilities; (4) crude oil reclamation facilities
and EP waste land treatment facilities; and (5) used oil re-refining facilities. 

The EPA estimates that there are the following numbers of existing off-site waste and recovery operations facilities
in the United States: 710 hazardous waste TSDF receiving wastes from off-site; 10 industrial waste landfills receiving
nonhazardous industrial waste other than construction and demolition debris from off-site; 15 privately-owned
industrial wastewater treatment facilities; 11 crude oil reclamation facilities; 15 EP waste land treatment
facilities; and 4 used oil re-refineries. Many but not all of these facilities would be designated as major sources
of HAP emissions as defined under CAA section 112. Insufficient information is available the EPA to project numbers
for new off-site waste and recovery operations facilities. The EPA is requesting information from affected industries
and other interested parties to improve the Agency's profile of existing and new off-site waste and recovery operations
in the United States. 

The total nationwide organic HAP emissions from the off-site waste and recovery operations source category are estimated
by the EPA to be approximately 51,500 megagrams of organic HAP per year (Mg/yr). Approximately 90 percent of these
organic HAP emissions (approximately 46,000 Mg/yr) are estimated to occur from the operations at hazardous waste
TSDF receiving waste or recoverable materials from off-site. 



