 


A wide spectrum of health effects have been associated with exposure to ETS. These effects include mucous membrane
irritation, decrease in respiratory system performance, adverse effects on the cardiovascular system, reproductive
effects, and cancer. The following section also presents more detailed information on these health effects. 




1. Pharmacokinetics 





Whether a chemical elicits toxicity or not depends not only on its inherent potency and site specificity but also on
how the human system can metabolize and excrete that particular chemical. To produce health effects, the constituents
of ETS must be absorbed and must be present in appropriate concentration at the sites of action. After absorption,
some of these contaminants are metabolized to less toxic metabolites while some carcinogens are activated by metabolism
in the body. Available biomarkers of ETS, such as nicotine, clearly show that nonsmoker exposure is of sufficient
magnitude to be absorbed and to result in measurable levels of these biomarkers. There is sufficient evidence in the
literature to indicate that several components of sidestream smoke are rapidly absorbed and widely distributed
within the body. However, the extent of absorption, distribution, retention and metabolism of these contaminants
in the body depends upon various physiological and pharmacokinetic parameters that are influenced by gender, race,
age and smoking habits of the exposed individuals. These parameters and others may result in differences in susceptibility
among exposed subpopulations. Nicotine is one of the most widely studied constituents of tobacco smoke. There have
been numerous studies on the pharmacokinetics of nicotine in both animals and man. 





(a) Absorption and distribution. 

Absorption and distribution of tobacco smoke constituents are usually measured by using surrogate markers. A correlation
between nicotine absorption and exposure to tobacco smoke has between demonstrated, thus making nicotine an appropriate
marker for tobacco smoke in pharmacokinetic studies. The steady state volume of distribution for nicotine is large
indicating that it is widely distributed within the body [Ex. 4185]. Nicotine has been shown to bind with plasma
proteins which may interfere with elimination and thereby prolong retention in the body. The studies in the docket
clearly indicate that nicotine and other constituents of tobacco smoke are readily absorbed and distributed throughout
the body thereby increasing the potential of producing adverse effects at more then one target site. 





(b) Metabolism. 

Nicotine is rapidly eliminated, primarily via metabolism and urinary excretion. The investigation of metabolism


in vivo 

and 

in vitro

, has resulted in the identification of more than 20 metabolic products in the plasma and urine of humans and animals.
The principle metabolic pathways of nicotine appear to involve oxidation of the pyrrolidine ring to yield nicotine-1
&rsquo;-N-oxide and cotinine, the latter being the major metabolite and the precursor of many of the metabolic products
of nicotine. Some of the metabolites detected in the urine of rats after intravenous administration in a study by Kyerematen
et al. [Ex. 4185] are listed in Table II1. In humans, cotinine is the major degradation product of nicotine
metabolism and has a serum half-life of about 17 hours compared to two hours for the parent compound, nicotine [Exs.
427, 4253]. Trans-3
&rsquo;-hydroxycotinine in the free form constitutes the largest single metabolite in smokers' urine accounting
for 3540% of the urinary nicotine metabolite [Exs. 448, 4241]. 



Smokers and nonsmokers differ in their metabolism of nicotine and cotinine [Exs. 4133, 4184, 4279].
The half-life values for urinary elimination of nicotine and cotinine were found to be significantly shorter in smokers
than nonsmokers [Ex. 4186]. Plasma nicotine clearance was faster in smokers than in nonsmokers in this study.
More rapid elimination of nicotine and cotinine has been attributed to the inductive effects of chronic cigarette
smoking on the hepatic metabolism of many xenobiotic agents. However, Benowitz et al. [Ex. 429] were unable
to confirm published research suggesting that smokers metabolize nicotine and cotinine more rapidly than nonsmokers.




Variations in nicotine metabolism occur among individuals. Variations also occur due to differences in gender and
race [Exs. 426, 4186, 4314]. It has also been suggested that the metabolism of nicotine between
smokers and nonsmokers may differ. Male smokers have been shown to metabolize nicotine faster than do female smokers
after intravenous infusion of nicotine and active smoking. However, this difference was not observed by Benowitz
and Jacob [Ex. 423] during a study of daily intake of nicotine in smokers versus nonsmokers. The metabolism
of nicotine has also been studied in animals. Male rats (4 strains) were shown to metabolize nicotine faster than did
females [Ex. 4185]. 



In summary, the potential effect of nicotine, and other ETS constituents in the body, is governed by interactions
between several physiological and pharmacokinetics parameters. These 
interactions may lead to longer retention of toxic constituents, thus prolonging the effects on the target organs
resulting in tissue injury. 




2. Irritation 





Exposure to ETS is capable of inducing eye and upper respiratory tract irritation. Common chemical sense or irritation
perception is mediated through receptors in the fifth, ninth, and tenth cranial nerves. These receptors are found
throughout the nasal, pharyngeal, and laryngeal areas of the respiratory system and also on the surface of the eyes
[Ex. 4239]. It is partially through the stimulation of these receptors that exposed persons perceive irritation.


