 



Comments and Other Information Received 





Comments on the proposed decision on the petition were received from five interested persons and organizations.
Specifically, written comments were received from two individuals, one importer, one avicultural organization,
and one pet industry representative. 

No comments were received which provided the Service with additional scientific information on the status of African
grey parrots in C&ocirc;te d'Ivoire, Togo, Benin, or Guinea. In making this final decision the Service depended on
the information provided with the petition and, most importantly, the CITES Secretariat, including recent reports.
Since the notice of receipt of the petition and proposed action was published in the 

Federal Register

, a recent law enforcement investigation has further substantiated information contained in the CITES Secretariat-sponsored
survey of African grey parrots in Ghana, that African grey parrots are smuggled to C&ocirc;te d'Ivoire from other
African countries. 



Three commenters stated that they were concerned about the timing of the petition, in light of the statutorily mandated
moratorium that became effective on October 23, 1993. The Service agrees that the importation of African grey parrots
as well as all other CITES-listed bird species (with some exceptions) are prohibited, except as allowed pursuant
to regulations that the Service has promulgated under the WBCA (see 58 FR 60524). The Service notes however that it
is required under the WBCA to issue and publish in the 

Federal Register

 a final determination on the petition, by not later than 90 days after the end of the period for public comment. Therefore,
the Service is making a final decision on this petition; no further action is promulgated only because the statutorily
mandated moratorium makes any such action moot. 



One commenter believed that any blanket cessation of importation which might affect cooperative breeding programs
would be ill-advised and contradictory to the intent of the Wild Bird Conservation Act. The Service disagrees that
the cessation of importation of particular species from certain countries is contrary to the intent of the WBCA, if
it is in the interest of the conservation of the species. The WBCA allows the Secretary to establish, modify, or terminate
any prohibition, suspension, or quota on importation of any species of exotic bird where it is determined that the
trade in such species is detrimental to the species' survival in the wild. Furthermore, the suspension of imports
of a species from one or more countries does not impact on a person's ability to apply for approval of a cooperative breeding
program for that species. 



One commenter, although not necessarily in disagreement with the proposed action by the Service, questioned whether
the petition warranted the type of emergency relief sought in the petition in light of the tremendous pressure the
Service was under to promulgate regulations for the WBCA and staffing problems. The Service notes that the action
proposed in the notice of August 25, 1993, did not constitute emergency relief, but rather constituted compliance
with the petition review process outlined in the statute. The Service does appreciate the public's concern that promulgation
of regulations implementing the WBCA is a resource-intensive endeavor. 



One commenter questioned the appropriateness of relying upon petitions supported by incomplete documents. The
Service notes that its finding is based on various documents, including published and unpublished studies and law
enforcement investigations. The commenter noted that part of the petition submitted by the Environmental Investigation
Agency had some names blacked out. Those omissions were by the petitioner, and in no way affected the Service's findings.
The Service gathered documents during its review of the petition; these included the recent CITES Secretariat-sponsored
survey of African grey parrots in Ghana (Dandliker, 1992), CITES Notifications to the Parties, and information from
recent law enforcement investigations. 



One commenter supported the suspension of African grey parrots from C&ocirc;te d'Ivoire, Togo, and Benin to the United
States, but asked that the Republic of Niger and other range States of African grey parrots be included. The commenter
had lived in Niger and frequently observed the parrot in its natural habitat in Niger. The commenter expressed concern
because Niger shares a border with Benin. Although the Service is concerned with the status of African grey parrots
throughout its range, the Service does not have scientific or law enforcement information available to it to assess
the status of African grey parrots in Niger to make the relevant findings. Furthermore, since Niger was not included
in the 

Federal Register

 notice of August 25, 1993 that called for public comments, the Service does not consider it appropriate to add it in
at this time. Should such information become available on Niger, or any other country, the Service will review it and
include it in its record of information on the African grey parrot. 



One commenter questioned the allegations of smuggling in the petition and the supporting information for such allegations.
The Service finds that there is sufficient supporting information to document smuggling activities involving African
grey parrots. The recent CITES Secretariat-sponsored survey of African grey parrots in Ghana (Dandliker, 1992)
showed that the majority of African grey parrots (

P. e. erithacus

) exported from C&ocirc;te d'Ivoire are, in reality, birds that are smuggled into C&ocirc;te d'Ivoire from Ghana,
and it showed that all the African grey parrots exported from Togo likely come from Ghana. As an example of serious law
enforcement problems regarding the African grey parrot, a recent law enforcement investigation resulted in a California
bird importer pleading guilty to conspiring to smuggle African grey parrots into the United States. The importer
conspired to import approximately 1,478 ``Congo'' African grey parrots which had been illegally taken from their
wild habitat in Zaire, where the commercial trade in African grey parrots was banned. The parrots were smuggled from
Zaire to S&eacute;n&eacute;gal, where the exporters obtained false CITES export documents to accompany the shipments
to the United States. The CITES export documents falsely stated that the parrots originated in Guinea or C&ocirc;te
d'Ivoire, countries where the ``Congo'' African grey parrot does not occur. 




