 

Raytech Corporation Salaried Employees Savings 
Plan (the Salaried Plan) and Raytech Corporation Hourly Employee Savings Plan (the Hourly Plan; together, the Plans)

Located in Shelton, Connecticut 


[Application Nos. D9722 and D9723] 


Proposed Exemption 


The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authority of section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2)
of the Code and in accordance with the procedures set forth in 29 CFR Part 2570, Subpart B (55 FR 32836, 32847, August
10, 1990). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions of sections 406(a), 406(b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the
sanctions resulting from the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1)(A) through
(E) of the Code, shall not apply to (1) the proposed extension of credit by Raytech Corporation (Raytech) to the Plans
in the form of payments (the Makeup Payments) with respect to group annuity contract CG01274B3A (the GIC) issued by
Executive Life Insurance Company (ELIC); and (2) the Plans' potential repayment of the Makeup Payments (the Repayments),
provided: (a) all terms of such transactions are no less favorable to the Plans than those which the Plans could obtain
in arm's-length transactions with an unrelated party; (b) no interest and/or expenses are paid by the Plans; (c) the
Makeup Payments are made only in lieu of payments due from ELIC with respect to the accumulated book value of the GIC
at the time of the Makeup Payments; (d) the Repayments are restricted to the amounts, if any, paid to the Plans after
March 27, 1994, by ELIC or other responsible third parties with respect to the GIC (the GIC Proceeds); (e) the Repayments
do not exceed the total amount of the Makeup Payments; and (f) the Repayments are waived to the extent the Makeup Payments
exceed the GIC Proceeds. 


Summary of Facts and Representations 


1. Raytech is a multi-national manufacturer and marketer of specialty engineered products for heat resistant, inertia
control, energy absorption and transmission applications. In 1988, Raytech became the sponsor of the Plans, which
are defined contribution plans under section 401(k) of the Code. 
2. The Salaried Plan currently has 281 participants and beneficiaries, and has assets with an approximate aggregate
fair market value of $9,793,000. The Hourly Plan currently has 236 participants and beneficiaries, and has assets
with an approximate aggregate fair market value of $1,051,000. Effective January 1, 1994, Charles Schwab Trust Company
(the Trustee) was appointed as trustee to the Plans. 
3. Investments of funds contributed under the Plans are made by the Trustee as directed by participants in accordance
with provisions of the Plans. In 1988, the Plans provided two investment options: (i) a ``Guaranteed Interest Fund''
in which the monies were to be held under a contract or contracts issued by one or more major insurance companies providing
for a stipulated minimum rate of interest, as selected by the Plans' administrative committee (the Committee) or
(ii) a ``Managed Securities Fund'', consisting of a mutual fund managed by a bank which was selected by the Committee.
Under the provisions of the Salaried Plan, Raytech's matching contributions could be delivered in cash or Raytech
common stock at the direction of Raytech's Board of Directors. 
4. In 1992, both Plans were amended, revising the name of the Equity Fund from ``Managed Security Fund'' to ``Equity
Fund'', and the Salaried Plan was amended to add an additional investment option in a Balanced Fund as selected by the
Committee. In 1993, both Plans were amended to change the Guaranteed Interest Fund option. Prior to this amendment,
the Guaranteed Interest Fund provided for monies contributed in a particular year to be held by a single insurance
company (e.g., ELIC). Pursuant to this amendment, the Plans now permit investments in a ``pooled investment fund''
that features insurance company contracts issued by multiple insurance companies. Under the terms of each of the
Plans, the participants have withdrawal and transfer rights with respect to their accounts (Withdrawal Events).
The circumstances triggering Withdrawal Events include severance from service, disability, retirement, death,
hardship, transfer of funds and loans. 
5. The GIC was issued by ELIC to the Plans in 1988. Employee savings contributions directed to the Guaranteed Interest
Fund and related Raytech contributions were invested in the GIC during 1988. As of April 11, 1991, total principal
deposited under the GIC plus accumulated interest under the GIC, less previous withdrawals (the Accumulated Book
Value) for the Plans amounted to $1,774,779. On April 11, 1991 (the Conservation Date), ELIC was seized by the California
Insurance Commissioner and its assets were frozen and its payments suspended, including the GIC.
<FOOTCITE>5</FOOTCITE>
 Effective September 3, 1993 (the Closing Date), the California Superior Court approved a rehabilitation/liquidation
plan (the Rehab Plan).
<FOOTCITE>6</FOOTCITE>
 The Rehab Plan provides for the resolution of ELIC's contractual obligations. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
5

</FOOTNAME>
In this proposed exemption the Department expresses no opinion as to whether the acquisition and holding of the GIC
violated any provisions of Part 4 of Title I of the Act. 

</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
6

</FOOTNAME>
In October, 1992, the Secretary of Labor filed suit against Raymark Industries, Inc. (Raymark) and certain named
fiduciaries in the U.S.District Court for Connecticut in a case now captioned 

Robert B. Reich, Secretary of the U.S. Department of Labor v. Raymark Industries, Inc., et.al.,

 Civil Action No. 5:92CV 614 (EBB). The suit named Raytech as a successor in liability to Raymark. The suit alleged the
breach of fiduciary duties under the Act in connection with the purchase of a group annuity contract from ELIC to fund
the benefits of three Raymark pension plans following an investigation that began in June, 1991. The Department notes
that the exemption proposed herein is not intended to affect any cause of action by any participant of the Plans or the
Department with respect to the GIC. 



</FOOTNOTE>

