 

DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION




Federal Aviation Administration


<CFRNO>14 CFR Part 93</CFRNO>




<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 27664]</RINDOCK>



The High Density Rule


<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), DOT.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Notice of public meeting.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

As part of the Clinton Administration's initiative to help revitalize the airline industry, the Department of Transportation
(the Office of the Secretary and the FAA) is reviewing the 25 year old High Density Traffic Airports Rule (HDR), a regulation
that limits hourly takeoffs and landings (slots) at the following airports: New York's LaGuardia and Kennedy; Chicago's
O'Hare; and Washington, D.C.'s National. The review will be a thorough examination of the slot rule to assess airline
capacity, competition, fares, and service patterns at the four airports. It will also evaluate the rule's economic,
operational and environmental impacts, including the way domestic and international slots are allocated, and will
consider alternative traffic management techniques. On April 1, 1994, the FAA published a request for comments to
gather information on the effectiveness and viability of the HDR and any potential alternatives to the rule (59 FR
15332; Docket No. 27664). The comment period closed on May 27, 1994, and approximately 100 comments have been received.
These public meetings will report study progress and give the public another opportunity to comment on the HDR. If
the results of the review suggest changes to the HDR, those changes would be proposed through the regulatory process,
pursuant to the Administrative Procedure Act. Changes affecting the number of instrument flight rule takeoffs and
landings authorized for air carriers for Washington National Airport would require a legislative change since they
are imposed by statute.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

The public meetings will be held as follows: Washington, DC_Wednesday, October 19, 1994; New York_Friday, October
21, 1994; Chicago_Thursday, November 17, 1994. The meetings will be held from 12 p.m.4 p.m. and 6 p.m.8
p.m. Persons not able to attend a meeting are invited to provide written comments, which must be received on or before
November 23, 1994.




</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

The exact locations of the public meetings will be published in a separate 

Federal Register

 notice. Persons unable to attend the meeting may mail their comments in triplicate to: Federal Aviation Administration,
Office of the Chief Counsel, Rules Docket (AGC200), Docket No. 27664, 800 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington,
DC 20591.



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:



Requests to present a statement at the meeting or questions regarding the logistics of the meeting should be directed
to Cindy Herman, Office of Rulemaking, 800 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20591; telephone (202) 2677627;
fax (202) 2675075.



Questions concerning the subject matter of the meeting should be directed to Mr. Larry Barry, APO220, Federal
Aviation Administration, 800 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20591, telephone (202) 2673305.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 


Participation at the Meeting




Requests from persons who wish to present oral statements at the Washington, DC or New York public meetings should
be received by the FAA no later than October 3, 1994. Requests from persons who wish to present oral statements at the
Chicago public meeting should be received by the FAA no later than November 1, 1994. Such request should be submitted
to Cindy Herman, as listed above in the section titled ``FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT''

 and should include at which meeting oral statements will be presented, a written summary of oral remarks to be presented,
and the estimate of time needed for the presentation. Requests received after the date specified above will be scheduled
if there is time available during the meeting. Requests to present oral statements may be made on the day of the public
meetings during the registration period, although time constraints may not permit the accommodation of such requests.
The DOT will prepare an agenda of speakers that will be available at the meeting. The names of those individuals whose
requests to present oral statements are received after the date specified above may not appear on the written agenda.
To accommodate as many speakers as possible, the amount of time allocated to each speaker may be less than the amount
of time requested.



Background





The HDR (14 CFR part 93, Subpart K) was adopted in 1969 as a temporary measure to reduce delays at five congested airports:
JFK International, LaGuardia, Newark International, O'Hare International, and Washington National. Total hourly
limits on the number of operations, or operating ``slots'', were imposed at each airport during certain hours of the
day. For each airport, the hourly total was divided into three operator categories: air carrier, commuter (originally
air taxi), and ``other'', which consists primarily of general aviation and charters. The limits were based on the
Engineering Performance Standards (EPS), which are a method for determining the Instrument Flight Rules (IFR) operating
capacity of an airport.

All limitations for Newark Airport were removed from the HDR in the early 1970's. The limits were made permanent at
the four other airports in 1973, and have remained in effect in some form since 1969. Between 1981 and 1984, the HDR was
superseded by the Interim Operations Plan adopted in response to the air traffic controllers' strike (SFAR 44). All
SFAR 44 limitations were lifted, and the HDR limitations reinstated, by the ``Interim Final Rule'' issued in March
1984 (49 FR 8237, March 6, 1984). At Washington National Airport, slots are further limited by statute.

The hour and category limits in the HDR are enforced by a regulatory requirement to have an Air Traffic Control reservation
for a takeoff or landing at a high density airport during restricted hours. Air carrier and commuter reservations
are considered slots, which are continuing reservations at the same time each day. ``Other'' category reservations
are allocated on an ad hoc basis for individual operations, using a first-come first-served reservation system.
Reservations are available up to 48 hours in advance of the time of operation by calling a voice-activated computer
system maintained by the FAA Air Traffic System Command Center.



The Study



The review now being conducted by the DOT will include the specific issues for public comment listed below. The requirements
of each of the four airports will be reviewed separately but each airport's relation to the national air traffic system
will be considered. Any changes to the HDR will be subject to the separate process required by the Administrative Procedure
Act. In the case of Washington National, a change to the HDR would also require a statutory change.




Specific Issues for Public Comment



There are several specific issues on which the DOT seeks comment at the public meeting. These key issues are intended
to help focus public comments on areas which will be useful to the DOT in completing its review of the HDR. The comments
at the meetings need not be limited to these issues, and the DOT invites comments on any other aspect of the HDR.

(1) The economic, environmental, competitive, and operational aspects of the HDR at the four airports.

(2) The projected air traffic environment

(3) The process for allocating domestic and international slots

(4) Access for small communities at HDR airports

(5) Potential alternatives to the current regulatory scheme at the HDR airports



Meeting Procedures





The following procedures are established to facilitate the meetings:

(1) There will be no admission fee or other charge to attend or to participate in the meeting. The meeting will be open
to all persons who are scheduled to present statements or who register on the day of the meeting (between 10:45 a.m.
and 11:45 a.m.) subject to availability of space in the meeting rooms. The meetings may adjourn early if scheduled
speakers complete their statements in less time than is scheduled for the meetings.


</SUPPLEM>
