 

Finally, it should be noted that wastewater from the sludge 
treatment system is currently being put back in the Surge Pond. 
Although characterization of this wastewater has not been 
provided, this wastewater may contain significant concentrations 
of volatile organics which could simply evaporate from the pond. 
It may be possible to reduce releases of volatile organics from 
the wastewater to the air by treating this wastewater in the 
newly constructed closed-tank wastewater treatment system instead 
of the old system of open surface impoundments. However, the 
Final Listing Rule for F037/F038 established the Agency's 
position that wastewater removed from wastewater treatment 
sludges by dewatering that is recycled to process operation or 
returned to the treatment system is not a ``derived from'' 
hazardous wastes if it can be demonstrated that the water removed 
from the sludge is no more contaminated than the original 
influent to the treatment unit from which the sludge was removed 
for dewatering (55 FR 46372, November 2, 1990). Thus, 
wastewater from the sludge treatment system is excluded from the 
definition of hazardous waste and its management is not within 
the jurisdiction of RCRA. 



B. Proposed Alternative Treatment Standards 



If this treatability variance is finalized, Citgo 
Corporation may renew the disposal of the treated sludge 
generated by the onsite treatment system for sludges removed from 
the Surge Pond at the Lake Charles Refinery site in a Subtitle C 
hazardous waste disposal facility (since it remains a hazardous 
waste), subject to the following conditions: 

(1) The stabilized sludge generated by the treatment system must 
meet the F037/F038 nonwastewater treatment standards for benzene, 
chromium, and nickel and the NESHAP standard for benzene prior to 
disposal in a subtitle C regulated facility. Treatment of 
benzene will also result in incidental treatment of volatile 
organics in the waste. Meeting LDR and NESHAP standards for 
benzene should also assure optimized operation of the treatment 
process, since it is designed to treat benzene. Other 
constituents that are normally regulated for F037/F038 
nonwastewaters are not regulated for this waste. 

(2) The vapor control system must be operated in accordance with 
performance specifications required by LDEQ, which state that the 
thermal oxidizer fire box temperature shall be maintained at 
1600
&cir;F or higher for one second or more. If the vapor control 
system malfunctions, operation of the system must cease until the 
problem has been corrected. 



List of Subject in 40 CTR Part 268



Environmental protection, Hazardous Waste.


Dated: August 4, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Michael Shapiro, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Director, Office of Solid Waste.


For the reasons set out in the preamble, title 40, chapter I, of 
the Code of Federal Regulations is proposed to be amended as 
follows: 


PART 268_LAND DISPOSAL RESTRICTIONS. 


1. The authority citation for part 268 continues to read as 
follows:





Authority:

 42 U.S.C. 6905, 6912(a), 6921, and 6924. 



2. Section 268.44 is amended by adding paragraph (p) to 
read as follows: 


268.44 

Variance from a treatment standard.


* * * * * 


(p) Citgo Corporation may dispose the treated sludge 
generated by the onsite treatment system for sludges removed from 
the Surge Pond at the Lake Charles Refinery site in a Subtitle C 
hazardous waste disposal facility, subject to the following 
conditions: 
(1) The stabilized sludge generated by the treatment system 
must meet the F037 and F038 nonwastewater treatment standards for 
benzene, chromium, and nickel and the NESHAP standard for 
benzene. Other constituents that are normally regulated in F037 
and F038 nonwastewaters are not regulated for this waste. 
(2) The vapor control system must be operated in accordance 
with performance specifications required by Louisiana Department 
of Environmental Quality, which state that the thermal oxidizer 
fire box temperature shall be maintained at 1600
&cir;F or higher for 
one second or more. If the vapor control system malfunctions, 
operation of the system must cease until the problem has been 
corrected.

</SIGNJOB>
