 

EPA's criteria documents are intended to provide a comprehensive toxicological evaluation of each chemical addressed
therein, based on available information. For toxic pollutants, the documents tabulate the numeric acute and chronic
toxicity information for aquatic life and, where sufficient information is available, derive the numeric criteria
maximum concentrations (acute criteria) and the numeric criteria continuous concentrations (chronic criteria)
that the Agency recommends to protect aquatic life resources. The documents also provide recommended criteria to
protect human health. EPA has published numeric aquatic life criteria for 30 priority pollutants and human health
criteria for 91 priority pollutants. Aquatic life criteria address potential water column impacts only. 

EPA is now proposing sediment quality criteria for five priority pollutant chemicals (endrin, dieldrin, fluoranthene,
phenanthrene, and acenaphthene) that EPA has determined are present in the sediment of the Nation's waters and cause
or have the potential to cause adverse effects to the water column and benthic assemblages and their hierarchical
foodchains including humans. Pursuant to section 104 of the Clean Water Act, the Agency has conducted research, experiments
and demonstrations and has studied the effects of contaminated sediment on freshwater, marine, and estuarine aquatic
life. EPA used this information to develop the criteria proposed today, which represent EPA's first effort to develop
sediment quality criteria. These five chemicals were selected because of their known toxicity, hydrophobicity,
and persistence. 

EPA developed these proposed sediment quality criteria using a methodology called the Equilibrium Partitioning
Approach which was selected after considering a variety of approaches that could be used to assess sediment contamination.
Technical reviews of the methodology and supporting science was conducted by the EPA Science Advisory Board (SAB)
in February 1989 and June 1992. Data collected in support of the ambient aquatic life water quality criteria or an equivalent
data base were also used to derive the proposed sediment quality criteria. Sediment criteria concentrations are
expressed as micrograms chemical per gram organic carbon and apply to sediments with " 0.2% organic carbon; below
this the criteria should not be applied because of significant scientific uncertainty associated with extrapolating
to sediments with &lt; 0.2% organic carbon. 



III. Possible Uses of Sediment Quality Criteria 



The main purpose of this notice is to seek comment on the scientific and technical merit of the criteria and methodology.
To place the criteria in context, this section discusses potential uses of the criteria. 

EPA is in the process of identifying and evaluating a range of possible uses to which final sediment quality criteria
may be applied. For example, EPA is considering whether to use these criteria as a basis for water quality assessment
reports under section 305(b), as a basis for total maximum daily loads under section 303(d), and water quality-based
effluent limits in National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (``NPDES'') permits under section 402, and/or
as a possible standard in developing clean-up strategies under the Clean Water Act or other statutes. These and other
possible uses are discussed below.

Section 305(b) requires the states to assess the quality of their navigable waters in terms of the extent to which they
meet the goals of the Clean Water Act. EPA proposes to encourage states, during these assessments, to identify areas
with sediment contamination.

Under section 303(c), states adopt water quality standards including criteria to protect designated uses. Final
section 304(a) numeric sediment quality criteria guidance could be used by states in adopting State numeric sediment
quality criteria designed to protect the public health or welfare, enhance the quality of water, and serve the purposes
of the Act. 

Sediment quality criteria could become a basis for total maximum daily loads under section 303(d) and water quality-based
effluent limits in NPDES permits under section 402. (Their use in NPDES permits is discussed in detail below). Pursuant
to section 303(d), states are required to identify and establish total maximum daily loads for water where existing
pollution controls are not stringent enough to achieve applicable water quality standards. Under section 301(b)(1)(c),
permit writers are required to impose in NPDES permits any more stringent limitations necessary to achieve water
quality standards. If a state has adopted water quality standards based on sediment quality criteria, and if those
standards are not being achieved, then TMDLs are required (unless existing controls will remedy the impairment)
and appropriate effluent limits need to be included in NPDES permits. In addition, even if the states do not adopt numeric
sediment criteria as part of state water quality standards, the EPA section 304(a) criteria could still be used by
State and Federal permit writers as a starting point under 40 CFR 122.44(d)(1)(vi) to derive numeric water quality-based
effluent limits as necessary to attain applicable narrative criteria (e.g., those that require receiving waters
to be ``free from'' toxics). Indeed, many states, as part of their narrative criteria, have adopted prohibitions
against objectionable sediment deposits. Similarly, the section 304(a) criteria could be used in state's TMDLs.







