 



(A) Components buried below ground. 

(B) Components exclusively handling fluids with a VOC concentration of 10 percent by weight or less, as determined
by the test method specified in paragraph (t)(7)(ii) of this section; or components exclusively handling fluids,
if the weight percent evaporated is 10 percent or less at 150 degrees Celsius as determined by the test method specified
in paragraph 
(t)(7)(iii) of this section. 

(C) Components at oil and gas production facilities or conveying stations handling liquids of: 

(

1

) Less than or equal to 20 degree API gravity after the point of primary separation. 

(

2

) Between 20 and 30 degree API gravity which are located either: 

(

i

) Downstream of a wellhead equipped with a casing vapor recovery system, provided that the vapor recovery is at a pressure
of less than 10 psig; or 

(

ii

) After the point of primary separation of oil and gas, provided the separation vessel is equipped with a vapor recovery
system and is operated at a pressure less than 25 psig. 

(

3

) Components qualifying for an exemption under paragraph  (t)(4)(ii)(C)(

2

) (

i

) or (

ii

) of this section shall be subject to the following requirements: 

(

i

) Components shall be visually inspected on a quarterly basis. Upon detection of a visible leak, the leak shall be measured
to quantify emission concentrations according to paragraph (t)(7)(i) of this section. The quarterly visual inspection
can be changed to an annual inspection if the requirements of paragraph (t)(3)(ii)(A)(

6

) of this section are satisfied; and 

(

ii

) Components shall either be subject to paragraph (t)(4)(ii)(C)(

3

)(

i

) of this section, or that any leak from components not subject to an inspection program that are detected by the EPA
shall constitute a violation of this section. 

(iii) One-half inch and smaller stainless steel tube fittings which have been demonstrated to the EPA to be leak-free
based on an initial inspection in accordance with paragraph (t)(7)(i) of this section. 

(iv) Components in vacuum service. 

(5) 

Reporting.

 Any owner or operator of a facility subject to paragraph (t) of this section shall comply with the following reporting
requirements. 

(i) A compliance plan shall be prepared and submitted to the EPA by July 1, 1995. The plan will include the following
information: 

(A) Component identification methodology to meet the requirements of paragraphs (t)(3)(i) (A) through (C) of this
section. 

(B) An inspection schedule for all unsafe-to-monitor components pursuant to paragraph (t)(3)(ii)(A)(

4

) of this section. 

(C) A description of all components meeting the exemption requirements of paragraphs (t)(4) (i) through (iv) of this
section. 

(ii) A certification of compliance shall be submitted to the EPA on or before January 1, 1996, and annually thereafter.
The certification of compliance shall include: 

(A) A declaration that the facility is in compliance with all of the requirements of paragraph (t) of this section.


(B) A summary of any changes that have been made to component identification in the original compliance plan. 

(6) 

Recordkeeping. 

(i) Each facility operator shall maintain an inspection log containing, at a minimum, the following: 

(A) Name, location, type of components, and description of any unit where leaking components are found. 

(B) Date of leak detection, emission level (ppmv) of leak, 
and method of leak detection. 

(C) Date of leak repair and description of repair action. 

(D) Date and emission level of re-check after leak is repaired. 

(E) Identification of leaks from critical components that cannot be repaired until the next process turnaround.


(F) If applicable, the API gravity of petroleum process fluids. 

(G) The VOC content of leaking process fluids or gases. 

(H) Total number of components inspected, and total number and percentage of leaking components found by component
type. 

(ii) Records of leaks detected by a quarterly or annual operator inspection and each subsequent repair and reinspection
shall be submitted to the EPA upon request. 

(iii) All records of operator inspection and repair shall be maintained at the facility for the previous two year period
and be made available at the time of inspection by the EPA or immediately upon EPA request. 

(7) Test methods. 

(i) Measurements of total gaseous organic compounds in leak concentrations shall be conducted according to EPA Reference
Method 21. The analyzer shall be calibrated with methane. 

(ii) The VOC content of fluids shall be determined using procedures that conform to ASTM Methods E 168, 
E 169, or E 260 or any other procedure that conforms to the above ASTM methods and is approved by the EPA in writing. 

(iii) Determination of the evaporated compounds of liquids shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Method D 8682.


(iv) Determination of the control efficiency of any VOC control equipment shall be performed in accordance with 40
CFR part 60, appendix A, Method 25 or 25A; or SCAQMD Test Method 25.1, which is available from EPA. 

(v) Determination of the API gravity of crude oil shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Method D 287. 


