 

After a careful legal review of Section 210 of Pub. L. 101574 (the statutory provision authorizing a waiver
to SBA's nonmanufacturer rule), its accompanying legislative history, and a written comment received prior to the
publication of the August 30, 1994 proposed rule that pertains to the ``domestic'' portion of the nonmanufacturing
rule, SBA has concluded that the correct interpretation of the Act is that a waiver of the nonmanufacturer rule under
section 8(a)(17)(B)(iv) is a waiver of the entire requirement that a nonmanufacturer must supply the product of a
domestic small business. In this regard, section 8(a)(17)(B)(iv) of the Act states that a nonmanufacturer must ``supply
the product of a domestic small business manufacturer or processor, unless [the Administrator grants] a waiver of


such requirement

.'' SBA believes that the statutory reference to ``such requirement'' relates to the entire requirement that, absent
a waiver, a nonmanufacturer must supply the product of a domestic small business. A waiver issued pursuant to this
statutory authority therefore serves to authorize a nonmanufacturer to supply other than the product of a domestic
small business while still qualifying as a small business under the Act. It should be noted, however, that SBA's waiver
of its nonmanufacturer rule does not waive other government-wide requirements applicable to government procurement,
such as the Buy American Act, and any statements of SBA to the effect that the domestic requirement could not be waived
by SBA were intended only to make this point.
SBA recognizes that its current regulations may still cause some confusion on this point. Currently, 13 CFR 121.906(b)(1),
for small business set asides, and 13 CFR 121.1106(b)(1), for 8(a) procurement, each contain a separate paragraph
(iv) ostensibly suggesting that a nonmanufacturer must supply a product that was manufactured or produced in the
United States regardless of whether a waiver has been granted. As indicated above, SBA believes that the waiver of
any domestic manufacture requirement is statutorily contained within any waiver of the nonmanufacturer rule granted.
These paragraphs are also inconsistent with the other regulatory provisions described above which have dealt with
definitions relevant to the nonmanufacturer rule and its waiver. 
SBA believes clarification to its regulations is advisable to eliminate any such inconsistency or confusion. This
final rule incorporates, without substantive change, the statutory language of section 8(a)(17)(B)(iv) of the
Act into SBA's size regulations at 13 CFR 121.906(b)(1)(iii) for small business set aside procurements and at 13 CFR
121.1106(b)(1)(iii) for section 8(a) procurements, and eliminates any inconsistency in the regulations. It also
adds clarifying language by adding new paragraphs 121.906(b)(4) and 121.1106(b)(4) to explain that an SBA waiver
of the nonmanufacturer rule has no effect on other laws and regulations dealing with domestic or foreign sources for
government acquisitions which may exist outside the Act. 
Because the statutory requirement regarding waivers to the nonmanufacturer rule of section 8(a)(17)(B)(iv) of
the Act is being implemented in this final rule, SBA believes that the portion of the August 30, 1994 proposed rule regarding
such waivers has been superseded. The remainder of that proposed rule has not been affected by this final rule, and
will be completed upon publication of a further final rule on revisions to the section 8(a) program. 


