 

The definition of 

Grazing preference

 would be revised to mean the priority to have a Federal permit or lease for a public land grazing allotment that is attached
to base property owned or controlled by a permittee or lessee, or applicant. The proposed revision would better match
the language of section 3 of the Taylor Grazing Act of 1934. The definition would drop the reference to a specified quantity
of forage, a practice that was adopted by the former Grazing Service during the adjudication of grazing privileges.
Like the Forest Service, the BLM would identify the amount of grazing use (AUMs), consistent with land use plans, in
grazing use authorizations to be issued under a lease or permit. 
A definition of 

Interested public 

would be added to mean an individual, group or organization that has submitted written comments to the authorized
officer regarding the management of livestock grazing on specific grazing allotments. 
The definition of 

Land use plan

 would be revised to remove the inference that all management framework plans would be replaced by resource management
plans. 
A definition of 

Permitted use 

would be added to define the amount of forage in an allotment that is allocated for livestock grazing and authorized
for use, or included as suspended nonuse, under a grazing permit or lease. The definition was added to those included
in the advance notice of proposed rulemaking. The term replaces the animal unit months of forage use previously associated
with grazing preference. 
The definition of 

Range improvement 

would be expanded to include protection and improvement of rangeland ecosystems as a purpose of range improvements.

The definition of 

Suspension 

would be revised to reflect the revision of the definition of the term ``preference.'' The term ``preference'' would
be replaced with ``permitted use.'' 
A definition of 

Temporary nonuse 

would be added to refer to permitted use that may be temporarily made unavailable for livestock use in response to a
request by the permittee or lessee. 
The term 

Unauthorized leasing and subleasing

 would be defined to mean leases or other agreements that have not been approved by the authorized officer. 
The definition of 

Utilization

 would be amended to mean the consumption of forage by all animals consistent with the definitions in the BLM Technical
Reference 44003 and the Bureau Manual System for Inventory and Monitoring. 


Section 4100.07Cross-References 


This section would be amended to guide the public to the applicable sections of the 43 CFR part 4 when considering an
appeal of a decision relating to grazing administration, and to 43 CFR part 1780 regarding advisory committees. 


Section 4100.09Information Collection 


This section would be added to conform to the requirements of the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 

et seq.

). The section discloses to the public the estimated burden hours needed to comply with the information collection
requirements in this proposed rule, why the information is being collected, and what the information will be used
for by the BLM. 


Subpart 4110_Qualifications and Preference 


Sections 4110.1Mandatory Qualifications 


Although most applicants for grazing use would be engaged in the livestock business, the proposed rule would clarify
that mortgage insurers, natural resource conservation organizations, and private parties whose primary source
of income is not the livestock business, could meet the criteria for qualification for a grazing permit or lease. 





