 

In regard to the third comment, legislation passed subsequent to 
Public Law 100435 further defined the requirements regarding joint 
applications for GA and food stamps. Section 1740 of the Leland 
Act modified the combined application form requirement in section 
11(i)(3) of the Food Stamp Act to require a combined GA and food 
stamp application form only in States that have a single 
statewide GA application form. The Department implemented this 
provision in the December 4, 1991, final rule (56 FR 63597) which 
implemented the categorical eligibility and application 
provisions of the Leland Act. 

A fourth commenter recommended that the Department withhold 
approval of joint applications which require clients to answer 
questions irrelevant to the Food Stamp Program if they are 
applying for food stamps only. The commenter felt that clients 
must be informed that answers to those questions are optional. 
The Department agrees that any joint application must be clear 
enough to afford applicants the option of answering only those 
questions relevant to the program or programs for which they are 
applying. The Department is amending the regulatory language at 
7 CFR 273.2(b)(3) to add this requirement. 



Application Process_Verification_7 CFR 273.2(f) and 273.21(j) 



Section 311 of Public Law 100435 and the interim rule published 
June 7, 1989, implemented five provisions pertaining to 
verification of application information supplied by the 
household. The interim provisions required that State agencies: 
(1) Provide all applicant households with a clear written 
statement explaining what the household must do to cooperate in 
obtaining verification and completing the application; (2) assist 
each applicant household in obtaining verification and completing 
the application process; (3) not require households to provide 
multiple sources of verification when the household has already 
provided verification which adequately supports statements on the 
application (although a State agency may require households to 
provide additional verification when the State agency determines 
that existing verification is incomplete, inaccurate or 
inconsistent); (4) not deny an application solely because a 
person outside of the household (who is not a person outside of 
the household because of a specific disqualification action or 
ineligible status) fails to cooperate with the State agency's 
processing of the application; and (5) process applications, if a 
household cooperates by providing information, by taking 
appropriate steps to verify information otherwise required to be 
verified under the Food Stamp Act. 

One commenter felt that clarification is needed regarding whether 
a State agency must provide applicants with a general 
verification statement or a specific verification statement 
tailored to each applicant household (7 CFR 273.2(c)(5)). The 
Department believes the preamble to the interim rule was quite 
clear in encouraging State agencies to develop a general 
statement that could be given to all applicant households, rather 
than a written statement which would need to be tailored to each 
applicant household. 

While the interim rule provided guidelines that must be used in 
developing the general verification notice, the Department wishes 
to promote greater conformity among State agency-designed notices 
to ensure that applicant households are consistently informed of 
the necessary documents needed for verification of information. 
Therefore, this final action amends 7 CFR 273.2(c)(5) to add a 
requirement that the State agency, at a minimum, include in the 
general verification notice examples of the types of documents 
the household should provide and an explanation of the period of 
time the documents should cover. 






