 

<TABLE>






Universal Treatment Standards for Cyanide1




[Nonwastewaters] 


1Regulated constituent 


1Maximum for any single composite sample (mg/kg)


 


Cyanide (Total) 
590 
Cyanide (Amenable) 
30 

 

1Cyanide nonwastewaters are analyzed using SW846 Method 9010 or 9012, sample size 10 grams, distillation
time, one hour and 15 minutes.

</TABLE>



b. Cyanide Wastewaters 



EPA is promulgating 1.2 mg/l (total cyanide) and 0.86 mg/l 
(amenable cyanide) as UTS for wastewater forms of cyanide wastes. 
In the proposed rule, EPA pointed out that a total cyanide 
concentration of 1.9 mg/l, regardless of process waste type, is 
widely used in wastewater discharge regulations_namely those 
for the Metal Finishing Industry and the Organic Chemicals, 
Plastics and Synthetic Fibers (OCPSF) Industry; however, the 
concentration of 1.9 mg/l was a typographical error. The Agency 
intended to propose a concentration 1.2 mg/l of total cyanide. 
(The 1.2 mg/l level is supported by EPA's OCPSF regulations and 
the background information in the record to the proposed rule 
supporting the proposed total cyanide UTS applicable to cyanide 
wastewaters.) The majority of commenters from the pharmaceutical 
and waste treatment industry commented on the proposed UTS 
cyanide for wastewaters assuming a standard of 1.2 mg/l total 
cyanide level was proposed. 

Commenters pointed out that the proposed level of 1.2 mg/l 
(total cyanide) is not always applied to OCPSF discharges. EPA 
has authorized permit writers or control authorities to exempt a 
source from OCPSF's total cyanide (discharge) limit, and to 
establish a Best Professional Judgement (``BPJ'') amenable cyanide 
limit. The BPJ limit must be based on a determination that the 
cyanide limits are not achievable due to elevated levels of non- 
amenable cyanide that result from the unavoidable complexing of 
cyanide at the process source (40 CFR 414.11(g), 414.91, and 
414.101). As with the CWA regulations, EPA provides facilities 
with a RCRA treatability variance process in the 40 CFR 268.44 
regulations that would allow a facility to achieve an alternate 
treatment standard (see discussion of treatability variance at 
section XII of this preamble). EPA believes that this provision 
provides a mechanism for establishing an alternative cyanide 
limit for OCPSF facilities in appropriate cases. 

These commenters also reported that CWA regulations for the 
Pharmaceutical Industry specify cyanide limitations as high as 
33.5 mg/l total cyanide. EPA looked into these concerns; in 
particular, whether the proposed standard of 1.2 mg/l can be 
achieved universally. Treatment performance data, however, were 
not submitted by the commenters. Contrary to the commenters' 
arguments, the literature and the performance data on cyanide 
treatment clearly show that cyanide wastewaters are treatable to 
1.2 mg/l total cyanide. While the CWA cyanide limit is 33.5 mg/l 
for the pharmaceutical industry, that limit was established in 
1983 and is currently being investigated for possible revision. 
Data were obtained from these ongoing efforts, confirming that 
pharmaceutical wastes can achieve the 1.2 mg/l cyanide level. 

Other commenters emphasized that because EPA's proposed 
universal wastewater standard of 1.2 mg/l total CN could not be 
routinely met by cyanide destruction technologies available at 
their site, EPA should only set a treatment level of 0.86 mg/l 
(amenable cyanide). Another commenter added that in the Third 
Third rule (see 55 FR 2255022553, June 1, 1990), EPA already set 
a level of 0.86 mg/l for amenable cyanide in characteristic 
wastewaters which is routinely met by their modified wastewater 
treatment system. The proposed UTS treatment standard of 0.86 
mg/l (amenable cyanide) is based on the treatment of complex-iron 
wastewaters from the electroplating industry by alkaline 
chlorination (a cyanide destruction technology, and BDAT). The 
commenter urged EPA to set this level as the sole cyanide UTS. 

In the first place, the Agency views the issue of requiring 
treatment for both total and amenable CN to be settled in past 
rules, and did not intend to reopen it. See 54 FR at 26609 (June 
23, 1989). If further response is deemed necessary, EPA remains 
unpersuaded by these arguments. Clean Water Act effluent 
limitations could technically be met by adding ferro-sulfate or 
other sulfate reagents to wastewaters. These chemical reagents 
do not destroy cyanides in the effluent wastewater but instead, 
they leave behind iron-cyanide complexes or thiocyanates. By 
requiring compliance for both amenable and total cyanide, 
facilities must pursue treatment practices that can effectively 
destroy cyanides. EPA is thus promulgating 1.2 mg/l (total 
cyanide) and 0.86 mg/l (amenable cyanide) as UTS for wastewater 
forms of cyanide wastes. 

EPA had previously reserved the treatment standard for total 
cyanide in wastewater forms of D003 reactive cyanide wastes. In 
today's rule, EPA is applying the UTS of 1.2 mg/l to this waste. 
EPA sees no reason that the limit is not generally achievable, 
and commenters supplied no reasons.



