 

The petition and accompanying documentation state that the species is subject to impacts by proposed mineral exploration
and potential open pit heap leach gold mine development. Mine exploration roads have been constructed through existing
populations. With plants occurring on steep, barren slopes at high elevations, disturbance due to further mining
exploration and potential development could produce long term destabilization and erosion of slope habitat which
would reduce or eliminate populations of 

L. grimesii. 

The toxic effects of open pit heap leach gold mine development also have the potential to further reduce populations.



Lathyrus grimesii 

is not currently protected by any regulatory mechanism, as it is not included on the U.S. Forest Service ``Sensitive''
or State of Nevada ``Critically Endangered'' species lists. The available information suggests that the species'
restricted range and small population size increase the chance of extirpation resulting from stochastic (i.e. random)
or localized events such as rock slides, erosion, disease, toxic effects of contaminant spills, or predation. 
The Service has reviewed the petition and other information available in the Service's files. On the basis of the best
scientific and commercial information available, the Service finds that substantial information has been presented
indicating that listing of 

Lathyrus grimesii 

may be warranted. This species was included as a category 2 candidate for listing in the notice of review published
in the 

Federal Register

 on September 30, 1993 (58 FR 51144). Although a status review of this species was initiated upon its inclusion in category
2, the Service hereby announces its formal review of the species' status pursuant to this 90-day petition finding.
The Service requests any additional data, comments, and suggestions from the public, other concerned governmental
agencies, the scientific community, industry, or any other interested parties concerning the status of 

L. grimesii. 

Of particular interest is information regarding (1) The existence and status of additional populations, (2) environmental
factors determining distribution, (3) pollinators, (4) toxic effects of cyanide on the species, and (5) genetic
variability in known populations. 



References Cited 



Cronquist, A., A.H. Holmgren, N.H. Holmgren, J.L. Reveal, and P.K.Holmgren. 1989. Intermountain Flora_Vascular
Plants of the Intermountain West, U.S.A. Volume Three, Part B_Fabales by R.C. Barneby. New York Botanical Garden,
Bronx, New York. 279 pp. 



Author 



This notice was prepared by Janet J. Bair, Nevada Field Office (see 

ADDRESSES 

section above). 



Authority 



The authority for this action is the Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1531 

et seq.

) 




Dated: June 27, 1994. 



<SIGNER>
Bruce Blanchard, 


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Director, Fish and Wildlife Service. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9416644 Filed 7894; 8:45 am] 


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 431055P 
</BILLING>


 

