 

(2) For the training of the teachers of those students so as to allow for the equitable participation of those teachers
in the programs under this part.

(b) (1) If a State, Indian tribe, or LEA is prohibited by law from providing for the participation of students or teachers
from private nonprofit schools as required by paragraph (a) of this section, or if the Corporation determines that
a State, Indian tribe, or LEA substantially fails or is unwilling to provide for their participation on an equitable
basis, the Corporation will waive those requirements and arrange for the provision of services to the students and
teachers.

(2) Waivers will be subject to the Corporation procedures that are consistent with the consultation, withholding,
notice, and judicial review requirements of section 1017(b) (3) and (4) of the Elementary and Secondary Education
Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 2727 (b)).



2516.320


Is a participant eligible to receive an AmeriCorps 
educational award?



No. However, service-learning coordinators who are approved AmeriCorps positions are eligible for AmeriCorps
educational awards.



Subpart D_Application Contents



2516.400


What must a State or Indian tribe include in an application for a grant?



In order to apply for a grant from the Corporation under this part, a State (SEA) or Indian tribe must submit the following:
(a) A three-year strategic plan for promoting service-learning through programs under this part, or a revision of
a previously approved three-year strategic plan. The application of a SEA must include a description of how the SEA
will coordinate its service-learning plan with the State Plan under part 2513 of this chapter and with other federally-assisted
activities.

(b) A proposal containing the specific program, budget, and other information specified by the Corporation in the
grant application package.

(c) Assurances that the applicant will_

(1) Keep such records and provide such information to the Corporation with respect to the programs as may be required
for fiscal audits and program evaluation; and

(2) Comply with the nonduplication, nondisplacement, and grievance procedure requirements of part 2540 of this
chapter.



2516.410


What must a grantmaking entity, local partnership, or LEA include in an application for a grant?



In order to apply to the Corporation for a grant, a grantmaking entity, local partnership, or LEA must submit the following:
(a) A detailed description of the proposed program goals and activities. The application of a grantmaking entity
must include_

(1) A description of how the applicant will coordinate its activities with the State Plan under part 2513 of this chapter,
including a description of plans to meet and consult with the State Commission, if possible, and to provide a copy of
the program application to the State Commission and with other federally-assisted activities; and

(2) A description of how the program will be carried out in more than one State.

(b) The specific program, budget, and other information specified by the Corporation in the grant application package.

(c) Assurances that the applicant will_

(1) Keep such records and provide such information to the Corporation with respect to the program as may be required
for fiscal audits and program evaluation;

(2) Prior to the placement of a participant, consult with the appropriate local labor organization, if any, representing
employees in the area who are engaged in the same or similar work as that proposed to be carried out by the program, to
prevent the displacement and protect the rights of those employees;

(3) Develop an age-appropriate learning component for participants in the program that includes a chance for participants
to analyze and apply their service experiences; and

(4) Comply with the nonduplication, nondisplacement, and grievance procedure requirements of part 2540 of this
chapter.

(d) For a local partnership, an assurance that the LEA will serve as the fiscal agent.



2516.420


What must an LEA, local partnership, or qualified organization include in an application for a subgrant?



In order to apply for a subgrant from an SEA, Indian tribe, or grantmaking entity under this part, an applicant must
include the information required by the Corporation grantee.



Subpart E_Application Review



2516.500


How does the Corporation review the merits of an application?



(a) In reviewing the merits of an application submitted to the Corporation under this part, the Corporation evaluates
the quality, innovation, replicability, and sustainability of the proposal on the basis of the following criteria:
(1) Quality, as indicated by the extent to which_

(i) The program will provide productive meaningful, educational experiences that incorporate service-learning
methods;

(ii) The program will meet community needs and involve individuals from diverse backgrounds (including economically
disadvantaged youth) who will serve together to explore the root causes of community problems;

(iii) The principal leaders of the program will be well qualified for their responsibilities;

(iv) The program has sound plans and processes for training, technical assistance, supervision, quality control,
evaluation, administration, and other key activities; and

(v) The program will advance knowledge about how to do effective and innovative community service and service-learning
and enhance the broader elementary and secondary education field.

(2) Replicability, as indicated by the extent to which the program will assist others in learning from experience
and replicating the approach of the program.

(3) Sustainability, as indicated by the extent to which_

(i) An SEA, Indian tribe or grantmaking entity applicant demonstrates the ability and willingness to coordinate
its activities with the State Plan under part 2513 of this chapter and with other federally assisted activities;

(ii) The program will foster collaborative efforts among local educational agencies, local government agencies,
community based agencies, businesses, and State agencies;

(iii) The program will enjoy strong, broad-based community support; and

(iv) There is evidence that financial resources will be available to continue the program after the expiration of
the grant.

(b) The Corporation also gives priority to proposals that_

(1) Involve participants in the design and operation of the program;

(2) Reflect the greatest need for assistance, such as programs targeting low-income areas;

(3) Involve students from public and private schools serving together; 

(4) Involve students of different ages, races, genders, ethnicities, abilities and disabilities, or economic backgrounds,
serving together;

(5) Are integrated into the academic program of the participants;

(6) Best represent the potential of service-learning as a vehicle for education reform and school-to-work transition;

(7) Develop civic responsibility and leadership skills and qualities in participants;

(8) Demonstrate the ability to achieve the goals of this part on the basis of the proposal's quality, innovation, replicability,
and sustainability; or

(9) Address any other priority established by the Corporation for a particular period.

(c) In reviewing applications submitted by Indian tribes and U.S. Territories, the Corporation_

(1) May decide to approve only planning of school-based service-learning programs; and

(2) Will set the amounts of grants in accordance with the respective needs of applicants.



2516.510


What happens if the Corporation rejects a State's application for an allotment grant?



If the Corporation rejects a State's application for an allotment grant under 2516.600(b)(2), the Corporation
will_

(a) Promptly notify the State of the reasons for the rejection;



