 



Response: 

The Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments to RCRA added section 3004(n), which directs the EPA to ``***
promulgate regulations for the monitoring and control of air emissions from hazardous waste treatment, storage,
and disposal facilities, including but not limited to open tanks, surface impoundments, and landfills, as may be
necessary to protect human health and the environment.'' The EPA considers the most appropriate, effective, and
efficient way to fulfill this congressional mandate is to develop air standards for TSDF that are implemented under
the existing RCRA subtitle C permitting program already in place for these facilities. However, the EPA disagrees
with one commenter's assertion that, in establishing these RCRA air standards, the EPA cannot consider the impact
of air standards promulgated or currently being developed under other statutory authorities such as the CAA. On the
contrary, RCRA section 1006(b) requires the EPA to coordinate its regulations under RCRA statutes and to avoid duplication,
to the maximum extent practicable, with appropriate provisions of the CAA.

The EPA disagrees that the requirements of RCRA section 3004(n) are best fulfilled by deferring to air standards established
under CAA authority. There is no indication that Congress intended for air standards to be issued only within the authority
granted to the EPA by the CAA. If this was the case, then Congress would not have amended RCRA section 3004(n) under HSWA
after Congress had already authorized the EPA to control air emissions under the CAA. Refer to S. Rep. No. 284, 98th
Cong. 1st sess. 63. Thus, both RCRA and the CAA authorize the EPA to control air emissions from TSDF.

Although historically many standards promulgated by the EPA under authority of RCRA have addressed the prevention
of soil and water contamination from improper management of hazardous waste, the EPA is not limited by RCRA to promulgating
standards only for certain media (e.g., surface waters, groundwater, and soils). Indeed, RCRA section 3004(n) specifically
directs the EPA to issue regulations controlling air emissions from TSDF as necessary to protect human health and
the environment.

The selection of TSDF air emission sources for control by establishing air standards under RCRA section 3004(n) is
based on controlling those TSDF air emission sources determined by the EPA to have significant toxic and ozone precursor
emission potential but for which emission control is not adequately addressed by other standards promulgated by
the EPA such as NESHAP and NSPS established under the CAA. At proposal, the EPA concluded that additional air emission
control requirements for TSDF tanks, surface impoundments, and containers are needed. This decision was based on
the EPA's determination that existing and future Federal standards under the CAA and State air standards do not adequately
address the control of TSDF organic air emissions.

As previous described in section III.E of this preamble, CAA section 112 has been amended by Congress since RCRA section
3004(n) was enacted. Section 112 of the CAA as amended requires the EPA to identify major sources and area sources of
HAP emissions and to develop NESHAP for these sources. To date for this air standards development program, the EPA
has either promulgated or proposed several NESHAP that may apply to some hazardous waste management activities at
TSDF. However, in general, these NESHAP added requirements to address HAP emissions from certain waste and material
recovery operations that are not subject to or exempted from regulation under the RCRA air standards in 40 CFR parts
264 and 265. Thus, the NESHAP and other air standards being developed under CAA are not intended to duplicate the RCRA
air standards, but instead to integrate with the RCRA air standards to create a comprehensive air program for addressing
organic air emissions from all waste and related material recovery operations.

For example, on-site wastewater treatment operations at synthetic organic chemicals manufacturing industry (SOCMI)
facilities are regulated under the hazardous organic NESHAP (``the HON'') promulgated on April 22, 1994 (see 59 FR
19402). At many of these facilities, the hazardous wastewaters generated by process units and resulting wastewater
treatment sludges are managed in tank systems that are exempted from RCRA permitting requirements under provisions
in 40 CFR 264.1(g)(6) or 40 CFR 265.1(c)(10). Thus, the air emission control requirements under the HON, in most cases,
affect wastewater treatment tanks not subject to the RCRA air standards.



