 



Vessel Tracking System (VTS)

 means a vessel tracking system as set forth in 650.25(a)(2) and approved by NMFS for use by scallop vessels as
required by this part. 


VTS unit

 means a device installed on board a vessel used for vessel tracking and transmitting the tracked position as required
by this part. 


650.3 

Relation to other laws. 


(a) The relation of this part to other laws is set forth in 
620.3 of this chapter. 
(b) Nothing in these regulations shall supersede more restrictive state management measures for Atlantic sea scallops.



650.4 

Vessel permits. 


Any vessel of the United States that fishes for, possesses, or lands per trip Atlantic sea scallops in quantities greater
than 
40 pounds (18.14 kg) shucked scallops or 5 bushels (176.2 l) in-shell, except vessels that fish exclusively in state
waters for sea scallops, must have been issued and carry on board an authorizing letter issued under 650.4(a)(9)(vi)(D),
a valid limited access scallop permit or a valid general scallop permit, issued under this section. 
(a) 

Limited access scallop permits.

 Any vessel of the United States that possesses or lands per trip more than 400 pounds (181.44 kg) of shucked scallops
or the equivalent amount of in-shell scallops (50 U.S. bushels (17.62 hl)), except vessels that fish exclusively
in state waters for sea scallops, must have been issued and carry on board an authorizing letter issued under 
650.4(a)(9)(vi)(D), or a valid Federal limited access scallop permit. To qualify for a limited access scallop
permit a vessel must meet the following criteria, as applicable: 
(1) 

Eligibility in 1994.

 (i) To be eligible to obtain a limited access scallop permit for 1994, a vessel must meet one of the following criteria:

(A) The vessel had been issued a Federal scallop permit in 1988 or 1989, and the vessel landed more than 400 pounds (181.44
kg) of shucked scallops or the equivalent amount of in-shell scallops (50 U.S. bushels (17.62 hl)) on at least one trip
completed during 1988 or 1989; or, 
(B) The vessel was under written agreement for construction or for re-rigging on or prior to March 2, 1989, and the vessel
was issued a Federal scallop permit and landed scallops between March 2, 1989, and March 2, 1990; or, 
(C) The vessel was purchased between March 2, 1989, and November 28, 1990; it had been issued a Federal scallop permit
and landed scallops between January 1, 1982, and January 1, 1988; and it had been issued a Federal scallop permit and
landed more than 400 pounds (181.44 kg) of scallops on any one trip completed in 1990; or, 
(D) The vessel is replacing a vessel that meets any of the criteria set forth in paragraph (a)(1)(i)(A), (a)(1)(i)(B)
or (a)(1)(i)(C) of this section. 
(ii) No more than one vessel may qualify, at any one time, for a limited access scallop permit based on that or another
vessel's fishing and permit history. If more than one vessel owner claims eligibility for a limited access scallop
permit, based on one vessel's fishing and permit history, the Regional Director shall determine who is entitled to
qualify for the limited access scallop permit and the DAS allocation according to paragraph (a)(3) of this section.

(iii) A limited access scallop permit for 1994 will not be issued unless the application for such permit is received
by the Regional Director on or before December 31, 1994. 
(2) 

Eligibility in 1995 and thereafter. 

To be eligible to renew or apply for a limited access scallop permit after 1994, a vessel must have been issued a limited
access scallop permit for the preceding year, or the vessel must be replacing a vessel that had been issued a limited
access scallop permit for the preceding year, and, if applicable, the vessel must meet the criteria set forth in paragraph
(a)(4) of this section. If more than one vessel owner claims eligibility to apply for a limited access scallop permit
based on one vessel's fishing and permit history after 1994, the Regional Director shall determine who is entitled
to qualify for the limited access scallop permit and the DAS allocation according to paragraph (a)(3) of this section.

(3) 

Change in ownership.

 The fishing and permit history of a vessel is presumed to transfer with the vessel whenever it is bought, sold, or otherwise
transferred, unless there is a written agreement, signed by the transferor/seller and transferee/buyer, or other
credible written evidence, verifying that the transferor/seller is retaining the vessel fishing and permit history
for purposes of replacing the vessel. 
(4) 

Replacement vessels.

 To be eligible to replace a vessel that has been issued a limited access scallop permit, the replacement vessel must
meet the following criteria: 
(i) The replacement vessel's horsepower may not exceed by more than 20 percent the horsepower of the vessel it is replacing
as of the date the vessel it is replacing was initially issued a 1994 limited access scallop permit as specified on a
valid application for a permit under this section; except that, the horsepower of the replacement vessel may not exceed
the horsepower of the vessel being replaced if the horsepower of the vessel being replaced has been increased through
upgrade or vessel replacement from that specified when the vessel being replaced initially applied for a 1994 limited
access scallop permit; and, 
(ii) The replacement vessel's length, gross registered tonnage, and net tonnage may not exceed by more than 
10 percent the length, gross registered tonnage, and net tonnage of the vessel being replaced, based on specifications
provided in the initial 1994 application for a limited access scallop permit; except that, the length, gross registered
tonnage, and net tonnage of the replacement vessel may not exceed the length, gross registered tonnage, and net tonnage
of the vessel initially issued a limited access scallop permit if any or all of these specifications have been increased
through upgrade or vessel replacement from that specified when the vessel being replaced initially applied for a
1994 limited access scallop permit. For purposes of this paragraph, a vessel not required to be documented under Title
46, U.S.C. will be considered to be 5 gross registered tons. For undocumented vessels, net tonnage does not apply.

(5) 

Upgraded vessel.

 To remain eligible to retain a valid limited access scallop permit, or to apply for, or renew a limited access scallop
permit, a vessel may be upgraded, whether through refitting or replacement, only if the upgrade complies with the
following limitations: 
(i) The vessel's horsepower may be increased, whether through refitting or replacement, only once. Such an increase
may not exceed 20 percent of the horsepower of the vessel initially issued a 1994 limited access scallop permit as specified
in that vessel's permit application for a 1994 limited access scallop permit; and, 
(ii) The vessel's length, gross registered tonnage and net tonnage may be upgraded, whether through refitting or
replacement, only once. Such an increase shall not exceed 10 percent each of the length, gross registered tonnage,
and net tonnage of the vessel initially issued a 1994 limited access scallop permit as specified in that vessel's application
for a 1994 limited access scallop permit. This limitation allows only one upgrade, at which time any or all three specifications
of vessel size may be increased. This type of upgrade may be done separately from an engine horsepower upgrade. 




