 





Medium volatility organic compound (MVOC) 

means any organic compound that exerts a vapor pressure greater than 2 mm Hg and less than or equal to 80 mm Hg when measured
at 20 C. 


Non-aerosol product 

means any antiperspirant or deodorant that is not dispensed by a pressurized spray system. 


Roll-on product 

means any antiperspirant or deodorant that dispenses active ingredients by rolling a wetted ball or wetted cylinder
on the affected area. 


Stick product 

means any antiperspirant or deodorant that contains active ingredients in a solid matrix form, and that dispenses
the active ingredients by frictional action on the affected area. 



Volatile organic compound (VOC) 

means any compound of carbon, excluding carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, carbonic acid, metallic carbides or carbonates,
and ammonium carbonate, which participates in atmospheric photochemical reactions other than those defined as
exempt compounds. These exempt compounds have been determined to have negligible photochemical reactivity. For
purposes of determining compliance with emission limits, VOC will be measured by test methods given in this section.
Where such a method also measures compounds with negligible photochemical reactivity, an owner or operator may exclude
these negligibly reactive compounds when determining compliance with an emission standard. However, the U.S. EPA
may require such owner or operator, as a precondition to excluding these compounds for purposes of determining compliance,
to provide monitoring methods and monitoring results demonstrating, to the satisfaction of the U.S. EPA, the amount
of negligibly reactive compounds in the source's emissions. 

(3) 

Standards

. 

(i) Except as provided in paragraph (b)(4) of this section, no person shall sell, supply, offer for sale, or manufacture
in California any antiperspirant or deodorant which, at the time of sale or manufacture, contains volatile organic
compounds in excess of the limits specified in the following Table of Standards, after the specified effective date.




<TABLE>




Table of Standards


[Percent volatile organic compounds by weight]

1Product form

1Effective date

22/15/95

3HVOC

a



3MVOC

b



21/1/99

3HVOC

3MVOC





Aerosol product:



Antiperspirant 
60 
20 
0 
10 
Deodorant 
20 
20 
0 
10 


Non-aerosol product 
0 
0 
0 
0 




a

High volatility organic compounds, i.e., any organic compound that exerts a vapor pressure greater than 80 mm Hg when
measured at 20 C. 



b

Medium volatility organic compounds, i.e., any organic compound that exerts a vapor pressure greater than 2 mm Hg
and less than or equal to 80 mm Hg when measured at 20 C.

</TABLE>



(ii) No existing product may be reformulated to increase either the product's total VOC content or total ethanol content.
An existing product may be reformulated to reduce the product's total ethanol content or total VOC content, as long
as the reformulation does not increase the product's total HVOC content. 
(iii) No person shall sell, supply, offer for sale, or manufacture in California any antiperspirant or deodorant
which contains any of the following ozone-depleting compounds: CFC-11 (trichlorofluoromethane), CFC-12 (dichlorodifluoromethane),
CFC-113 (1,1,1-trichloro-2,2,2-trifluoroethane), CFC-114 (1-chloro-1,1- difluoro-2-chloro-2,2-difluoroethane),
CFC-115 (chloropentafluoroethane), halon 1211 (bromochlorodifluoromethane), halon 1301 (bromotrifluoromethane),
halon 2404 (dibromotetrafluoroethane), HCFC-22 (chlorodifluoromethane), HCFC-123 (2,2-dichloro-1,1,1-trifluoroethane),
HCFC-124 (2-chloro- 1,1,1,2-tetrafluoroethane), HCFC-141b (1,1-dichloro-1-fluoroethane), HCFC-142b (1-chloro
1,1-difluoroethane), 1,1,1- trichloroethane, and carbon tetrachloride. 

(4) 

Exemptions

. 



