 



Participant

 means an individual who_

(i) Is determined to be eligible to participate in the project under 644.3; and

(ii) Receives project services.



Postsecondary education

 means education beyond the secondary school level.



Potential first-generation college student 

means_

(i) An individual neither of whose parents received a baccalaureate degree; or

(ii) An individual who regularly resided with and received support from only one parent and whose supporting parent
did not receive a baccalaureate degree.



Secondary school

 means a school that provides secondary education as determined under State law, except that it does not include education
beyond grade 12.



Target area

 means a geographic area served by an Educational Opportunity Centers project.



Veteran

 means a person who served on active duty as a member of the Armed Forces of the United States_

(i) For a period of more than 180 days, any part of which occurred after January 31, 1955, and who was discharged or released
from active duty under conditions other than dishonorable; or

(ii) After January 31, 1955, and who was discharged or released from active duty because of a service-connected disability.




(Authority: 20 U.S.C. 1070a11, 1070a16, and 1141)



Subpart B_Assurances



644.10

 What assurances must an applicant submit?



An applicant shall submit, as part of its application, assurances that_

(a) At least two-thirds of the individuals it serves under its proposed Educational Opportunity Centers project
will be low-income individuals who are potential first-generation college students;

(b) Individuals who are receiving services from another Educational Opportunity Centers project or a Talent Search
project under 34 CFR Part 643 will not receive services under the proposed project;

(c) The project will be located in a setting or settings accessible to the individuals proposed to be served by the project;
and

(d) If the applicant is an institution of higher education, it will not use the project as a part of its recruitment program.




(Authority: 20 U.S.C. 1070a16)



Subpart C_How Does the Secretary Make a Grant?



644.20

 How does the Secretary decide which new grants to make?



(a) The Secretary evaluates an application for a new grant as follows:

(1)(i) The Secretary evaluates the application on the basis of the selection criteria in 644.21.

(ii) The maximum score for all the criteria in 644.21 is 100 points. The maximum score for each criterion is indicated
in parentheses with the criterion.

(2)(i) For an application for a new grant to continue to serve substantially the same populations or campuses that
the applicant is serving under an expiring project, the Secretary evaluates the applicant's prior experience in
delivering services under the expiring project on the basis of the criteria in 644.22.

(ii) The maximum score for all the criteria in 644.22 is 15 points. The maximum score for each criterion is indicated
in parentheses with the criterion.






