 

Notice Advisories to NAVSTAR Users (NANU) are near real-time operational status capability reports. NANUs are issued
to notify users of future, current, or past satellite outages, system adjustments, or any condition which might adversely
affect users. NANUs are generated by 2SOPs as events occur. GPS Status Messages contain general information that
is downloaded daily from the Air Force's (2SOPS) electronic bulletin board. The message contains information about
the satellite orbit (plane/slot), clocks, and current or recent NANUs. Status Messages are generated by 2SOPS once
a day Monday through Friday, except on Federal holidays.
Almanacs contain the orbital information and clock data of all the satellites. The almanac for all satellites can
be obtained from downloading the continuously transmitted data stream from any satellite.
In addition to receiving information from the MCS, the GPSIC works with representatives of the National Geodetic
Survey (NGS) to offer NGS computed precise GPS orbit data to the public via the GPSIC bulletin board. This data is called
precise ephemeris data. Precise ephemeris data describes the orbit of each satellite as observed by numerous ground
stations. It is useful in making a refined determination of where the satellites were at some time in the past. The time
lag for this information is about eight days.
The BBS is an electronic version of a bulletin board, where information is made available in easy to access lists and
files. Any user with a computer and modem can dial the BBS and browse through the information or copy files into their
own computer for further use. The BBS is menu-driven and has an extensive set of on-line help utilities. If necessary,
users can also page the GPSIC watchstander to request personal assistance. The BBS is free and open to all. However,
users will have to pay their own connection charges (long distance telephone or public data network costs). First-time
callers are asked to register on-line (provide their names, addresses, etc.) before proceeding to the BBS main menu.
Through the BBS, a wide range of information is available 24 hours a day. BBS information is updated whenever the other
GPSIC sources are. Users may call the BBS via either telephone or SprintNet (a public data network). Ordinary telephone
is the easiest for most people, but SprintNet offers a high speed error-free alternative for those (especially international
callers) who may have difficulty in getting a good data connection over the voice phone lines. To contact the BBS, call:
(tel) 7033135910. Modem speeds of 300 to 14,400 bps and most common U.S. or international protocols
are supported. Communications parameters should be set to: 8 data bits, No parity, 1 stop bit (8N1), asynchronous
comms, full duplex. We have eight phone lines at this number and two auxiliary numbers to accommodate modems which
may be incompatible with the ones on 3135910. The BBS SprintNet number is: 31102021323 (or abbreviate to 202
1328 if accessing SprintNet via telephone to one of their modems.) For SprintNet access, users must set up their own
accounts with Sprint or a similar public data network which has a ``gateway'' to SprintNet. For more information,
call: (800) 7361130 (U.S.) or (913) 5416876) (international).
Users who need further information or assistance may call the GPSIC watchstander at 7033135900, or
write to Commanding Officer, USCG Omega Navigation System Center, 7323 Telegraph Road, Alexandria, VA 223103998.

