 

After reviewing approximately 6,420 abstracts of scientific or medical articles and approximately 230 epidemiologic
studies, consulting with outside experts, and conducting public hearings, NAS issued a report, entitled ``Veterans
and Agent Orange: Health Effects of Herbicides Used in Vietnam'', on July 27, 1993. NAS concluded that there is sufficient
evidence of an association between exposure to herbicides used in the Republic of Vietnam and the subsequent development
of chloracne, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, soft-tissue sarcoma, Hodgkin's disease and porphyria cutanea tarda. VA
was already paying compensation for the first three conditions based upon the statutory presumptions established
by Public Law 1024, and the Secretary announced that same day that he had concluded that a positive association
exists between exposure to herbicides used in the Republic of Vietnam and the subsequent development of Hodgkin's
disease and porphyria cutanea tarda. Proposed regulations were published in the 

Federal Register

 on September 28, 1993 (See 58 FR 5052830). 

The Secretary also announced that VA would review the remaining findings in the NAS report to determine whether a positive
association exists between herbicide exposure and any other conditions. That review has been completed and the Secretary
has concluded that a positive association exists for multiple myeloma and respiratory cancers. 
The NAS report found ``limited/suggestive evidence''_a category it defined as meaning that evidence suggests an

association between herbicide exposure and a specific disease, but that chance, bias, and confounding cannot be
ruled out with confidence_of an association between herbicide exposure and the subsequent development of multiple
myeloma. VA, however, found the evidence concerning multiple myeloma, a malignant proliferation of plasma cells
which are derived from B lymphocytes, to be convincing. Most of the studies reviewed by NAS showed an increased risk,
although in most cases it was not a statistically significant increase. One occupational study (Fingerhut M.A.,
Halperin W.E., Marlow D.A., Piacitelli L.A., Honchar P.A., Sweeney M.H., Greife A.L., Dill P.A., Steenland K., Suruda
A.J. 1991. Cancer mortality in workers exposed to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. New England Journal of
Medicine 324:212218) found a relationship between herbicide exposure and multiple myeloma. Although this
finding was not supported by the findings of Saracci and colleagues (Saracci R., Kogevinas M., Bertazzi P.A., Bueno
De Mesquita B.H., Coggon D., Green L.M., Kauppinen T., L'Abbe K.A., Littorin M., Lynge E., Mathews J.D., Neuberger
M., Osman J., Pearce N., Winkelman R. 1991. Cancer mortality in workers exposed to chlorophenoxy herbicides and chlorophenols.
Lancet 338:10271032), the Saracci study is flawed as a result of questions regarding exposure. Another study
(Pesatori A.C., Consonni D., Tironi A., Landi M.T., Zocchetti C., Bertazzi P.A. 1992. Cancer morbidity in the Seveso
area, 19761986. Chemosphere 25:209212) showed a clear association between herbicide exposure and
multiple myeloma in both males and females. Moreover, multiple myeloma is closely related biologically to 
B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma; consequently, the epidemiological evidence concerning non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
gives added weight to the association between herbicide exposure and multiple myeloma. Based on this clinical consideration
and the weight of the epidemiogical evidence, the Secretary has determined that there is a positive association between
herbicide exposure and multiple myeloma that manifests itself to a degree of 10 percent at any time after exposure.
We are proposing to amend 38 CFR 3.309(e) to implement the Secretary's decision. This amendment is proposed to be effective
the date of publication of the final rule, as provided by Public Law 1024.
 
The NAS report also found limited/suggestive evidence of an association between herbicide exposure and the subsequent
development of respiratory cancers, specifically cancers of the lung, larynx, or trachea. For study purposes, NAS
included cancer of the bronchus when it considered cancer of the lung; therefore, we are including cancer of the bronchus
within the scope of the proposed presumption. 

In reviewing the NAS report, which noted that not all studies had fully controlled for or evaluated smoking as a confounding
factor, VA gave weight to the fact that the studies found high relative risks for respiratory cancers in production
workers (Manz A., Berger J., Dwyer J.H., Flesch-Janys D., Nagel S., Waltsgott H. 1991. Cancer mortality among workers
in chemical plant contaminated with dioxin. Lancet 338:959964; Fingerhut et al., 1991). The Fingerhut study
showed an increased risk with the duration of exposure. VA also noted that despite the failure of some studies to control
for smoking, it is unlikely that there were major differences in smoking patterns between the study and control groups.
Considering all of the evidence, the Secretary has determined that the credible evidence for an association outweighs
the credible evidence against an association and that there is, therefore, a positive association between exposure
to herbicides used in the Republic of Vietnam and the subsequent development of respiratory cancers. 




