 

Because Telecommunications Basket SUNS are linked to a portfolio of equity securities, the Amex's existing equity
floor trading rules will apply to the trading of Telecommunications Basket SUNS. First, pursuant to Amex Rule 411,
the Exchange will impose a duty of due diligence on its members and member firms to learn the essential facts relating
to every customer prior to trading Telecommunications Basket SUNS.
<FOOTCITE>20</FOOTCITE>
 Second, consistent with Amex Rule 411, the Exchange will further require that a member or member firm specifically
approve a customer's account for trading Telecommunications Basket SUNS prior to, or promptly after, the completion
of the transaction. Third, Telecommunications Basket SUNS will be subject to the equity margin rules of the Exchange.
Fourth, prior to trading Telecommunications Basket SUNS, the Exchange will distribute a circular to the membership,
in the form reviewed by the Commission, providing guidance with regard to member firm compliance responsibilities
(including suitability recommendations) when handling transactions in Telecommunications Basket SUNS and highlighting
the special risks and characteristics of the Telecommunications Basket SUNS.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
20

</FOOTNAME>
Amex Rule 411 requires that every member, member firm or member corporation use due diligence to learn the essential
facts relative to every customer and to every order or account accepted.




</FOOTNOTE>


III. Commission Findings and Conclusions


The Commission finds that the proposed rule change is consistent with the requirements of the Act and the rules and
regulations thereunder applicable to a national securities exchange, and, in particular, the requirements of section
6(b)(5).
<FOOTCITE>21</FOOTCITE>
 Specifically, the Commission believes that providing for exchange-trading of Telecommunications Basket SUNS
will offer a new and innovative means of participating in the market for global telecommunications securities. In
particular, the Commission believes that Telecommunications Basket SUNS will permit investors to gain equity exposure
in global telecommunications companies, while at the same time, limiting the downside risk of the original investment.22
For these reasons, as well as those discussed in the MITTS Approval Orders,23 the Commission finds that the listing
and trading of Telecommunications Basket SUNS by the Amex is consistent with the Act.
<FOOTCITE>24</FOOTCITE>

<FOOTCITE></FOOTCITE>



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
21

</FOOTNAME>
15 U.S.C. 78f(b)(5) (1988).
22Pursuant to section 6(b)(5) of the Act the Commission must predicate approval of exchange trading of new products
upon a finding that the introduction of the product is in the public interest. Such a finding would be difficult with
respect to a product that served no investment, hedging, or other economic function, because any benefits that might
be derived by market participants would likely be outweighed by the potential for manipulation, diminished public
confidence in the integrity of the markets, and other valid regulatory concerns.
23See MITTS Approval Orders, 

supra

 note 7.
24See MITTS Approval Orders, 

supra

 note 7.
</FOOTNOTE>


As with MITTS, Telecommunications Basket SUNS are not leveraged instruments, however, their price will still be
derived and based upon the underlying basket of securities. Accordingly, the level of risk involved in the purchase
or sale of a Telecommunications Basket SUNS is similar to the risk involved in the purchase or sale of traditional common
stock. Nonetheless, as with the MITTS, the Commission has several specific concerns regarding the trading of this
type of product.
The Commission notes that the Exchange's rules and procedures that address the special concerns attendant to the
trading of hybrid securities will be applicable to Telecommunications Basket SUNS. In particular, by imposing the
hybrid listing standards, suitability, disclosure, and compliance requirements noted above, the Commission believes
the Exchange has addressed adequately the potential problems that could arise from the hybrid nature of Telecommunications
Basket SUNS. Moreover, the Exchange will distribute a circular to its membership calling attention to the specific
risks associated with Telecommunications Basket SUNS.





