 

Most of the comments received in response to the ANPR regarding health claims addressed the need for these types of
claims to inform and remind consumers about the relationship between diet and health. The comments stressed that
such claims must be supported by strong scientific consensus. Commenters also emphasized the importance of working
with FDA to bring about uniformity in health claims regulations so that health messages may be of substantial use to
consumers. 



Alternative Considered 



In developing this proposed rule, FSIS considered an alternative to improve the efficiency of establishing regulations
to permit health claims on the labeling of meat and poultry products. Under the alternative, FSIS would not issue regulations
to authorize the use of health claims, but, rather, would permit health claims that are authorized by FDA. In approving
labeling applications, FSIS would refer to FDA regulations to specify the conditions under which health claims may
be used on the labeling of products under USDA inspection. FSIS relied heavily on FDA's decisions about the validity
and significance of the relationship between the substances and diseases that are subjects of this proposal, and
would continue to do so for future claims. 

Because health claims are diet-related, FSIS believes they are invariably applicable to food products regulated
by both FSIS and FDA. Many foods from different food categories can be used alone or as ingredients in other products;
for example, as components of meals containing fish, meat, or poultry. FSIS is interested in receiving comments on
the alternative approach it considered. Comments should address the impact such an alternative might have on the
use of health claims on meat and poultry products, and what other actions FSIS should take to ensure that health claims
and criteria for their use are compatible for all food products. Such comments will be given serious consideration
in FSIS's decision on a final rule for health claims. 



FDA Health Claims Regulations 



In response to the provisions of the NLEA that bear on health claims, FDA adopted general requirements for such claims
in a final regulation published in the 

Federal Register

 on January 6, 1993 (58 FR 2478). FDA's approach to establish general requirements in conformity to the NLEA provisions
is detailed in its proposed regulation on this subject published in the 

Federal Register

 on November 27, 1991 (56 FR 60537). Among other things, the regulation FDA adopted at 21 CFR 101.14 defines a health
claim, including implied claims, and disqualifying nutrient levels for total fat, saturated fat, cholesterol,
or sodium. The regulation prohibits health claims on the label or in labeling for a food that exceeds any one of the disqualifying
nutrient levels, unless an exception is made under a specific provision authorizing a health claim. 

As provided in 21 CFR 101.14, when a health claim is made about the effects of consuming a substance at decreased levels,
the substance in the food bearing the claim must meet a regulatory definition for ``low,'' unless an alternative level
is established in the specific regulation authorizing the claim. If the claim is about the effects of consuming a substance
at other than decreased levels, the level of the substance must be sufficiently high to justify the claim. The regulation
also prohibits health claims for any food that contains less than 10 percent of the Reference Daily Intake or Daily
Reference Value for vitamin A, vitamin C, iron, calcium, protein, or fiber per reference amount customarily consumed
prior to any nutrient addition. Health claims are not allowed for foods when a substance, other than one for which a
disqualifying nutrient level is established, is present at an inappropriate level as set forth in a specific provision
authorizing a claim. Also, health claims are not allowed on foods for children less than 2 years of age unless they are
specifically provided for by regulation. 

As mandated by the NLEA, FDA evaluated relationships associating nutrients with disease or health-related conditions
with respect to their appropriateness for health claims. The results of the evaluation and detailed discussion on
each relationship, including the materials (studies, publications, etc.) to evaluate their validity, and the conditions
of their use are contained in proposed regulations published in the 

Federal Register

 on November 21, 1991 (56 FR 60566 through 60855), and final regulations published in the 

Federal Register

 on January 6, 1993 (58 FR 2537, 2552, 2622, 2665, 2739, 2787, and 2820). FDA's final regulations were developed in accordance
with the general requirements contained in 21 CFR 101.14, and authorize seven health claims to describe the following
associations: 

(1) Calcium and osteoporosis, (58 FR 2665); 

(2) Dietary lipids and cancer, (58 FR 2787); 

(3) Sodium and hypertension, (58 FR 2820); 

(4) Dietary saturated fat and cholesterol and risk of coronary heart disease, (58 FR 2739); 

(5) Fiber-containing grain products, fruits, and vegetables and cancer, (58 FR 2537); 

(6) Fruits, vegetables, and grain products that contain fiber, particularly soluble fiber, and risk of coronary
heart disease, (58 FR 2552); and 

(7) Fruits and vegetables and cancer, (58 FR 2622). 

More recently, FDA published a proposed rule in the 

Federal Register

 on October 14, 1993 (58 FR 53254), to authorize the use of a health claim about the relationship between folate and neural
tube defects. On January 4, 1994, FDA published a notice in the 

Federal Register

 (59 FR 433) that the proposed regulation is considered a final regulation for dietary supplements. FDA advises that
it has no intention of taking action against foods in conventional form that are naturally high in folate that bear
a claim about this nutrient-disease relationship so long as the claim complies with the provisions of 21 CFR 101.79
that have become final for dietary supplements by operation of law. However, FDA strongly discourages use of the claim
on foods fortified with folic acid until it finalizes the October 14, 1993, proposal. 






