 

The purpose of Program Planning projects will be to create plans for state-wide, coordinated, technology extension
programs in order to enhance the competitiveness of small- and medium-sized manufacturers. These projects will
plan for the development and coordination of existing and/or newly formed services, such as state industrial assistance
programs; workforce training; university-based industrial assistance programs; and management assistance programs;
into a unified state-wide program. Plans will include providing access to a wide range of technology and services,
such as technology deployment, workers skills development, technology transfer and commercialization, or export
and market development.

Applicants may conduct planning activities on multiple intrastate region basis, when regions are defined by the
state. Regions should be clearly defined by the proposing organizations and it must be clear why the program is regionally
oriented, versus state-wide, and how the multiple intrastate regions will be integrated into a state-wide plan or
interact such that state-wide coverage is achieved.

Applicants may include pilot testing activities as part of their planning process. If pilot testing of the proposed
extension plan is included in the project, it should include methods of evaluating the pilot test's success in implementing
the proposed extension plan. Any proposed pilot activity must be consistent with the program plan developed for the
state.



Program Planning Projects Evaluation Criteria



Proposals from applicants will be evaluated and rated on the basis of the following criteria by an impartial competitive
review panel. Each proposal should address all five evaluation criteria and evaluation criteria 13 will be
weighted more heavily than criteria 45. Selection will be based upon total evaluation score as well as geographic
distribution.

1. 

Target Population (25 points):

 Potential applicants should specify a methodology for identifying a population of beneficiary companies (the target
population) and their technology assistance-related needs. Factors that will be considered include:


(a) Methodology for defining the size and demographic characteristics of the target population to be served by the
program plan.

(b) Methodology for determining the target population's assistance needs, eg. technology, training, information,
quality improvement, management, etc.

(c) Methodology to ensure that the plan is appropriate for addressing identified industry needs.

2. 

Resource Identification and Assessment (20 points):

 Applicants should describe the methodology for collecting information about the number, size, technical sophistication,
type, and relevance of industrial assistance activities that will be part of the coordination effort. Factors that
will be considered include:

(a) Methodology for identifying relevant assistance programs and other sources of expertise outside applicant's
organization.

(b) Methodology for assessing relevance and effectiveness of resources in addressing identified industry needs.

3. 

Coordination with Existing Resources (25 points):

 Applicants should set forth a plan for interacting or coordinating with appropriate existing and/or newly-formed
state and local technology-industrial assistance services, potential industry partners, and appropriate federal
services, to develop a coordinated state-wide delivery system. Factors that will be considered include:

(a) Methodology and adequacy of plans for forming effective linkages and partnerships necessary to plan for and provide
a coordinated range of services to meet the needs of the target population.

(b) Safeguards to ensure that planned activity does not duplicate existing services or resources.

4. 

Management (15 points):

 Applicants should specify plans for proper organization, staffing, and management of the planning process. Factors
that will be considered include:

(a) Appropriateness and authority of the governing or managing organization to conduct a state-wide (or regional)
planning process.

(b) Qualifications of the project team and its leadership to conduct a state-wide (or regional) planning process.

(c) Appropriateness of the organizational approach for carrying out the planning activity.

(d) Evidence of significant involvement and support by the state and by private industry.



