 


d. 

Consideration of legal authority of FDA and other 
agencies to require specific packaging measures for foods and 
drugs. 

In its consideration of what action to take concerning 
the packaging of iron-containing drugs and dietary supplements to 
ensure their safe use, FDA recognized that it must act within the 
limits of its statutory authority and consider the statutory 
authority of other government agencies. As noted above, under 
the PPPA, CPSC has authority to regulate the packaging of 
household substances. Under the PPPA, CPSC can establish special 
packaging performance standards. Thus, by regulation, CPSC has 
established special packaging standards and performance criteria 
for special packaging, 16 CFR 1700.15 and 1700.20, respectively. 
However, the PPPA specifically limits CPSC from establishing 
regulations that require specific packaging designs, product 
content, and package quantity for household substances, including 
food and drugs. 



i. 

Packaging for iron-containing dietary supplements. 

The 
act provides FDA with broad authority to ensure that food is safe 
and wholesome. In particular, the act prohibits the adulteration 
of food in sections 301 and 402 (21 U.S.C. 331 and 342) and 
requires, in sections 409(a) (21 U.S.C. 348(a)) and 402(a)(2)(C), 
that all food additives be listed for use by FDA before they are 
added to food. 



In section 409(a), the act deems a food additive to be 
unsafe unless its use conforms to the conditions specified in the 
listing regulation. These conditions include, but are not 
limited to, specifications as to the particular food or classes 
of food to which the additive may be added, as to the manner in 
which the additive may be added to such food, and any directions 
or other labeling or packaging requirements for such additive 
deemed necessary to ensure the safety of such use (section 
409(c)(1)(A) of the act. Thus, under the act, the agency is 
authorized to specify packaging requirements for a food additive 
when it finds that use of such packaging is necessary to ensure 
the safe use of the additive. 



In section 201(s), the act provides an exemption to the food 
additive definition for substances that are generally recognized 
as safe (GRAS) under the conditions of their intended use. FDA 
has issued regulations delineating conditions under which use of 
certain substances is GRAS. If the conditions of a particular 
use of a substance are not those that are generally recognized as 
safe, the use is not GRAS, but subject to regulation under the 
food additives provisions of the act. 



Should FDA determine that a particular type of packaging is 
necessary to ensure the safe use of iron substances in dietary 
supplements, either as GRAS substances or as listed food additives, then any use of iron substances in dietary supplements

that does not involve use of that type of packaging would 
constitute a use of an unapproved food additive and render the 
dietary supplements adulterated under the act. 



ii. 

Packaging for iron-containing drug products. 

Section 
501(a)(2)(B) of the act (21 U.S.C. 351(a)(2)(B)) states that a 
drug shall be deemed to be adulterated if the methods used in, or 
the facilities or controls used for, its manufacture, processing, 
packing, or holding do not conform to, or are not operated or 
administered in conformity with, current good manufacturing 
practice to assure that such drug meets the requirements of the 
act as to safety and has the identity and strength, and meets the 
quality and purity characteristics, which it purports or is 
represented to possess. 



A drug product may be safe and effective as manufactured but 
used in an unsafe and ineffective manner. Current good 
manufacturing practice is, to some extent, an evolving standard. 
To remain ``current,'' a manufacturer must take into account 
advances in technology as well as new information about the use 
of the product including, but not limited to, information about 
any dangers associated with use of the drug product. 
Manufacturers must use this knowledge to alter, adapt, or change 
their manufacturing procedures to ensure that all possible 
measures have been implemented to eliminate known dangers. 
Therefore, advances in technology and new information about 
dangers associated with a drug product can mean that further 
steps by the manufacturer are necessary to guard against such 
foreseeable dangers, in order to hold the drug product in a 
manner that ensures its safety and, thus, comports with current 
good manufacturing practice. 



