 

<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:



Table of Contents



I. Introduction
II. NPL Deletion Criteria
III. Deletion Procedures
IV. Basis for Intended Site Deletions



I. Introduction



The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Region II announces its intent to delete the Radium Chemical Company site,
Woodside, Queens County, New York from the NPL and requests public comment on these actions. The NPL constitutes appendix
B to the NCP, which EPA promulgated pursuant to section 105 of CERCLA, as amended. The EPA identifies sites that appear
to present a significant risk to public health, welfare, or the environment and maintains the NPL as the list of those
sites. Sites on the NPL may be the subject of remedial actions financed by the Hazardous Substances Superfund Response
Trust Fund (Fund). Pursuant to 300.425(e)(3) of the NCP, any site deleted from the NPL remains eligible for
Fund-financed remedial actions, if conditions at the site warrant such action.

The EPA will accept comments concerning the Radium Chemical Company site for thirty days after publication of this
notice in the 

Federal Register.



Section II of this notice explains the criteria for deleting sites from the NPL. Section III discusses procedures
that EPA is using for these actions. Section IV discusses how the sites meet the deletion criteria.



II. NPL Deletion Criteria



The NCP establishes the criteria the Agency uses to delete sites from the NPL. In accordance with 40 CFR Section 300.425(e),
sites may be deleted from the NPL where no further response is appropriate. In making this determination, EPA will
consider whether any of the following criteria have been met:

(i) EPA, in consultation with the State, has determined that responsible or other parties have implemented all appropriate
response actions required; or

(ii) All appropriate Fund-financed responses under CERCLA have been implemented and EPA, in consultation with the
State, has determined that no further cleanup by responsible parties is appropriate; or

(iii) Based on a remedial investigation, EPA, in consultation with the State, has determined that the release poses
no significant threat to public health or the environment and, therefore, taking of remedial measures is not appropriate.

</SUPPLEM>
