 

(B) In the absence of a conversion contract, the conversion of which is begun on or after [Insert date 90 days after date
of publication of the final rule in the 

Federal Register

.]; or
(C) That is completed on or after January 1, 1997.
(2) Existing vessel means other than a new vessel.
(e) Damage survival for all existing vessels except those vessels authorized to carry more than 12 passengers on an
international voyage. An existing vessel is presumed to survive assumed damage if it meets the following conditions
in the final stage of flooding:


* * * * *


(f) Damage survival for all new vessels except those vessels authorized to carry more than 12 passengers on an international
voyage. A new vessel is presumed to survive assumed damage if it is shown by calculations to meet the conditions set
forth in paragraphs (f)(1) through (f)(6) of this section in the final stage of flooding and to meet the conditions
set forth in paragraphs (f)(7) and (f)(8) of this section in each earlier stage of flooding. For the purposes of establishing
boundaries to determine compliance with the requirements in paragraphs (f)(1) through (f)(8), openings that are
fitted with weathertight closures and that are not submerged during any stage of flooding will not be considered as
downflooding points.
(1) Each vessel must have positive righting arms for a minimum range beyond the angle of equilibrium as follows:


<TABLE>





1Vessel service 
1Required range



Exposed waters, oceans, or Great Lakes winter 
15 degrees.
Partially-protected waters or Great Lakes summer 
10 degrees.
Protected waters 
5 degrees.


</TABLE>


(2) Each vessel must not have any opening through which downflooding can occur within the minimum range specified
in paragraph (f)(1) of this section.
(3) Each vessel must have an area under each righting arm curve of at least 0.015 meter-radians, measured from the angle
of equilibrium to the smaller of the following angles:
(i) The angle at which downflooding occurs; or
(ii) The angle of vanishing stability.
(4) Each vessel must have within the positive range a righting arm (GZ) equal to or greater than the GZ as calculated
below:




<IMPORT>



E:GRAPHICSEP10AU94.051


</IMPORT>



Where_
C=1.00 for vessels on exposed waters, oceans, or Great Lakes winter
C=0.75 for vessels on partially-protected waters or Great Lakes summer
C=0.50 for vessels on protected waters
GZ=0.10 meter or as calculated by the formula above, whichever is greater.


D

=intact displacement
Heeling moment=greatest of the heeling moments as calculated in paragraphs (i) through (iv) below.



(i) The passenger heeling moment is calculated assuming_
(A) Each passenger weights 75 kilograms;
(B) Each passenger occupies 0.25 square meter of deck area; and
(C) All passengers are distributed, on available deck areas unoccupied by permanently affixed objects, toward one
side of the vessel on the decks where passengers would move to enter lifesaving equipment or leave the vessel in case
of flooding, and so that they produce the most adverse heeling moment.
(ii) The heeling moment due to asymmetric escape routes for passengers, if the vessel has asymmetric escape routes
for passengers, is calculated assuming_
(A) Each passenger weighs 75 kilograms;
(B) Each passenger occupies 0.25 square meter of deck area; and
(C) All passengers are distributed, on available deck areas unoccupied by permanently affixed objects, toward one
side of the vessel on the decks where passengers would move to enter lifesaving equipment or leave the vessel in case
of flooding, and so that they produce the most adverse heeling moment.
(iii) The heeling moment due to launching of survival craft is calculated assuming_
(A) All survival craft, including davit-launched liferafts and rescue boats, fitted on the side to which the vessel
heels after sustained damage, are swung out if necessary, fully loaded and ready for lowering;
(B) Persons not in the survival craft that are swung out and ready for lowering are distributed about the center line
of the vessel so that they do not provide additional heeling or righting moments; and
(C) Survival craft on the side of the vessel opposite that to which the vessel heels remain stowed.
(iv) The heeling moment due to wind pressure is calculated assuming_
(A) A wind pressure of 120 Newtons per square meter;
(B) The wind acts on an area equal to the projected lateral area of the vessel above the waterline corresponding to the
intact condition; and
(C) The wind lever arm is the vertical distance from a point at one-half the mean draft, or the center of area below the
waterline, to the center of the lateral area.
(5) Each vessel must have an angle of equilibrium that does not exceed_
(i) 7 degrees for one compartment flooding;
(ii) 12 degrees for two compartment flooding; or
(iii) 15 degrees for one or two compartment flooding where_
(A) The vessel has an area under each righting arm curve, when the equilibrium angle is between 7 degrees and 15 degrees,
of at least 0.035 meter-radians, measured from the angle of equilibrium to the smaller of the angle at which downflooding
occurs or the angle of vanishing stability; and
(B) The vessel has positive righting arms for at least 20 degrees beyond the angle of equilibrium.
(6) The margin line of the vessel must not be submerged when the vessel is in the equilibrium condition.
(7) Each vessel must have a maximum angle of equilibrium that does not exceed 15 degrees during each earlier stage of
flooding.
(8) Each vessel must have a maximum righting arm of at least 0.05 meter and positive righting arms for a range of at least
7 degrees during each earlier stage of flooding. Only one breach in the hull and only one free surface need be assumed
when meeting the requirements of this paragraph.
(g) Damage survival for vessels authorized to carry more than 12 passengers on an international voyage. A vessel is
presumed to survive assumed damage if it is shown by design calculations to comply with the damage stability required
for that ship by the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974 as amended, chapter II1, part
B, regulation 8.


* * * * *


Dated: August 3, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Joseph J. Angelo,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Chief, Office of Marine Safety, Security and Environmental Protection.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9419515 Filed 8994; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 491014M
</BILLING>





