 







<USDEPT>FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM</USDEPT>



<DOCTITLE>Consumer Advisory Council; Notice of Meeting of Consumer Advisory Council</DOCTITLE>



The Consumer Advisory Council will meet on Thursday, June 23. The meeting, which will be open to public observation,
will take place in the Board Room of the Eccles Building. The meeting is expected to begin at 9 a.m. and to continue until
4 p.m., with a lunch break from 1 until 2 p.m. The Eccles Building is located on C Street, Northwest, between 20th and
21st Streets in Washington, DC.

The Council's function is to advise the Board on the exercise of the Board's responsibilities under the Consumer Credit
Protection Act and on other matters on which the Board seeks its advice. Time permitting, the Council will discuss
the following topics:




Community Reinvestment Act Reform. 

Discussion of issues related to the interagency proposal to revise regulations implementing the Community Reinvestment
Act.



Interagency Policy Statement on Fair Lending. 

Discussion led by the Community Affairs and Housing Committee on the policy statement on fair lending recently adopted
by the Board and nine other federal agencies_in particular whether additional guidance is necessary and on what issues.




Sale of Mutual Funds and Other Uninsured Instruments by Depository Institutions. 

Discussion led by the Depository and Delivery Systems Committee on possible ways to address consumer confusion that
may arise when uninsured investments are sold to the public by depository institutions, which historically have
offered only insured savings instruments.



Truth in Savings Proposal. 

Discussion led by the Depository and Delivery Systems Committee on a proposal by the Board to amend Regulation DD (Truth
in Savings) to clarify that interest credited to an account becomes part of the principal, and thus is subject to compounding;
the proposal would allow institutions to continue to use an existing formula for calculating the annual percentage
yield, whereas an earlier proposal would have required a new formula for certain accounts.



Home Ownership Counseling Models. 

Report by the Community Affairs and Housing Committee on the key elements of successful home ownership counseling
programs, elements that should be present in any home ownership counseling program sponsored, recognized or supported
by a bank.



Governor's Report. 

Report by Federal Reserve Board Member Lawrence B. Lindsey on economic conditions, recent Board initiatives, and
issues of concern, with an opportunity for questions from Council members.



Members Forum. 

Presentation of individual Council members' views on the economic conditions present within their industries or
local economies (including whether it is getting easier to obtain a loan, and whether there is a strong focus on lending
in the inner cities).



Committee Reports. 

Reports from Council committees on their work.

Other matters previously considered by the Council or initiated by Council members also may be discussed.

Persons wishing to submit to the Council their views regarding any of the above topics may do so by sending written statements
to Ann Marie Bray, Secretary, Consumer Advisory Council, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC 20551. Comments must be received no later than close of business Monday,
June 20, and must be of a quality suitable for reproduction.

Information with regard to this meeting may be obtained from Bedelia Calhoun, Staff Specialist, Consumer Advisory
Council, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington,
DC 20551, 2024526470. Telecommunications Device for the Deaf (TDD) users may contact Dorothea Thompson,
2024523544.





Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 18, 1994.




<SIGNER>
William W. Wiles,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Secretary of the Board.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9412601 Filed 52394; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 621001M
</BILLING>


