 



(F) A schedule detailing inspection and maintenance intervals including dates and durations of expected system
shutdowns. 

(G) Written justification for less than continuous operation of the gas collection system. 

(H) Operating procedures including system start-up, balancing, optimization, and shutdown. 

(I) Qualifications and training requirements for on-site personnel. 

(J) Safety precautions, protective clothing and equipment requirements, and emergency procedures. 

(6) 

Test Methods. 

(i) The following procedures shall be used to establish baseline conditions pursuant to paragraph (g)(3)(i)(B)
of this section: 

(A) The gas collection rate and landfill surface integrity shall be evaluated and brought to baseline conditions
by testing for leaks and repairing all such leaks using the repair methods listed in paragraph (g)(3)(i)(H)(1

) of this section. Surface leak testing shall be performed using an instrument which meets the apparatus specifications
of EPA Method 21 (40 CFR part 60, appendix A). The instrument shall be calibrated before and after each test using zero
air and an approximate 500 ppm methane standard calibration gas in accordance with the instrument manufacturer's
recommendations. 

(B) Surface leak testing shall be performed by holding the detector probe 2 inches from the landfill surface while
walking a pattern of parallel paths not more than 50 feet apart over all surface areas specified in paragraph (g)(3)(i)(H)(

1

) of this section. Cracks, holes, and other breaches in the surface as well as areas where buried waste interfaces with
undisturbed, native soil shall also be evaluated. The owner is not required to monitor surfaces on steep slopes and
other areas posing a hazard to testing personnel; however, leaks identified in such areas are not exempt from the provisions
of paragraph (g)(3)(i)(H) of this section. 

(C) Surface leak testing shall be performed only when the average wind speed is less than 5 miles per hour and instantaneous
wind speed is less than 10 miles per hour, unless EPA approves alternate wind speed limits based on demonstrated recurrent
site-specific conditions. Average wind speed shall be determined on a 10 minute average using an on-site anemometer
with a continuous recorder. Surface testing shall not be conducted when the surface is wet or when there has been rain
during the preceding 72 hours. Surface testing of landfill surfaces that are normally wet (i.e., a golf course) may
be performed when the surface is wet. EPA personnel may randomly identify leaks without regard to the above wind speed
and surface condition requirements. 

(D) EPA Method 21 (40 CFR part 60, appendix A) shall be used to determine leaks along the gas transfer path. 

(ii) EPA Method 2D (40 CFR part 60, appendix A) shall be used for the flowrate measurements required by paragraphs (g)(3)(i)(B)(

1

) and (g)(3)(i)(D) of this section. 

(iii) EPA Method 3A (40 CFR part 60, appendix A) shall be used for the oxygen concentration measurements required by
paragraphs (g)(3)(i)(B)(

2

) and (g)(3)(i)(C) of this section. 

(iv) The non-methane organic compound destruction/treatment efficiency of a control device shall be determined
using the following equation: 



<IMPORT>




E:GRAPHICSEP05MY94.106

</IMPORT>





where: 

NMOC

out

 = the measured concentration as methane of non-methane organic compounds in the exhaust, and 

NMOC

in

 = the measured concentration as methane of non-methane organic compounds in the landfill gas entering the control
device. 




(A) NMOC

in

 and NMOC

out

 shall be determined using EPA Method 25 (40 CFR part 60, appendix A) sampling and analysis procedures modified to delete
the condensate trap from the sampling train. Grab samples of landfill gas at the inlet to the control device, and exhaust
from the control device shall be collected simultaneously and at a constant rate over a period of at least 10 minutes
in identical clean Tedlar

&reg;


<FOOTCITE>33</FOOTCITE>
 bags (or equivalent). Each sample volume shall be sufficient to perform two NMOC analyses and to measure the sample's
oxygen content. The oxygen concentration shall be measured at both the inlet to the control device and the exhaust
from the control device and in each grab sample using EPA Method 3A (40 CFR part 60, appendix A). Corresponding oxygen
concentrations (grab samples and sampling port readings) must agree to within 1% oxygen. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
33

</FOOTNAME>
Mention of trade names or specific products does not constitute endorsement by EPA.

</FOOTNOTE>


(B) The inlet flow shall be determined using: 

