 

III. Retransmission Consent





A. Definition Issues






1. Multichannel Video Programming Distributors





55. Section 325(b)(1) provides that ``no cable system or other multichannel video programming distributor shall
retransmit the signal of a broadcasting station, or any part thereof, *** ``except with express authorization
of the station or if carried pursuant to must-carry. Section 602(12) of the Communications Act defines a multichannel
video programming distributor as ``a person such as, but not limited to, a cable operator, a multichannel multipoint
distribution service (MMDS), a direct broadcast satellite service, or a television receive-only satellite program
distributor, who makes available for purchase, by subscribers or customers, multiple channels of video programming.''




56. In the Report and Order we found that ``local broadcast signals provided by MATV facilities or by VHF/UHF antennas
on individual dwellings situated within the station's broadcast service area are not subject to retransmission
consent, provided that these signals are available without charge at the resident's option.'' We further stated
that this exemption applies to MATVSMATV, MMDSSMATV and MMDS-individual antenna combinations, so
long as there is no charge. The analogy used was that of an individual purchasing and installing a roof top antenna to
receive broadcast signals. This exception to retransmission consent was added to the Commission's rules as 76.64(e).
That section states that ``[p]rovision of local broadcast signals my master antenna television (MATV) facilities
or by VHF/UHF antennas on individual dwellings is not subject to retransmission consent, provided that these signals
are available without charge at the resident' option. That is, the antenna facilities must be owned by the individual
subscriber or building owner and not under the control of the multichannel video programming distributor.'' On October
5, 1993, at the request of the Wireless Cable Association (``WCA'') and the National Private Cable Association (``NPCA''),
we adopted a Stay Order with respect to 76.64(e), pending our resolution of this issue. The determining factor
used in the rule relates to antenna ownership, not the provision of the service free-of-charge.




57. We note that a wireless operator meets the definition of a multichannel video programming distributor (``MVPD'')
and generally would be responsible for obtaining retransmission consent for all broadcast signals retransmitted
over their system. We are cognizant of Congress' desire not to affect a viewer who receives these broadcast signals
over an antenna not owned by a MVPD. The application of the retransmission consent requirement to MMDS and SMATV facilities
was an effort to create regulatory parity between these types of operations and cable systems. In the Report and Order,
the Commission expressed its belief that to the extent the signal reception involved was under the control of the individual
subscriber and the signals involved were not being ``sold'' by the MMDS and SMATV operators, the consent requirement
should not apply. In addition, and in recognition of the concerns raised by WCA, we find that retransmission consent
is not required if the broadcast signal reception service is received without a separate subscription charge and
the antenna is either (1) owned by the subscriber or the building owner; or (2) under the control and available for purchase
by the subscriber or building owner upon termination of service. We believe that this interpretation upholds Congressional
intent without causing undue disruption to subscribers. We will amend 76.64(e) of our rules to reflect this
change.




