 

723.509Confidentiality of information. 



Subpart E_Domestically Produced Cigarettes 



723.501 



Definitions. 



In addition to the definitions set forth at 723.104, the definitions set forth in this section shall be applicable
for purposes of administering the provisions of this subpart. 



Domestic manufacturer of cigarettes. 

A person that produces and sells more than 1 percent of the cigarettes produced and sold in the United States. 



Domestic tobacco. 

Any quantity of harvested tobacco which has been cultivated, grown, and produced in the United States. 



Imported tobacco. 

Any tobacco, including Oriental and Turkish tobaccos, not produced in the United States if such tobacco has been entered
into the United States. Any tobacco that cannot be verified as being domestic tobacco shall be presumed to be imported
tobacco. 



Manufactured tobacco. 

Tobacco that has been processed and packaged into cigarettes or other consumer tobacco products. 



Producer owned cooperative marketing association. 

Those loan associations that offer price support for burley and flue-cured tobacco through contractual agreements
with the Commodity Credit Corporation of USDA. These associations are the Burley Tobacco Growers Cooperative Association,
the Burley Stabilization Corporation, and the Flue-Cured Tobacco Cooperative Stabilization Corporation. 



Tobacco. 

Any commodity or substance that is commonly considered to be tobacco in the trade. 



United States. 

The 50 States of the United States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, or any Territory or Possession of the United
States. 



Unmanufactured tobacco. 

Any tobacco that is not processed and packaged as a consumer tobacco product. 



USDA. 

The U.S. Department of Agriculture. 



723.502 



Domestic tobacco content. 



(a) 

General requirement. 

(1) Except as provided in 723.505 of this part, during each calendar year beginning with 1994, the total domestic
tobacco used for cigarettes manufactured in the United States by a domestic manufacturer of cigarettes shall, for
the calendar year, equal or exceed 75 percent of the total quantity of tobacco used by such manufacturer in such cigarettes.


(2) Any tobacco that has been reconstituted, or otherwise processed to the extent that it has lost its respective identity
as either domestic tobacco or imported tobacco before its acquisition by such domestic manufacturer of cigarettes,
shall be considered as imported tobacco when determining compliance with the domestic tobacco content requirements
of this subpart. 

(3) Any tobacco having lost its identity with respect to its origin of production during the manufacturing process
which is recaptured and reused to manufacture cigarettes in the United States by the same manufacturer and any cigarettes
returned to the manufacturer and reused by such manufacturer to manufacture cigarettes in the United States shall
not be recounted. The burden of establishing such re-use shall be on the manufacturer. 

(b) 

Reports required by manufacturers. 

(1) Beginning with the 1994 calendar year, a domestic manufacturer of cigarettes shall report to the Director, for
each calendar year, the following on the basis of weights of tobacco as it begins use in manufacturing cigarettes:


(i) The total quantity of tobacco used by the manufacturer to produce cigarettes in the United States during such calendar
year. 

(ii) The total quantity of imported tobacco used by the manufacturer in the production of cigarettes in the United
States during such calendar year. 

(iii) The total quantity of domestic tobacco used by the manufacturer in the production of cigarettes in the United
States during such calendar year. 

(2) For purposes of the report required by paragraph (b)(1) of this section, tobacco weights shall be reported based
on the weight of tobacco when it is ready for manufacturing into cigarettes and to the extent, if any, that a conversion
is needed, tobacco weight shall be converted to such weights based on normal processing yields with respect to the
various forms and kinds of tobacco, subject to review by the Director. 

(c) 

Where and when to report. 

The reports required by this subpart shall be mailed or otherwise delivered to Director, Tobacco and Peanuts Division,
Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service, USDA, P.O. Box 2415, Washington, DC 200132415 by February
15 of the year after the calendar year for which the report applies. 
 

