 

<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE: 

April 13, 1994.



</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:



John Lynch, Regulations Branch (AFS850), General Aviation and Commercial Division, Federal Aviation Administration,
800 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20591; Telephone (202) 2678150. 


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

Availability of Final Rule



Any person may obtain a copy of this final rule by submitting a request to the Federal Aviation Administration, Office
of Public Affairs (APA200), 800 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20591, or by calling the Office of
Public Affairs at (202) 2673484. Communications must identify the docket number of this amendment.



Background



The decision to amend the specific number of hours of instruction that holders of flight instructor certificates
must complete in an approved FIRC to renew their certificates originated from a petition for exemption submitted
by the AOPA. The AOPA petitioned the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) for exemption from 61.197(c) of
the FAR to permit holders of flight instructor certificates to renew their certificates by attending an approved
FIRC of 16 hours of ground or flight instruction, or both, in lieu of the current 24 hours required by 61.197(e).
The AOPA fully described its rationale in its petition for exemption.

The FAA agreed with the AOPA's rationale in its petition for exemption. There is a need to streamline current FIRCs
to provide for a condensed weekend renewal program. The majority of certificated flight instructors maintain personal
or professional responsibilities such that weekend renewal is a needed option for the maintenance of their certificate.
The recent advances in instructional technology and training techniques more than compensate for a reduction in
classroom time requirements. The innovative and interactive educational programs, such as the AOPA's ``Trigger
Tapes'' and ``Operation Airspace'' facilitating learning at the application level, allow for a reduction in the
amount of hours that holders of flight instructor certificates must complete in an approved FIRC to renew their certificates
while maintaining the current level of safety.

The FAA determined, however, that rulemaking was necessary to permit holders of flight instructor certificates
to renew their certificates by attending an approved FIRC of fewer hours of ground or flight instruction, or both,
than the 24 hours currently required by the FAR. Therefore, the FAA decided that the appropriate response to the AOPA's
petition for exemption was to propose a change to the existing regulations. The FAA concluded that the current level
of safety would be maintained and was appropriate in light of the recent advances in instructional technology and
training techniques. In addition, the FAA determined that the option to specify the number of hours of instruction
through an FAA approval, as part of the approved renewal program, will offer substantial benefits to the aviation
community; specifically, it will eliminate the burden of the longer 24 hour course, mitigate the current decline
in instructional resources, and offer financial advantages to individual flight instructors. For example, approval
of AOPA's 16 hour course will allow a 1 day reduction in travel expenses to individual flight instructors saving an
average per diem cost of $100.

The AOPA petition for exemption was published in the 

Federal Register

 on March 17, 1993 (58 FR 14466). The FAA received two comments on the petition of which both comments voiced support.
After review of the petition and the submitted comments, the FAA concluded that while the petition had considerable
merit, the AOPA was not unique in its position. Therefore, on September 17, 1993, the FAA issued Notice No. 9311
(58 FR 48748) that proposed to permit holders of flight instructor certificates to renew their certificates by completing
an approved number of hours of ground or flight instruction, or both, in an approved FIRC.



Discussion of Public Comments 



A. General



The FAA received 47 comments in response to Notice No. 9311, mostly from certified flight instructors (CFI's).
The following organizations also submitted comments: Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association (AOPA), AOPA Air Safety
Foundation, Arizona Pilots Association, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, Gaits Aviation Seminars, Inc.,
Hoffman Pilot Center, Inc., Richmor Aviation, Skylanes, Inc., and Wisconsin Department of Transportation.

Thirty-three commenters, including the Arizona Pilots Association, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, Gaits
Aviation Seminars, Inc., Skylanes, Inc., and the Wisconsin Department of Transportation support the proposal to
amend 61.197(c) of the FAR by permitting holders of flight instructor certificates to renew their certificates
by completing an approved number of hours of ground or flight instruction, or both, in an approved FIRC.


</SUPPLEM>
