 

In determining how expenditures made as of a certain date should be characterized, the Commission might consider
such information as how many delegates the candidate has, the number of candidates who received votes in each of the
candidate's party's most recent state primary elections or other state nominating procedures, the relative percentages
received by each candidate in these proceedings, and whether the candidate had begun to focus on issues raised by other
projected general election candidates and his or her comparability with such candidates. The Commission welcomes
suggestions of other factors that could prove helpful in making this determination.
Another question involves local campaign offices that continue to operate after a state's primary election or other
nominating procedure is over, when the office is no longer focused on securing the nomination in that state. The Commission
is proposing a rebuttable presumption that a local campaign office that remains open more than 30 days after a state's
primary election, or the close of any other nomination process in that state, is operating in support of the general
election campaign. The Commission welcomes comments on this approach, as well as suggestions for others that would
result in a fair attribution of these expenditures.
This situation becomes more complicated when applied to supplies and materials. The Commission is therefore seeking
comments on how such items should be treated. One approach would be to require an inventory of everything on hand, including
campaign materials but perhaps excluding items below a certain threshold amount, as of the DOI. These items would
then be sold to the general election at cost. If there was no inventory, everything purchased or delivered in the last
60 days before the DOI would be presumed to be a general election expense. The Commission notes that this approach could
be difficult to verify, since the inventory would be at a point in time which could not be recreated. Nevertheless,
it is important that primary election funds not be used to subsidize the general election.
Finally, the Commission welcomes comments on how other foods and/or services, such as campaign-related travel and
media expenses, should be treated in this context. For example, if a candidate travels to a state where the primary
has already been held, some of the travel could be for fundraising to help obtain the nomination, but some or all might
be for general election purposes.
Nothing in this NPRM is intended to revise the Commission's ``continuing to campaign'' rules set forth at 11 CFR 9034.4(a)(3)(ii).
These rules allow a candidate who is no longer eligible for matching funds but is still seeking the nomination to use
post-DOI contributions to pursue his or her primary campaign_a different situation than that addressed in this proposal.
The Commission recognizes that, under unusual circumstances, a candidate who appears to have been eliminated early
in the election cycle may later secure the nomination. As is currently true, these special situations would be evaluated
on a case-by-case basis.
Conversely, a candidate who appears to have secured the nomination early in the campaign may in fact fail to obtain
it, and thus not qualify for general election funding. The Commission is less concerned with this possibility, as
the focus of this portion of the rulemaking is on how certain expenditures should be treated by those candidates who
go on to become the convention's nominee.


2. Convention Expenses of Ineligible Candidates


The Commission is seeking comments on whether expenses incurred by losing primary election candidates in attending
their party's national nominating convention should be considered a qualified campaign expense under 11 CFR 9032.9.
Such attendance could provide a defeated candidate the opportunity to continue to fundraise, perhaps to campaign
for the vice presidential nomination, and to maintain contact with his or her pledged convention delegates.
The Commission notes, however, that qualified campaign expenses are defined in the Presidential Primary Matching
Payment Account Act at 26 U.S.C. 9032(9)(A) as those ``incurred by a candidate, or by his authorized committee, in
connection with his campaign for nomination for election.'' This definition seemingly does not apply to those no
longer seeking the presidential nomination. Also, the term ``candidate'' is defined as ``an individual who seeks
nomination for election to be President of the United States,'' and thus does not on its face include those seeking
the vice presidential nomination. 26 U.S.C. 9032(2). Further, in recent years presidential candidates have increasingly
announced their vice presidential selections in advance (at times well in advance) of the national convention. Finally,
under 11 CFR 9034.1(b), candidates can already count fundraising expenses incurred following their Date of Ineligibility
(DOI), including those incurred at a national nominating convention, as qualified campaign expenses.


