 

Proposed 488.166Validation Surveys


We have reconsidered the necessity of including this section in the text of the regulation, and have concluded that
it would be pointless and redundant to retain it. We believe that the statutory provisions upon which this section
is based are self-implementing, and that regulatory interpretation is not needed to clarify them. In addition, the
few elaborations on the requirements in sections 1819(g)(3) and 1919(g)(3) of the Act, which are found at 488.316
are duplicated elsewhere in the regulations, and we believe there is little reason to repeat them. Appeals applicable
to certifications of noncompliance based on validation surveys will be conducted according to 488.330, Certification
of compliance or noncompliance.
In the absence of a regulatory section devoted to validation surveys, we are adding a definition of a validation survey
to 488.301, Definitions, to serve as a reference because the term is used elsewhere in the regulations.
Our decision to not finalize proposed 488.166 does not make the public comments we received on this section
any less valuable for they are still pertinent commentary on validation survey policy and we are responding to them,
accordingly.


Comment: 

Several commenters insisted that HCFA validation surveys should be conducted concurrently with the State survey.
Other commenters encouraged HCFA to use the Onsite Performance Assessment and Training Survey (OSPATS) as the validation
survey method. Still other commenters said the HCFA validation survey should be as soon as possible after the State
survey, but no more than 2 weeks, 3 weeks or 30 days after the State survey. Most commenters noted that survey findings
may vary slightly from day to day and that it was essential that both survey teams were viewing the same set of facts.
In addition, concurrent surveys cause less disruption to facilities and residents and enable HCFA to provide immediate
feedback to State surveyors. One commenter recommended that HCFA validation surveys not be concurrent; another
said the unexpected nature of the validation survey was important in that the facility will return to its ``normal
daily routine'' after the State survey; and one commenter said the HCFA validation surveys were a waste of time.


Response: 

We agree with the commenters as to the advantages of a validation survey concurrent with the State standard recertification
survey. To that end, HCFA has developed the OSPATS. The OSPATS long term care survey process has Federal surveyors
assessing the facility while evaluating State survey agency performance. This process, which is fairly new for long
term care surveys, is believed by some providers to be less disruptive to facilities and residents. It does ensure
that both Federal and State surveyors observe the same conditions in the facility. It is our intent to expand the use
of the OSPATS process for validation surveys. We also agree that when the validation survey is not concurrent with
the State survey, it should occur as soon as possible after the State survey. Sections 1819(g)(3)(A) and 1919(g)(3)(A)
of the Act permit a 2 month period; in practice HCFA attempts to schedule the surveys closer to the State survey. However,
often there are scheduling and/or travel difficulties, which make minimum intervals between the two surveys difficult
to achieve. We want to retain the flexibility to use whatever survey process best achieves the goals of the Act. The
commenters who said that the validation surveys should not be concurrent or were a waste of time presented no reasons
or alternative proposals. We can say only that validation surveys, concurrent or not, are mandated by sections 1819(g)(3)
and 1919(g)(3) of the Act.


