 

Several aviculturists and one conservation organization expressed confusion over Section 15.31 (d). They note
that adequate enforcement controls should be in place in countries of export of captive-bred birds, as well as in countries
of origin of the wild populations. The Service agrees and notes that it is just as critical that enforcement be in place
and adequate in range countries as it be in place in exporting countries. The Service notes that adequate enforcement
in exporting countries is critical to ensure that wild-caught birds will not be misrepresented and laundered as captive-bred
birds. Adequate enforcement is critical to implementation of CITES, a specified purpose of the WBCA. Therefore,
the Service has modified 15.31 (d) accordingly. 



General Comments Pertaining to Section 15.33: Species Included in the Approved List for Captive-Bred Species 



This section establishes a list of approved captive-bred species, based on the criteria in Section 15.31. The Service
used the best information available, including records of imports into the United States of both wild-caught and
captive-bred birds for the years 19881992, CITES annual reports, published reports on the bird trade, law
enforcement data on the commercial trade in captive-bred species, law enforcement and intelligence information
on the illegal trade in exotic bird species, information from the CITES Secretariat, and information from other governments.
The final list of approved species includes 45 captive-bred exotic bird species and the color mutations for 3 captive-bred
species that can be imported from any other country without a WBCA permit; other applicable requirements still apply,
including any permits or documents required by CITES, other federal laws, and the exporting country. 

The Service has included in the approved list of captive-bred species several exotic bird species that are not listed
in any Appendix to the Convention but are regularly bred in captivity and are not taken from the wild. Although these
species are not listed in an Appendix and thus are not presently prohibited under the WBCA, these species are included
in the list for the convenience of the public. If any of these species were to become listed in CITES Appendix I, II, or
III, their importation would remain exempt from the provisions of the WBCA, pursuant to this section. To ensure that
there is no confusion, even if the species or higher taxon to which it belongs were subsequently listed in the Appendices
to the Convention, the Service would still consider it to be an approved captive-bred species pursuant to this subpart
D. 

Several commenters supported the approved list of captive-bred species published in the March 17, 1994 

Federal Register

 notice, whereas numerous commenters suggested specific additions of parrot and finch species to the approved list.
The Service reviewed information available to it for all of these species, based on the criteria in Section 15.31.
These comments are addressed below. 

Several falconry/raptor breeder organizations commented that all birds in the order Falconiformes should be exempted
from the WBCA and its implementing regulations. The Service disagrees and cannot exempt entire families of birds
that Congress did not choose to exempt. Except for the 10 bird families specifically exempted by the WBCA, the WBCA
applies to all species of exotic birds being exported from any country, whether individual birds are of captive or
wild origin. However, the Service notes that raptors can be imported into the United States in several ways, including
under permit requirements for scientific research, cooperative breeding programs, or zoological display or breeding.


Several commenters expressed concerns that once this list of approved captive-bred species is published, no additional
species could be added to the list. That is not the case. As new information becomes available, and as captive breeding
becomes more successful, the Service may propose modifications to this list of approved captive-bred species, including
the inclusion of additional species. 

Some of the species recommended by several commenters for inclusion in the list of approved captive-bred species
are very rare in aviculture, and there are few records of their international trade, either in the United States or
elsewhere. The Service has not included such species in the approved list, and notes that a purpose of the list of approved
captive-bred species is to facilitate commercial importation of captive-bred species, whose trade in no way can
be detrimental to populations of these species in the wild. The fundamental purpose of the WBCA is conservation of
exotic bird species in the wild. For species that are rare in aviculture, individual captive-bred birds may be imported
for approved cooperative breeding programs, zoological breeding and display, or scientific research, pursuant
to Subpart C of this part. 



Comments on Specific Species 



