 

(h) If a requester has no payment history, or has not paid on time in the past, FOIA managers may ask the requester to pay
after processing the request but before sending the records.

(i) When employees with different hourly rates search for information for an ``Other'' (Category 3) requester, waive
the cost of the most expensive 2 hours of search. Requesters receive the first 2 hours search (Category 3 requesters
only) and the first 100 pages of duplication (Categories 2 and 3) free only once per request. If you complete your work
and refer the request to another FOI office for action, tell that FOI office how much time you spent searching and how
many pages you copied for the requester.



806.19

Aggregating requests.



A requester may make many requests at once, each seeking parts of a document or documents, just to avoid paying fees.
When a requester or a group of requesters breaks a request into many requests to avoid paying, the FOIA manager may combine
the requests and charge accordingly. Before combining requests, be sure you have solid evidence that the requesters
are trying to avoid fees. Do not combine one requester's multiple requests on unrelated subjects. Contact SAF/AAIQ
before taking action.



806.20

Fee waivers.



(a) Waive fees for requesters of all categories when:

(1) FOIA costs total $15 or less.

(2) A record is created voluntarily to save the cost of supplying many records.

(3) A record previously withheld is released at small cost (e.g., $15 to $30).

(4) Releasing the information is likely to contribute significantly to public understanding of the operations or
activities of the DoD and is not primarily in the commercial interest of the requester.

(b) A waiver in the public interest establishes the two basic requirements below. Both must be met before you waive
or reduce fees. Use the following six factors. Begin with the first four factors to determine ``public interest''
and then use the two remaining factors to decide if release ``is not primarily in the commercial interest of the requester.''

(1) 

Requirement 1. 

Is releasing the information in the public interest business it will probably contribute significantly to public
understanding of the government's operations or activities?

(i) 

Factor 1_Subject of the Request. 

Analyze whether the subject matter will significantly contribute to the public understanding of DoD operations
or activities. Requests made for records in DoD's possession originated by nongovernment organizations for their
intrinsic content rather than informative value will likely not contribute to public understanding of DoD operations
or activities. Press clippings, magazine articles, or records expressing an opinion or concern from a member of the
public regarding a DoD activity are such records. Releasing older records may be relevant to current DoD activities,
so do not discount it under this factor simply because it is old. For example, a requester might want historical records
to study how a certain current DoD policy evolved. Review these requests closely, comparing the requester's stated
purpose for the records and the potential for public understanding of DoD operations and activities.

(ii) 

Factor 2_Informative Value. 

Closely analyze a record's substantive contents to determine whether disclosure is meaningful, and will inform
the public on DoD operations or activities. While the subject of a request may contain information concerning DoD
operations or activities it may not always help people understand these operations or activities. One example is
a heavily edited record, containing only random words, fragmented sentences, or paragraph headings. Another example
is information already in the public domain.

(iii) 

Factor 3_General Public Will Understand the Subject Better. 

Will the records' release inform, or have the potential to inform, the public or just the requester or a few interested
persons? Knowing the requester's identity is essential to determine whether he or she plans to, and knows how to, communicate
information to the public. Plans to write a book, research a subject, work on a doctoral dissertation, or indigency
are not reason enough to waive fees. The requester must tell how he or she plans to disclose the information to the general
public. You may ask requesters for their qualifications, the nature of their research, the purpose of requesting
information, and their plans for making information public.

(iv) 

Factor 4_Significance of Public Understanding. 

Balance the relative significance or impact of the disclosure against the level of public knowledge or understanding
that exists before disclosure. Records released on a subject of wide public interest should contain previously unknown
facts that increase public knowledge. They should not duplicate what the general public already knows. Determining
the significance of information requires objective judgment. Take care to determine whether disclosure will probably
lead to significant public understanding of the issue. Do not judge whether the information is important enough to
be public.



