 



Response:

 While we appreciate the merits of these 
suggestions, the FFP reduction formula now specified at 
488.320 has certain limitations as it cannot logically be 
used to sanction a State for failure to achieve a 12 month 
statewide average interval requirement for standard surveys. 
This is because a survey agency's performance in calculating 
the 12 month statewide average interval is unrelated to the 
terms of the FFP reduction formula. The formula is 
comprised of two terms: the total number of residents in 
nursing facilities surveyed by HCFA during a quarter and the 
total number of residents in nursing facilities found, in 
accordance with HCFA surveys, to be noncompliant. Thus, the 
statutory formula does not lend itself to remedying problems 
States might be experiencing in conducting timely surveys. 
However, section 1919(g)(3) of the Act states that we may 
respond to inadequate State survey performance in Medicaid 
facilities by providing for the training of the State's 
survey teams. We are revising 488.308 and 488.320 in 
this final rule accordingly. 


Comment:

 A commenter asked that we explain which date 
is used for computation of the 12 month statewide average 
interval when an extended survey follows a standard survey. 


Response:

 The last day of the standard survey, not the 
last day of the extended survey, is the date used in the 
computation of the statewide average interval. Sections 
1819(g)(2)(A)(iii)(I) and 1919(g)(2)(A)(iii)(I) of the Act 
specify the statewide average interval between standard 
surveys shall not exceed 12 months. 


Comment:

 In examining the criteria which trigger 
special surveys, one commenter agreed that survey agencies 
may need to conduct a survey when changes occur as specified 
in the regulation. A few other commenters disagreed and 
indicated that an abbreviated or standard survey within 60 
days of a change in ownership, management, nursing home 
administrator and/or director of nursing was stressful, 
wasteful of taxpayer dollars or unnecessary. One commenter 
specifically stated that the change of a director of nursing 
as a survey trigger was inappropriate and should be removed. 





