 

Another commenter suggested that residents' 
understanding is critical and their education should be 
expanded to include: 
&bull;How the survey process works and how to participate. 
&bull;How the investigation process works and how to 
participate. 
&bull;How the care planning process works and how to 
participate. 


Response:

 These suggestions have considerable merit and 
are within both the spirit and intent of the Act. We agree 
with the commenters that the proposed regulation 
unnecessarily restricted the scope of the mandated 
educational programs. The regulation is being revised to 
permit the education programs to cover all aspects of the 
long-term care survey process. We believe the States should 
have the flexibility to structure the educational programs 
to the needs of the facilities. The methods of developing 
the programs (for example, consultation with the ombudsmen 
program) and the methods of presentation are best left to 
the States. The comment that States should work with 
residents and family councils to solicit their 
recommendations prior to any changes in requirements goes 
beyond the educational process. In some respects, this 
comment incorporates residents and families as participants 
in the survey and enforcement processes. Whenever there is 
public rulemaking, any member of the public is a participant 
in the process and can comment and make recommendations on 
such matters. In addition, when surveyors speak with 
residents during the survey, residents are free to bring up 
comments about the survey process if they wish. Regarding 
the comment that residents' understanding of the survey, 
investigation, and the care planning processes should be 
expanded, we repeat that the regulation is being amended to 
permit the educational programs to cover all aspects of the 
long-term care process. 


Comment:

 One commenter recommended that HCFA share 
central office and regional office satellite training to 
provide training simultaneously with nursing facility staff 
and consumers. 


Response:

 It is beyond the scope of this regulation to 
institute such detailed procedures as providing satellite 
training to consumers or specifying any other training 
medium. It is beyond our technological capabilities to 
provide training via satellite to every SNF and NF in the 
country. The costs of installing the necessary equipment in 
each facility would far exceed our budgetary resources. 


Comment:

 One commenter stated that, although this 
section providing education to residents and staff of 
facilities is an excellent idea, it lacks specificity and 
oversight. Because of budgetary crises, this is but another 
educational program at State expense and will receive low 
priority. HCFA must ensure that the State will conduct 
educational programs at particular time intervals or face 
sanctioning by HCFA. 


Response:

 Although there is no statutory provision 
requiring HCFA to oversee States to determine if they have 
failed to conduct educational programs as required by the 
Act, we recognize that we have some responsibility to do so. 
It is within the purview of the States to decide how and 
when to conduct their educational programs. We believe it 
is wiser to leave these decisions to the individual States 
since they must design the educational programs the Act 
specifies. However, we are looking into the feasibility of 
monitoring the States in some way to assure that they are in 
compliance with this statutory requirement. We plan to find 
an acceptable approach to evaluating State efforts in 
providing educational programs to facilities and their 
staffs, and residents and their representatives. 


Comment:

 A commenter stated that further definition of 
the nature and frequency of educational programs is needed 
and, for consistency, HCFA should establish the nature and 
content of such programs. There could be extensive new 
resource requirements if the program is not considered 
adequate. Another commenter recommends that we define 
``periodic'' and detail the process for State compliance. 


Response:

 As previously mentioned, the nature and 
content could cover any of the requirements of sections 1819 
and 1919 of the Act. When manual instructions are 
developed, they will provide guidelines on topics such as 
frequency of educational programs. 


Comment:

 One commenter questioned whether on-site 
presentations were preferable to written communication. 


Response:

 This is a detailed and specific matter. The 
methods of training will be determined by the States, but 
HCFA will publish guidelines in manuals to assist States in 
structuring their programs. 


Comment:

 This commenter also recommends replacing the 
word ``conduct'' with ``provide'' to allow for the use of 
subcontractors, and for the distribution of written and/or 
auto-visual materials toward this end. 


Response:

 We believe to make such a change could be 
interpreted as changing the intent of the Act, which uses 
the word ``conduct.'' The Act gives the responsibility for 
developing educational programs specifically to the States. 


Comment:

 Two commenters stated that funds must be made 
available to the States for educational purposes. 





