 

The statutory requirements for nonattainment new source review SIPs and permitting are found at sections 172 and
173 of the Act. The Act requires States to address a number of nonattainment NSR provisions in a SIP submittal to meet
the requirements of part D of title I of the Act. What follows is a summary of the requirements and how the Indiana submittal
addresses them. A more detailed analysis is contained in the Technical Support Document for this rule which is available
for inspection at the Region 5 address listed above. 
The Act requires States to submit the following nonattainment NSR provisions: 
a. Provisions to ensure that certain construction bans previously imposed in States pursuant to section 110(a)(2)(I)
are lifted. 
The amended Act repealed provisions formerly in section 110(a)(2)(I) which required construction bans in certain
nonattainment areas. A construction ban was imposed in Lake and Porter Counties pursuant to section 110(a)(2)(I).
With some exceptions not applicable here, the amended Act thus lifted such construction bans, including the ban in
Lake and Porter Counties. This final rule therefore revises the Code of Federal Regulations to remove references
to the construction ban formerly imposed in Lake and Porter Counties for failure to have an approvable ozone plan.

b. Provisions, pursuant to section 173(a)(1), to assure that calculations of emissions offsets are based on the same
emissions baseline used in the demonstration of reasonable further progress. 326 IAC 233(a)(5) requires
emission offsets to result in reasonable further progress toward attainment of the NAAQS. Also, the definition of
emissions offsets baselines in 326 IAC 233(b) is consistent with reasonable further progress. 
c. A provision, pursuant to section 173(c)(1), to allow offsets to be obtained in another nonattainment area if the
area has an equal or higher nonattainment classification and emissions from the other nonattainment area contribute
to a NAAQS violation in the area in which the source would construct. Indiana has established this provision in 326
IAC 235. 
d. A provision, pursuant to section 173(c)(1), that any emissions offsets obtained in conjunction with the issuance
of a permit to a new or modified source must be enforceable at the time of permit issuance and in effect by the time the
new or modified source commences operation. Indiana has established this provision in 326 IAC 233(b)(8).

e. A provision, pursuant to section 173(c)(1), to assure that emissions increases from new or modified sources are
offset by real reductions in actual emissions. Indiana has established this provision in 326 IAC 233(a)(5).

f. A provision, pursuant to section 173(c)(2), to prevent emissions reductions otherwise required by the Act from
being credited for purposes of satisfying part D offset requirements. Indiana has established this provision in
326 IAC 233(b)(9). 
g. States must establish provisions, pursuant to sections 172(c)(4) and 173(a)(1)(B), that reflect changes in growth
allowances; specifically, (1) the elimination of existing growth allowances in any nonattainment area that received
a notice prior to the Amendments that the SIP was substantially inadequate or receives such a notice in the future;
and (2) the restriction of growth allowances to only those portions of nonattainment areas formally targeted as special
zones for economic development. Indiana does not have any of the above mentioned growth allowances. 
h. A provision, pursuant to section 173(a)(5), that requires an analysis of alternative sites, sizes, production
processes, and environmental control techniques for proposed sources. This analysis shall demonstrate that the
benefits of the proposed source significantly outweigh the environmental and social costs imposed as a result of
its location, construction, or modification. This shall be a prerequisite to issuing any part D permit. Indiana has
established this provision in 326 IAC 233(a)(4). 
i. In accordance with section 173(d), Indiana has committed to report determinations, from nonattainment new source
review permits, to the RACT/BACT/LAER clearinghouse in the annual Indiana Department of Environmental Management
Air Management Program Workplan. 
j. A provision, pursuant to section 173(e), that allows any existing or modified source that tests rocket engines
or motors to use alternative or innovative means to offset emissions increases from firing and related cleaning,
if four conditions are met: (a) the proposed modification is for expansion of a facility already permitted for such
purposes, (b) the source has used all available offsets and all reasonable means to obtain offsets and sufficient
offsets are not available, (c) the testing is essential to national security, and (d) the source will comply with an
alternative measure designed to offset any emissions increases not directly offset by the source. Indiana has established
this provision in 326 IAC 233(b)(11). 
k. Provisions pursuant to section 819 of the Act that effectively exempt activities related to stripper wells from
the new additional NSR requirements of new subparts 2, 3, and 4 for particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter
less than or equal to a nominal 10 micrometers (PM10), ozone, or carbon monoxide (CO) nonattainment areas classified
as serious or less and having a population of less than 350,000. Indiana has not established such provisions. This
is acceptable because there are no stripper well activities in the State of Indiana. 
l. Provisions, pursuant to section 328, to assure that sources located on an outer continental shelf (OCS) and within
25 miles of the State's seaward boundary, are subject to the same requirements applicable if the source were located
in the corresponding onshore area. Indiana has not established such provisions. This is acceptable because Indiana
is inland and not located on an OCS. 
m. Pursuant to sections 302(z) and 111(a)(3), a definition of ``stationary source'' to include internal combustion
engines other than the newly defined category of ``nonroad engines.'' Indiana has established a definition consistent
with these requirements in 326 IAC 231(aa). 
n. Pursuant to section 415, exemptions from nonattainment NSR provisions for installation, operation, cessation,
or removal of a qualifying temporary clean coal technology demonstration project. Such projects must still comply
with any applicable SIP and all other requirements for the attainment and maintenance of NAAQS. Indiana has established
this provision in 326 IAC 232(i). 
o. A provision, pursuant to section 173(a)(3), to assure that owners or operators of each proposed new or modified
major stationary source demonstrate, as a condition of permit issuance, the compliance of all other major stationary
sources under the same ownership in the State. Indiana has established this provision in 326 IAC 233(a)(3).



3. Ozone 







