 

<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
Background


Restoring endangered or threatened animals and plants to the point where they are again secure self-sustaining members
of their ecosystems is a primary goal of the Service's endangered species program. To help guide the recovery effort
the Service is working to prepare recovery plans for most of the listed species native to the United States. Recovery
plans describe actions necessary for the conservation of the species, establish criteria for the recovery levels
for downlisting or delisting them, and estimate time and cost for implementing the recovery measures needed.
The Endangered Species Act of 1973 (Act), as amended (16 U.S.C. 1531 

et seq

.) requires the development of recovery plans for listed species unless such a plan would not promote the conservation
of a particular species. Section 4(f) of the Act, as amended in 1988, requires that public notice, and an opportunity
for public review and comment be provided during recovery plan development. The Service will consider all information
presented during a public comment period prior to approval of each new or revised recovery plan. The Service and other
Federal agencies will take these comments into account in the course of implementing approved recovery plans.
The Key Largo woodrat and cotton mouse were listed as endangered species on August 31, 1984. Both species require tropical
hardwood hammock forests for food and cover. An estimated 6,500 woodrats and 18,000 cotton mice occur on 2,100 acres
of forested uplands. Both species originally occurred throughout all of the hardwood hammocks of Key Largo, but are
now restricted to only north Key Largo, representing about one-half their original distribution. Primary threats
to these species include habitat destruction and fragmentation, road mortality, and vulnerability to catastrophic
events such as storms or fires. Current habitat acquisition by both the State and Federal governments will provide
nearly complete public ownership for the remaining hardwood hammocks on north Key Largo. Specific recovery actions
include additional habitat purchase and protection and the future reestablishment of both species to the southern
portion of Key Largo.
The Gulf sturgeon, a subspecies of the Atlantic sturgeon 

Acipenser oxyrinchus

, was listed as a threatened species on September 30, 1991. The Gulf sturgeon is an anadromous fish which migrates from
salt water into large coastal rivers to spawn and spend the warmer months. The majority of its life is spent in fresh
water. The current population levels of Gulf sturgeon in rivers other than the Suwannee and Apalachicola rivers are
unknown, but are thought to be reduced from historic levels. Historically, the subspecies occurred in most major
rivers from the Mississippi River to the Suwannee River, and marine waters of the central and eastern Gulf of Mexico
to Florida Bay. Major factors in the decline of the Gulf sturgeon include barriers (dams) to historical spawning habitats,
habitat loss, water quality degradation, and overfishing.
The recovery plan for the Gulf sturgeon was prepared by a Recovery Team containing members from the States of Louisiana,
Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida, the Gulf States Marine Fisheries Commission, the National Marine Fisheries
Service, the National Biological Survey, university researchers, commercial fishing interests, conservation
organizations, and the Service. The draft plan currently available for public comment resulted from a technical
review during the summer of 1992. Major recovery actions include identifying and restoring essential habitats of
the Gulf sturgeon. Initial restoration efforts will focus on riverine habitats. Another recovery action includes
reducing incidental catch of the fish by commercial fishermen. The ultimate recovery goal for the Gulf sturgeon is
to establish population levels that would allow delisting of the fish in selected river systems. After delisting,
the goal is to establish populations that could support commercial fishing in those selected river systems.
The two Hernando County plants 

Campanula robinsiae 

(Brooksville bellflower) and 

Justicia cooleyi

 (Cooley's water-willow) were listed as endangered species on August 28, 1989. Brooksville bellflower inhabits
wet ``prairies'' and lake margins in the hill country of Hernando County. Cooley's water-willow primarily inhabits
hardwood forests, but appears to persist or thrive in clearings, pastures, and roadsides. Its distribution appears
to be primarily in the hills of Hernando County, but it is also known from Sumter County, near Mascotte. The draft recovery
plan emphasizes better information on the life history of the bellflower, an annual that grows in late winter and is
often under water. For Cooley's water-willow, immediate efforts are needed to control the spread of alien pest vines,
especially air-potato (a tropical yam that produces tubers on its vines) and skunkvine (an Asian vine that can cover
the ground in a forest, and whose leaves have a fecal odor when brused). Recovery efforts for these plants will begin
on land owned by Federal and State agencies.

</SUPPLEM>
