 

2. The Trust's board of trustees, including a majority of trustees who are not interested persons of the Trust, will
approve the dual distribution structure. The minutes of the meetings of the board of trustees regarding the deliberations
of the trustees with respect to the approvals necessary to implement the dual distribution system will reflect in
detail the reasons for the trustees' determination that the dual distribution system is in the best interests of both
the Funds and their respective shareholders. 
3. On an ongoing basis, the trustees, pursuant to their fiduciary responsibilities under the Act and otherwise, will
monitor each Fund for the existence of any material conflicts between the interests of the two classes of shares. The
trustees, including a majority of the trustees who are not interested persons of the Trust, will take such action as
is reasonably necessary to eliminate any conflicts that may develop. The Adviser and the Distributor will be responsible
for reporting any potential or existing conflicts to the trustees. If a conflict arises, the Adviser and the Distributor
at their own cost will remedy such conflict up to and including establishing a new registered management investment
company. 
4. The plan will be adopted and operated in accordance with the procedures set forth in rule 12b1 (b) through
(f) as if the expenditures made thereunder were subject to rule 12b1, except that the shareholders need not
receive the voting rights specified in rule 12b1. 
5. The board of trustees will receive quarterly and annual statements concerning shareholder servicing expenditures
complying with paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of rule 12b1, as it may be amended from time to time. In the statements,
only expenditures properly attributable to the servicing of a particular class of shares will be used to justify any
servicing fee charged to that class. Expenditures not related to the servicing of a particular class will not be presented
to the trustees to justify any fee attributable to that class. The statements, including the allocations upon which
they are based, will be subject to the review and approval of the trustees who are not interested persons of the trust
in the exercise of their fiduciary duties. 
6. Dividends paid by a Fund with respect to teach class of shares, to the extent any dividends are paid, will be calculated
in the same manner, at the same time, on the same day, and will be in the same amount, except that payments for services
described in condition 1 above that are rendered to a particular class of shares will be borne exclusively by that class.

7. The methodology and procedures for calculating the net asset value, and dividends and distributions of the two
classes have been reviewed by an expert (the ``Expert'') who has rendered a report of applicants, which has been provided
to the staff of the SEC, stating that the methodology and procedures are adequate to ensure that the calculations and
allocations will be made in an appropriate manner. On an ongoing basis, the Expert, or an appropriate substitute Expert,
will monitor the manner in which the calculations and allocations are being made, and, based upon this review, will
render at least annually a report to the Funds that the calculations and allocations are being made properly. The reports
of the Expert shall be filed as part of the periodic reports filed with the SEC pursuant to sections 30(a) and 30(b)(1)
of the Act. The work papers of the Expert with respect to these reports, following request by the Funds (which the Funds
agree to provide), will be available for inspection by the SEC staff upon the written request to a Fund for these work
papers by a senior member of the Division of Investment Management, limited to the Director, an Associate Director,
the Chief Accountant, the Chief Financial Analyst, and Assistant Director, and any Regional Administrators or Associate
and Assistant Administrators. The initial report of the Expert is a ``report on policies and procedures placed in
operation'' and the ongoing reports will be ``reports on policies and procedures placed in operation and tests of
operating effectiveness'' as defined and described in SAS No. 70 of the AICPA, as it may be amended from time to time,
or in similar auditing standards as may be adopted by the AICPA from time to time. 
8. Applicants have adequate facilities in place to ensure implementation of the methodology and procedures for calculating
the net asset value and dividends and distributions of the two classes of shares and the proper allocation of expenses
between the two classes of shares, and this representation will be concurred with by the Expert in the initial report
referred to in condition 7 above and will be concurred with by the Expert, or an appropriate substitute Export, on an
ongoing basis at least annually in the ongoing reports referred to in condition 7 above. Applicants will take immediate
corrective measures if this representation is not concurred in by the Expert or appropriate substitute Expert. 
9. The conditions pursuant to which the order is granted and the duties and responsibilities of the trustees of the
Trust with respect to the Plan will be set forth in guidelines which will be furnished to the trustees. 
10. Each Fund will disclose in its prospectus the respective expenses, performance data, distribution arrangements,
services, fees, sales loads, deferred sales loads, and exchange privileges applicable to the two classes of shares,
regardless of whether both classes of shares in the portfolio are offered through the same prospectus. Each Fund will
disclose the respective expenses and performance data applicable to each class of shares in every shareholder report.
The shareholder reports will contain, in the statement of assets and liabilities and statement operations, information
related to the Fund as a whole generally and not on a per class basis. Each Fund's per share data, however, will be prepared
on a per class basis with respect to all classes of shares of such Fund. To the extent any advertisement or sales literature
describes the expenses and/or performance data applicable to either class of shares, it will also disclose the respective
expenses and/or performance data applicable to the other class of shares of such Fund. The information provided by
applicants for publication in any newspaper or similar listing of a Fund's net asset value or public offering price
will separately present this information for each class of shares of such Fund. 
11. Applicants acknowledge that the grant of the exemptive order requested by this application will not imply SEC
approval, authorization, or acquiescence in any particular level of payments that the Funds may make pursuant to
the Plan in reliance on the exemptive order. 
12. The initial determination of the class expenses that will be allocated to a particular class and any subsequent
changes thereto will be reviewed and approved by a vote of the board of trustees of the Trust including a majority of
the trustees who are not interested persons of the Trust. Any person authorized to direct the allocation and disposition
of monies paid or payable by a Fund to meet class expenses shall provide to the board of trustees, and the trustees shall
review, at least quarterly, a written report of the amounts so expended and the purposes for which such expenditures
were made. 
13. The prospectus of each fund will contain a statement to the effect that a salesperson and any other person entitled
to receive compensation for selling or servicing Fund shares may receive different compensation with respect to
one particular class of shares over another in the Fund. 
14. The Distributor will adopt compliance standards as to when each class of shares may appropriately be sold to particular
investors. Applicants will require all persons selling shares to agree to conform to such standards.



For the SEC, by the Division of Investment Management, pursuant to delegated authority. 


<SIGNER>
Margaret H. McFarland, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Secretary. 

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9413379 Filed 6194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 801001M
</BILLING>


