

Appendix C to Part 516_Department of Defense Directive 5405.2, Release of Official Information in Litigation and
Testimony by DoD Personnel as Witnesses 
 

Department of Defense Directive 
 

July 23, 1985, Number 5405.2, GC, DOD 


Subject: Release of Official Information in Litigation and Testimony by DoD Personnel as Witnesses 
References: 
(a) Title 5, United States Code, Sections 301, 552, and 552a 
(b) Title 10, United States Code, Section 133 
(c) DoD Directive 5220.6, ``Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Program,'' December 20, 1976 
(d) DoD Directive 5200.1R, ``Information Security Program Regulation,'' August 1982, authorized by DoD
Directive 5200.1, June 7, 1982 
(e) DoD Directive 5230.25, ``Withholding of Unclassified Technical Data from Public Disclosure,'' November 6,
1984 
(f) DoD Instruction 7230.7, ``User Charges,'' January 29, 1985 
(g) DoD Directive 5400.7R, ``DoD Freedom of Information Act Program,'' December 1980, authorized by DoD Directive
5400.7, March 24, 1980 


A. Purpose 


Under Section 301 reference (a) and reference (b), this Directive establishes policy, assigns responsibilities,
and prescribes procedures for the release of official DoD information in litigation and for testimony by DoD personnel
as witnesses 
during litigation. 


B. Applicability and Scope 
 

1. This Directive applies to the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), the Military Departments, the Organization
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (OJCS), the Unified and Specified Commands, and the Defense Agencies (hereafter referred
to as ``DoD Components''), and to all personnel of such DoD Components. 
 2. This Directive does not apply to the release of official information or testimony by DoD personnel in the following
situations: 
 a. Before courts-martial convened by the authority of the Military Departments or in administrative proceedings
conducted by or on behalf of a DoD Component; 
 b. Pursuant to administrative proceedings conducted by or on behalf of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC) or the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB), or pursuant to a negotiated grievance procedure under a collective
bargaining agreement to which the Government is a party; 
 c. In response to requests by Federal Government counsel in litigation conducted on behalf of the United States; 
 d. As part of the assistance required in accordance with the Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Program
under DoD Directive 5220.6 (reference (c)); or 
 e. Pursuant to disclosure of information to Federal, State, and local prosecuting and law enforcement authorities,
in conjunction with an investigation conducted by a DoD criminal investigative organization. 
3. This Directive does not supersede or modify existing laws or DoD programs governing the testimony of DoD personnel
or the release of official DoD information during grand jury proceedings, the release of official information not
involved in litigation, or the release of official information pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C.
Section 552 (reference (a)) or the Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C. Section 552a (reference (a)), nor does this Directive preclude
treating any written request for agency records that is not in the nature of legal process as a request under the Freedom
of Information or Privacy Acts. 
4. This Directive is not intended to infringe upon or displace the responsibilities committed to the Department of
Justice in conducting litigation on behalf of the United States in appropriate cases. 
5. This Directive does not preclude official comment on matters in litigation in appropriate cases. 
6. This Directive is intended only to provide guidance for the internal operation of the Department of Defense and
is not intended to, does not, and may not be relied upon to create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable
at law against the United States or the Department of Defense. 


C. Definitions 



