 

(i) To the extent permitted or required by ERISA, the Plan is amended to provide ``pass-through'' voting privileges
to Plan participants.



24. Life of Virginia and the Accounts represent that the future accounts and their life insurance company depositors
will rely on the exemptions from section 6(c) of the 1940 Act requested herein to purchase and hold Fund shares 

only if

 such life insurance company depositors comply with conditions (b), (c), (d), (e) and (h) above as those conditions
relate to such life insurance company depositors and to the owners of variable annuity contracts and variable life
insurance contracts issued by those life insurance company depositors.


B. Request for Exemptions Under Section 17(b)


25. AAI and the Plan request that the Commission issue an order pursuant to section 17(b) of the 1940 Act, exempting
them from the provisions of section 17(a) of the 1940 Act to the extent necessary to permit the Plan to purchase shares
of the Fund with investment securities of the Plan. AAI and the Plan represent that the terms of the proposed transactions
as set forth herein, including the consideration to be paid and received: (i) Are reasonable and fair to the Fund, to
its Money Market Portfolio and its Total Return Portfolio, to shareholders, and to variable contract owners invested
in each of the Money Market Portfolio and the Total Return Portfolio; and (ii) do not involve overreaching on the part
of any person concerned. Furthermore, AAI and the Plan represent that the proposed transactions will be consistent
with the general purposes of the 1940 Act and, more specifically, the policies of the Fund, its Money Market Portfolio,
and its Total Return Portfolio.
26. AAI and the Plan also assert that the proposed transactions, in addition to meeting the standards of section 17(b)
vis-a-vis the Fund, are fair and reasonable to the Plan and are in the best interests of the Plan participants as determined
by the Plan trustees. In particular, AAI and the Plan submit that the proposed transactions are consistent with the
policy and purpose of the Plan as recited in its current registration statement, and are consistent with the provisions
of ERISA (applicable to defined contribution plans) regarding reporting and disclosure, participation and vesting,
funding, fiduciary responsibility, administration and enforcement.
27. Section 17(a)(1) of the 1940 Act, in relevant part, prohibits any affiliated person of a registered investment
company, or any affiliated person of such person, acting as principal, from knowingly selling any security or other
property to that company. Section 17(a)(2) of the 1940 Act generally prohibits the persons described above, acting
as principals, from knowingly purchasing any security or other property from the registered investment company.
28. Section 2(a)(3) of the 1940 Act defines the term ``affiliated person of another person'' in relevant part as: ``(A)
any person directly or indirectly owning, controlling, or holding with power to vote, 5 per centum or more of the outstanding
voting securities of such other person; (B) any person 5 per centum or more of whose outstanding voting securities
are directly or indirectly owned, controlled, or held with power to vote, by such person; (C) any person directly or
indirectly controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, such other person. ***''
29. AAI and the Plan assert that because Life of Virginia's general account owns directly more than 25% of the outstanding
voting securities of the Common Stock Index Portfolio and the Government Securities Portfolio of the Fund, and because
section 2(a)(9) of the 1940 Act establishes a presumption that a person owning 25% or more of another person's outstanding
voting securities controls the latter person, the Common Stock Index Portfolio and the Government Securities Portfolio
are controlled by Life of Virginia and, consequently, by Aon Corporation. Although the variable contract owners
are considered the beneficial owners of many Fund shares, AAI and the Plan submit that the Fund and each of its portfolios
(arguably) is under the control of Life of Virginia (and Aon Corporation), since Life of Virginia owns of record all
of the shares of the Fund. AAI and the Plan further submit that, because they, too, are controlled by Aon Corporation,
AAI, the Plan, the Fund, and the Fund's portfolios can be deemed under the common control of Aon Corporation. 
30. AAI and the Plan asset that since a person under common control with a registered investment company is an affiliated
person of that investment company, AAI and the Plan are affiliated persons of the Fund and its Money Market Portfolio
and Total Return Portfolio. The Plan's proposal to purchase Fund shares with investment securities would entail
the sale of such securities by the Plan (or by AAI and the Plan), acting as principal, to the Fund and therefore would
contravene section 17(a).
31. Section 17(b) of the 1940 Act provides that the Commission may, upon application, grant an order exempting any
transaction from the prohibitions of Section 17(a) if the evidence establishes that:
(a) The terms of the proposed transaction, including the consideration to be paid or received, are reasonable and
fair and do not involve overreaching on the part of any person concerned;
(b) The proposed transaction is consistent with the policy of each registered investment company concerned, as recited
in its registration statement and reports filed under the 1940 Act; and
(c) The proposed transaction is consistent with the general purposes of the 1940 Act.
32. Subject to certain enumerated conditions, Rule 17a7 under the 1940 Act exempts from the prohibitions of
section 17(a) a purchase or sale transaction between: (i) Registered investment companies or separate series of
registered investment companies, which are affiliated persons, or affiliated persons of affiliated persons, of
each other; (ii) between separate series of a registered investment company; or (iii) between a registered investment
company or a separate series of a registered investment company and a person which is an affiliated person of such registered
investment company (or affiliated person of such person) solely by reason of having a common investment adviser or
investment advisers which are affiliated persons of each other, common directors, and/or common officers.


