 




<CFRNO>5 CFR Part 630</CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>RIN 3206AG 43</RINDOCK>



Absence and Leave; Sick Leave for Adoption



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Office of Personnel Management.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Interim rule with request for comments.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Office of Personnel Management is issuing interim regulations to permit employees to use sick leave for purposes
related to the adoption of a child.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

The interim rules are effective on December 2, 1994. Comments must be submitted on or before January 31, 1995.



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Comments may be sent or delivered to Donald J. Winstead, Acting Assistant Director for Compensation Policy, Personnel
Systems and Oversight Group, U.S. Office of Personnel Management, Room 6H31, 1900 E Street NW., Washington, DC 20415.



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:



Jo Ann Perrini or Sharon Herzberg, (202) 6062858.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

Section 629 of Public Law 103329, The Treasury, Postal Service and General Government Appropriations Act
for fiscal year 1995, September 30, 1994, made two significant changes in leave entitlements for Federal employees.
Section 629(a) added section 6327 to title 5, United States Code, to provide employees with an entitlement to 7 days
of paid leave each calendar year (in addition to annual and sick leave) to serve as a bone-marrow or organ donor. The
law provides that an employee is entitled to use this leave without loss of or reduction in pay, leave to which otherwise
entitled, credit for time or service, or performance or efficiency rating. The Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
does not believe regulations are needed to administer section 6327. Agencies are responsible for notifying employees
of this new entitlement to paid leave.



The length of absence for such purposes will vary depending upon the medical circumstances of each case. For medical
procedures and recuperation requiring absences longer than 7 days, agencies are encouraged to continue to accommodate
employees by granting additional time off in the form of excused absence, accrued sick leave and/or annual leave,
as appropriate; leave without pay; and advanced sick and/or annual leave.

Section 629(b) amended 5 U.S.C. 6307 to permit an employee to use sick leave for purposes related to the adoption of
a child. (Conforming technical changes were also made in 5 U.S.C. 6129.) This change was recommended in the Report
of the National Performance Review on September 7, 1993. Section 629(b) also directs OPM to prescribe regulations
to allow an employee to substitute sick leave retroactively for all or any portion of any annual leave used by an employee
for adoption-related purposes between September 30, 1991, and September 30, 1994. (September 30, 1991, was the ending
date of the former 1-year experimental program created by Public Law 101509 to test the feasibility of granting
sick leave for adoption-related purposes.) If an employee elects to make this substitution, the employing agency
must adjust the employee's leave accounts to reflect the amount of annual leave and sick leave, respectively, that
would remain had sick leave been used instead of all or any portion of the annual leave actually used, as designated
by the employee.



Sick Leave for Adoption



OPM's sick leave regulations at 5 CFR 630.401 have been amended to permit employees to use accrued or accumulated sick
leave for purposes relating to the adoption of a child. In addition, 630.402 has been revised to require employees
to request, to the extent possible, advance approval to use sick leave for adoption-related purposes. This is consistent
with current requirements related to the advance approval of sick leave for medical, dental, and optical examination
or treatment and to provide care for a family member. When required by the exigencies of the situation, an agency may
advance up to 30 days of sick leave for adoption-related purposes under 5 U.S.C. 6307(c).

The purposes of which an adoptive parent may request sick leave include appointments with adoption agencies, social
workers, and attorneys; court proceedings; required travel; and any other activities necessary to allow the adoption
to proceed. Since adoption procedures and requirements differ among jurisdictions and adoption agencies, the interim
regulations do not attempt to specify all of the circumstances in which the use of sick leave would be appropriate.
For example, sick leave may be granted for any periods during which an adoptive parent is ordered or required by the
adoption agency or by a court to be absent from work to care for the adopted child. Agencies are reminded that this new
entitlement to use sick leave for purposes relating to the adoption of a child is in addition to an employee's entitlement
to unpaid leave for the placement of a child with an employee for adoption under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993
(FMLA) (Pub. L. 1033, February 5, 1993). (See 5 CFR 630.1203.)


</SUPPLEM>
