 

The Department encourages the use of statistical models since they are more efficient and precise in identifying
claimants as well as easier to manage and adapt. However, States may use characteristic screening. Whichever system
is used, each State must assure that the system implemented in fact identifies claimants who are permanently laid
off and unlikely to return to work in either their previous industry or occupation.

9. 

The Selection Pool. 

Under the profiling system anticipated by the Department (see item 4), all claimants identified in accordance with
the requirements of Section 303(j)(1), SSA, will be either immediately referred to reemployment services or, if
services are not available, placed in a selection pool. Claimants in the selection pool may be referred to services
at a latter date.

As noted in the background section, early intervention is one of the principal aims of the worker profiling and reemployment
services initiative. Holding claimants in the pool for more than a minimum period of time will not achieve this early
intervention. Therefore, the Department recommends that claimants be removed from the selection pool after 4 weeks.

In addition, the Department recognizes that large-scale permanent layoffs and plant closings do not occur at regular
intervals. Therefore, there may be times when a State elects to retain claimants in the pool for longer periods. States
may also elect to vary the length of time individuals are held in the pool by locality within the State.

10. 

Notifications of Referrals to Reemployment Services. 

Notification to claimants of referrals to reemployment services should occur 

only 

if a referral is actually made. (It is not necessary to notify claimants that they have been placed in the selection
pool since they are not required to take any action until a referral is made.) These notification and referral notices
must be in writing and must advise claimants:




&bull;That they have been identified as likely to need reemployment services in order to make a successful transition
to new employment.

&bull;When and where to report for the services.

&bull;To bring all relevant information concerning ongoing or recently completed reemployment services or current
training in which they have participated and believe would help them return to work. Alternatively, States may choose
to have certain claimants, such as those already in training, contact the UI agency first. Either way, the notice must
clearly explain what information the claimant is expected to provide and to whom.

&bull;That failure to participate in reemployment services may result in denial of UI.




Each State must maintain a record of each claimant referral notification in the same manner that it would any other
formal correspondence that is pertinent to the adjudication of UI eligibility issues.




