 





Commercial baking facility

 means a facility that bakes bread, biscuits, rolls, pies, cakes, cookies, or other similar products. 


Commercial charbroiling facility

 means a facility that broils any type of food over a charcoal or gas-fired broiler. 


Food preparation facility

 means any commercial baking, commercial charbroiling, wine- or brandy-making, fruit and vegetable preservation,
grain mill production, vegetable oil production, or malt beverage production facility. This definition includes
restaurants involved in activities described in the previous sentence. 


Fruit and vegetable preservation facility

 means a facility that preserves food by, but not limited to, canning, curing, pickling, salting, smoking, cooking,
or freezing. 


Grain mill production facility

 means a facility that grinds any grain including, but not limited to, wheat, rice, corn, or rye into flour or meal. 


Malt beverage production facility

 means a facility engaged in malting, fermentation, aging, or packaging of barley or any other grain for the purpose
of producing an alcoholic beverage. 


Vegetable oil production facility

 means a facility that extracts oil from any vegetable seed. 


Wine- or brandy-making facility

 means a facility that ferments juices from grapes or any other fruit for the purpose of producing alcoholic beverages.

(ii) 

Applicability. 
(A) The requirements of paragraphs (b)(4) (iii)(A) and (iii)(B), (iv)(A), (v)(A), and (vi)(A) of this section shall
apply to any owner or operator of a commercial food preparation facility located in the control area as defined in paragraph
(a)(1) of this section at which VOC emissions are greater than or equal to 4.5 kg (10 lbs) during any one day. 
(B) The requirements of paragraphs (b)(4) (iv)(B), (v)(B), and (vi)(B) of this section shall apply to any owner or
operator of a commercial food preparation facility located in the applicable area specified in paragraph (b)(4)(ii)(A)
of this section at which total uncontrolled VOC emissions from all emissions sources are always less than 4.5 kg (10
lbs) during any one day. If VOC emissions from a facility which is exempt from the limitations of paragraph (b)(4)(iii)(B)
of this section ever exceed 4.5 kg (10 lbs) during any one day on or after January 1, 2000, the facility will lose its exempt
status, and the owner or operator shall comply with the requirements of paragraphs (b)(4) (iii)(B), (iv)(A), (v)(A),
and (vi)(A) of this section beginning January 1 of the calendar year following the date of the exceedance. 
(iii) Specific Provisions. 
(A) Each owner or operator of a source subject to the FIP VOC emissions cap program as defined in paragraph (b)(1)(ii)
of this section shall submit a VOC emissions reduction compliance plan to the Administrator by January 1, 1999. The
plan shall be prepared for the years 2001 through 2005 and shall include all of the information specified in paragraphs
(b)(1)(iii)(A) (1)

 through 

(5)

 of this section. Each owner or operator shall submit a revised plan to the Administrator within 30 calendar days of
receipt of comments from the Administrator. Each owner or operator shall comply at all times with the provisions of
the most recent plan approved by the Administrator. 


(1)

 The name, title, address, and telephone number of the owner or operator of the facility, and of each person responsible
for preparing the information required under paragraph (b)(1)(iii)(A)

(2)

 of this section. 


(2)

 Baseline VOC emissions shall be calculated for each facility. Baseline emissions for each facility shall equal the
sum of VOC emissions from all emissions sources at the facility including emissions associated with the use of architectural
coatings and clean-up solvents. Baseline emissions shall be calculated as specified in paragraph (a)(4)(xii) and
(a)(4)(xiii) of this section. 


(3)

 Methods to be employed by the owner or operator to limit VOC emissions from emissions sources to within the emissions
level required in paragraphs (b)(2)(iii)(B) 

(1)

 through 

(5)

 of this section. Methods may include but are not limited to: 


(i)

 Installation of capture systems and control devices; 


(ii)

 Modifications to increase the efficiency of existing capture systems and/or control devices; 


(iii)

 Process modifications and/or substitutions; and 



