 

Categories A and B:




_International Travel (via American flag carrier);

_Domestic travel;

_Maintenance (lodging, meals, incidental expenses, etc.);

_Stipend (not to exceed $250 per month);

_Academic program costs (e.g. book allowance);
_Orientation costs (speaker honoraria are not to exceed $150 per day per speaker);
_Cultural enrichment expenses (admissions, tickets, etc.; limited to $150 per participant);

_Conference and/or other travel and lodging for cultural enrichment (not to exceed $400.00 per participant);

_Administration (salaries, benefits, communications, other direct costs and indirect costs), including administration
of tax withholding and reporting as required by federal, state and local authorities and in accordance with relevant
tax treaties.*;

_Taxes and visa fees;

_Application should demonstrate substantial cost-sharing (dollar and in-kind) in both program and administrative
expenses, including tuition waivers and overseas partner contributions.


*

Please Note: 

It is required that requested administrative funds, including indirect costs and administrative expenses for orientation,
not exceed 20 percent of the total amount requested from USIA; administrative expenses should be cost-shared. (See
the accompanying guidelines for complete cost-sharing and auditing requirements.)



Review Process 
 


USIA will acknowledge receipt of all proposals and will review them for technical eligibility. Proposals will be
deemed ineligible if they do not fully adhere to the guidelines established herein and in the application package,
including the Guidelines for Preparing Proposals. Eligible proposals will be forwarded to panels of USIA officers
for advisory review. All eligible proposals will also be reviewed by the appropriate geographic area office, and
the budget and contracts offices. Proposals may also be reviewed by the Agency's Office of General Counsel. Funding
decisions are at the discretion of the Associate Director for Educational and Cultural Affairs. Final technical
authority for grant assistance resides with USIA's grants officer.



Review Criteria
 


Technically eligible applications will be competitively reviewed according to the following criteria:



a. Quality of Program Plan 



Including academic rigor and excellence, thorough conception of project, demonstration of meeting participants'
needs, contributions to understand the partner country, proposed follow-up, and qualifications of program staff
and participants.



b. Reasonable, Feasible, and Flexible Objectives



The capacity of the organization to conduct the program. Proposals should clearly demonstrate how the institution
will meet the program objectives and plan.



c. Track Record



Relevant Agency and outside assessments of the organization's experience with international programs; for organizations
that have not worked with USIA, the demonstrated potential to achieve program goals will be evaluated.



d. Multiplier Effect/Impact



The positive effect of the program on long-term mutual understanding, the inclusion of maximum sharing of information,
and the establishment of long-term institutional and individual linkages.



e. Value of U.S.-Partner Country Relations



The assessment by USIA's geographic area office of the need, potential impact, and significance of the project with
the partner country.



f. Cost Effectiveness



Greatest return on each grant dollar, degree of cost-sharing exhibitied.



g. Diversity and Pluralism



Preference will be given to proposals that demonstrate efforts to include participants from diverse regions, and
of different socio-economic and ethnic backgrounds, to the extent feasible for the applicant institutions.



h. Adherence



Of proposed activities to the criteria and conditions described above.



i. Institutional Commitment



As demonstrated by financial and other support to the program.



j. Follow-On Activities



Proposals should provide a plan for continued follow-on activity (without USIA support) which insures that USIA
supported programs are not isolated events.



k. Evaluation Plan



Proposals should provide a plan for evaluation by the grantee institution.



Notice 



The terms and conditions published in this RFP are binding and may not be modified by any USIA representative. Explanatory
information provided by the Agency that contradicts published language will not be binding. Issuance of this request
for proposals does not constitute an award commitment on the part of the government. Final award cannot be made until
funds have been fully appropriated by Congress, allocated and committed through internal USIA procedures.



Notification



All applicants will be notified in writing of the results of the review process on or about September 23, 1994. All funded
proposals will be subject to periodic reporting and evaluation requirements.
 


Options for Renewal (All Categories)
 


Subject to the availability of funding for FY 1996 and the satisfactory performance of grant programs, USIA may invite
grantee organizations to submit proposals for renewals of awards.


 

Dated: June 11, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Barry Fulton,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Associate Director, Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9414690 Filed 61594; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 823001M
</BILLING>


