 

(c) Gas masks for respiratory protection against gases and vapors other than those specified in paragraph (b) of this
section, may be approved upon submittal of an application in writing for approval to the Certification and Quality
Assurance Branch listing the gas or vapor and suggested maximum use concentration for the specific type of gas mask.
The Institute will consider the application and accept or reject it on the basis of effect on the wearer's health and
safety and any field experience in use of gas masks for such exposures. If the application is accepted, the Institute
will test such masks in accordance with the requirements of this subpart. 


84.111


Gas masks; required components. 


(a) Each gas mask described in 84.110 shall, where its design requires, contain the following component parts:

(1) Facepiece or mouthpiece and noseclip; 
(2) Canister or cartridge; 
(3) Canister harness; 
(4) External check valve; and 
(5) Breathing tube. 
(b) The components of each gas mask shall meet the minimum construction requirements set forth in subpart G of this
part. 


84.112


Canisters and cartridges in parallel; resistance requirements. 


Where two or more canisters or cartridges are used in parallel, their resistance to airflow shall be essentially equal.



84.113


Canisters and cartridges; color and markings; requirements. 


The color and markings of all canisters and cartridges or labels shall conform with the requirements of the American
National Standard for Identification of Air Purifying Respirator Canisters and Cartridges, K 13.11973,
obtainable from the American National Standards Institute, Inc.; 1430 Broadway; New York, N.Y. 10018. 


84.114


Filters used with canisters and cartridges; location; replacement. 


(a) Particulate matter filters used in conjunction with a canister or cartridge shall be located on the inlet side
of the canister or cartridge. 
(b) Filters shall be incorporated in or firmly attached to the canister or cartridge and each filter assembly shall,
where applicable, be designed to permit its easy removal from and replacement in the canister or cartridge. 


84.115


Breathing tubes; minimum requirements. 


Flexible breathing tubes used in conjunction with gas masks shall be designed and constructed to prevent: 
(a) Restriction of free head movement; 
(b) Disturbance of the fit of facepieces or mouthpieces; 
(c) Interference with the wearer's activities; and 
(d) Shutoff of airflow due to kinking, or from chin or arm pressure. 


84.116


Harnesses; installation and construction; minimum requirements. 


(a) Each gas mask shall, where necessary, be equipped with a suitable harness designed and constructed to hold the
components of the gas mask in position against the wearer's body. 
(b) Harnesses shall be designed and constructed to permit easy removal and replacement of gas mask parts, and where
applicable, provide for holding a full facepiece in the ready position when not in use. 


84.117


Gas mask containers; minimum requirements. 


(a) Gas masks shall be equipped with a substantial, durable container bearing markings which show the applicant's
name, the type and commercial designation of mask it contains and all appropriate approval labels. 
(b) Containers for gas masks shall be designed and constructed to permit easy removal of the mask. 


84.118


Half-mask facepieces, full facepieces, and mouthpieces; fit; minimum requirements. 


(a) Half-mask facepieces and full facepieces shall be designed and constructed to fit persons with various facial
shapes and sizes either: 
(1) By providing more than one facepiece size; or 
(2) By providing one facepiece size which will fit varying facial shapes and sizes. 
(b) Full facepieces shall provide for optional use of corrective spectacles or lenses, which shall not reduce the
respiratory protective qualities of the gas mask. 
(c) Half-mask facepieces shall not interfere with the fit of common industrial safety spectacles, as determined
by the Institute's facepiece tests in 84.124. 
(d) Gas masks with mouthpieces shall be equipped with noseclips which are securely attached to the mouthpiece or gas
mask and provide an airtight seal. 
(e) Facepieces shall be designed to prevent eyepiece fogging. 


84.119


Facepieces; eyepieces; minimum requirements. 


(a) Full facepieces shall be designed and constructed to provide adequate vision which is not distorted by the eye.

(b) All eyepieces shall be designed and constructed to meet the impact and penetration requirements specified in
Federal Specification, Mask, Air Line: and Respirator, Air Filtering, Industrial, GGGM125d, October
11, 1965. 


84.120


Inhalation and exhalation valves; minimum requirements. 


(a) Inhalation and exhalation valves shall be provided where necessary and protected against damage and distortion.

(b) Inhalation valves shall be designed and constructed to prevent excessive exhaled air from adversely affecting
cartridges, canisters, and filters. 
(c) Exhalation valves shall be protected against external influence, and designed and constructed to prevent inward
leakage of contaminated air. 


84.121


Head harnesses; minimum requirements. 


(a) Facepieces shall be equipped with adjustable and replaceable head harnesses, designed and constructed to provide
adequate tension during use and an even distribution of pressure over the entire area in contact with the face. 
(b) Mouthpieces shall be equipped, where applicable, with adjustable and replaceable harnesses designed and constructed
to hold the mouthpiece in place. 


84.122


Breathing resistance test; minimum requirements. 


(a) Resistance to airflow will be measured in the facepiece or mouthpiece of a gas mask mounted on a breathing machine
both before and after each test conducted in accordance with 84.124, 84.125, and 84.126, with air flowing
at a continuous rate of 85 liters per minute. 
(b) The maximum allowable resistance requirements for gas masks are as follows: 




