 



Response:

 The regulation of fishing is not authorized by the Designation Document. NOAA has determined that existing fishery
management authorities are adequate to address fishery resource issues. As with all other fisheries that occur within
the Sanctuary, crab fishing and razor clam digging remain under the regulatory authority of existing Federal, state,
tribal and regional fishery authorities. NOAA does not view fishing as contrary to the goals of the Sanctuary. The
sanctuary program is by law mandated ``to facilitate to the extent compatible with the primary objective of resource
protection, all public and private uses of the resources ***.'' (including fishing) (16
U.S.C. 1431(b)(5)). 

Existing fishery management agencies are primarily concerned with the regulation and management of fish stocks
for a healthy fishery. In contrast, the National Marine Sanctuary Program has a different and broader mandate under
the MPRSA to protect all Sanctuary resources on an ecosystem-wide basis. Thus, while fishery agencies may be concerned
about certain fishing efforts and techniques in relation to fish stock abundance and distribution, the Marine Sanctuary
Program is also concerned about the potential incidental impacts of specific fishery techniques on all Sanctuary
resources including benthic habitats or marine mammals as well as the role the target species plays in the health of
the ecosystem. In the case of the Olympic Coast, fish resources are already extensively managed by existing authorities
and NOAA does not envision a fishery management role for the Sanctuary Program. Accordingly, fishing activities
have not been included in the list of activities in the Designation Document subject to regulation as part of the Sanctuary
regime. However, the Sanctuary Program will provide research results and recommendations to existing fishery management
agencies in order to enhance the protection of fishery and other resources within the Sanctuary. 



Comment:

 No additional fisheries management or regulation is needed in the Sanctuary. Commercial, recreation, and subsistence
fishing can be compatible with sanctuary designation, and the existing regulatory framework is adequate at this
time. 



Response:

 See response to previous comment. The Designation Document places kelp harvesting within the scope of future regulation
since there is no existing management plan for kelp harvesting. 



Comment:

 Clarify the language associated with commercial fishing practices near sunken vessels, rocks and reefs in the proposed
sanctuary to insure continuance of historical and customary fishing practices. Existing Federal and state regulations
adequately protect archeological treasures, man-made reefs, and natural rock and reef formations. The FEIS should
acknowledge and permit prevailing practices. 



Response:

 Commercial fishing vis-a-vis historical resources is an exempted activity under the prohibition against disturbance
of historical resources. However, the exemption is only for incidental disturbance and therefore does not allow
deliberate disturbance. 



Comment:

 Fishing should either be regulated, or placed in the scope of regulation, because there may be a time in the 
future when fishing needs to be regulated by the Sanctuary. 



Response:

 NOAA believes that existing authorities are adequate to regulate fishing. Should the need arise to regulate fishing
as part of the Sanctuary management regime, the Designation Document could be amended. 



Comment:

 Proposed regulations should result in the gradual reduction of fishing, aquaculture, kelp harvesting and waterfowl
hunting to insure that no commercial activity threatens the integrity of any resources in the proposed Sanctuary.
Some commenters believed that the Sanctuary should ban all commercial fishing activities except Native American
fishing activities. 



Response:

 A blanket reduction of resource-use activities across the Sanctuary could not be imposed without credible evidence
that each resource affected is threatened by a population decrease or stock failure. Absent such evidence, the Act
requires that existing uses be facilitated to the extent compatible with the primary objective of resource protection.




Comment:

 True refugia should be established where all consumptive uses are prohibited for a period of time. 



Response:

 The determination of whether refugia are established in the Sanctuary will be done in coordination with the NMFS,
PFMC, Washington Department of Fisheries (WDF), the tribes, environmental groups, and industry. The Sanctuary
Advisory Committee (SAC) will be an important forum to address this issue. If, in coordination with other governmental
agencies, it is determined that establishment of refugia is a desirable alternative, NOAA will analyze the alternative
through the preparation of an environmental impact statement/management plan and solicitation of public input
pursuant to the NEPA and the APA. 



