 

Parties to this proceeding may request disclosure within 
5 days of publication of this notice and any interested party may request a hearing within 10 days of publication. Any
hearing, if requested, will be held 44 days after the date of publication, or the first workday thereafter. Interested
parties may submit case briefs and/or written comments not later than 30 days after the date of publication. Rebuttal
briefs and rebuttals to written comments, limited to issues raised in such briefs or comments, may be filed not later
than 37 days after the date of publication. The Department will publish a notice of the final results of this administrative
review, which will include the results of its analysis of issues raised in any such briefs or comments.
The Department shall determine, and the U.S. Customs Service shall assess, antidumping duties on all appropriate
entries. Individual differences between USP and FMV may vary from the percentage stated above. The Department will
issue appraisement instructions directly to the U.S. Customs Service. 
Furthermore, the following deposit requirements will be effective upon completion of the final results of this administrative
review for all shipments of certain circular welded carbon steel pipes and tubes from Thailand, entered or withdrawn
from warehouse, for consumption on or after the publication date of the final results of this administrative review,
as provided by section 751(a)(1) of the Act: (1) The cash deposit rate for Saha Thai will be that established in the final
results of this review; (2) for merchandise exported by manufacturers or exporters not covered in this review but
covered in the original less-than-fair-value (LTFV) investigation or previous reviews, the cash deposit will continue
to be the rate published in the final determination or the last final results for which the manufacturer or exporter
received a company-specific rate; (3) if the exporter is not a firm covered in this review, or the original LTFV investigation,
but the manufacturer is, the cash deposit rate will be that established for the manufacturer of the merchandise in
the final results of this review, a previous review, or the original investigation; and (4) if neither the exporter
nor the manufacturer is a firm covered in this or any previous review, the cash deposit rate will be the ``all others
rate'' from the LTFV investigation. 
On May 25, 1993, the Court of International Trade (CIT), in 

Floral Trade Council v. United States,

 822 F. Supp. 766 (CIT 1993), and 

Federal-Mogul Corporation and the Torrington Company v. United States,

 822 F. Supp. 782 (CIT 1993), decided that once an ``all others'' rate is established for a company, it can only be changed
through an administrative review. The Department has determined that, in order to implement these decisions, it
is appropriate to reinstate the original ``all others'' rate from the LTFV investigation (or that rate as amended
for correction for clerical errors or as a result of litigation) in proceedings governed by antidumping duty orders
for the purposes of establishing cash deposits in all current and future administrative reviews. 
Because this proceeding is governed by an antidumping duty order, the ``all others'' rate for the purposes of this
review will be 15.67 percent, the ``all others'' rate established in the Department's final determination of sales
at LTFV (51 FR 3384, January 27, 1986). 
There is a countervailing duty order on certain circular welded carbon steel pipes and tubes from Thailand (50 FR 32751,
August 15, 1985). In accordance with section 772(d)(1)(D) of the Act, entries subject to both antidumping duties
and countervailing duties will not be assessed antidumping duties on the portion of the margin attributable to export
subsidies. Because the amount of countervailing duties to be imposed on entries during the POR has yet to be determined,
we cannot at this time make the appropriate adjustment. However, to ensure that the appropriate adjustment is made,
upon issuing our final results of the administrative review, we will instruct U.S. Customs not to assess antidumping
duties on the margin attributable to export subsidies for the POR. 
This notice also serves as a preliminary reminder to importers of their responsibility under 19 CFR 353.26 to file
a certificate regarding the reimbursement of antidumping duties prior to liquidation of the relevant entries during
this review period. Failure to comply with this requirement could result in the Secretary of the Department's presumption
that reimbursement of antidumping duties occurred and the subsequent assessment of double antidumping duties.
This administrative review and notice are in accordance with section 751(a)(1) of the Act (19 U.S.C. 1675(a)(1))
and 19 CFR 353.22.



Dated: November 14, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Susan G. Esserman,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant Secretary for Import Administration.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9428828 Filed 112194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 3510DSP
</BILLING>


