 

Therefore, the acute exposure conditions possible in human laboratory studies may 
provide us with very limited information about the long-term effects of chronic exposure. 


3.6.2.4. Multiple exposures 

In the environment and the workplace, persons are seldom 
exposed to only a single chemical. Rather, they are most often exposed to complex mixtures 
of chemicals, the relative concentrations of which may vary over time. For example, one 
farmer had more than 50 different chemical products (pesticides, herbicides, solvents, metals, 
gases) with nervous system effects that he used, prepared, or stored in his work shed. 
Chemicals used in industrial processes may also contain impurities or contaminants that may 
produce neurotoxic effects or alter the neurotoxicity of the more abundant chemical species. 
Chemical mixtures may have additive or potentiating effects not predictable from studies of 
single chemicals (Strong and Garruto, 1991). Human laboratory exposure studies 
traditionally have employed one highly purified chemical or combinations of two chemicals 
(usually solvents) and thus may produce a spectrum of neurotoxic effects different from 
environmental and occupational exposures. 
Recently volatile organic compounds (VOCs) have been used in human exposure 
studies (Otto and Hudnell, 1991). VOCs consist of multiple volatile compounds administered 
at concentrations commonly found in indoor air from emissions by laminates, carpet, 
plastics, and other building and decorating materials. Although VOCs are thought to produce 
primarily mucosal irritation and odors, reports of ``sick building syndrome'' and individual 
sensitivity to indoor air contaminants suggest that other neurobehavioral mechanisms also 
may be operating.
 


3.6.2.5. Generalizability and individual differences 

The results of field studies and 
laboratory exposure studies are most valuable when they can be extrapolated to the general 
population. Studies conducted in male workers or in young, healthy volunteers may have 
limited applicability to women or to people in other age ranges. It therefore is important to 
conduct studies that include males and females of different ages and ethnic heritage. 
Culture-sensitive neurobehavioral test methods are being developed and validated in the 
United States and other countries. 

While it is important to increase the generalizability of results, it is equally important 
to know when results cannot be generalized. Studies should be specifically directed toward 
identifying subsets of individuals who are more or less sensitive to neurotoxic insult or differ 
in mode of expression. There are many examples of individual differences that alter 
response to chemicals and drugs: phenylketonurics are more sensitive to dietary tyramine 
and persons with variants of plasma pseudocholinesterase are more affected by some 
neuromuscular blocking agents. 


3.6.2.6. Veracity of neurobehavioral test results 

In most epidemiologic and human 
laboratory studies, research volunteers are highly motivated to perform well on tests of 
neurobehavioral function. Under voluntary conditions, actual neurobehavioral performance 
may serve as a reasonable index of nervous system capabilities. Some studies, however, are 
conducted in response to complaints of symptoms thought to be related to workplace, 
environmental, or therapeutic exposure to chemicals and drugs. The performance of research 
participants with symptoms and complaints may be significantly affected (consciously or 
unconsciously) by monetary rewards, emotional relief, or social gains from the validation of 
their complaints. Under these conditions, performance may or may not accurately reflect the 
capabilities of the nervous system and may lead to inaccurate conclusions about the 
magnitude of nervous system dysfunction or about putative chemical or drug etiologies. 
In addition to suboptimal performance engendered by potential reinforcers or rewards, 
research participants involved in disputes over suspected neurotoxic exposures or in litigation 
for monetary damages are likely to be experiencing significant emotional and behavioral 
reactions from situational sources that can alter the outcome of neurobehavioral assessment. 
Anxiety, depression, sleep disturbances, fatigue, worry, obsessive thoughts, and 
distractibility may contribute to less than optimal performance on motor and cognitive 
neurobehavioral tasks, especially where speed and sustained concentration are important. 
Under stressful conditions, it may be extremely difficult to differentiate between neurotoxic 
and situational sources of observed functional impairment. Functional neurobehavioral tests 
are not well equipped to distinguish between impairment from neurotoxicity and from 
nonchemical variables. The use of functional tests in symptomatic populations requires great 
care in interpretation. The development of validity scales and other control procedures for 
assessing nonchemical influences on performance is greatly needed. 


3.6.3. Cross-Species Extrapolation 


Many neurobehavioral tests were developed according to constructs of human 
cognitive processes. The diverse measures of cognitive, sensory, and motor performance in 
humans are therefore not easily compared with neurobehavioral function in animals. While it 
may be possible to conceptually relate some animal and human neurobehavioral tests (e.g., 
grip strength or signal detection), many procedural differences prevent direct comparison 
between species. 
A more direct extrapolation from animals to man might be possible if the tests were 
chosen on the basis of procedural similarity rather than on a conceptual basis (Anger, 1991). 
Stebbins and colleagues (1975) were successful in developing homologous procedures in 
nonhuman primates for the psychophysical evaluation of antibiotic ototoxicity. Efforts to 
develop comparable tests of memory and other neurobehavioral functions in animals and 
humans are under way (Stanton and Spear, 1990, Paule et al., 1990), and such efforts may 
aid in cross-species extrapolation. Other procedurally defined methods, such as Pavlovian 
conditioning (Solomon and Pendlebury, 1988), operant conditioning (Cory-Slechta, 1990), 
signal detection, and psychophysical scaling techniques (Stebbins and Coombs, 1975), could 
also be used to facilitate interspecies risk extrapolation. Deriving comparable 
neurobehavioral assessment methods in animals and humans that will allow a more 
straightforward extrapolation across species is of paramount importance for neurotoxicity risk 
assessment. 





