 

Section 4 of the Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1533) and 
regulations (50 CFR Part 424) promulgated to implement the listing 
provisions of the Act set forth the procedures for adding species to 
the Federal lists. A species may be determined to be endangered or 
threatened due to one or more of the five factors described in 
section 4(a)(1). These factors and their application to 

Allium 
tuolumnense

 (Traub) Denison and McNeal (Rawhide Hill onion), 

Brodiaea 
pallida

 Hoover (Chinese Camp brodiaea), 

Carpenteria californica

 
Torrey (carpenteria), 

Calyptridium pulchellum

 (Eastwood) Hoover 
(Mariposa pussypaws), 

Clarkia springvillensis

 Vasek (Springville 
clarkia), 

Fritillaria striata

 Eastwood (Greenhorn adobe lily), 


Lupinus citrinus

 Kellogg var. 

deflexus

 (Congdon) Jepson (Mariposa 
lupine), 

Mimulus shevockii

 Heckard and Bacigalupi (Kelso Creek 
monkeyflower), 

Navarretia setiloba

 Covelle (Piute Mountains 
navarretia), and 

Verbena californica

 Moldenke (Red Hills vervain) are 
as follows: 

A. 

The present or threatened destruction, modification, or 
curtailment of their habitat or range. Brodiaea pallida, 
Calyptridium pulchellum, Clarkia springvillensis, Lupinus citrinus

 
var. 

deflexus, Mimulus shevockii, Allium tuolumnense, Carpenteria 
californica, Fritillaria striata, Navarretia setiloba,

 and 

Verbena 
californica

 are restricted to grassland and woodland communities in 
the foothills of the Sierra Nevada and Tehachapi Mountains in 
California. The primary threat facing these 10 plants is the ongoing 
and threatened destruction and adverse modification of their 
habitats. The habitats of these 10 plants are being threatened by 
one or more of the following: urbanization, agricultural land 
conversion, off-highway vehicle use, mining, road and rights-of-way 
maintenance associated with hydroelectric operations, logging, 
illegal dumping, incompatible fire management techniques, and highway 
construction and maintenance projects. 

The human populations in the counties where these species of 
plants occur are projected to grow significantly over the next 
decade. For example, Tuolumne County is projected to increase 46 
percent between 1992 and 2005, Fresno County is predicted to grow 53 
percent by 2005, and Tulare and Kern Counties are expected to 
increase 40 percent and 44 percent, respectively, by the year 2005 
(California Department of Finance 1991, 1992). The increase in 
housing construction that will likely accompany this population 
growth threatens the populations of the 10 plants that occur on 
privately owned land. 



Brodiaea pallida

 is only known from one population of 1,600 
plants in the Red Hills. A portion of the population was destroyed 
prior to 1982 (CNDDB 1993). A subdivision has been proposed for the 
area containing the remainder of the population. Although the 
project has apparently been revised to exclude most of the 

B. pallida

 
population from the area proposed for housing, the project is still 
expected to adversely affect the plant through its plan to encourage 
recreational activities in the area containing 

B. pallida.

 The 
project would also adversely affect this species because it would 
negatively impact the hydrological conditions necessary for growth 
and reproduction (Blaine Rogers, San Joaquin Delta College, 

in. 
litt.

, 1985). 

Six of the seven populations of 

Calyptridium pulchellum

 
contain fewer than 300 plants (CNDDB 1993). The seventh population 
of 

C. pulchellum

 contains approximately 800 plants. Residential 
development threatens four populations of 

C. pulchellum.

 Two 
populations of 

C. pulchellum

 occur on 1-acre lots that are for sale 
in the midst of an existing subdivision (CNDDB 1993). A third 
population of 

C. pulchellum

 occurs on a ranch that is for sale; the 
potential exists for the ranch to be subdivided after it is sold 
(CNDDB 1993). A fourth population of 

C. pulchellum

 occurs on a 
vacant lot adjacent to and downslope from a developed lot. Run-off 
from landscape maintenance of the developed lot threatens this 
population (CNDDB 1993). This fourth population has not been seen 
since 1983 and may be extirpated (CNDDB 1993). 

Disturbance associated with suburban foothill development 
destroyed part of one population of 

Lupinus citrinus

 var. 

deflexus

 in 
the early 1980s (CDFG 1989a). Since then, this population appears to 
be recovering (CDFG 1989a). The rapidly accelerating development of 
the western slope of the Sierra Nevada is a serious potential threat 
to all four populations of this species (CDFG 1989a). Presently, a 
home occupies each of the population sites south of the town of 
Mariposa in Mariposa County (California Native Plant Society (CNPS) 
1990). The construction of these homes destroyed some of the plants. 

The Joshua tree and pinyon-juniper woodland communities where 


Mimulus shevockii

 occurs are desirable for development because of 
their scenic viewsheds. Current mobile home development projects and 
associated road construction is adversely affecting 

M. shevockii

 at 
six sites; development projects planned for the future will also 
adversely affect this species (CNDDB 1993). Five of the populations 
of 

M. shevockii

 occur on a mixture of BLM and private lands and two 
populations occur on private lands. Parts of two populations have 
been destroyed by construction of a gravel road and an off-highway 
vehicle road (CNDDB 1993). Agricultural land conversion and mobile 
home lot development already have destroyed part of one of these 
populations and the remaining portion of this population is 
threatened with additional agricultural land conversion (CNDDB 1993). 



