 

Under the PPPA, effectiveness standards have been established for special packaging (16 CFR 1700.15), as has a procedure
for evaluating the effectiveness (16 CFR 1700.20). Regulations have been issued requiring special packaging for
a number of household products (16 CFR 1700.14). The findings that the Commission must make in order to issue a standard
requiring child-resistant (``CR'') packaging for a product are discussed below in Section D of this notice. For the
purposes of the PPPA, the amount of a substance ``in a single package'' that triggers the requirement to place the product
in CR packaging refers to the total amount in a single retail unit of the substance. 
The PPPA allows the Commission to require CR packaging for household substances, which include foods, drugs, or cosmetics
as these terms are defined in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321). 15 U.S.C. 1471(2)(B). Mouthwashes
are either drugs, if they make medical claims, or cosmetics. 
Section 4(a) of the PPPA, 15 U.S.C. 1473(a), allows the manufacturer or packer to package a nonprescription product
subject to special packaging standards in one size of non-CR packaging only if (1) the manufacturer (or packer) also
supplies the substance in CR packages and (2) the non-CR packages bear conspicuous labeling stating: ``This package
for households without young children.'' 15 U.S.C. 1473(a). If the package is too small to accommodate this label
statement, the package may bear a label stating: ``Package not child-resistant.'' 16 CFR 1700.5(b). The right of
the manufacturer or packer to market a single size of the product in noncomplying packaging under these conditions
is termed the ``single-size exemption.'' 
The Commission may restrict the right to market a single size in noncomplying packaging if the Commission finds that
the substance is not also being supplied in popular size packages that comply with the standard. 15 U.S.C. 1473(c).
In this case, the Commission may, after giving the manufacturer or packer an opportunity to comply with the purposes
of the PPPA and an opportunity for a hearing, order that the substance be packaged exclusively in CR packaging. To issue
such an order, the Commission must find that the exclusive use of special packaging is necessary to accomplish the
purposes of the PPPA. 


2. The Mouthwash Petition 


On March 2, 1993, the Commission was petitioned to require child resistant packaging for mouthwashes containing
more than 5 percent ethanol. The term ``mouthwash'' includes liquid products that are variously called mouthwashes,
mouthrinses, antiseptics, gargles, fluoride rinses, anti-plaque rinses, and breath fresheners. It does not include
throat sprays or aerosol breath fresheners. The petition was submitted by the American Academy of Pediatrics, the
American Association of Poison Control Centers, the Center for Science in the Public Interest, and 28 states, Guam,
and the Northern Mariana Islands. 
The petitioners stated several reasons for their request: (1) Many mouthwashes contain high percentages of ethanol,
an extremely toxic substance, in a package large enough to cause children serious injury or death; (2) these mouthwashes
are accessible to children because they are generally considered innocuous and do not have CR packages; (3) they are
attractive to children because of their appealing taste, color, and smell; and (4) data show that children have been
seriously injured or died from accidental ingestion of ethanol-containing mouthwashes. 
On November 17, 1993, the Commission granted the petition. Although the Nonprescription Drug Manufacturers Association
(``NDMA'') and the Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association (``CTFA'') had announced plans to implement a
voluntary program to place mouthwashes with more than 5 percent ethanol in CR containers, the Commission found that
mandatory action still may be necessary. In April 1994, the NDMA and CTFA notified the Commission that the products
subject to their voluntary program had been changed from mouthwashes with more than 5 percent ethanol to mouthwashes
with 3 grams or more in a single container. 


B. Toxicity 


The Commission's toxicity review indicates that mouthwashes with ethanol can present a serious ingestion hazard
to children. Most of the popular adult mouthwashes contain between 14 percent and 27 percent ethanol. By comparison,
beer contains between 5 percent and 7 percent ethanol and wine contains 12 to 14 percent ethanol. 
Ethanol depresses the central nervous system. Symptoms of acute ethanol poisoning in children include irritability,
lethargy, and unconsciousness which can lead to coma and death at high doses. Lethal blood levels of ethanol in children
are reported to range between 250 and 500 mg/dl, and the lethal dose of ethanol is 3 g/kg. Deaths or serious injury could
occur at lower doses due to other ethanol-induced effects. Ethanol poisoning in children can produce certain metabolic
complications such as hypoglycemia, metabolic acidosis, and hypokalemia. 
A review of the relevant literature shows that three deaths of children under 5 years of age have been reported. The
most recent death reported occurred in 1992 and involved a 3-year-old girl who ingested an unknown amount of mouthwash
that contained 18 percent ethanol. Several other cases of ethanol-induced hypoglycemia or toxicity following mouthwash
ingestion are reported in the literature. 
The National Electronic Injury Surveillance System (``NEISS'') reported 36 cases of ethanol-containing mouthwash
from January 1987 through November 1993. Based on these ingestions, it was estimated that a total of 1,670 mouthwash
poisoning cases were treated in hospital emergency rooms in the United States during that time. An estimated 81 percent
of these children were 1 or 2 years old, and about 5 percent of the children were hospitalized. 



