 



Accelerate airport and aircraft programs. EPA could 
accelerate programs designed to reduce emissions from commercial, 
general, and military aircraft and associated activity. 



Accelerate turnover of recreational boat engines.

 Emissions 
from recreational boat engines will eventually be reduced through 
the adoption of national standards for new engines and subsequent 
fleet turnover. It is possible to achieve an accelerated 
turnover similar to that required for heavy equipment either by 
restricting operation of boats which use engines that do not meet 
new national standards, or by imposing a fee on the excess 
emissions from such boats. 

Most of the requirements for stationary source categories 
described in section III.C.3 and the statewide area sources 
described in section III.C.4 are scheduled for implementation in 
1996. EPA expects, in fact, that all stationary source emission 
reductions projected under the 2005 attainment demonstration will 
be achieved by 2000 except for those required by the cap rules 
discussed in section III.C.5. 

The proposed cap programs require most stationary sources in 
Ventura to reduce VOC and NO

X

 emissions by at least 4% and 6% per 
year respectively for each year from 2001 through 2005. 
Theoretically, EPA could require 20% or greater VOC reductions 
(and 30% or greater NO

X

 reductions) by 2000. While this might 
accelerate attainment, EPA cannot conclude that accelerating such 
reductions would be practicable, and believes it could well be 
counterproductive in practice. Specifically, such a dramatic 
near-term reduction requirement might result in massive non-
compliance that would overwhelm EPA's enforcement abilities and 
fail to achieve real air quality improvement. 

EPA has estimated the effects of an onroad heavy duty truck 
measure, nonroad growth cap, accelerated shipping fee system, 
accelerated airport and aircraft programs, accelerated turnover 
of recreational boat engines, and accelerated stationary source 
cap on the overall Ventura emission inventory. After accounting 
for these controls, EPA projects an emission reduction shortfall 
of approximately 10 tons/day of VOC and 5 tons/day of NO

X

. Note 
that the NO

X

 contribution by stationary sources in Ventura is 
substantially greater than in the Sacramento area. Therefore, 
the mobile source measures do not produce the same effect as they 
did in Sacramento. 

In order to address the remaining emission reduction 
shortfall, EPA could impose activity restrictions using a variety 
of regulatory approaches. For example, broad-based reductions 
from many stationary and almost all mobile source categories 
could be obtained with such blunt measures as fuel surcharges or 
gas rationing. More focused reductions could be made by 
targeting motor vehicle activity through fees on vehicle-miles-
traveled (VMT) or no-drive days. 

EPA believes such potentially severe measures should only be 
selected after substantial public participation and debate. When 
faced with an attainment shortfall in the 1990 proposed FIP for 
the South Coast Basin (55 FR 36458), EPA did propose to limit 
mobile source activity with a no-drive day program for onroad 
motor vehicles. In the 1990 South Coast case, however, EPA was 
struggling to find enough reductions to attain by the latest 
legally acceptable date. In Ventura, the issue is whether there 
are practical measures to attain prior to the statutory deadline. 
In order to achieve the remaining emission reductions necessary 
for Ventura to attain by 2000, EPA estimates that two no-drive 
days or equivalent alternative activity reductions would be 
needed. That is, each highway vehicle registered in Ventura 
would be prohibited from being driven on two of the five workdays 
in each week. 

Obviously, this and other measures needed to accelerate 
attainment in Ventura would have dramatic negative socioeconomic 
impacts in the area. EPA does not consider them legally required 
as practical measures or good policy. For that reason, EPA 
cannot conclude that such measures would be practicable and EPA 
is not, therefore, proposing to attain the standard before 2005. 



5. South Coast Ozone 



a. 

Reduction requirements.

 Anthropogenic emissions in the South Coast in 1990 totaled 
approximately 1913 tons per day of VOC and 1273 tons per day of 
NO

X

 for an average summer weekday. The air pollution control 
regulations now in effect in the South Coast are, with few 
exceptions, the most stringent in the Country. In addition, many 
of the CARB or SCAQMD adopted regulations prescribe future 
compliance requirements that are still more stringent, and the 
existing CARB standards on new engines and equipment will deliver 
increasing reductions each year as a result of fleet turnover. 
Sections II.B and III.H. of this NPRM discuss the adopted CARB 
and SCAQMD rules which are assigned credit as part of the FIP 
attainment demonstration. 

Even after allowing credit for reductions from these State 
and local measures, continued growth in the area's population and 
activity levels will erode much of the future benefits of 
currently adopted controls. Consequently, in the absence of 
further SIP or FIP measures, emissions in the South Coast will 
not decline appreciably. The 2010 emissions levels are projected 
to be 1390 tons/day VOC and 1142 tons/day NO

X

 for an average 
summer weekday. 

Extensive urban airshed modeling of three episodes in 1985 
and 1987 provided the basis for the SCAQMD's 1991 Air Quality 
Management Plan, which concluded that ozone attainment could be 
achieved if basin-wide emissions were reduced to approximately 
187 tons per day of VOC and 399 tons per day of NO

X

 (episode-
specific emissions). Based on the current baseline emissions 
inventory, and prior to the completion of extensive new modeling 
analyses that are underway, EPA is using reduction targets of 90 
percent for VOC and 69 percent for NO

X

 from the 1990 base-year 
emissions levels.
<FOOTCITE>29</FOOTCITE>
 Assuming these reduction targets, the 
combination of SIP and FIP controls must achieve, by 2010, total 
reductions of 1726 tons per day of VOC and 874 tons per day of 
NO

X

 from 1990 emissions, or 1203 tons per day of VOC and 743 tons 
per day of NO

X

 from 2010 baseline emissions. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
29

</FOOTNAME>
Other combinations of VOC and NO

X

 reductions may be evaluated in preparation of the 1994 ozone SIP. To the extent possible, EPA will attempt to conform
the final FIP (and any subsequent amendments to the FIP) to the State's chosen mix of VOC and NO

X

 reductions used in the 1994 ozone SIP.

</FOOTNOTE>


As with Sacramento and Ventura, EPA's control strategy 
analysis for the South Coast began with a comparison of the 
applicable existing South Coast rules to the rules currently in 
effect in other areas. Although the SCAQMD generally has among 
the most advanced regulations in the Country, EPA was able to 
identify stationary and area source categories for which new or 
enhanced technology-based rules could be promulgated immediately 
to yield additional emission reductions. Section III.C.3. 
discusses those new or improved category-specific stationary and 
area source rules which EPA is able to propose at this time. 

After credit for emissions reductions from this initial set 
of FIP measures, a massive shortfall in necessary emission 
reductions still remains. The FIP mobile source core measures 
are identified in section III.B.2. and III.D.1.b. These measures 
contribute substantial further reductions (approximately 205 tons 
per day VOC and 181 tons per day NO

X

), leaving roughly 1000 tons 
per day VOC and 562 tons per day NO

X

 to be achieved by added 
stationary and area source controls. 

EPA proposes to achieve the remaining target reductions 
through a combination of the emission cap rules set forth in 
section III.C.5., additional mobile source controls discussed in 
section III.D, and the ``new technology'' commitments discussed in 
section III.B.5.d. below and in section III.G. 



