 

Section 519 of the act requires device manufacturers, 
distributors, importers, and user facilities to submit to FDA 
reports of certain adverse events to ensure the safety and 
effectiveness of devices. FDA has implemented this provision in 
regulations establishing mandatory reporting requirements for 
manufacturers, importers, and distributors (21 CFR part 803). 
FDA also has proposed regulations establishing reporting 
requirements for user facilities (see the 

Federal Register

 of 
November 26, 1991 (56 FR 60024)). 
Under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act (42 
U.S.C. 262(d)), biological products are licensed in accordance 
with regulations ``designed to insure the continued safety, 
purity, and potency'' of these products. Under FDA's implementing 
regulations, a biological product license may be revoked if the 
product does not conform to applicable standards or is not safe 
and effective (21 CFR 601.5(b)). The agency's proposed biologics 
adverse experience reporting regulations would establish 
mandatory reporting requirements for manufacturers of most 
biological products (see the 

Federal Register

 of March 29, 1990 
(55 FR 11611)). 
Although these reporting requirements are or will be mandatory for manufacturers, device distributors, and device
user facilities, these required reports ultimately rely upon voluntary reporting by health professionals. Manufacturers
cannot report adverse events if they do not find out about them from the health professionals who observed or were advised
of the events. As stated in section II. of this document, disclosure of patient or reporter identities serves as a significant
disincentive for voluntary reporting by health professionals. Preempting State and local disclosure laws and rules
that permit or require such disclosure would remove a significant impediment to FDA's ability to implement postmarketing
surveillance programs that are essential to the public health. 
Furthermore, sections 505(k) and 519 of the act provide that regulations and orders issued with respect to postmarketing
reporting requirements ``shall have due regard for the professional ethics of the medical profession and the interests
of patients ***'' (21 U.S.C. 355(k) and 360i). The confidentiality of the physician-patient relationship
is a basic tenet of medical ethics. The AMA Code of Ethics requires that, with certain limited exceptions, ``(t)he
utmost effort and care must be taken to protect the confidentiality of all medical records'' (``1992 Code of Medical
Ethics, Annotated Current Opinions,'' Section 5.07; and see the ``1991 Standards of Clinical Nursing Practice of
the American Nursing Association''). The recent AMA opinion that physicians have an ethical obligation to report
adverse drug or device events is likely to be incorporated in medical practice if confidentiality can be ensured (Ref.
11). 
FDA firmly believes that the public health interest in securing information from health professionals about potential
hazards associated with marketed products far outweighs the interest an individual plaintiff may assert to obtain
reporters' identities in private tort actions. 
FDA recognizes the sophistication and complexity of private tort litigation in the United States and the proposed
preemption action is not intended to frustrate or impede tort litigation in this area. Indeed, FDA recognizes that
product liability plays an important role in consumer protection. The proposed regulation has been drafted to permit
any individual plaintiff who experienced an adverse event and subsequently has become involved in medical malpractice
litigation with the person who reported the event to obtain all the information contained in the adverse event report.
In this situation, where both parties to the litigation know each other's identities, the interests of the parties
in protecting this information is minimized and, therefore, would not impose a significant disincentive to reporting.





