 







<USDEPT>SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION</USDEPT>



<RINDOCK>[Release No. 3434811; File No. SRAmex9437]</RINDOCK>


Self-Regulatory Organizations; Notice of Filing of Proposed Rule Change by the American Stock Exchange, Inc., Relating
to the Off-Site Storage of Customer Options Account Information


October 7, 1994.


Pursuant to Section 19(b)(1) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (``Act''), 15 U.S.C. 78s(b)(1), notice is hereby
given that on September 12, 1994, the American Stock Exchange, Inc. (``Amex'' or ``Exchange'') filed with the Securities
and Exchange Commission (``SEC'' or ``Commission'') the proposed rule change as described in Items I, II, and III
below, which Items have been prepared by the self-regulatory organization. The Commission is publishing this notice
to solicit comments on the proposed rule change from interested persons.


I. Self-Regulatory Organization's Statement of the Terms of Substance of the Proposed Rule Change


Currently, paragraph (b), ``Maintenance of Customer Records,'' of Amex Rule 922, ``Supervision of Accounts,''
requires that background and financial information of customers who have been approved for options transactions
be maintained at both the branch office servicing the customer's account and at the principal supervisory office
with jurisdiction over the branch office. Amex Rule 922(b) also requires that copies of account statements be maintained
at both the branch office supervising the accounts and at the principal supervisory office with jurisdiction over
the branch for the most recent six-month period. The Amex proposes to amend Exchange Rule 922(b) to provide that the
customer information and account statements currently maintained at the principal supervisory office may be maintained
at a location other than the principal supervisory office if the documents and information are readily accessible
and promptly retrievable.
The text of the proposal is available at the Office of the Secretary, Amex, and at the Commission.


II. Self-Regulatory Organization's Statement of the Purpose of, and Statutory Basis for, the Proposed Rule Change


In its filing with the Commission, the self-regulatory organization included statements concerning the purpose
of and basis for the proposed rule change and discussed any comments it received on the proposed rule change. The text
of these statements may be examined at the places specified in Item IV below. The self-regulatory organization has
prepared summaries, set forth in sections (A), (B), and (C) below, of the most significant aspects of such statements.


(A) Self-Regulatory Organization's Statement of the Purpose of, and Statutory Basis for, the Proposed Rule Change


(a) Purpose


Presently, the rules of all the options exchanges and the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. (``NASD'')
uniformly require that both the branch office servicing an options customer's account and the principal supervisory
office having jurisdiction over the branch office retain account statements and other financial and background
information for the account for supervisory purposes. With the advances in data storage and retrieval capability
available through optical disks, fax machines, microfiche and computer, coupled with the escalating costs of storing
records on-site, many member organizations prefer to store documents away from their principal supervisory offices.
In this connection, an increasing number of member organizations have asked and received permission from the self-regulatory
organizations (``SROs'') to store the required customer option account documents off-site so long as they are readily
accessible and promptly retrievable. In view of the number of requests received by the SROs to store customer options
information off-site, the Options Self-Regulatory Council (``OSRC'')
<FOOTCITE>1</FOOTCITE>
 has asked each of the options exchanges and the NASD to consider amending their rules to permit the principal supervisory
office to store customer account information off-site.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
1

</FOOTNAME>
The OSRC is a committee comprised of representatives from each of the options exchanges and the NASD.

</FOOTNOTE>


The Exchange believes that these off-site storage arrangements are consistent with the record retention requirement
rules, provided the documents are readily accessible and promptly retrievable. In this regard, the proposed rule
will not compromise the supervisory obligations of a member firm since the firm will still be required to maintain
customer option account documents and information at the branch office servicing the customer's account. To ensure
compliance with the provisions of the rule, the Amex states that it will periodically examine the document retrieval
capabilities of member firms using off-site document storage arrangements.


(b) Basis


