 

Accordingly, FDA is proposing to make importers subject to 
the general provisions of subpart A. Thus, FDA is proposing in 
123.11(a) to require that products that are offered for import 
be produced under the same HACCP and sanitation controls that it 
is proposing to apply to domestically produced seafood. FDA is 
proposing to require that importers adopt an HACCP plan that 
includes the criteria for how they will decide to purchase and 
then handle seafood while it is under their control. They must 
also establish ways to determine that these requirements are 
being met. 
More specifically, the plan must include hazard analysis, 
critical control points, and critical limits for each type of 
product imported as well as a copy of each supplier's HACCP plan 
for those products, as required in 123.11(b). Under proposed 
123.11(b), these plans must be available on file at the 
importer's U.S. place of business. As stated above, the agency 
is developing a hazard analysis book to assist importers, as well 
as processors, in designing their individual plans. 
Because of the proposed requirement of 123.11(b) that 
importers must have on file an HACCP plan from each of their 
foreign suppliers, foreign processors who wish to offer their 
products for import into the United States after the 
implementation of this regulation will have to operate under 
valid HACCP plans and sanitation control procedures and furnish 
copies of those plans to the U.S. importers. The foreign 
processors should maintain appropriate monitoring records, as dictated by the principles of HACCP already discussed.
These 
records should be kept at the foreign processors' places of 
business. 
Importers will be required under proposed 123.11(c) to 
take affirmative steps to monitor that their suppliers are in 
fact operating under their HACCP plans. Thus, under this 
proposal, the importer will need to take such steps as: (1) 
Obtaining records from the foreign processors' facilities; (2) 
obtaining certification from foreign governments that the 
suppliers are operating under valid HACCP plans or obtain 
certification lot by lot; (3) visiting the facilities to inspect 
them on a regular basis; or (4) taking some similar type of 
action, e.g., end product testing. 
For example, importers of swordfish may specify to their 
suppliers that the mercury level in the swordfish that they 
purchase cannot exceed FDA's action level of 1 part per million 
methyl mercury. The importers may decide to require certificates 
of analysis for methyl mercury on a regular basis from their 
suppliers as a means of ensuring that the swordfish that they 
offer for import into the United States is not adulterated. 
Section 123.11(d) provides an option for those importing 
from a country that has an active memorandum of understanding 
(MOU) or similar agreement with FDA. If the MOU is current, and 
if there is equivalency between the inspection system of the 
foreign country and the U.S. system, the importer will be able to 
rely on the MOU in lieu of the actions required under 
123.11(c). An active MOU must accurately reflect the current 
situation between the signing parties and be functioning and 
enforceable in its entirety. It is the importer's responsibility 
to determine whether the MOU is in fact active, and whether it 
covers the products that the importer intends to receive from 
that country. 
Finally, the agency strongly encourages importers (as 
reflected in proposed 123.11(e)) to require their suppliers to 
obtain HACCP training such as is required in 123.9. 
Proposed 123.12 provides that there must be evidence that 
seafood offered for import has been produced in accordance with 
part 123, subpart A. As stated previously, FDA is including this 
requirement to ensure that there is equivalent treatment of 
imported and domestic products. FDA can ensure that domestic 
product is being produced in accordance with the HACCP plan and 
the sanitation controls in 123.10 through direct observation 
and review of records. Similar inspection of foreign processors 
would be prohibitively expensive. However, FDA tentatively finds 
that mere reliance on the existence of an HACCP plan is not 
enough, and that additional evidence of compliance must be 
provided. FDA tentatively finds that this evidence can be 
provided by the means listed in proposed 123.12(a). 
One of the ways that the agency contemplates obtaining this 
evidence would be by inspecting, at the importers' U.S. place of 
business, the importers' and foreign suppliers' HACCP plans, 
sanitation procedures, and records associated with the importers' 
plans. If these records demonstrate that the foreign processor and the importer are operating in accordance with
adequate HACCP 
plans, agency will have assurance that the food is not 
adulterated under section 402(a)(4) of the act. 
FDA also intends to pursue MOU's with countries that 
demonstrate that their inspection systems are and continue to be 
substantially equivalent to those in the United States (proposed 
123.12(a)(2)). The existence of an active MOU between FDA and 
the country of origin covering the seafood products being offered 
for import will provide assurance that these products covered by 
the MOU are being produced under appropriate conditions. 
If there is no MOU, the agency will take into consideration, 
for purposes of verifying the compliance of imported seafood, 
knowledge that a foreign country has an advanced seafood 
inspection system that provides for plans that are HACCP based, 
as provided in proposed 123.12(a)(3). The existence of such a 
regulatory system and its enforcement will provide assurance 
about the conditions under which products exported from that 
country are being produced. 
Proposed 123.12(a)(4) provides that inspection of foreign 
processors by the agency or other organization designated by FDA 
may also be used to establish compliance with these regulations. 
Finally, the agency intends to use other measures as it 
finds appropriate to make determinations about the acceptability 
of the product being offered for import, including but not 
limited to end product testing, as in proposed 123.12(a)(5). 



