 




<RINDOCK>[Docket Nos. 50321 and 50366] </RINDOCK>

 


<DOCTITLE>Environmental Assessment and Finding of No Significant Impact, Georgia Power Co., et al.; Edwin I. Hatch Nuclear
Plant, Units 1 and 2 </DOCTITLE>

 

This U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is considering issuance of amendments to Facility Operating
License Nos. DPR57 and NPF5, issued to Georgia Power Company (GPC or the licensee), for operation of
the Edwin I. Hatch Nuclear Plant, Units 1 and 2, located in Appling County, Georgia. 

 

Environmental Assessment 

 

Identification of the Proposed Action 

 

The proposed amendments will replace the existing Technical Specifications (TS) in their entirety with the Improved
Technical Specifications (ITS). The proposed action is in accordance with the licensee's amendment request dated
February 25, 1994, and supplemented July 8, August 8 and August 31, September 23, October 19, and November 1, 1994.


 

The Need for the Proposed Action 

 

It has been recognized that nuclear safety in all plants would benefit from improvement and standardization of TS.
The ``NRC'' Interim Policy Statement on Technical Specification Improvements for Nuclear Power Reactors,'' (52
FR 3788 dated February 6, 1987) and later the Final Policy Statement, formalized this need. To facilitate the development
of individual ITS, each reactor vendor owners group (OG) and the NRC staff developed standard technical specifications.
For General Electric (GE) plants, the standard TS (STS) are found in NUREG1433, ``Standard Technical Specifications,
General Electric Plants, BWR/4,'' dated September 1992, which formed the basis of the Hatch ITS. The NRC Committee
to Review Generic Requirements (CRGR) reviewed the STS, made not of its safety merits, and indicated its support of
conversion by operating plants to the STS. 

 

Description of the Proposed Change 

 

The proposed revision to the TS is based on NUREG1433 and on guidance provided in the Policy Statement. Its objective
is to completely rewrite, reformat, and streamline the existing TS. Emphasis is placed on human factors principles
to improve clarity and understanding. The Bases section has been significantly expanded to clarify and better explain
the purpose and foundation of each specification. In addition to NUREG1433, portions of the existing TS were
also used as the basis for the ITS. Plant-specific issues (unique design features, requirements, and operating practices)
were discussed at length with the licensee, and generic matters were discussed with the licensee, GE, and other OGs.


 The proposed changes from the existing TS can be grouped into four general categories, as follows: 

 

Non-Technical (administrative)

 changes were intended to make the ITS easier to use for plant operations personnel. They are purely editorial in nature
or involve the movement or reformat of requirements without affecting technical content. Every section of the Hatch
TS has undergone these types of changes. In order to ensure consistency, the NRC staff and GPC have used NUREG1433
as guidance to reformat and make other administrative changes. 

 

Relocation of requirements

 includes items that were in the existing Hatch TS, but did not meet the criteria set forth in the Policy Statement for
inclusion in TS. 



