 

3.2.2. Neuropsychological Testing 



Neuropsychologists have developed quantitative methods to supplement clinical neurologic exam and laboratory
data for the diagnosis of neurologic disease. Currently, two assessment batteries, the Luria-Nebraska and the Halstead-Reitan,
and shorter versions are used in clinical practice. The batteries consist of subtests that quantify a wide spectrum
of cognitive, motor, sensory, intellectual, affective, and personality functions. The pattern of relative performance
on the subtests can be interpreted along with historical and medical data to suggest the presence or absence of neurologic
disease and the possible anatomic location of any focal lesions or degeneration. Clinical interpretation of the
data is enhanced by data on age-related population norms for many subtests and by the systematic observation of the
patient during testing. 

Several neurotoxicity assessment batteries use components of neuropsychological tests and have adapted and shortened
analogs of some subtests. Tests derived from the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale_Revised (WAISR) have
been used frequently to assess neurobehavioral impairment from chemical agents, and other abbreviated variations
of neuropsychological battery subtests have been incorporated into neurobehavioral toxicity batteries and used
in field and laboratory studies. 



3.2.3. Applicability of Clinical Methods to Neurotoxicology Risk Assessment 



Neurologic and neuropsychologic methods have long been employed to identify the adverse health effects of environmental
workplace exposures. Peripheral neuropathies (with sensory and motor disturbances), encephalopathies, organic
brain syndromes, extrapyramidal syndromes, demyelination, autonomic changes, and dementia are well-characterized
consequences of acute and chronic exposure to chemical agents. The range of exposure conditions that produce clinical
signs of neurotoxicity also has been defined by using these clinical methods. It is very important to make external/internal
dose measurements in humans in order to determine the actual dose(s) which can cause unwanted effects. 

Aspects of the clinical neurologic examination approach limit its usefulness for neurotoxicologic risk assessment.
Information obtained from the neurologic exam is mostly qualitative and descriptive rather than quantitative.
Estimates of the severity of functional impairment can be reliably placed into only three or four categories (for
example, mild, moderate, severe). Much of the assessment depends on the subjective judgment of the examiner; the
magnitude and symmetry of muscle strength are often judged by having the patient push against the resistance of the
examiner's hands. The datum is therefore the absolute and relative amount of muscle load sensed by the examiner in
his or her arms. 

Compared with other methods, the clinical neurologic exam may be less sensitive in detecting early neurotoxicity
in peripheral sensory and motor nerves. While clinicians' judgments are equal in sensitivity to quantitative methods
in assessing the amplitude of tremor, tremor frequency is poorly quantified by clinicians. Thus, important aspects
of the clinical neurologic exam may be insufficiently quantified and lack sufficient sensitivity for detecting
early neurobehavioral toxicity produced by environmental or workplace exposure conditions. However, a neurologic
evaluation of persons with documented neurobehavioral impairment would be helpful for identifying nonchemical
causes, such as diabetes and cardiovascular insufficiency. 

Administration of a neuropsychological battery also requires a trained technician, and interpretation requires
a trained and experienced neuropsychologist. Depending on the capabilities of the patient, 2 to 4 hours may be needed
to administer a full battery; 1 hour may be needed for the shorter screening versions. These practical considerations
may limit the usefulness of neuropsychological assessment in large field studies of suspected neurotoxicity. 

In addition to logistical problems in administration and interpretation, neuropsychological batteries and neurologic
exams share two disadvantages with respect to neurotoxicity risk assessment. First, neurologic exams and neuropsychological
test batteries are designed to confirm and classify functional problems in individuals selected on the basis of signs
and symptoms identified by the patient, family, or other health professionals. Their usefulness in detecting low-base
rate impairment in workers or the general population maybe generally thought to be limited, decreasing the usefulness
of clinical assessment approaches for epidemiologic risk assessment. 

Second, neurologic exams and neuropsychologic test batteries were largely developed to assess the functional correlates
of the most common forms of nervous system dysfunction: brain trauma, focal lesions, and degenerative conditions.
The clinical tests were primarily validated against these neurologic disease states. There has been insufficient
research to demonstrate which tests designed to assess functional expression of neurologic disease are most useful
in characterizing the modes of CNS impairment produced by chemical agents and drugs. More research is needed to validate
the usefulness of neuropsychologic test methods in neurotoxicology. 



3.3. Current Neurotoxicity Testing Methods 



3.3.1. Neurobehavioral Methods 



Chemical agents directly or indirectly affect a wide range of nervous system activities. Many of these chemical actions
are expressed as alterations of behavior; Anger (1990a) lists 35 neurobehavioral effects of chemical exposure that
illustrate alterations in sensory, motor, cognitive, affective, and personality function. Professional judgment
is important in the interpretation of data from studies using neurobehavioral methods since some endpoints can be
subjective. 

Dozens of tests of neurobehavioral function have been proposed or used in field or laboratory studies to assess the
neurotoxicity of chemical agents. Table 31 lists some frequently used tests of motor, sensory, cognitive,
and affective neurobehavioral function.



