 

650.27 

DAS exemption program. 



Any vessel holding a limited access scallop permit under 650.4(a) may request an exemption from the DAS Program,
as follows, while scallop fishing exclusively landward of the outer boundary of a state's waters. Any such exemption
granted will exempt the vessel from the DAS requirements specified under 650.24(c). 

(a) 

VTS notification.

 Vessel owners requesting a DAS exemption via a VTS shall: 

(1) Notify NMFS, via their VTS, prior to the vessel's first trip under the DAS exemption program, that the vessel will
be fishing exclusively in state waters for scallops; and, 

(2) Notify NMFS, via their VTS, prior to the vessel's first planned trip in the EEZ, that the vessel is to resume fishing
under the vessel's DAS allocation. 

(b) 

Other methods of notification.

 Vessel owners opting to request entry into the DAS exemption program via fax or phone shall: 

(1) Notify NMFS by calling 5082819335 or faxing 5082819135 the following information
at least 7 days prior to the date on which the exemption is requested: owner and caller name and address; vessel name
and permit number; and beginning and ending dates of the exemption period; 

(2) Remain in the exemption program a minimum of 7 days; and, 

(3) If an exemption holder has been in the program a minimum of 7 days and wishes to withdraw earlier than the designated
end of the exemption period, the exemption holder must notify the Regional Director of early withdrawal from the program.
Notification of withdrawal is made by calling 5082819335 or by faxing 5082819135. When
providing notice, the exemption holder will specify that the request is for withdrawal from the program and provide
the vessel name and permit number, and the name and phone number of the caller. The exemption holder may not leave port
to fish for scallops in the EEZ until 48 hours after notification of early withdrawal is received by the Regional Director.


(c) A vessel participating in the DAS exemption program may not fish in the EEZ during the participation period. 

(d) Participation in the DAS exemption program expires when the owner's or vessel's name changes. 

(e) Vessels participating in the DAS exemption program continue to be subject to all the other requirements of this
part. 



650.28 

At-sea observer coverage. 



(a) The Regional Director may require observers for any vessel holding a Federal sea scallop permit. 

(b) Owners of vessels selected for observer coverage must notify the appropriate Regional or Center Director, as
specified by the Regional Director, before commencing any fishing trip that may result in the harvest of any Atlantic
sea scallops. Notification procedures will be specified in selection letters to vessel owners. 

(c) An owner or operator of a vessel on which a NMFS-approved observer is embarked must: 

(1) Provide accommodations and food that are equivalent to those provided to the crew; 

(2) Allow the observer access to and use of the vessel's communications equipment and personnel upon request for the
transmission and receipt of messages related to the observer's duties; 

(3) Allow the observer access to and use of the vessel's navigation equipment and personnel upon request to determine
the vessel's position; 

(4) Allow the observer free and unobstructed access to the vessel's bridge, working decks, holding bins, weight scales,
holds, and any other space used to hold, process, weigh, or store fish; and 

(5) Allow the observer to inspect and copy the vessel's log, communications logs, and any records associated with
the catch and distribution of fish for that trip. 



650.29 

Experimental fishing exemption. 



(a) The Regional Director may exempt any person or vessel from the requirements of this part for the conduct of experimental
fishing beneficial to the management of the sea scallop resource or fishery. 

(b) The Regional Director may not grant such exemption unless it is determined that the purpose, design, and administration
of the exemption is consistent with the objectives of the FMP, the provisions of the Magnuson Act, and other applicable
law, and that granting the exemption will not: 

(1) Have a detrimental effect on the sea scallop resource and fishery; or 

(2) Create significant enforcement problems. 

(c) Each vessel participating in any exempted experimental fishing activity is subject to all provisions of this
part except those necessarily relating to the purpose and nature of the exemption. The exemption will be specified
in a letter issued by the Regional Director to each vessel participating in the exempted activity. This letter must
be carried aboard the vessel seeking the benefit of such exemption. 



Subpart C_Framework Adjustments to Management Measures 



650.40 

Framework specifications. 



(a) Annually, upon request from the Council, but at a minimum in the years 1996 and 1999, the Regional Director will
provide the Council with information on the status of the sea scallop resource. 

(b) Within 60 days of receipt of that information, the Council's Plan Development Team (PDT) shall assess the condition
of the Atlantic sea scallop resource to determine the adequacy of the total allowable DAS reduction schedule, described
in 650.24(c), to achieve the target fishing mortality rate. In addition, the PDT shall make a determination
whether other resource conservation issues exist that require a management response in order to meet the goals and
objectives outlined in the FMP. The PDT shall report its findings and recommendations to the Council. In its report
to the Council, the PDT shall provide the appropriate rationale and economic and biological analysis for its recommendation
utilizing the most current catch, effort, and other relevant data from the fishery. 

(c) After receiving the PDT findings and recommendations, the Council shall determine whether adjustments to, or
additional, management measures are necessary to meet the goals and objectives of the FMP. After considering the
PDT's findings and recommendations, or at any other time, if the Council determines that adjustments to, or additional,
management measures are necessary, it shall develop and analyze appropriate management actions over the span of
at least two Council meetings. The Council shall provide the public with advance notice of the availability of both
the proposals and the analyses, and opportunity to comment on them prior to and at the second Council meeting. The Council's
recommendation on adjustments or additions to management measures must come from one or more of the following categories:


(1) DAS changes; 

(2) Shell height; 

(3) Offloading window re-instatement; 

(4) Effort monitoring; 

(5) Data reporting; 

(6) Trip limits; 

(7) Gear restrictions; 




