 



Response: 

It is the State's responsibility to initiate a peer review of its RDT management process. An initial peer review
should be undertaken sometime during the first three years after the State's management process has been approved
by the FHWA Division Office.
The peer review is intended to review a State's management process, not the content of its RDT program. It will
not be used for compliance or certification. Peer reviews should help in identifying, reinforcing, and conveying
effective program approaches across the country and enable a nationwide sharing of successful practices and policies.
The purpose of providing the peer review report and a written response to the report findings to the FHWA Division Administrator
is primarily to keep the Division Administrator informed of the status of the State's program and what efforts are
being taken to improve the program.
The members of the peer review team will be selected by the State. The FHWA will establish criteria for team members
and will develop and maintain a list of qualified individuals who will be available to serve on the teams. At least two
members of the peer review team must be selected from this list.
A State may include a line item in its work program to pay for the peer review of its RDT program with FHWA planning
and research funds. The FHWA will consider establishing a national pooled-fund project if there is sufficient interest
from the States and if it would expedite the peer review process.
The ``periodic basis'' for conducting peer reviews has been determined by the FHWA to be once every three years. After
experience has been gained operating under the new procedures, consideration will be given to extending the time
period between reviews.


Comment: 

Comments were mixed on whether the proposed rule should be mandatory for all States or whether a State could continue
to submit individual RDT studies for Federal approval.


Response: 

The option to submit individual studies for Federal approval (i.e., to continue operating under current procedures)
has not been included in the final rule. The regulations are mandatory for all States. The final regulation provides
a State with considerable latitude in developing and managing its RDT activities and supports the intent of
ISTEA to move the decisionmaking process to the State level.
The FHWA is available, at a State's request, to assist in reviewing any RDT activities that are highly technical
or require special expertise.


Comment: 

One commenter stated that the FHWA's intent concerning the degree of RDT program interaction within State agencies
should be more clearly stated. Specifically, expectations regarding the degree of management involvement at various
organizational levels should be disclosed.


Response: 

Due to the different organizational structures of the States, it is not possible to be specific concerning the degree
of management involvement. Each State should involve those management levels that are necessary to develop and implement
an RDT program that addresses high priority transportation issues.


Comment: 

One commenter stated that the NPRM implies that the FHWA is going to require a uniform format for State work programs
since the information will be entered into a national data base.


Response: 

There is no intent to require a uniform work program format. The FHWA will encourage the States to include summary sheets
listing all studies and costs followed by more detailed information on individual studies in their work programs.
Also, as part of its management process, each State is required to use the Transportation Research Board's Transportation
Research Information Services (TRIS) for reporting its active RDT activities. It will be the State's responsibility
to enter its new RDT activities into the TRIS data base. Since uniform entries will be required for the data base,
it could reasonably result in the States' work programs becoming more uniform to simplify data entry.


