 



As the above discussion suggests, we seek to meet several 
goals as we engage in the development and promulgation of FIPs for 
these California areas. These goals compel EPA to go beyond normal 
boundaries of rule development and implementation. EPA views both 
the SIP and FIP processes as an opportunity to make real progress 
towards clean air on a variety of fronts. To do that, these FIPs 
must include more than rules which reduce emissions; they must also 
involve a concerted effort to make the process of bringing clean 
air to California work better. This effort will require even 
better cooperation and coordination among local, state and federal 
air pollution control agencies, better coordination with the other 
governmental agencies which must contribute to the solutions, and 
more public involvement and education. Success demands that 
everyone work together on creative and innovative solutions to the 
difficult air pollution problems these areas still face. 


1. Provide for the Emissions Reductions Needed To Meet EPA's 
Obligations


First and foremost, EPA's goal is to meet its obligations 
under the Clean Air Act and under court orders, to promulgate plans 
in Sacramento, Ventura, and the South Coast which provide for 
attainment of the health-based ozone and carbon monoxide standards. 
Due to historical failures of these three nonattainment areas to 
develop adequate plans themselves, the courts have determined that 
the Clean Air Act, as amended in 1990, requires EPA to provide 
plans now. Although EPA disagreed with the retention of the FIP 
obligations in the wake of the 1990 amendments, EPA takes its 
obligations, and their ultimate objective of clean air very 
seriously.
<FOOTCITE>3</FOOTCITE>
 In EPA's view, any efforts to fulfill other goals 
stated below must complement this ultimate objective of clean air. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
3

</FOOTNAME>
EPA has previously published advance notices of proposed rulemakings (ANPRs) and/or notices of proposed rulemaking
(NPRs) for FIPs in the three areas. For Sacramento, ANPRs were published on April 5, 1990 (55 FR 12669) and May 27, 1992
(57 FR 22194). For the South Coast, EPA published an ANPR on December 7, 1988 (53 FR 49494) and an NPR on September 5, 1990
(55 FR 36458). EPA published an NPR for Ventura on January 17, 1991 (56 FR 1754). While the approach of these FIPs is quite
different, the reader should consult these notices for an account of the litigation, settlement agreements, modifications
to the agreements, regulatory history, and EPA's then-current interpretations of its obligations. For an account
of EPA's views on timing and circumstances of these FIP obligations, see especially the executive summary of the South
Coast NPR. See also Coalition for Clean Air, 971 F.2d 219 (9th Cir. 1992).

</FOOTNOTE>


2. Develop the FIPs in a Manner Which Encourages and Assists the 
Implementation of Air Quality Measures by State and Local Agencies


It is most appropriate for state and local agencies to play 
the lead roles in addressing their own air pollution problems. In 
fact, that is how Congress, through the Clean Air Act, intended it 
to work. Traditionally, this approach has placed EPA in the roles 
of technical advisor, grant officer, and, as a last resort when 
local or state responsibilities are not met, as a backstop. But 
the air quality problems faced by these California areas are 
tremendous, and despite their efforts the state and local 
governments have been as yet unable to provide a plan for attaining 
the health standards. It has therefore become necessary, both 
legally and practically, for EPA to play the backstop role at this 
time. 
As EPA pursues this role, we believe that we must do so in a 
manner which both encourages and supports the efforts of the state 
and local governments to meet their continuing air quality related 
responsibilities, especially regarding the development of the 
November 15 SIP submittal. In short, this means moving beyond the 
mere fulfillment of our legal responsibilities toward the 
establishment of a full working partnership among all parties. 
Obviously, the first real test of this new partnership begins 
now. As has been previously discussed, these FIPs are being 
proposed at the same time as state and local agencies are preparing 
to meet many of the Act's most important requirements, including 
their own plans to address the very same obligation as these FIPs: 
attainment of the ozone NAAQS.
<FOOTCITE>4</FOOTCITE>
 EPA is concerned that issuance of 
comprehensive regulatory FIPs within the FIP time frame has the 
potential to disrupt the SIP planning process. State and local 
agencies will be in the process of designing air quality measures 
for legislative or board consideration at the same time the federal 
government is proposing to promulgate measures to cover the very 
same emission sources. At the very least, these parallel planning 
processes are likely to create confusion for the public and the 
regulated community. EPA's goal is to develop the FIPs in a manner 
that supports effective air quality planning by the responsible 
state and local agencies. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
4

</FOOTNAME>
For carbon monoxide, the South Coast is revising its CO SIP which was submitted to EPA in 1992. The South Coast is currently
scheduled to submit this revised SIP to EPA in November 1994.
</FOOTNOTE>


3. Minimize Federal Intrusion Into State and Local Affairs 


EPA will meet its obligations to prepare federal plans for 
clean air in these three areas of California, and EPA must, and 
will if necessary, implement the measures it promulgates. However, 
EPA firmly believes that clean air is more likely to be achieved 
faster, and in greater harmony with local economic and community 
goals, if its own role is minimized by effective state and local 
actions. 


