 

The Committee has designated Merrill Lynch Asset Management, Inc. (MLAM) as the investment manager for the I Fund.
MLAM and the Trustee are both subsidiaries of Merrill Lynch  Co. In accordance with investment guidelines provided
by the Committee, MLAM generally invests and manages the I Fund's assets, which consist of Plan contributions, participant
reallocations of Account balances to the I Fund, and proceeds of maturing investments. MLAM represents that it is
not an investment manager within the meaning of Section 3(38) of the Act with respect to any ``cloned'' contracts,
including the GIC, which were issued to the Plans as part of the asset transfer from the Predecessor Plans.

1

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


1

</FOOTNAME>
 In this proposed exemption, the Department expresses no opinion as to whether or not MLAM constitutes an investment
manager within the meaning of Section 3(38) of the Act. 

</FOOTNOTE>


3. On April 11, 1991 (the Conservation Date), Executive Life was placed in conservatorship by the Commissioner of
Insurance of the State of California.

2

 As of that date, payments under the GIC were suspended, and no withdrawals or payments from the GIC have been made since
the Conservation Date. As of the Conservation Date, the GIC had a book value of $3,766,668, representing total principal
deposits under the GIC plus accrued interest at the Contract Rate less previous withdrawals, and constituting approximately
2.4 percent of the assets of the I Fund at that time. Effective April 30, 1991, the Committee froze a proportionate share
of each of the 2,918 Accounts invested in the I Fund. With respect to the frozen portion of each Account, the Committee
has prohibited the crediting of earnings, the making of distributions, withdrawals and loans, and the reallocation
of the frozen Account portions to other investment options of the Plans. Printed Account statements provided to the
Plans participants have reported the frozen Account portions separately, indicating the frozen status. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


2

</FOOTNAME>
 The Department notes that the decision to acquire and hold the GIC is governed by the fiduciary responsibility requirements
of Part 4, Subtitle B, Title I of the Act. In this proposed exemption, the Department is not proposing relief for any
violations of Part 4 which may have arisen as a result of the acquisition and holding of the GIC. 


</FOOTNOTE>


4. In September 1993, the Employer entered into a written agreement for the sale of substantially all the assets of
one of the Employer's business units to Silgan Containers Corporation (Silgan). Pursuant to that agreement, the
Employer is required to transfer to one or more individual account plans maintained by Silgan (the Silgan Plans) the
assets and liabilities of the Plans with respect to the Accounts of the Plans' participants who transferred employment
from the Employer to Silgan as a result of the sale of the business unit. The parties agreed that the asset transfer is
to be made in cash. The asset transfer includes 288 Accounts which are subject to the proportionate freeze resulting
from the Executive Life conservatorship. 


5. On August 13, 1993, the Los Angeles Superior Court approved the terms of the Rehabilitation/Liquidation Plan for
Executive Life (the Rehab Plan) effective September 3, 1993. On or about December 29, 1993, each holder of an Executive
Life contract was provided with an election form and summary of the Rehab Plan. Under the Rehab Plan, Executive Life's
guaranteed investment contracts were reduced in value to approximately 79 percent of the book value as of the Conservation
Date (the Rehab Value), and each holder of such contracts was paid an amount (the Interim Payment) for accumulated
interest and fees for the period between the Conservation Date and September 3, 1993. Each contract holder, including
the Plans, was informed that each contract holder could elect by February 12, 1994 to ``opt in'' or ``opt out'' of the
Rehab Plan. The Employer represents that by ``opting in'', according to the Rehab Plan summary, a contract holder
would be issued a new 5-year contract issued by Aurora National Life Assurance Company, the successor of Executive
Life, in an amount equal to the Rehab Value less the amount of the Interim Payment, plus the right to receive possible
distributions (Residual Payments) from certain trusts and settlements which may occur in the liquidation of Executive
Life. The Employer states that, according to the Rehab Plan summary, ``opting out'' of the Rehab Plan results in a cash
settlement, consisting of an immediate cash payment (the Initial Payment), and the right to receive any Residual
Payments which become available. The Interim Payment was payable to all contract holders, whether they ``opt in''
or ``opt out'' of the Rehab Plan. 


6. The Employer states that after review and consideration of the Rehab Plan summary and the reports of outside consultants
retained for analysis and advice, the Committee determined that the Plans should ``opt out'' of the Rehab Plan. Accordingly,
the Plans received the Initial Payment on the GIC on March 31, 1994. When combined with the Interim Payment, the Plans
have received approximately 57 percent of the GIC's Conservation Date book value. The Employer states that the Residual
Payments potentially available to the Plans, as a contract holder which ``opts out'' of the Rehab Plan, will consist
of the net proceeds, if any, from the following: (a) An allocation holdback equal to approximately 11 percent of the
GIC's Conservation Date book value; (b) liquidation of three trusts established under the Rehab Plan to liquidate
Executive Life's non-investment grade securities and other assets, paid through an ``Opt-Out Trust''; and (c) remaining
proceeds from another trust established under the Rehab Plan to deal with bond indemnification obligations shared
by contract holders. The Employer states that the summary of the Rehab Plan reported that some Residual Payments may
be made annually but others could take a substantial period of time to realize. The Employer represents that under
the Rehab Plan, neither the timing nor the amount of any Residual Payments can be determined with certainty. However,
the Employer represents that on the basis of the Rehab Plan summary and the analysis conducted by consultants retained
to assist the Committee, the Committee estimates that the Plans will receive total Residual Payments of $1,073,500.30
(the Estimated Residuals), or about 28.5 percent of the GIC's book value as of the Conservation Date. 





