 

NHTSA believes that Mr. Crail's initial assertion about a trailer's ability to comply with Standard 121 without incorporating
a relay booster valve on trailers is incorrect. The agency notes that the majority of trailers required a relay booster
valve to comply with the requirements adopted on May 3, 1989 (54 FR 13890, 8507, Notice 3). However, the control
line pressure requirements of the August 1992 notice did not have the effect of requiring that an additional valve
be added to the system. The August 1992 requirements only required that valves used to comply with the May 1989 requirements
did not induce unwanted pressure differentials. Therefore, NHTSA believes that the amendment in question did not
have the effect of requiring a relay booster valve where none was required before.



Other Hardware Costs

 

NHTSA further believes that Mr. Crail's assertions about the rulemaking's hardware costs are incorrect.

The agency considered these same assertions about hardware costs when it was developing the August 1992 rule. In that
rule, NHTSA indicated that some manufacturers might have to use higher quality relay valves than they presently use
to meet the requirements, but that these higher quality valves are not significantly more expensive. In addition,
the agency acknowledged that manufacturers may have to modify existing valve designs to control pressure differential.
However, the agency estimated that such modified valves would cost only a few dollars more per trailer. Moreover,
the final rule also indicated that these upgraded valves would only be needed on towing trailers. The total annual
production of towing trailers is roughly 21,400. Therefore, the agency concluded that the aggregate costs for additional
equipment on all trailers to comply with the control line pressure balance requirements would be relatively small.

In its review of Mr. Crail's petition for reconsideration, NHTSA once again reviewed the hardware costs associated
with the control line pressure balance requirements. The agency concludes that valves that would be needed to meet
the August 1992 rule are not significantly more expensive that those used prior to the rule. To illustrate, Bendix,
a valve manufacturer, has designed a new valve that it advertises as complying with these new requirements. These
valves actually cost less than valves previously used in trailers to control for pressure balance. Accordingly,
NHTSA continues to believe that its initial determination that the hardware costs associated with the rulemaking
are not unreasonable is correct.



Testing Costs



Mr. Crail also asserted that the agency seriously underestimated the costs to trailer manufacturers for testing
compliance with the new dynamic test procedure. As noted above, NHTSA stated in the final rule that the mini-tractor
test rights that are currently used to test compliance with other requirements in Standard No. 121 could be readily
upgraded to check for pressure differentials at an added cost of about $300. Mr. Crail asserted that, on top of the $300
costs estimated by NHTSA, there would be nearly $5900 of additional costs to record the pressure data collected during
the prescribed test. The $5900 estimate consisted of two sets of pressure transducers and cables, at a cost of $600
per set, a strip chart recorder, at a cost of about $4000, and approximately $700 in labor costs.

Mr. Crail also stated that trailer test rigs commonly used by trailer manufacturers cannot be simply adapted to the
additional tasks of recording pressure tracers simultaneously at both the trailer's input and delivery gladhands,
as the agency suggested in the preamble to the final rule. Instead, Mr. Crail asserted that manufacturers would have
to equip the test rig with at least three additional pressure transducers and a recording device capable of three channel
input.

NHTSA disagrees. Through tests conducted at the Vehicle Research and Test Center (VRTC) and conversations with a
Gooch Brake and Equipment Company, a manufacturer of mini-tractor test rigs, NHTSA concludes that trailer manufacturers
need not equip their test rigs with additional pressure transducers and a recording device costing approximately
$5900. As explained in the final rule, most trailer manufacturers use test rigs, known as ``variables'' test equipment,
for a variety of timing and pressure testing of vehicles in certifying compliance with Standard No. 121. Therefore,
a manufacturer typically will not have to procure test equipment solely to comply with the new rule. Rather, most manufacturers
can easily upgrade their current test rig to evaluate the pressure differential through the following modifications
at a cost of about $300: Adding a hose, gladhands, and an air flow restrictor, for approximately $100; and upgrading
the test rig's software, for $200. While it is true that the total cost of ``variables'' test equipment would be approximately
$6000 to $7000, a trailer manufacturer that already owns the test rig would incur an incremental cost of $300 to comply
with this amendment.



