 

As set out below, Edge and agreement corporations, bankers' banks that are not subject to reserve requirements, and
limited-purpose trust companies are subject to a daylight overdraft penalty fee levied against the average daily
daylight overdraft incurred by the institution. The annual rate for the daylight overdraft penalty fee is equal to
the annual rate applicable to the daylight overdrafts of other depository institutions (i.e., the rate set forth
in section (I)(B)) 

plus

 100 basis points, adjusted to take account of the Fedwire operating day (multiplied by the fraction of the day Fedwire
is scheduled to operate). The daily daylight penalty rate is calculated by dividing the annual penalty rate by 360.

The penalty fee applies to the institution's average daily daylight overdraft in accounts at the Federal Reserve.
The average daily overdraft is calculated by dividing the sum of the negative Federal Reserve account balances at
the end of each minute of the scheduled Fedwire operating day (with positive balances set to zero) by the total number
of minutes in the scheduled Fedwire operating day. The penalty fee is charged in lieu of, not in addition to, the daylight
overdraft fee described in section (I)(B) and is effective April 14, 1994. 
Overnight overdrafts for these institutions are treated similarly to overnight overdrafts of other depository
institutions. 
a. 

Edge and agreement corporations

.

9

 Edge and agreement corporations should refrain from incurring daylight overdrafts in their reserve or clearing
accounts. In the event that any daylight overdrafts occur, the Edge or agreement corporation must post collateral
to cover the overdrafts. In addition to posting collateral, the Edge or agreement corporation would be subject to
a daylight overdraft penalty fee levied against the average daily daylight overdrafts incurred by the institution,
as described above. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


9

</FOOTNAME>
These institutions are organized under section 25A of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 611631) or have an
agreement or undertaking with the Board under section 25 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. 601604a). 
</FOOTNOTE>


This policy reflects the lack of access of these institutions to the discount window and the possibility that the parent
of an Edge or agreement corporation may be unable or unwilling to cover its subsidiary's overdraft on a timely basis.
The Board notes that the parent of an Edge or agreement corporation could fund its subsidiary during the day over Fedwire
and/or the parent could substitute itself for its subsidiary on private networks. Such an approach by the parent could
both reduce systemic risk exposure and permit the Edge or agreement corporation to continue to service its customers.
Edge and agreement corporation subsidiaries of foreign banks are treated in the same manner as their domestically-owned
counterparts. 
b. 

Bankers' banks

.

10

 Bankers' banks are exempt from reserve requirements and do not have regular access to the discount window. They do,
however, have access to Federal Reserve payments services. The Board's policy provides that bankers' banks should
refrain from incurring overdrafts and post collateral to cover any overdrafts they do incur. In addition to posting
collateral, a bankers' bank would be subject to a daylight overdraft penalty fee levied against the average daily
daylight overdrafts incurred by the institution, as described above. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


10

</FOOTNAME>
For the purposes of this policy statement, a bankers' bank is a financial institution that is not required to maintain
reserves under the Board's Regulation D (12 CFR part 204) because it is organized solely to do business with other financial
institutions, is owned primarily by the financial institutions with which it does business, and does not do business
with the general public and is not a depository institution as defined in the Board's Regulation A (12 CFR 201.2(a)).

</FOOTNOTE>


The Board's policy for bankers' banks reflects the need to protect Reserve Banks from potential losses resulting
from daylight overdrafts incurred by bankers' banks. The policy also reflects the fact that some bankers' banks do
not incur the costs of maintaining reserves as do other depository institutions and do not have regular access to the
discount window and the similarity between overdrafts and discount window credit. 
Bankers' banks may voluntarily waive their exemption from reserve requirements, thus gaining access to the discount
window. Such bankers' banks would be free to establish caps and would be subject to the same policy as other depository
institutions. The policy set out in this section applies only to those bankers' banks that have not waived their exemption
from reserve requirements. 




