 

(ii) Documentation that the facility maintains records of all birds traded from the facility, including both within
the country in which the facility is located and internationally; and 

(iii) Copies of these production and trade data shall be included with the application for the past two calendar years;
and 

(12) A statement documenting that adequate enforcement controls are in place in the country and at the facility to
prevent the use of the facility for the export or re-export of wild-caught stock, including a statement on security
at the facility and any prior losses due to theft. 



15.42 

Approval criteria and conditions. 



(a) 

Approval criteria.

 Upon receiving an application completed in accordance with 15.41 of this subpart, the Director will decide
whether or not a breeding facility should be approved. In making this decision, the Director shall consider, in addition
to the general criteria in part 13 of this subchapter, the following factors: 

(1) The facility is located in a country that is: 

(i) a Party to the Convention; 

(ii) has domestic legislation that adequately implements the Convention; 

(iii) has designated functioning Management and Scientific Authorities; and 

(iv) is current in providing annual reports to the Convention Secretariat;

(2) The facility has demonstrated the capability of producing captive-bred birds of the species in the numbers to
be imported into the United States from that facility; 

(3) The facility is operated in a manner that is not detrimental to the survival of the species in the wild; 

(4) The parental breeding stock was acquired from birds that were legally obtained, exported, and/or imported; 

(5) Adequate enforcement controls are in place to prevent the use of the facility for the export or re-export of wild-caught
stock; 

(6) The breeding protocol of the facility is adequate to avoid deleterious inbreeding so that the need for augmentation
from the wild is eliminated or minimized; 

(7) The facility is operated in a humane and healthful manner; 

(8) The facility has the expertise or other resources necessary for proper and healthful care and maintenance of the
exotic birds, and the facility is operated according to professionally recognized standards; and 

(9) All birds that are to be exported from the facility are bred at that facility, and are identifiable through either
closed leg bands or electronic marking, and records kept are adequate to ensure identification, parentage, and disposition
of individual birds. 

(b) 

Approval conditions. 

In addition to the general conditions set forth in part 13 of this subchapter, qualifying facilities must submit a
report to the Service within 12 months of approval, and annually thereafter. These reports shall contain production
and mortality records of the facility, including hatching and banding records, and the numbers of birds exported
to the United States during the reporting period and the numbers by which the birds were identified. All approvals
shall be subject to other conditions as the Director may deem appropriate. 

(c) 

Duration of approval. 

Approvals of foreign breeding facilities shall be effective for three years from the time a determination is made,
provided that: 

(1) The facility continues to meet the requirements of a qualifying facility for the entire time; 

(2) The facility submits an annual report in order to remain designated as a qualifying facility; and 





(3) If the Director finds that a facility no longer meets these requirements, its designation as a qualifying facility
shall be terminated. A notice will be published in the 

Federal Register

 containing the date that the approval is terminated and the reason for the termination. 

(d) 

Publication in the 

Federal Register

. The Director shall publish a notice in the 

Federal Register

 of each application submitted for approval under this subpart. Each notice shall invite the submission of written
data, views, or arguments with respect to the application from all interested parties. The Director shall publish
notice periodically in the 

Federal Register

 listing the approved foreign breeding facilities and the effective dates of their approval.




Dated: October 19, 1993.



<SIGNER>
Bruce Blanchard,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Director.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 946098 Filed 31694; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 431055P
</BILLING>

