 

2. Commission Ruling 



The Commission denies the Indicated Parties' and Hadson's requests for rehearing. Their arguments lose sight of
the fact that the Form 592 information must still be provided electronically, thus allowing interested parties and
the Commission staff to monitor the activities of pipelines and their affiliates and to initiate the appropriate
action when evidence of discrimination in favor of affiliates exists. The Indicated Parties' concerns about obtaining
reliable and accurate Form 592 information are unfounded. Section 250.16(g)(2) states that:

 


An interstate pipeline must provide 24-hour access, by electronic means, to the data specified in paragraph (b)(2)
of this section. Access to the information must be provided once the service has begun. A pipeline must, on a daily basis,
either update the information or indicate that no changes have occurred in the log information. 


 


Most pipelines satisfied this requirement through the use of EBBs in the past, and Order No. 636 now mandates EBBs.
Interested parties have been receiving and will continue to receive the Form 592 information electronically. Thus,
the Indicated Parties' argument that the Commission and the industry have no experience with EBBs is inaccurate.
Moreover, the requirements of Order No. 636 ensure that each pipeline's Order No. 497 EBB must provide for: (a) Downloading
by users; (b) daily back-up of information, which must be available for at least three years; (c) purging information
on completed transactions from current files; (d) display of most recent entries ahead of information posted earlier;
and (e) on-line help, a search function and a menu that permits users to separately access records in the transportation
log and standards of conduct information.

22

 These features allow shippers to take the information that is currently filed on Form 592s off the pipelines' EBBs
and obtain access to the information up to three years after it is posted.

23

 In these circumstances, the burden on the pipelines from filing Form 592s and the administrative burden on the Commission
from collecting them outweighs any benefits of collecting the data in hard copy. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


22

</FOOTNAME>
18 CFR 284.8(b)(4) and 284.9(b)(4). 


</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


23

</FOOTNAME>
18 CFR 284.8(b)(4) and 284.9(b)(4). 

</FOOTNOTE>


The Commission also does not believe that Hadson's argument relying on 18 U.S.C. 1001 is a valid reason for maintaining
the Form 592 filing requirement. Section 1001 states: 



Whoever, in any matter within the jurisdiction of any department or agency of the United States knowingly and willfully
falsifies, conceals or covers up by any trick, scheme, or device a material fact, or makes any false, fictitious or
fraudulent statements or representations, or makes or uses any false writing or document knowing the same to contain
false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or entry, shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than
five years, or both. 


 




Hadson's argument implies that because a hard copy of the Form 592 information will not be filed with the Commission
pipelines will knowingly provide inaccurate or incorrect information through electronic means. The Commission
believes that the language of the statute is broad enough to cover electronic postings. However, in order to prevent
any such fraudulent conduct, the Commission deems the electronic posting of the Form 592 information equivalent
to a filing for purposes of 18 U.S.C. 1001. 



Since contemporaneously with this order the Commission is issuing a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NOPR) which proposes
to revise Order No. 497's reporting requirements, including Form 592, the Commission will not address Tenneco's
request to delete certain parts of Form 592. 



C. Application of Order No. 497 to Ozark 



1. Request for Rehearing 



Ozark asserts that the Commission's order on remand ignores the court's instructions requiring the Commission to
consider the effect of Ozark's evidence on the question of control. Ozark contends that it simply relies upon an equally
deficient rationale for concluding, without reference to any evidence, that Tennessee Ozark and Ozark Pipeline
Corporation each, individually, ``controls'' Ozark, thereby making the marketing affiliates of those partners
marketing affiliates of Ozark. Ozark submits that to avoid problems inherent in finding that these partners can exercise
``affirmative control'' over Ozark, the Commission concluded that they can exercise ``negative control'' by simply
withholding their vote and vetoing any transportation transaction that would compete with their respective marketing
affiliates. 




