 

Federal Information Processing Standards Publication 187



(Date)



Announcing the Standard for Administration Standard for the Telecommunications Infrastructure of Federal Buildings



Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUBS) are issued by the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) after approval by the Secretary of Commerce pursuant to Section 111(d) of the Federal Property
and Administrative Services Act of 1949 as amended by the Computer Security act of 1987, Public Law 100235.



1. Name of Standard. 

Administration Standard for the Telecommunications Infrastructure of Federal Buildings (FIPS PUB 187) (Former
Draft Federal Standard 1094).



2. Category of Standard. 

Telecommunications Standard; Telecommunications Administration.



3. Explanation. 

This standard, by adoption of ANSI/TIA/EIA6061993, Administration Standard for the Telecommunications
Infrastructure of Commercial Buildings, specifies the administrative requirements of the telecommunications
infrastructure within a new, existing, or renovated office building or campus. Telecommunications infrastructure
can be thought of as the collection of those components (telecommunications equipment spaces, cable pathways, grounding,
wiring, and termination hardware) that provide the basic support for the distribution of all information within
a building or campus. Administration of telecommunications includes documentation (recordkeeping, drawings,
labeling, etc.) of telecommunications outlet boxes, connectors, cables, termination hardware, patching and cross-connect
facilities, conduits, other cable pathways, telecommunications closets, and other spaces.








Note: 

Development of ANSI/TIA/EIA6061993, which included Federal Government participation, was a joint
Canadian/U.S. effort, resulting in the Canadian Standards Association (CSA) publication of the Canadian equivalent
of the U.S. standard as CSA T528 at approximately the same time as publication of the American National Standard.








4. Approving Authority. 

Secretary of Commerce.



5. Maintenance Agency. 

National Communications System, Office of Technology and Standards.



6. Related Documents. 

a. Federal Information Resources Management Regulations subpart 20120.303, Standards, and subpart 20139.1002,
Federal Standards.

b. Federal Standard 1037B, Glossary of Telecommunications Terms.

c. Federal Information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS PUB) 174, Federal Building Telecommunications
Wiring Standard (Former Draft Federal Standard 1090).

d. Federal Information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS PUB) 175, Federal Building Standard for Telecommunications
Pathways and Spaces (Former Draft Federal Standard 1091).

e. Federal Information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS PUB) 176, Residential and Light Commercial Telecommunications
Wiring Standard (Former Draft Federal Standard 1092).

f. Future Federal Information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS PUB), Federal Building Grounding and Bonding
Requirements for Telecommunications (Draft Federal Standard 1093).

At the time of publication of this standard, the editions indicated above were valid. All publications are subject
to revision, and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying
the most recent editions of these publications.



7. Objectives. 

The purpose of this standard is to facilitate interoperability and transportability among telecommunication facilities
and systems of the Federal Government and compatibility of these facilities and systems at the computer-communications
interface with data processing equipment (systems) of the Federal Government. This standard specifies a uniform
telecommunications infrastructure administration scheme that is independent of applications, which may change
several times throughout the life of a building. This standard establishes guidelines for end users, manufacturers,
consultants, contractors, designers, installers, and facility administrators involved in the administration
of telecommunications infrastructure.



8. Applicability. 

This standard shall be used by all departments and agencies of the Federal Government in the administration of the
telecommunications infrastructure for all new office buildings. Use of the FIPS is recommended for the administration
of the telecommunications infrastructure within an existing or renovated office building or campus. Existing building
wiring systems, especially those installed prior to the emergence of digital communications and voice/data integration,
may not readily accept application of this standard. Modernization of the existing pathway, space, and wiring systems
to meet the FIPS 174, FIPS 175, and FIPS 176 infrastructure standards may require a significant monetary expenditures.
Agencies should conduct a thorough facility analysis of existing and renovated buildings to determine the cost of
applying the standards, and develop a migration plan where cost savings can be achieved. This plan will help to ensure
timely and efficient completion of the conversion process. The result of following this administration standard
will be a telecommunications infrastructure that is well documented and easily managed by the administrator over
the life cycle of the building. This standard is not intended to hasten the obsolescence of telecommunications administration
procedures currently in use in Federal facilities; nor is it intended to provide systems engineering or applications
guidelines.



