 

System name:



Individuals Authorized Access to the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) Data Center.



Security classification:



None.



System location:



Health Care Financing Administration, Bureau of Data Management and Strategy, 7131 Rutherford Road, Baltimore,
Maryland 21244.



Categories of individuals covered by the system:



Those individuals with an approved need for access to the computer resources and information maintained by the Health
Care Financing Administration.



Categories of records in the system:



The system contains name, work address, work phone number, an assigned user identification (UserID) number, an associated
password, and the software system(s) that the individual is authorized to use.



Authority for maintenance of the system:



5 U.S.C. 552(e)(10)



Purpose:



This system is used for assigning, controlling, tracking, and reporting authorized access to and use of HCFA's computerized
information and resources.



Routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categories of users and purposes of such uses:



Disclosure may be made to:

1. To a congressional office, from the record of an individual in response to an inquiry from the congressional office
made at the request of that individual.

2. To the Department of Justice, to a court or other tribunal, or to another party before such tribunal, when:

a. HHS, or any component thereof; or

b. Any HHS employee in his or her official capacity; or 

c. Any HHS employee in his or her individual capacity where the Department of Justice (or HHS, where it is authorized
to do so) has agreed to represent the employee; or

d. The United States or any agency thereof when HHS determines that the litigation is likely to affect HHS or any of its
components;




Is a party to litigation or has an interest in such litigation, and HHS determines that the use of such records by the
Department of Justice, the tribunal, or other party is relevant and necessary to the litigation and would help in the
effective representation of the governmental party, provided, however, that in each case, HHS determines that each
disclosure is compatible with the purpose for which the records were collected.



3. To a contractor for the purpose of collating, analyzing, aggregating, or otherwise refining or processing records
in this system, or for developing, modifying, and/or manipulating it with ADP software. Data would also be available
to users incidental to consultation, programming, operation, user assistance, or maintenance for an ADP or telecommunications
system containing or supporting records in the system.



