 

Habitat for marbled murrelets has been declining since the arrival of European settlers. Information specific to
the range of the marbled murrelet is not available; however, historic forest condition has been estimated for western
Oregon and Washington by several authors. Because marbled murrelet habitat represents a significant portion of
area included in these estimates, trends in habitat are assumed to follow the same general pattern. Although the extent
of mature and old-growth forest before the 1800s is difficult to quantify, western Oregon and Washington are estimated
to have been covered by approximately 9.7 to 11.3 million hectares (24 to 28 million acres) of forest at the time of modern
settlement (early to mid-1800s), of which about 70 percent (5.6 to 7.7 million hectares (14 to 19 million acres)) are
estimated to have been old-growth (Society of American Foresters Task Force 1983, Morrison 1988, Norse 1988, Spies
and Franklin 1988). Historical estimates for northwestern California are not as precise but suggest there were between
526,000 and 1.3 million hectares (1.3 and 3.2 million acres) of old-growth Douglas-fir/mixed conifer forest and
approximately 890,000 hectares (2.2 million acres) of old-growth coastal redwood forest (Society of American Foresters
Task Force 1983, Laudenslayer 1985, California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection 1988, Fox 1988, Morrison
1988). Currently, there are approximately 1.4 million hectares (3.4 million acres) of old-growth forest remaining
in western Oregon and Washington, an 82 percent reduction from estimated prelogging levels (Booth 1991). 

Some of the old-growth areas that have been affected by past natural perturbations such as forest fire and windthrow
currently provide suitable nesting habitat for marbled murrelets. Mature forests that have naturally regenerated
from such perturbations often retain scattered old-growth trees and clumps, providing structure for nesting. This
is particularly true in coastal Oregon where there were extensive fires historically. Marbled murrelet nests have
been found in remnant old-growth trees in mature forests in Oregon; no occupied sites have been located in young stands,
clearcuts, or young forests that lack at least some remnant old-growth trees (Nelson 

pers. comm. 

1992). 

Forests generally require 200 to 250 years to develop old-growth characteristics that supply adequate structure
for nesting marbled murrelets. This time period may be shorter in redwood forests and in areas where significant remnants
of the previous stand remain. Intensively managed forests in Washington, Oregon, and California have been subjected
to average cutting rotations of 70 to 120 years (USDI 1984, USDA 1988). Cutting rotations of 40 to 50 years are common
for some private lands. Timber harvest strategies on Federal lands and some private lands have emphasized dispersed
clearcut patches and even-aged management. Thus, forest lands that are intensively managed for timber production
are generally not allowed to develop the old-growth characteristics that are required for marbled murrelet nesting.
Suitable nesting habitat that remains under these harvest patterns is highly fragmented. 



Previous Management Efforts 



Since the listing of the marbled murrelet in Washington, Oregon, and California as threatened, several different
approaches to management of the species or its habitat have been developed through various Federal efforts. 

In May 1991, the U.S. House of Representatives' Agriculture and Merchant Marine and Fisheries Committees commissioned
the Scientific Panel on Late-Successional Forest Ecosystems (Scientific Panel) to provide an array of alternatives
for the management of late-successional forests on Federal lands within the range of the northern spotted owl (

Strix occidentalis caurina

). Information on the known inland locations of marbled murrelets and marbled murrelet habitat was included in the
base information used by the Scientific Panel and was specifically considered in developing the alternatives. These
reserve systems are often referred to as Late-Successional/Old-Growth areas (LSOGs). The Scientific Panel conducted
risk assessments for marbled murrelets under each alternative (Johnson 

et al. 

1991). 




