 

Finally, a conforming amendment is adopted to the ancillary importation regulation on registered importers, part
592. 


 Effective Date 


The interim final rule is effective upon publication in the 

Federal Register

. NHTSA notes that without this amendment to permit a continuous entry bond, RIs and their customers will be unable
to import nonconforming vehicles pursuant to 49 CFR 591.5(f). Therefore, NHTSA finds that the issuance of this notice
without prior opportunity for comment is necessary in view of the difficulties that unexpectedly began to occur recently
and would continue to occur were part 591 not amended. The agency also finds for good cause that it is in the public interest
to establish an immediate effective date for the amendments made by this notice. In the absence of an immediate effective
date, RIs would be unable to continue importing vehicles from Canada and other countries. The amendments impose no
new requirements but instead provides an alternative to an existing requirement, whose continued viability is doubtful.



Rulemaking Analyses 


A. Executive Order 12866 (Federal Regulation) and DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures 


This notice was not reviewed under EO 12866. After considering the impacts of this rulemaking action, NHTSA has determined
that the action is not significant within the meaning of the Department of Transportation regulatory policies and
procedures. It amends an existing requirement to afford RIs an alternative method of providing a bond for imported
nonconforming vehicles. The number of RIs affected is less than 20. The cost impacts of this regulatory action are
cost savings to the RIs in procuring bonds (an estimated $20 per vehicle), and nonquantifiable cost savings in the
paper work involved to obtain single-entry bonds. The impacts are so minimal as not to warrant the preparation of a
full regulatory evaluation. 


B. Regulatory Flexibility Act 


The agency has also considered the effects of this action in relation to the Regulatory Flexibility Act. I certify
that this action would not have a significant economic impact upon ``a substantial number of small entities,'' but
it will have a significant economic impact upon RIs, which number less than 20, and which are small businesses within
the meaning of the Regulatory Flexibility Act. This action appears required to allow them to continue in business.
Governmental jurisdictions will not be affected at all since they are generally neither importers nor purchasers
of nonconforming imported motor vehicles. 


C. Executive Order 12612 (Federalism) 


The agency has analyzed this action in accordance with the principles and criteria contained in Executive Order 12612
``Federalism'' and determined that the action does not have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the preparation
of a Federalism Assessment. 


D. National Environmental Policy Act 


NHTSA has analyzed this action for purposes of the National Environmental Policy Act. The action will not have a significant
effect upon the environment because it is anticipated that the annual volume of motor vehicles imported will not vary
significantly from that existing before promulgation of the rule. 


E. Civil Justice Reform 


This interim final rule will not have any retroactive effect. Under section 103(d) of the National Traffic and Motor
Vehicle Safety Act (15 U.S.C. 1392(d)), whenever a Federal motor vehicle safety standard is in effect, a state may
not adopt or maintain a safety standard applicable to the same aspect of performance which is not identical to the Federal
standard. Section 105 of the Act (15 U.S.C. 1394) sets forth a procedure for judicial review of final rules establishing,
amending or revoking Federal motor vehicle safety standards. That section does not require submission of a petition
for reconsideration or other administrative proceedings before parties may file suit in court. 


 Comments 


Interested persons are invited to submit comments on the interim final rule. It is requested but not required that
10 copies be submitted. 





