 

The State allowed ``Triples'' to have three trailing units, not to exceed 28.5 feet, with a 15-foot hitch between the
trailing units. Appendix C has been changed to a cargo-carrying length of 115.5 feet to reflect this. 



OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS: 





PERMIT: 

The State requested that a new sentence be added after the first sentence under the ``Permit'' provisions for ``Rocky
Mountain Doubles'' in appendix C as follows: ``Also, the vehicle must purchase an overweight permit pursuant to C.R.S.
424409(11)(a)(II)(A), (B), or (C), and comply with Rule 415 in the rules pertaining to Extra-Legal
Vehicles or Loads.'' The State also commented that the time restrictions on the operation of ``Rocky Mountain Doubles''
in the next sentence should be changed from 7 a.m. to 6 a.m. and from 4 p.m. to 3 p.m. and that the sentence in parentheses
should read as follows: ``('Rocky Mountain' doubles not operating at greater than the legal maximum weight of 80,000
pounds are subject to different hours of operation restrictions. Refer to rules pertaining to the Operation of Longer
Vehicle Combinations on Designated State Highway Segments).'' The CRASH said motor carriers that operate ISTEA
vehicles must have an established safety program as provided in Chapter 9 of the Colorado Department of Highways Rules
and Regulations for Operation of Longer Vehicle Combinations on Designated State Highway Segments. Elements of
the program include compliance with minimum safety standards at 8 CCR 15071; hazardous materials regulations
at 8 CCR 15077, 8, and 9; Colorado Uniform Motor Vehicle Law, Articles 1 through 4 of Title 42, C.R.S., as amended;
and Public Utility Commission's regulations at 4 CCR 7236, 8, 15, 22, and 23. Revised appendix C includes these
changes. 



ROUTES: 



Appendix C in the SNPRM indicated routes on which ``Rocky Mountain Doubles'' could travel as ``National Network routes
except that LCV's may not operate on I70 from Exit 90 to Exit 259.'' However, the State indicated that they essentially
may operate only on the Interstate System. Appendix C has been amended accordingly. 



LEGAL CITATIONS: 



The State said that in the ``Legal Citations'' for ``Rocky Mountain Doubles,'' 424407(1)(C)(III)(A),
should be corrected by changing the capital ``C'' to a small ``c.'' It also said that provisions following this citation
should be deleted and the following added: ``LVC's must comply with Longer Vehicle Combination Rules and the Extra-Legal
Vehicles or Load Rules. However, when the rules address the same subject, the LVC, since it is operating at greater
than 80,000 pounds, must comply with the Extra-Legal Vehicles or Loads Rules. Such rules are: 412 and
413 concerning holiday travel restrictions, 415 concerning hours of operation restrictions,
48 concerning minimum distance between vehicles and 415 concerning maximum allowable gross weight.''
These changes have been made. 



OTHER COMMENTS: 



The State pointed out that no maximum gross weight is shown in connection with the truck-trailer combination listed
in appendix C. This is correct because a truck-trailer combination is not an LCV as defined in the ISTEA since it is not
a combination of a truck tractor and two or more trailers or semitrailers. Therefore, its maximum weight on the Interstates
is not frozen as of June 1, 1991, but remains as provided in 23 U.S.C. 127(a). The listing for this combination has been
changed in appendix C by adding ``WEIGHT'' as a separate category under ``Operational Conditions'' and indicating
that the vehicle must be in compliance with State laws and regulations. 

The State also noted that ``Rocky Mountain Doubles'' could operate from milepoint 8.9 to milepoint 9.7 on State Highway
133 in Delta. However, as this is not on the Interstate System or the NN, the ISTEA freeze provisions do not apply. Accordingly,
the route is not listed in the vehicle descriptions. The CRASH said that prior to June 1, 1991, ``Rocky Mountain Doubles''
could operate on I70 from the Utah State Line only to State Highway 65 (Exit 49). In fact, the route was extended
from State Highway 65 to State Highway 13 (Exit 90) on April 5, 1990. Since this was prior to June 1, 1991, ``Rocky Mountain
Doubles'' may continue to operate from the Utah State Line to State Highway 13 (Exit 90) after that date. 

The State also commented that the freeze on the operation of LCV's on the Interstate System and the freeze on the operation
of CMV's with two or more cargo-carrying units on the NN may create administrative and enforcement problems. However,
it also recognized that this arises from the ISTEA and cannot be changed in this proceeding. 



FLORIDA 



COMBINATION: 



The State commented that Florida law and rules contain no references to ``Rocky Mountain Doubles'' and that all references
to them in appendix C should be deleted. The revision of the categories used in appendix C, as presented by this final
rule, addresses the State's concern over nomenclature. 



OTHER COMMENTS: 



Florida commented that the 106-foot length previously given for ``Turnpike Doubles,'' now shown for a truck tractor
and two trailing unit combination, is incorrect. The maximum length should be 116 feet. The 116-foot dimension is
the maximum overall vehicle length established by State regulation. Appendix C is a listing which includes maximum
cargo-carrying length. The convention used throughout this rulemaking is that, in the absence of any information
to the contrary, cargo-carrying length for a truck tractor combination is the maximum overall length minus 10 feet.
Thus, 106 feet remains the cargo-carrying length value for Florida's truck tractor and two trailing unit combination.




