 

The employer is required to institute a medical surveillance program for all employees who are or will be exposed to
asbestos at or above the permissible exposure limits (0.1 fiber per cubic centimeter of air) for 30 or more days per
year and for all employees who are assigned to wear a negative-pressure respirator. All examinations and procedures
must be performed by or under the supervision of licensed physician at a reasonable time and place, and at no cost to
the employee.
Although broad latitude is given to the physician in prescribing specific tests to be included in the medical surveillance
program, OSHA requires inclusion of the following elements in the routine examination,
(i) Medical and work histories with special emphasis directed to symptoms of the respiratory system, cardiovascular
system, and digestive tract.
(ii) Completion of the respiratory disease questionnaire contained in Appendix D to this section.
(iii) A physical examination including a chest roentgenogram and pulmonary function test that include measurement
of the employee's forced vital capacity (FYC) and forced expiratory volume at one second (FEV

1

).
(iv) Any laboratory or other test that the examining physician deems by sound medical practice to be necessary.
The employer is required to make the prescribed tests available at least annually to those employees covered; more
often than specified if recommended by the examining physician; and upon termination of employment.
The employer is required to provide the physician with the following information: A copy of this standard and appendices;
a description of the employee's duties as they relate to asbestos exposure; the employee's representative level
of exposure to asbestos; a description of any personal protective and respiratory equipment used; and information
from previous medical examinations of the affected employee that is not otherwise available to the physician. Making
this information available to the physician will aid in the evaluation of the employee's health in relation to assigned
duties and fitness to wear personal protective equipment, if required.
The employer is required to obtain a written opinion from the examining physician containing the results of the medical
examination; the physician's opinion as to whether the employee has any detected medical conditions that would place
the employee at an increased risk of exposure-related disease; any recommended limitations on the employee or on
the use of personal protective equipment; and a statement that the employee has been informed by the physician of the
results of the medical examination and of any medical conditions related to asbestos exposure that require further
explanation or treatment. This written opinion must not reveal specific findings or diagnoses unrelated to exposure
to asbestos, and a copy of the opinion must be provided to the affected employee.


