 

(1) The proportion which eligible individuals in each such area bears to the total number of such persons, respectively,
in that State;

(2) The relative distribution of such individuals residing in rural and urban areas within the State; and


(3) The relative distribution of such individuals who are individuals with the greatest economic need, such individuals
who are minority individuals, and such individuals with greatest social need.

(c) 

Annual report of funds allocated by state. 

The State agency for each State receiving funds under title V shall report at the beginning of each fiscal year on such
State's status relative to section 506(c) of the Act. Each State's report shall include names and geographic locations
of all projects receiving title V funds for projects in the State and the amount allotted to each project. All recipients
and subrecipients operating in a State shall provide information necessary to compile the report. [Section 506(d).]




641.202



Eligibility for title V funds.



Agencies and organizations eligible to receive title V funds shall be those specified in sections 502(b) and 506(a)
of the Act.



641.203



Soliciting applications for title V funds.



The Department may solicit or request organizations to submit applications for funds.





641.204





Grant application requirements.



(a) 

Schedules. 

The Department shall establish, by administrative directive, schedules for submittal of grant preapplications
and applications; the contents of grant applications, including goals and objectives; amounts of grants; and grant
budget and narrative formats.



(b) 

Intergovernmental reviews. 

Grant applicants shall comply with the requirements of the Department's regulation at 29 CFR part 17 which implements
the intergovernmental review of Department programs and activities. A 

Preapplication for Federal Assistance 

form (SF424) filed as a result of the review system shall contain an attachment which, at a minimum, lists the
proposed number of authorized community service employment positions in each county, or other appropriate jurisdiction
within the affected State. Whenever a national organization or other program recipient or subrecipient proposes
to conduct projects within a planning and service area in a State, such organization or program recipient is responsible
for sharing their applications with area agencies on aging and other SCSEP sponsors in the area prior to the award of
the funds in accord with guidelines issued by the Department.

(c) 

Subgrants. 

A grant applicant planning to award funds by subgrant shall:

(1) Outline the nature and extent of the planned use of such funds; and

(2) Assure that in the event that a subgrant agreement is canceled in whole or in part, the recipient will provide continuity
of services to enrollees.



641.205



Responsibility review.



(a) In order to enter into and continue a grant relationship with DOL, an organization (applicant) shall be responsible.
To determine responsibility, DOL conducts a preaward review of all grant applicants. As part of this review, DOL applies
13 basic responsibility tests to each applicant.


(b) If a grant applicant fails either of the following two responsibility tests, it shall not be designated as a recipient:

(1) The Department's efforts to recover debts from the applicant (for which three demand letters have been sent) established
by final Department action have been unsuccessful, or the applicant has failed to comply with an approved repayment
plan.

(2) Fraud or criminal activity has been determined to exist within the organization.

(c) Eleven additional basic responsibility tests are applied to each grant applicant. Failure to meet any one of these
tests does not establish that the applicant is not responsible, unless the failure is substantial or persistent.
These tests are as follows:

(1) Serious administrative deficiencies have been identified, such as failure to maintain a financial management
system as required by Federal regulations.

(2) Willful obstruction of the monitoring process.

(3) Failure to meet performance requirements.


 

