 

A petition dated April 23, 1994, was received by the Service from the Biodiversity Legal Foundation on April 27, 1994.
The petition requested that the conterminous U.S. population of the North American lynx (

Felis lynx canadensis

) be listed as a threatened or endangered species. The petition provided numerous reasons for why the Canada lynx population
in the contiguous U.S. should be added to the List of Threatened and Endangered Species. The petitioners also requested
that the southern Rocky Mountain population of the lynx be protected by emergency listing because it is severely imperiled,
the population level is low, and it is reproductively isolated. 

Notice of a 90-day finding published in the August 26, 1994, 

Federal Register

 (59 FR 44123) found that there was substantial information to indicate that listing the contiguous population of
the Canada lynx may be warranted. However, the notice also indicated that the petition did not present substantial
information to indicate the emergency listing of the Canada lynx in the southern Rockies is warranted. 

The lynx, generally considered rare because of its secretive nature, is actually common throughout its Northern
American range. Lynx occupy the boreal regions of North America, commonly referred to as the Canadian and Hudsonian
Life Zones. These habitats are characterized by dense coniferous forests and wet bogs. Cold climates, deep snow,
and wildfire are major influences on these habitats. Lynx are found within these habitats from Newfoundland, Labrador,
and Quebec on the east to Alaska and British Columbia on the west; from the Arctic treeline south into portions of the
contiguous U.S. (Brittell et al. 1989). 

Specific to the U.S., lynx distribution represents the fringe of the population occurring in its historic range.
Consequently, the lynx does not commonly occur within this southern limit of its range due to the lack of favorable
habitats. Favorable habitat conditions for the lynx dissipate with decreasing latitude. Thus, the lynx is restricted
to higher elevations the more southern the latitude. The most southern range extensions for the species are found
in the Rocky Mountains and associated high elevations. The distribution and population numbers of the lynx closely
follow that of the snowshoe hare, its primary food item. During population highs, snowshoe hare may occupy marginal
habitats thereby, allowing the lynx to widen their distribution (Brittell et al. 1989). During years of abundance,
lynx may extend their distribution and occur in higher densities along the southern extension of their range. This
fluctuation of population size and distribution is attributed to dispersal of predominately young animals from
the resident Canadian population. Local ``irruptions'' or invasions of lynx have been reported in the northern U.S.
following population highs further north in Canada. Population cycles may not be as noticeable in the southern extremes
of the lynx range because such habitat is not an important part of its range and U.S. resident populations are initially
low.
The historic range of the lynx in the contiguous U.S. has generally been recognized as including New England (Maine,
New Hampshire, Vermont and New York), the Great Lakes (Michigan, Wisconsin and Minnesota), the Rocky Mountains (Idaho,
Montana, Wyoming, Utah, and Colorado) and the Northwest Region (Washington and Oregon). There is evidence that presence
of lynx in the contiguous U.S. corresponded to cyclic dispersals from Canada (particularly in the Great Lakes region).
Thus, the Service believes that some of these States within the species' historic range never supported viable resident
populations of lynx over time.
The Northeastern and Great Lakes forests are sub-boreal forests and therefore fire regimes, important for the creation
of snowshoe hare habitat, do not function as in true boreal forests. Most of these original sub-boreal forests were
destroyed by lumbering and agricultural activities by the late 1880's and early 1900's. The lynx was already extirpated
from the New England States (except for Maine) by the turn of the century.
Lynx were extremely scarce in the first half of the century in Montana. By 1979, the population was estimated to be between
1800 and 2500 animals. Lumbering activities and wildfire of the early 1920's, has affected Montana's present population
of lynx which is the largest in the contiguous U.S. Montana also has the largest amount of available habitat (Giddings
1994). In the Cascades (Northwest Region), lynx benefit from relative isolation of large undisturbed tracts of habitat
(approximately 3,673 square miles) and in the State of Washington, there is about 6,500 square miles of lynx habitat
(Brittell et al. 1989).
The Canada lynx (

Lynx canadensis

) is one and the same species (a monotypic species) throughout its entire range in North America. The term ``species''
under the Act includes any subspecies of fish, wildlife, and plants, and any distinct population segment of any species
of vertebrate fish and wildlife which interbreeds when mature. The Service limited it status review of the lynx to
the 48 contiguous States, as directed in the settlement agreement and requested in the petition.


Summary of Factors Affecting the Species


The following is a summary and discussion of the five factors set forth in section 4(a)(1) of the Act and their applicability
to the current status of the Canada lynx in the contiguous 48 States.


A. Present or Threatened Destruction, Modification, or Curtailment of Its Habitat or Range


