 



Response.

 The appendix note has been expanded to emphasize the need for barriers that provide both protection and travel cues
for bypassing construction hazards along a public sidewalk. A note has been added recommending particular attention
to scaffolding design. 



Technical Assistance 



Under both the Architectural Barriers Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act, the Access Board provides technical
assistance and training for entities covered under the acts. The Access Board's toll-free number allows callers
to receive technical assistance and to order publications. The Access Board conducts in-depth training programs
to advise and educate the general public, as well as architects and other professionals on the accessibility guidelines
and requirements. In addition, the Board is developing two manuals for use by both technical and general audiences.
The first is a general manual on ADAAG requirements that will be a useful tool in understanding ADAAG whether for purposes
of compliance or as a reference for accessible design. The second is a technical assistance manual on the application
of accessibility requirements for public sidewalks, curb ramps, street crossings and related pedestrian facilities
in the public right-of-way. This manual will assist public works, streets and engineering, and similar State and
local government agencies responsible for street and sidewalk improvements. The manual will also be of use to architects,
civil engineers, landscape architects and other professionals who provide design services for pedestrian improvements
under contract to public agencies and to construction firms who make the physical improvements. The manual on the
application of accessibility requirements for public rights-of-ways will be coordinated with the publication
of final rules by the Access Board and the Departments of Justice and Transportation. The more general manual on ADAAG
will be available as soon as possible after the publication of the final rules.
 
 


Regulatory Process Matters

Regulatory Assessment



These guidelines are issued to provide guidance to the Department of Justice and the Department of Transportation
in establishing accessibility standards for new construction and alterations of State and local government facilities
covered by title II of the ADA. The standards established by the Department of Justice and the Department of Transportation
must be consistent with these guidelines. These guidelines meet the criteria for a significant regulatory action
under Executive Order 12866 and this interim final rule has been reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget pursuant
to that order. 
 
The Board has prepared a Regulatory Assessment (RA) which has been placed in the docket and is available for public
inspection at the Board's office. The RA includes a cost impact analysis for certain accessibility elements and a
discussion of the regulatory alternatives considered. 
 
Accessibility does not generally add features to a building or a facility but rather simply requires that features
commonly provided have certain characteristics. Some of the characteristics may add marginally to the cost of an
element; however, the cost for installation is not usually increased. In addition, accessibility generally adds
little or no space to buildings and facilities. Several studies discussed in the Regulatory Impact Analysis prepared
for ADAAG on January 9, 1992 have shown that designing buildings and facilities to be accessible, from the conceptual
phase onward, adds less than one percent to the total construction costs. 

For purposes of the RA, the Board analyzed those provisions that pertain only to buildings and facilities which are
covered by title II of ADA. Included in the analysis were: adaptable fixed judges' benches and clerk's stations, accessible
jury boxes and witness stands, speakers' rostrums and raised daises, security systems, wiring and conduit for communication
systems, restricted and secured entrances, visiting areas, cells, cubicles, platform lifts and elevators, passing
space on sidewalks, crossing controls, motorist aid communication systems, on-street parking, principal and primary
entrances, and swimming pools. The RA also discusses the indirect costs of the accessibility elements such as maintenance,
operation and opportunity costs. 

The Board is particularly interested in estimating the aggregate (nationwide) annual cost of this rule. In order
to do so, the Board would need to calculate, for each category of facility, the product of (1) the cost of each individual
requirement and (2) the number of times each requirement applies within the ``average'' facility and (3) the number
of facilities affected each year. The Board has included reasonable estimates for the cost of individual requirements
in the RA, and is requesting, for each class of facility (i.e., courthouses, correctional facilities, residential
facilities, public rights-of-way), data on the extent to which each specific requirement will apply within the ``average''
facility. Additionally, the Board is requesting data on the number of affected facilities.
 


