 

(ii) Whenever there is a change in operations or in an employee's duties that presents a hazard about which the employee
has not previously been trained. 

(5) The employer shall certify that the training required by paragraphs (d)(1) through (d)(4) of this section has
been accomplished. 

(i) The certification shall contain the employee's name, the name of the certifier, and the date(s) of the certification.


(ii) The certification shall be available for inspection by the Assistant Secretary, the Director, employees, and
their representatives. 

(e) 

Rescue teams. 

The employer shall either establish a shipyard rescue team or arrange for an outside rescue team which will respond
promptly to a request for rescue service. 

(1) Shipyard rescue teams shall meet the following criteria: 

(i) Each employee assigned to the shipyard team shall be provided with and trained to use the personal protective equipment
he or she will need, including respirators and any rescue equipment necessary for making rescues from confined and
enclosed spaces and other dangerous atmospheres. 

(ii) Each employee assigned to the shipyard rescue team shall be trained to perform his or her rescue functions including
confined and enclosed and other dangerous atmosphere entry. 

(iii) Shipyard rescue teams shall practice their skills at least once every 12 months. Practice drills shall include
the use of mannequins and rescue equipment during simulated rescue operations involving physical facilities that
approximate closely those facilities from which rescue may be needed.

 




Note to paragraph (e)(1)(iii): 

If the team preforms an actual rescue during the 12 month period, an additional practice drill for that type of rescue
is not required.

 


(iv) At least one person on each rescue team shall maintain current certification in basic first aid which includes
maintenance of an airway, control of bleeding, maintenance of circulation and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
skills. 

(2) The employer shall inform outside rescue teams of the hazards that the team may encounter when called to perform
confined and enclosed space or other dangerous atmosphere rescue at the employer's facility so that the rescue team
can be trained and equipped.






Note to paragraph (e): 

The criteria for in-house rescue, listed in paragraph (e)(1) can be used by the employer in evaluating outside rescue
services.

 


(f) 

Exchanging hazard information between employers. 

Each employer whose employees work in confined and enclosed spaces or other dangerous atmospheres shall ensure that
all available information on the hazards, safety rules, and emergency procedures concerning those spaces and atmospheres
is exchanged with any other employer whose employees may enter the same spaces. 



1915.13



Cleaning and other cold work. 



(a) 

Locations covered by this section. 

The employer shall ensure that manual cleaning and other cold work are not performed in the following spaces unless
the conditions of paragraph (b) of this section have been met: 

(1) Spaces containing or having last contained bulk quantities of combustible or flammable liquids or gases; and


(2) Spaces containing or having last contained bulk quantities of liquids, gases or solids that are toxic, corrosive
or irritating. 

(b) 

Requirements for performing cleaning or cold work. 

(1) Liquid residues of hazardous materials shall be removed from work spaces as thoroughly as practicable before
employees start cleaning operations or cold work in a space. Special care shall be taken to prevent the spilling or
the draining of these materials into the water surrounding the vessel, or for shore-side operations, onto the surrounding
work area. 

(2) Testing shall be conducted by a competent person to determine the concentration of flammable, combustible, toxic,
corrosive, or irritant vapors within the space prior to the beginning of cleaning or cold work. 

(3) Continuous ventilation shall be provided at volumes and flow rates sufficient to ensure that the concentration(s)
of: 

(i) Flammable vapor is maintained below 10 percent of the lower explosive limit; and

 




Note to paragraph (b)(3)(i): 

Spaces containing highly volatile residues may require additional ventilation to keep the concentration of flammable
vapors below 10 percent of the lower explosive limit and within the permissible exposure limit.

 


(ii) Toxic, corrosive, or irritant vapors are maintained within the permissible exposure limits and below IDLH levels.


(4) Testing shall be conducted by the competent person as often as necessary during cleaning or cold work to assure
that air concentrations are below 10 percent of the lower explosive limit and within the PELs and below IDLH levels.
Factors such as, but not limited to, temperature, volatility of the residues and other existing conditions in and
about the spaces are to be considered in determining the frequency of testing necessary to assure a safe atmosphere.






Note to paragraph (b)(4):

 See Appendix A for additional information on frequency of testing.

 


(5) Spills or other releases of flammable, combustible, toxic, corrosive, and irritant materials shall be cleaned
up as work progresses. 

(6) An employee may not enter a confined or enclosed space or other dangerous atmosphere if the concentration of flammable
or combustible vapors in work spaces exceeds 10 percent of the lower explosive limit. Exception: An employee may enter
for emergency rescue or for a short duration for installation of ventilation equipment provided: 

(i) No ignition sources are present; 

(ii) The atmosphere in the space is monitored continuously; 

(iii) The atmosphere in the space is maintained above the upper explosive limit; and 

(iv) Respiratory protection, personal protective equipment, and clothing are provided in accordance with subpart
I of this part.

 




Note to paragraph (b)(6): 

Other provisions for work in IDLH and other dangerous atmospheres are located in Subpart I of this part.

 


(7) A competent person shall test ventilation discharge areas and other areas where discharged vapors may collect
to determine if vapors discharged from the spaces being ventilated are accumulating in concentrations hazardous
to employees. 

(8) If the tests required in paragraph (b)(7) of this section indicate that concentrations of exhaust vapors that
are hazardous to employees are accumulating, all work in the contaminated area shall be stopped until the vapors have
dissipated or been removed. 

(9) Only explosion-proof, self-contained portable lamps, or other electric equipment approved by a National Recognized
Testing Laboratory (NRTL) for the hazardous location shall be used in spaces described in paragraph (a) of this section
until such spaces have been certified as ``Safe for Workers.''

 




Note to paragraph (b)(9): 

Battery-fed, portable lamps or other electric equipment bearing the approval of a NRTL for the class, and division
of the location in which they are used are deemed to meet the requirements of this paragraph.

 


(10) The employer shall prominently post signs that prohibit sources of ignition within or near a space that has contained
flammable or combustible liquids or gases in bulk quantities: 

(i) At the entrance to those spaces; 

(ii) In adjacent spaces; and 

(iii) In the open area adjacent to those spaces. 

(11) All air moving equipment and its component parts, including duct work, capable of generating a static electric
discharge of sufficient energy to create a source of ignition, shall be bonded electrically to the structure of a vessel
or vessel section or, in the case of land-side spaces, grounded to prevent an electric discharge in the space. 



