 

Hydrocarbon propellants are flammable. Precautions should be taken in receiving, unloading, transferring, storing,
and filling hydrocarbon aerosol products. The listing of these compounds as acceptable substitutes does not exempt
producers or users from other applicable regulatory or industrial standards such as those promulgated by OSHA. However,
because of the widespread use of these materials, industry is already familiar with the safety precautions necessary
in switching from a CFC filling operation to one using hydrocarbons. 


(b) HFC134a, HFC125 and HFC152a. HFC134a, HFC125 and HFC134a are acceptable
substitutes for CFC11, HCFC22, and HCFC142b as propellants in the aerosols sector. HFC152a
has both zero ozone depletion potential and a comparatively low global warming potential. However, HFC152a
by itself is flammable, and necessary precautions should be taken when using this chemical. 
HFC134a and HFC125 also have no ozone depletion potential, yet these compounds do have atmospheric
lifetimes and could contribute to global warming. Despite these concerns, the Agency has listed these substitutes
as acceptable in today's rule-making since they meet the needs of specialized applications where other substitutes
do not provide acceptable performance. The use of these HFCs by themselves is acceptable, as are blends of these chemicals
with other acceptable substitutes. 


(c) Dimethyl ether. Dimethyl ether is an acceptable substitute propellant for CFC11, HCFC22 and HCFC142b
in the aerosols sector. The principal environmental concern for the use of DME is its ability to contribute to ground-level
ozone formation. However, the Agency's screen of effects from increased use of VOCs in aerosol products suggests
that increases in groundlevel ozone formation from use of DME can be controlled through existing VOC regulations.



(d) Compressed gases. Compressed gases are acceptable substitutes for CFC11, HCFC22 and HCFC142b
as propellants in the aerosols sector. The Agency believes that although compressed gases such as air, carbon dioxide,
and nitrogen are presently only used in about 79 percent of the aerosol products, their use will grow in the future.
These gases have low toxicity and 
industrial practices for using these substitutes are well established. Since these gases are under significantly
greater pressure than CFCs and HCFCs, containers holding these gases must be larger and bulkier, and safety precautions
should be undertaken during filling operations. Carbon dioxide and nitrogen are non-flammable and do not require
the use of explosion proof gassing equipment. Nitrous oxide, while non-flammable, can create a moderate explosion
risk under certain temperature and pressure conditions. 


(e) Alternative processes. Alternative processes are acceptable substitutes for CFC11, HCFC22 and
HCFC142b as propellants in the aerosols sector. Alternative processes such as finger and trigger pumps, two-compartment
aerosol products, mechanical pressure dispenser systems, and nonspray dispensers (e.g., solid stick dispensers)
have found increasing use as replacement for conventional aerosol products. The Agency believes that these products
do not pose any significant risks, since they rely on mechanical force to replace the propellant. 


(f) HCFC22, HCFC142b. HCFC22 and HCFC142b are acceptable substitutes for CFC11
as aerosol propellants. Users should note, however, that under section 610 of the Clean Air Act, extensive restrictions
already govern the use of HCFCs as aerosol propellants as of January 1, 1994. Only one exemption for HCFCs used as aerosol
propellants was granted under section 610 (58 FR 69637). Today's listing allows the use HCFC22 and HCFC142b
in the exempted application, but general use restrictions established under section 610 must still be followed.
Decisions taken under section 610 are described earlier in this chapter, as are the exemptions under section 610.




The principal problem with HCFC22 and HCFC142b is that they have significant ODPs and are therefore
classified as class II substances. Yet in limited where flammability is a technical impediment to use of other alternatives,
HCFC22 and HCFC142b may be the only alternatives to replace other ozone-depleting propellants. The
exemption for HCFC141b use as an aerosol solvent under section 610 reflects these user needs. 


(2) Solvents. (a) Petroleum hydrocarbons. C6C20 petroleum hydrocarbons are acceptable substitutes for
CFC11, CFC113, methyl chloroform (MCF) and HCFC141b as solvents in the aerosol sector. Petroleum
hydrocarbons, both naturally and synthetically derived, have a long history of safe use, and 
any risks due to increased tropospheric ozone formation or worker exposure can be controlled by existing regulations.
Concerns for risks from these compounds in possible uses as pesticide aerosol solvents have already been addressed
under FIFRA authorities. 



(b) HCFC141b. HCFC141b, either by itself or blended with other compounds, is an acceptable substitute
for CFC11, CFC113 and MCF as an aerosol solvent. Under section 610 of the Clean Air Act, extensive restrictions
already govern the use of HCFC141b as an aerosol solvent as of January 1, 1994. Limited exemptions for HCFC141b
use as an aerosol solvent were granted under section 610 (58 FR 69637). Today's listing allows the use HCFC141b
in the exempted applications, but general use restrictions established under section 610 must still be followed.
Decisions taken under section 610 are described earlier in this chapter, as are the exemptions under section 610.




The principal problem with HCFC141b is that it has a comparatively high ODP0.11. This is the highest
ODP of all HCFCs; in fact, the ODP of HCFC141b is about twice as high as HCFC22. Yet in certain cases, such
as where flammability is a technical impediment to use of other alternatives, HCFC141b may be the only alternative
to replace other ozone-depleting solvents. Several companies contacted the Agency under both section 610 and 612
indicating that they have tested alternatives, and that in some cases only HCFC141b meets performance or safety criteria.
The exemptions for HCFC141b use as an aerosol 
solvent under section 610 reflect these user needs. 


(c) Other chlorinated solvents. Trichloroethylene, perchloroethylene, and methylene chloride are acceptable
substitutes for CFC11, CFC113, MCF and HCFC141b as solvents in the aerosols sector. These substitutes
have the technical capability to meet a large portion of the needs of the aerosols 
industry. However, the Agency anticipates that, due to toxicity concerns associated with the use of these alternatives,
the market share for these other chlorinated solvents will not increase substantially. 







