 

(2) The public notice and opportunity to comment required under paragraph (h)(1) of this section shall be provided
as follows:

(i) The regulatory authority shall place a notice in the newspaper with the broadest circulation in the locality of
the abandoned site providing the public with a 30-day period in which to submit written comments.

(ii) The public notice shall contain the permittee's name, the permit number, the precise location of the land affected,
the inspection frequency proposed, the general reasons for reducing the inspection frequency, the bond status of
the permit, the telephone number and address of the regulatory authority where written comments on the reduced inspection
frequency may be submitted, and the closing date of the comment period.



PART 842_FEDERAL INSPECTIONS AND MONITORING



4. The authority citation for part 842 continues to read as follows:






Authority: 

Pub. L. 9587, 30 U.S.C. 1201 

et seq.

, and Pub. L. 10034, unless otherwise noted.




5. Section 842.11 is amended by revising paragraphs (e)(4) and (f) to read as follows:



842.11



Federal inspections and monitoring.



* * * * *



(e) *** 

(4) Where the site is, or was, permitted or bonded:

(i) The permit has either expired or been revoked; and

(ii) The Office has initiated and is diligently pursuing forfeiture of, or has forfeited, any available performance
bond.

(f) In lieu of the inspection frequency established in paragraph (c) of this section, the office shall inspect each
abandoned site on a set frequency commensurate with the public health and safety and environmental considerations
present at each specific site, but in no case shall the inspection frequency be set at less than one complete inspection
per calendar-year.

(1) In selecting an alternate inspection frequency authorized under the paragraph above, the office shall first
conduct a complete inspection of the abandoned site and provide public notice under paragraph (f)(2) of this section.
Following the inspection and public notice, the office shall prepare and maintain for public review a written finding
justifying the alternative inspection frequency selected. This written finding shall justify the new inspection
frequency by affirmatively addressing in detail all of the following criteria:

(i) How the site meets each of the criteria under the definition of an abandoned site under paragraph (e) of this section
and thereby qualifies for a reduction inspection frequency;

(ii) Whether, and to what extent, there exist on the site impoundments, earthen structures or other conditions that
pose, or may reasonably be expected to ripen into, imminent dangers to the health or safety of the public or significant
environmental harms to land, air or water resources;

(iii) The extent to which existing impoundments or earthen structures were constructed and certified in accordance
with prudent engineering designs approved in the permit;

(iv) The degree to which erosion and sediment control is present and functioning;

(v) The extent to which the site is located near or above urbanized areas, communities, occupied dwellings, schools
and other public or commercial buildings and facilities;

(vi) The extent of reclamation completed prior to abandonment and the degree of stability of unreclaimed areas, taking
into consideration the physical characteristics of the land mined and the extent of settlement or revegetation that
has occurred naturally with time; and

(vii) Based on a review of the complete and partial inspection report record for the site during at least the last two
consecutive years, the rate at which adverse environmental or public health and safety conditions have and can be
expected to progressively deteriorate.

(2) The public notice and opportunity to comment required under paragraph (f)(1) of this section shall be provided
as follows:

(i) The office shall place a notice in the newspaper with the broadest circulation in the locality of the abandoned
site providing the public with a 30-day period in which to submit written comments.

(ii) The public notice shall contain the permittee's name, the permit number, the precise location of the land affected,
the inspection frequency proposed, the general reasons for reducing the inspection frequency, the bond status of
the permit, the telephone number and address of the office where written comments on the reduced inspection frequency
may be submitted, and the closing date of the comment period.




<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9429243 Filed 112594; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 431005M
</BILLING>

