 

Some chemicals, such as the organophosphate and carbamate insecticides, are known to interfere with a specific enzyme,
acetylcholinesterase (AChE) (Costa, 1988). Inhibition of this enzyme in brain may be considered evidence of neurotoxicity,
whereas decreases in AChE in the blood, which can be easily determined in humans, are only suggestive of a neurotoxic
effect. A subset of organophosphate agents produces organophosphate-induced delayed neuropathy (OPIDN) after
acute or repeated exposure. Neurotoxic esterase (or neuropathy target enzyme, NTE) has been associated with agents
that produce OPIDN (Johnson, 1990).

The ultimate functional significance of many biochemical changes is not known; therefore it may be difficult to determine
if a specific biochemical change can be considered adverse or convincing evidence of neurotoxicity. Any such change,
however, is potentially adverse and each determination of adversity requires a judgment to be made. Likewise, the
absence of specific biochemical testing protocols does not mean biochemical changes are of no concern, but instead
reflects a lack of understanding of the significance of changes at the biochemical level.



4.3.5. Structural Endpoints of Neurotoxicity 



The central nervous system (brain and spinal cord) comprises nerve cells or neurons, which consist of a neuronal body,
axon, and dendritic processes. Various types of neuropathological lesions may be classified according to their
nature or the site where they are found (WHO, 1986; Krinke, 1989; Griffin, 1990). Lesions may be classified as neuropathy
(changes in the neuronal body), axonopathy (changes in the axons), myelinopathy (changes in the myelin sheaths),
neurodegeneration (changes in the nerve terminals), and peripheral neuropathy (changes in the peripheral nerves).
For axonopathies, a more precise location of the changes should be described (i.e., proximal, central, or distal
axonopathy). In some cases, agents produce neuropathic conditions that resemble naturally occurring neurodegenerative
disorders in humans (WHO, 1986). Table 45 lists examples of such chemicals, their known site of action, the
type of neuropathology produced, and the disease or condition that each typifies.


