 

B. Medicare Coverage of Diagnostic Nocturnal Penile Tumescence Testing (Testing for Impotence) 


Impotence is the inability to attain and maintain an erection sufficient to permit satisfactory intercourse and
is considered by Medicare to be the failure of a body part when the diagnosis, and frequently the treatment, require
medical expertise. Impotence can be organic or psychogenic in origin. The focus of diagnostic tests is to determine
the origin of impotence to establish the appropriate treatment. 
Currently, Medicare covers diagnostic NPT testing by plethysmography (for example, mercury strain gauges) and
other monitoring devices in a sleep disorder clinic to determine whether erectile impotence is organic or psychogenic.
Although impotence is not a sleep disorder, the nature of the testing requires that it be performed while the patient
sleeps. In the past, it was believed that patients with predominantly psychogenic impotence would regularly attain
normal erections during rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep, while patients with organic impotence would not demonstrate
significant sleep-associated normal erections. 
During NPT testing, mercury strain gauges placed on the shaft of the penis can detect and measure changes in penile
circumference during sleep. A normal result of NPT, measured with strain gauges, is two or more periods of sustained
erections lasting more than 20 minutes and associated with at least a 25-mm increase in penile circumference. Normal
NPT in a person with sexual dysfunction implies intact neurovascular structures and suggests psychogenic impotence.
An abnormal recording, however, is not definitive and only suggests organic impotence and will require further testing
for a more definite diagnosis. In addition, NPT testing has a high incidence (15 to 20 percent) of false-positive and,
although not as common, false-negative findings. 
Currently, diagnostic NPT testing in a sleep disorder clinic is listed as covered under ``Sleep Disorder Clinics''
in section 3112.5 of the Medicare Intermediary Manual (HCFA Pub. 133) and section 2055 of the Medicare Carriers
Manual (HCFA Pub. 143), under limited circumstances, for example, to confirm appropriate treatment and for
a maximum of 2 nights of testing. Section 3524, ``Diagnosis and Treatment of Impotence,'' of the Medicare Coverage
Issues Manual (HCFA Pub. 6), does not address the use of plethysmography, a non-specific test for vascular competence,
which may include monitoring devices, rigidometers, strain gauges, and stamp tests. However, we are revising this
manual section to state that plethysmography is noncovered for use in the diagnosis of impotence because it does not
indicate the rigidity and the duration of tumescence, both of which are necessary components in the evaluation of
impotence. (Before publication, RS will confirm the status of this manual instruction.) 


 C. Recommendations to Withdraw Coverage for Diagnostic Nocturnal Penile Tumescence Testing in a Sleep Disorder
Clinic 


In 1986, a Medicare contractor requested advice about paying for items and services related to impotence testing.
Medicare coverage instructions on the diagnosis and treatment of impotence did not specifically address the issues
of plethysmography and in-home impotence testing devices. At that time, two monitoring devices had been developed
for in-home testing under a physician's direction: the Snap-gauge, which measures the tumescence of the penis during
sleep, and Rigiscan, which measures the duration and frequency of erections as well as the degree of rigidity and tumescence
during sleep. 
As a result, we consulted the HCFA Physicians Panel, a group of staff physicians and other health professionals in
HCFA's central office and their counterparts in the Public Health Service (PHS). They advised us to ask PHS, through
the Office of Health Technology Assessment (OHTA), to assess the safety and effectiveness of the principal diagnostic
tests for impotence currently in use. (Our current process for making coverage decisions is discussed in the January
30, 1989, proposed rule entitled ``Medicare Program Criteria and Procedures for Making Medical Services Coverage
Decisions that Relate to Health Care Technology'' 
(54 FR 4305)). 


