 



Response:

 We will not automatically consider any disparity between validation and State survey findings as inadequate survey
performance. For example, when Federal surveyors find a facility in compliance with a requirement that the State
cited as a deficiency, Federal surveyors are directed to go through a decision making process to determine if the disparity
is due to facility correction or a flaw of the State survey. When Federal surveyors find deficiencies that were not
previously cited by the State, we will consider whether the discrepancies can be explained by changed facility conditions
or by other case specific factors before concluding that State survey performance has been inadequate.



Comment:

 One commenter suggested we reverse the order of the provisions of this section, making the reference to the failure
to identify poor resident care of greater importance.



Response:

 We do not imply that the way in which paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) are ordered is of any relevance. All are of equal importance.



Comment:

 One suggestion was that determinations of inadequate survey performance be based on a State agency's overall performance
rather than on isolated instances. Commenters believed that a pattern of noncompliance and noncorrection should
be established before HCFA concludes that there is inadequate survey performance, and that HCFA should only consider
State survey performance to be inadequate when the State ``substantially'' fails to perform as required. Others
requested that we consider there to be inadequate survey performance only when the State fails to identify serious
deficiencies.



Response:

 Sections 1819(g)(3)(C) and 1919(g)(3)(C) of the Act specify actions the Secretary may and must take if the State has
failed to perform surveys as required by the Act or if a State's survey and certification performance is otherwise
inadequate. Although the Act requires us to apply sanctions for inadequate survey performance, it gives us leeway
when it comes to determining what inadequate survey performance actually is. The Act does not specify the criteria
by which the Secretary is to make determinations of inadequate State performance, and does not obligate us to sanction
the State for every survey shortcoming. It would be inappropriate and unduly harsh to automatically consider any
failure by a State to cite a deficiency or to follow proper procedure to be inadequate survey performance. Rather,
we believe it would be preferable to reserve sanctions for States that demonstrate a pattern of failure to identify
deficiencies, or to follow proper procedure, or whose isolated oversights are particularly egregious. Changing
facility conditions may account for many of the discrepancies between Federal and State survey findings, and because
not every discrepancy or omission indicates systemic inadequate survey performance, not every one should cause
a State to automatically lose FFP or be subject to other sanctions.

We reflect this policy in 488.320. Guidelines for making determinations of inadequate survey performance
will be forthcoming in future manual instructions.



Comment:

 Some commenters said that any findings or remedies resulting from inadequate survey performance should be rescinded.



Response:

 As we stated in 488.168(c) of the proposed rule (which has been redesignated as 488.318(b) in this final
rule), ``Inadequate survey performance does not relieve a SNF or NF of its obligations to meet all requirements for
program participation, nor does it invalidate 

adequately documented

 deficiencies.'' (emphasis added) In other words, a flawed survey can still validly document one or many deficiencies;
the facility is still liable for sanctions where deficiencies, in fact, exist.




