 

IV. Competitive Bidding Design



A. General Competitive Bidding Rules



24. The 

Second Report and Order

 established the criteria to be used in selecting which auction design method to use for each particular auctionable
service. Generally, we concluded that awarding licenses to those parties who value them most highly will foster Congress'
policy objectives. In this regard, we noted that since a bidder's ability to introduce valuable new services and to
deploy them quickly, intensively, and efficiently increases the value of a license to that bidder, an auction design
that awards licenses to those bidders with the highest willingness to pay tends to promote the development and rapid
deployment of new services and the efficient and intensive use of the spectrum. In articulating our auction design
principles we further stated that: (1) Licenses with strong value interdependencies should be auctioned simultaneously;
(2) multiple round auctions, by providing bidders with information regarding other bidders' valuations of licenses,
generally will yield more efficient allocations of licenses and higher revenues, especially where there is substantial
uncertainty as to value; and (3) because they are relatively expensive to implement and time-consuming, simultaneous
and/or multiple round auctions become less cost-effective as the value of licenses decreases. 

See Second Report and Order

 at 69.

25. Based on the foregoing, we concluded that where the licenses to be auctioned are interdependent and their value
is expected to be high, simultaneous multiple round auctions would best achieve the Commission's goals for competitive
bidding. 

See Second Report and Order

 at  109111. We indicated that compared with other bidding mechanisms, simultaneous multiple
round bidding will generate the most information about license values during the course of the auction and provide
bidders with the most flexibility to pursue back-up strategies. Thus, we concluded that simultaneous multiple round
bidding is most likely to award interdependent licenses to the bidders who value them the most. We also indicated that
this method will facilitate efficient aggregation of licenses across spectrum bands, thereby resulting in vigorous
competition among several strong service providers who will be able rapidly to introduce a wide variety of services
highly valued by end users. 

Second Report and Order

 at  106. In addition, we concluded that because of the superior information and flexibility it provides, this
method is likely to yield greater revenues than other auction designs. Thus, we found that the use of simultaneous
multiple round auctions would generally be preferred. 

Id.

26. However, because simultaneous multiple round bidding is likely to be more administratively complex and costly
both for bidders and for the FCC than sequential or single round bidding, we indicated that we would use this auction
design only where license values are interdependent and the expected value of the licenses to be auctioned is high
relative to the costs of conducting a simultaneous multiple round auction. See Second Report and Order

 at 110111.



B. Competitive Bidding Design for Broadband PCS Licenses



27. In the 

Second Report and Order

 we considered several auction methods including simultaneous multiple round bidding, sequential bidding, and
combinatorial bidding. We discuss each of these below. We have chosen to adopt simultaneous multiple round auctions
as our auction methodology for broadband PCS licenses. We believe that for broadband licenses this method will best
meet Congress' goals in authorizing competitive bidding in section 309(j) of the Communications Act.



1. Simultaneous Multiple Round Auctions



28. There is considerable support in the record for the use of simultaneous multiple round auctions, in which two or
more licenses are put up for bid at the same time, and there are multiple bidding rounds in which bidders have the opportunity
to top the high bids from the previous round. Several comments and studies in the record by academic auction experts
advocate simultaneous multiple round bidding for broadband PCS. 

See

 comments of PacTel Corporation, Attachment of R. Preston McAfee; comments of Pacific Bell and Nevada Bell, Attachment
of Paul R. Milgrom and Robert B. Wilson; comments of NYNEX, Attachment by Robert G. Harris and Michael L. Katz. NTIA
also recommends simultaneous multiple round bidding.
<FOOTCITE>9</FOOTCITE>
 Comments of NTIA at 1416. Other experts recommend using some combination of sequential and simultaneous bidding.


See

 comments of Bell Atlantic Personal Communications, Inc., Attachment by Barry Nalebuff and Jeremy Bulow; and comments
of Telephone and Data Systems, Attachment by Robert J. Weber. Some commenters who originally expressed no opinion
on the issue or supported other methods in their comments supported proposals for simultaneous bidding in their reply
comments. 

See

 reply comments of ATT, GTE Service Corp. and Community Service Telephone Co.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
9

</FOOTNAME>
NTIA also supports all-or-nothing bids on groups of licenses, 

i.e.,

 combinatorial bidding, in conjunction with simultaneous multiple round bidding.

</FOOTNOTE>


29. The analysis in the 

Second Report and Order

 also supports simultaneous multiple round bidding for broadband PCS auctions. We concluded that multiple round
bidding is generally superior to single round bidding, and that when licenses are interdependent, simultaneous
bidding is generally superior to sequential bidding. As we noted in the 

Second Report and Order

, multiple-round auctions have the advantage over single-round auctions insofar as they provide more information
to bidders about the value that other bidders place on licenses, increasing the likelihood that the licenses are acquired
by those who value them most highly and increasing the revenue likely to be gained from the auction. Multiple-round
auctions are also more likely to be perceived as open and fair. The disadvantage of multiple round auctions is that
they have higher administrative costs than single round auctions. 

Second Report and Order

 at 8285.


