 

One commenter disagreed with the proposed action, stating that the suspension was not warranted, and that African
grey parrots should be allowed to be imported into the United States from C&ocirc;te d'Ivoire, Togo, and Benin. The
Service disagrees, based on the aforementioned discussion. At any rate, this suspension is now in effect independent
of this petition process. 

One commenter questioned if the suspension would affect the import of ``Timneh'' African grey parrots (

Psittacus e. timneh

) from C&ocirc;te d'Ivoire. This ruling would have affected the importation of all subspecies of African grey parrots
from C&ocirc;te d'Ivoire, including 

Psittacus e. timneh. 

One commenter questioned if the suspension would have affected the import of captive-bred African grey parrots.
The statutorily imposed suspension on the import of all CITES-listed birds makes that question moot, as it includes
all African grey parrots. The Service will shortly propose regulations pursuant to Section 107 of the WBCA, which
will allow for approval of foreign facilities breeding exotic birds in captivity. If a foreign facility is approved
as a qualifying facility, species of exotic birds for which the facility is approved can be imported into the United
States from that facility. When those regulations are finalized, any foreign facility breeding an otherwise prohibited
species, including the African grey parrot, may apply to the Service for approval, based on the application and issuance
requirements of the relevant regulations. However, if imports from a given country are specifically prohibited,
based on a petition submitted pursuant to the WBCA, the Service would consider it very difficult for a facility in that
country to qualify as an approved breeding facility. 



References Cited 



Dandliker, G. 1992. The grey parrot in Ghana: A population survey, a contribution to the biology of the species, a study
of its commercial exploitation and management recommendations. A report on CITES Project S30 to the CITES
Secretariat. 132 pp. 

Environmental Investigation Agency. 1993. Investigation into the trade in African grey parrots from Ghana. 146
pp. London, Great Britain. 

Forshaw, J. 1989. Parrots of the World. 3rd (revised) edition. Lansdowne Editions, Melbourne, Australia. 

Howard, R. and A. Moore. 1991. A Complete Checklist of the Birds of the World. 2nd edition. Academic Press Ltd., London,
England. 

CITES Secretariat Notification to the Parties No. 737. Lausanne, 20 April 1993. Significant Trade in Animal Species
included in Appendix II: Recommendations of the Standing Committee. 

CITES Secretariat Notification to the Parties No. 746. Lausanne, 7 May 1993. C&ocirc;te d'Ivoire: Trade in African
grey parrots. 



Authors



The authors of this notice are Dr. Rosemarie Gnam (Division of Law Enforcement) and Dr. Susan S. Lieberman (Office
of Management Authority), U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Washington, D.C. 20240 (703/3582093). 




[Final ruling on petition: Wild Bird Conservation Act (WBCA) of 1992; Final decision on petition to suspend imports
of African grey parrots into the United States from certain countries]

 


Dated: December 23, 1993.



<SIGNER>
Richard N. Smith,
 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Director.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 947072 Filed 32494; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 431055P
</BILLING>


