 

409.46 

Allowable administrative costs. 


Services that are allowable as administrative costs but are not separately billable include, but are not limited
to, the following: 
(a) 

Registered nurse initial evaluation visits

. Initial evaluation visits by a registered nurse for the purpose of assessing a beneficiary's health needs, determining
if the agency can meet those health needs, and formulating a plan of care for the beneficiary are allowable administrative
costs. If a physician specifically orders that a particular skilled service be furnished during the evaluation in
which the agency accepts the beneficiary for treatment and all other coverage criteria are met, the visit is billable
as a skilled nursing visit. Otherwise it is considered to be an administrative cost. 
(b) 

Visits by registered nurses or qualified professionals for the supervision of home health aides

. Visits by registered nurses or qualified professionals for the purpose of supervising home health aides as required
at 484.36(d) of this chapter are allowable administrative costs. Only if the registered nurse or qualified
professional visits the beneficiary for the purpose of furnishing care that meets the coverage criteria at 409.44,
and the supervisory visit occurs simultaneously with the provision of covered care, is the visit billable as a skilled
nursing or therapist's visit. 
(c) 

Respiratory care services

. If a respiratory therapist is used to furnish overall training or consultative advice to an HHA's staff and incidentally
provides respiratory therapy services to beneficiaries in their homes, the costs of the respiratory therapist's
services are allowable as administrative costs. Visits by a respiratory therapist to a beneficiary's home are not
separately billable. However, respiratory therapy services that are furnished as part of a plan of care by a skilled
nurse or physical therapist and that constitute skilled care may be separately billed as skilled visits. 
(d) 

Dietary and nutrition personnel

. If dieticians or nutritionists are used to provide overall training or consultative advice to HHA staff and incidentally
provide dietetic or nutritional services to beneficiaries in their homes, the costs of these professional services
are allowable as administrative costs. Visits by a dietician or nutritionist to a beneficiary's home are not separately
billable. 


409.47 

Place of service requirements. 


To be covered, home health services must be furnished in either the beneficiary's home or an outpatient setting as
defined in this section. 
(a) 

Beneficiary's home

. A beneficiary's home is any place in which a beneficiary resides that is not a hospital, SNF, or nursing facility as
defined in sections 1861(e)(1), 1819(a)(1), of 1919(a)(1) of the Act, respectively. 
(b) 

Outpatient setting

. For purposes of coverage of home health services, an outpatient setting may include a hospital, SNF or a rehabilitation
center with which the HHA has an arrangement in accordance with the requirements of 484.14(h) of this chapter
and that is used by the HHA to provide services that either_
(1) Require equipment that cannot be made available at the beneficiary's home; or 
(2) Are furnished while the beneficiary is at the facility to receive services requiring equipment described in paragraph
(b)(1) of this section. 


409.48 

Visits. 


(a) 

Number of allowable visits under Part A. 

To the extent that all coverage requirements specified in this subpart are met, payment may be made on behalf of eligible
beneficiaries under Part A for an unlimited number of covered home health visits. All Medicare home health services
are covered under hospital insurance unless there is no Part A entitlement. 
(b) 

Number of visits under Part B

. To the extent that all coverage requirements specified in this subpart are met, payment may be made on behalf of eligible
beneficiaries under Part B for an unlimited number of covered home health visits. Medicare home health services are
covered under Part B only when the beneficiary is not entitled to coverage under Part A. 
(c) 

Definition of visit. 

A visit is an episode of personal contact with the beneficiary by staff of the HHA or others under arrangements with
the HHA, for the purpose of providing a covered service. 
(1) Generally, one visit may be covered each time an HHA employee or someone providing home health services under arrangements
enters the beneficiary's home and provides a covered service to a beneficiary who meets the criteria of 409.42
(confined to the home, under the care of a physician, in need of skilled services, and under a plan of care). 
(2) If the HHA furnishes services in an outpatient facility under arrangements with the facility, one visit may be
covered for each type of service provided. 






