 

2. Section 18 is intended to prevent investment companies from issuing excessive amounts of senior securities and
thereby increasing unduly the speculative character of their junior securities, or from operating without adequate
assets or reserves. The proposed Multiple Class Plan does not involve borrowings, and does not affect the Funds' existing
assets or reserves. In addition, the proposed arrangement will not increase the speculative character of the shares
of the Funds, since each class of shares will participate in all of the Funds' appreciation or depreciation (if any),
income, and all of a Fund's expenses (with the exception of the Plan Payments and Class Expenses).

3. Applicants believe that the proposed allocation of Class Expenses in the manner described above, and the voting
rights relating to the Rule 12b1 Plans and Shareholder Service Plans are equitable and would not discriminate
unfairly against any group of shareholders. Because, with respect to any Fund, the rights and privileges of each class
of shares are substantially identical, the possibility that their interests would ever conflict would be remote.
In any event, the interests of the affected shareholders with respect to distribution and/or service fees would be
adequately protected since the distribution and service plans for each of those classes will conform to the requirements
of rule 12b1 (except that a Shareholder Service Plan may not confer certain voting rights), including the requirement
that their implementation and continuance be approved on an annual basis by both the full board and the non-interested
directors of the respective Funds.

4. Applicants also request an exemption from the provisions of sections 2(a)(32), 2(a)(35), 22(c), and 22(d) of the
Act, and rule 22c1 thereunder to the extent necessary to permit the Funds to offer shares subject to a CDSC. Applicants
believe that implementation of the CDSC in the manner and under the circumstances described above would be fair and
in the best interests of shareholders of the Funds, and would be appropriate in the public interest, and consistent
with the protection of investors and the purposes fairly intended by the policy and provisions of the Act.



Applciants' Conditions 



Applicants agree that any order of the SEC granting the requested relief will be subject to the following conditions:

1. Each class of shares will represent interests in the same portfolio of investments of a Fund or a series, and be identical
in all respects except as set forth below. The only differences among the classes of shares of the same Fund or series
will relate solely to (a) certain Class Expenses, which shall be limited to (i) transfer agent fees attributable to
a specific class of shares; (ii) printing and postage expenses related to preparing and distributing materials such
as shareholder reports, prospectuses, and proxy statements to current shareholders of a specific class; (iii) SEC
and state securities registration fees incurred by a specific class of shares; (iv) the expenses of administrative
personnel and services required to support the shareholders of a specific class; (v) litigation or other legal expenses
relating to a class of shares; (vi) directors' fees or expenses incurred as a result of issues relating to a specific
class of shares; and (vii) accounting expenses relating to a specific class of shares; (b) expenses payable by a class
pursuant to a Plan with respect to such class; (c) the fact that the classes will vote separately with respect to the
Funds' Rule 12b1 Plans and Shareholder Service Plans, except as provided in condition 15 below; (d) conversion
features; (e) exchange privileges; and (f) class designations. Any other incremental expenses not specifically
identified above that are subsequently identified and determined to be properly allocated to one class of shares
shall not be so allocated unless and until approved by the SEC pursuant to an amended order.

2. The directors of each of the Funds, including a majority of the independent directors, will have approved the Multiple
Class Plan prior to its implementation. The minutes of the meetings of the directors of the Funds regarding the deliberations
of the directors concerning, and their approval of, the Multiple Class Plan will reflect in detail the reasons for
their determination that the proposed Multiple Class Plan is in the best interests of both the Funds and their respective
shareholders.



