 



Phase Three: 

With careful planning and cost sharing, there may be enough money to conduct a third phase, in either the U.S. or Africa,
which would extend the work of the first two phases.



African Public Defender and Legal Aid Training Exchange



USIA will accept proposals for a two-way exchange project to foster the development of public defender and legal aid
services in Ethiopia, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia, and to promote linkages between legal professionals in the U.S.
and these countries for this purpose. USIA will consider providing funding up to approximately $200,000, of which
$10,000 must be devoted to developing or purchasing specialized support materials for participating African institutions.
For technical information, interested organizations may contact E/P Program Specialist Charlotte Peterson at
(202) 6195319.



Project Objectives



1. Introduce African participants to the U.S. legal system and the principles on which it is founded, particularly
the rule of law and the power of courts to overrule actions of the Executive and Legislative branches, and compare the
U.S. legal system with those of the target countries;

2. Examine the organizational structure and administrative operation of public defender and legal aid organizations
in the U.S., and explore how U.S. models might be adapted for use in the target countries;

3. Explore techniques of alternative dispute resolution and sentencing alternatives such as probation and community
service;

4. Provide a formal training component for the dual purpose of benefiting the individual visiting public defenders
and legal aid attorneys, and of enabling them to develop or enhance training programs for colleagues in their home
countries;

5. Discuss the primary constitutional issues affecting criminal cases, including due process, equal protection,
rules of evidence, and criminal procedure;

6. Explore strategies and modalities for challenging governmental actions, including test cases and class action
lawsuits;

7. Promote long-term linkages between African public defenders and legal aid organizations and their counterparts
in the U.S. in order to foster dialogue on issues of common concern and to enhance the institutional capabilities of
the African organizations;

8. Develop and/or purchase specialized support materials for participating institutions in each of the target countries.
Such materials might include but are not limited to legal reference and research books, training videos, textbooks
or other instructional materials. Grant monies of $10,000 must be used for this purpose.



Participants



The African participants will be attorneys active in public defense work and/or legal aid in their countries, or seeking
to establish such services. Participants will be nominated through coordination among U.S. Information Service
personnel in the target countries, USIA, and the African partner institutions. All participants must have strong
English-language skills.

The U.S. consultants who will travel to Africa will be selected by the grantee institution in consultation with USIA.
The grantee should provide the names of American participants and brief, relevant biographical data. American participants
should be selected on the basis of their experience and expertise in the thematic field. Experience in communicating
to foreign audiences and general knowledge of Africa and of the countries involved in the project are highly desirable.



Program Structure



The following suggestions should not serve as a blueprint, but as a stimulus for the development of an original program
design.



Phase One: 

The program could begin with a 34 week U.S. study tour for approximately 12 attorneys representing public defense
and legal aid services in the target countries. The study tour should allow the African lawyers to visit several regions
of the U.S. and should include cultural activities as well as the following professional components:




_An initial orientation to the U.S. legal system and the constitution on which it is founded;

_A series of field visits to familiarize the visiting lawyers with the operations of courts and other legal institutions
such as bar associations, law schools, and legal training facilities;

_Field visits and consultations with NGOs wholly or partly dedicated to legal aid, including organizations focused
on civil rights, consumer protection and public interest issues such as the environment;



