 

Foreign laboratories also may apply for NRTL accreditation. In determining eligibility for a foreign-based testing
agency or organization, however, OSHA takes into consideration the policy of the foreign government regarding both
the acceptance in that country of testing, data, equipment acceptances, and listings and labeling, which are provided
through nationally recognized testing laboratories recognized by the Assistant Secretary for OSHA, and the accessibility
to government recognition or a similar system in that country by U.S.-based, safety-related testing agencies, whether
recognized by the Assistant Secretary or not, if such recognition or a similar system is required by that country.
Presently, one foreign laboratory has been recognized by OSHA as an NRTL. That laboratory is the Canadian Standards
Association (CSA).



B. Section-by-Section Discussion



Section 6.1Purpose and Effective Date



Under the proposal, this part would establish the procedures and requirements for independent laboratories to perform
testing and evaluation for MSHA product approval. It also would authorize MSHA, when requested by an applicant for
product approval, to approve a product based on testing and evaluation requirements other than those set forth in
MSHA product approval regulations if the other requirements are equivalent to MSHA's or can be enhanced to provide
at least the same degree of protection as MSHA's requirements.

The provisions of this part would apply to all applications for approval and extensions of approval except those filed
under 30 CFR parts 7, 31, 32, and 36 received by MSHA after [insert the effective date of this rule]. However, MSHA recognizes
that it may take some time before there are NRTLs accredited by OSHA to perform testing and evaluation to all the various
MSHA product approval regulations. Until such time as an NRTL has been recognized to perform the necessary testing
and evaluation for a particular product, MSHA would continue to perform the required testing and evaluation for that
product for approval purposes. Once an NRTL is recognized to perform the required tests and evaluations for a given
product, however, the manufacturer would be required to have the necessary testing and evaluation conducted by an
NRTL recognized by OSHA to perform those specific tests and evaluations and to submit the testing and evaluation results
and the statement of product compliance along with its application for approval or extension of approval. Thus, for
example, if an NRTL had been recognized by OSHA to perform the testing and evaluation of hose conduit for approval under
30 CFR part 18, then the manufacturer would be required to use an NRTL to perform those tests and evaluations for an approval
or extension of approval and submit the results to MSHA as part of its application. On the other hand, if no NRTL had been
accredited to perform the hose conduit testing and evaluation, MSHA would continue to perform the testing and evaluation
required for product approval.

If only one NRTL is accredited to perform the necessary testing and evaluation for a particular product, the manufacturer
would have to use that NRTL to conduct the requisite testing and evaluation work. Where more than one NRTL has been recognized,
manufacturers would have a choice as to which NRTL would perform the work.



Section 6.2Definitions



The following definitions would apply to the provisions of this part.



Approval. 

This term would be used to describe a written document issued by MSHA which states that a product has met the requirements
of part 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 26, 27, 29, 33, or 35. It would not apply to the provisions of 30 CFR part 7. The definition
would be based on the existing definitions of ``approval'' in the parts specified above. It would be expanded to include
``certification'' and ``acceptance'' because these terms also are used to denote MSHA approval.



Evaluation. 

This term would mean the systematic examination of the extent to which a product fulfills the specified requirements
for MSHA product approval.



Section 6.10Use of Independent Laboratories 



Proposed 6.10(a) would require the applicant seeking MSHA product approval under part 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23,
26, 27, 29, 33, or 35 to provide, as a part of its application, documentation of the testing and evaluation necessary
to ensure compliance with MSHA requirements. Such testing and evaluation would be performed by an independent laboratory
that has been accredited by OSHA as a Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory and has demonstrated its capability
to perform the specific testing and evaluation required by MSHA for the product for which approval is sought.

To implement this proposed rule, MSHA and OSHA intend to expand by a subagreement the 1979 Interagency Agreement between
MSHA and OSHA which provides for interagency coordination to develop compatible safety and health standards, regulations,
and policies with respect to the mutual goals of the two organizations. That subagreement would include specific
provisions for detailing the coordination between the two agencies with respect to the NRTL program.



