 

(a) The Bidder shall at all times keep the premises free from accumulations of waste material or rubbish caused by its
employees or work, and at the completion of the work the Bidder shall remove all rubbish from and about the Project(s)
and all its tools, scaffolding and surplus materials and shall leave its work ``broom clean.'' 

(b) The work, from its commencement to completion, or to such earlier date or dates when the Owner may take possession
and control, shall be under the charge and control of the Bidder and during such period of control by the Bidder all risks
in connection therewith, and in connection with the equipment, materials and software to be used therein, shall be
borne by the Bidder. The Bidder shall make good and fully repair all injuries and damages to the equipment, materials
and software under the control of the Bidder by reasons of any act of God, or any other casualty or cause whether or not
the same shall have occurred by reason of the Bidder's negligence. The Bidder shall hold the Owner harmless from any
and all claims for injuries of persons or for damage to property happening by reason of any negligence on the part of
the Bidder or any of the Bidder's agents, subcontractors or employees during the control by the Bidder of the Project(s)
or any part thereof. The Owner shall promptly notify the Bidder in writing of any such claims received and, except where
the Owner is the claimant, shall give to the Bidder full authority and opportunity to settle such claims, and reasonably
cooperate with the Bidder in obtaining information relative to such claims. 

(c) Monthly reports of all accidents shall be promptly submitted to the Owner by the Bidder giving such data as may be
prescribed by the Owner. 

Section 2. Termination of Bidder's Risks and Obligations. The Bidder shall deliver to the Owner, and the Owner shall
accept, full possession and control of each Project on the date of Completion of the Project. However, at any time after
payment by the Owner to the Bidder of ninety percent (90%) of the Total Base Bid plus accepted alternates for that Project,
but prior to Completion of the Project, the Owner and the Bidder may agree in writing to an earlier date of delivery of
possession and control. Upon such delivery of possession and control of any Project the Bidder's risks and obligations
as set forth in Article IV, section 1(b), pertaining to such Project shall be terminated; provided, however, that
nothing herein contained shall relieve the Bidder of its obligation for full performance under the Specifications,
or its liability with respect to defective workmanship or materials as specified in Article II, section 7 hereof.
The equipment shall not be placed in service until delivery of possession and control to the Owner has been accomplished,
as set forth above. 



