 


A summary of the comments received by OPM on the proposed sick leave regulations and a description of the revisions
made in the regulations as a result of the comments are presented below. 


Use of Sick Leave To Care for Family Members



A large proportion of the commenters (65) opposed limiting the use of sick leave to provide care only for certain family
members_i.e., a child, spouse, or parent. The commenters believed the proposed rule was unfair and discriminatory
to many Federal employees who share close family responsibilities in a family group broader than a traditional nuclear
family. Further, they suggested this policy would be inconsistent with the intent of many other OPM initiatives designed
to assist Federal employees in balancing work and family needs. For example, one agency suggested that if the purpose
of the proposed sick leave regulations is to be sensitive to the needs of all employees, some consideration should
be given to those individuals who have legal responsibility for other family members or significant others. One commenter
recommended that OPM's definition of family member be changed so that the Federal Government could set an example
as an employer of a diverse workforce. 

One agency and 11 individuals recommended that the phrase ``son or daughter'' be substituted for the term ``child.''
The definition of ``child'' in the proposed rule includes individuals over the age of 18 only if they are disabled.
The agency was concerned that the term ``child'' may be perceived as connoting a lack of maturity and suggested that
this connotation is not appropriate to individuals over 18 who are disabled because it may reinforce negative stereotypes
about individuals with disabilities. The agency stated that the phrase ``son or daughter,'' as used in the Family
and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA) and in OPM's implementing regulations under the Act, is less likely to connote
immaturity, since the phrase identifies the relationship rather than a stage of development. 

Many commenters pointed out that the definition of ``child'' in the proposed rule would prohibit parents from using
sick leave to arrange for or attend the funeral of an adult son or daughter who is over 18 years old and is not disabled.


One agency noted that some agencies provide broader coverage for benefits under the FMLA by allowing additional family
members to be covered (as encouraged in OPM's interim regulations implementing Title II of the FMLA) and that these
agencies will be put in the awkward position of having different coverage for two leave programs that OPM recognizes
as having a ``similarity of purpose.'' 

Most of the commenters recommended that OPM use the broader definition of ``family member'' found in the Voluntary
Leave Transfer Program. One commenter noted that this definition is more accommodating to the needs of a wide variety
of family compositions. Another suggested that the broader definition would more faithfully fulfill the Federal
Government's purpose of being a responsive, competitive, and model employer. One agency noted that the broader definition
is consistent with the intent of the National Performance Review recommendations. Furthermore, the agency noted
that the broader definition recognizes that in today's society there are both traditional and nontraditional families
and that the responsibilities placed on the employee are the same in both cases. 

In response to these comments and consistent with the requirements of the Federal Employees Family Friendly Leave
Act, the final regulations include the broader definition of ``family member'' that is used in the Federal leave sharing
program. For these purposes, ``family member'' means (a) spouse and parents thereof; (b) children, including adopted
children, and spouses thereof; (c) parents; (d) brother and sisters, and spouses thereof; and (e) any individual
related by blood or affinity whose close association with the employee is the equivalent of a family relationship.
The term ``children, including adopted children, and spouses thereof,'' as used in this definition, covers adult
sons and daughters, whether disabled or not, and therefore permits an employee to use sick leave to arrange for or attend
the funeral of an adult son or daughter who is over 18 years old and is not disabled. 



Limitation on Use of Sick Leave for Family Care or Bereavement 



A significant number of the commenters (42) opposed OPM's proposed 5-day limitation on the amount of sick leave to
be used each leave year for family care or bereavement purposes. One commenter questioned whether 5 days of sick leave
each leave year realistically would be sufficient to enable an employee to provide care for family members, especially
in situations of terminal or serious illness. One commenter stated that the current move to ``empower'' employees
assumes that employees are able to exercise good judgment about their jobs. Therefore, it was suggested, OPM should
assume that employees can make a fair judgment about their own usage of leave. One agency commented that if the absence
represents an appropriate use of sick leave, the amount should be determined by the circumstances of each case, not
by an arbitrary ceiling. 

