 

(3) 

Category III.

 (i)(A) There is information indicating no more than a ``remote likelihood'' of an incidental taking of a marine mammal
in the fishery; 

(B) In the absence of information indicating the frequency of incidental taking of marine mammals, other factors
such as fishing techniques, gear used, methods used to deter marine mammals, target species, seasons and areas fished,
and species and distribution of marine mammals in the area suggest there is no more than a remote likelihood of an incidental
take in the fishery; or 

(C) Congress intended that the fishery should be placed in Category III and there is not documented information indicating
that it should be placed in another Category. 

(ii) ``Remote likelihood'' means that it is highly unlikely that any marine mammal will be incidentally taken by a
randomly selected vessel in the fishery during a 20-day period. 



229.4 

Prohibitions. 



(a) 

Prohibited activities.

 (1) It is unlawful for a commercial fishing vessel, a vessel owner, or a master or operator of a vessel to engage in a Category
I or II fishery unless the vessel owner or authorized representative has complied with the requirements pertaining
to registration, Exemption Certificates, decals and reports as contained in this part 229. 

(2) It is unlawful to assault, harm, oppose, impede, intimidate, impair or in any way interfere with an observer or
the observations being carried out. 

(b) 

Prohibited taking.

 (1) Except as otherwise provided in part 17 of this title, part 216 of this chapter or this part 229, it is unlawful to
take any marine mammal incidental to commercial fishing operations. 

(2) Under this part 229, it is unlawful to: 

(i)(A) Take any southern (California) sea otter; or 

(B) Intentionally lethally take any Steller sea lion, any Alaskan sea otter, any cetacean, any depleted species (including
the Pribilof Island population of North Pacific fur seal), or any endangered or threatened marine mammal. 

(ii) If the use of firearms or other means to deter marine mammals results in an injury or mortality of a marine mammal,
the taking is presumed to be an intentional lethal taking. 

(3) Exemptions under this part 229 apply only to prohibitions under the Marine Mammal Protection Act and do not apply
to prohibitions under the Endangered Species Act of 1973. To be exempt from the taking prohibitions under the Endangered
Species Act, specific authority under that Act is required. 

(c) 

Other prohibitions.

 It is unlawful to violate any other provision of these regulations or the terms and conditions of Exemption Certificates.




229.5 

Registrations for Category I and II fisheries. 



(a) 

Registrations.

 To engage lawfully in a Category I or II fishery after July 21, 1989, the vessel owner or authorized representative
of the vessel owner must register for and receive an Exemption Certificate or annual renewal. Registrations should
be submitted at least 30 days prior to the vessel engaging in a Category I or II fishery. The following information is
required to register: 

(1) Name, address, and phone number of vessel owner; 

(2) Name and address of operator, if different from owner; 

(3) Vessel name, length and home port; state commercial vessel license number, Coast Guard documentation number,
state registration number, and/or Tribal plaque number, where appropriate; 

(4) A list of all Category I and II fisheries that the vessel is expected to participate in during the calendar year (or
during 1989 and 1990, if the registration is made during 1989), and the estimated number of trips from port for each
fishery; and 

(5) A certification, signed and dated by the vessel owner or authorized representative, as follows: ``I hereby certify
under penalty of perjury that I am the owner of the vessel or that I am authorized to register for this exemption on behalf
of the owner, that I have reviewed all information contained on this document, and that it is true and complete to the
best of my knowledge.'' 

(b) 

Fee.

 A check or money order made payable to NOAA, National Marine Fisheries Service, in the amount of $30.00 must accompany
each registration or renewal. For good cause, the Assistant Administrator may waive the fee requirement. 



