

(2) It would adversely affect the readiness of a summoned soldier's unit, command, or activity. 


516.76 

Exemption determination authority. 


(a) The commander exercising special court-martial convening authority (SPCMCA) over a unit has the authority to
determine whether a soldier of that unit, who has been served with a summons, is exempt from serving on a state or local
jury unless that authority has been limited or withheld in accordance with paragraph (b) or (c) of this section. This
authority may not be delegated to a subordinate commander who does not exercise SPCMCA. 
(b) A commander superior to the SPCMCA, who also exercises SPCMCA or general court-martial convening authority (GCMCA)
over a unit, may limit or withhold the exemption determination authority of subordinate commanders. 
(c) A GCMCA, who orders a unit or soldier assigned to one command to be attached or detailed to another command for disciplinary
purposes (for example, ``for administration'' or ``for administration of military justice''), may reserve exemption
determination authority to the commander exercising SPCMCA in the chain of command to which the unit or soldier is
assigned rather than the chain of command to which the unit or soldier is attached or detailed. 


516.77 

Procedures for exemption. 


(a) Active duty soldiers served with a summons to serve on a state or local jury will promptly advise their commander
and provide copies of pertinent documents. 
(b) Unit commanders will evaluate the summons considering both the individual soldier's duties and the unit mission.
Coordination with the servicing judge advocate or legal adviser and with the appropriate state or local official
may be necessary to determine any impact on the soldier's duties or on unit readiness. 
(1) If the soldier is not exempt under 516.75 (b) or (c), the commander will process the soldier for permissive
TDY in accordance with AR 6305, Leaves and Passes. 
(2) If the soldier is exempt under 516.75 (b) or (c), the commander will forward the summons and any related documentation,
with recommendations, through the chain of command to the commander with exemption determination authority over
the soldier concerned. 
(c) The commander with exemption determination authority over the soldier concerned will determine whether the
soldier is exempt. His determination is final. 
(d) The exemption determination authority will notify responsible state or local officials whenever a soldier summoned
for jury duty is exempt. The notification will cite 10 U.S.C. 982 as authority. 


516.78 

Status, fees, and expenses. 


(a) Soldiers who are required to comply with summons to serve on state or local juries will be placed on permissive TDY
under the provisions of AR 6305. 
(b) Jury fees accruing to soldiers for complying with the summons to serve on state and local juries must be turned over
to the appropriate finance office for deposit into the U.S. Treasury. Commands will establish procedures with local
authorities and their servicing finance and accounting activity to ensure that such jury fees are so deposited. Soldiers,
however, may keep any reimbursement from state or local authority for expenses incurred in the performance of jury
duty, including transportation, meals, and parking. 



