 

Section 298.32Required Provisions in Documentation


Paragraph (a)(1) was amended in the interim final rule to provide for the furnishing of satisfactory insurance or
a performance bond by the manufacturer of AST/MST. Several shipyards commented that a performance bond is not necessary
where the manufacture of AST/MST is concerned because the manufacturers are merely suppliers of goods and services.
The proscription against work done outside the shipyard contained in paragraph (a)(5) was not within the scope of
the interim final rule, but several shipyards have requested that MARAD amend the provision to remove the prohibition
against the use of Title XI proceeds for payment of work done outside the shipyard unless the Secretary consents in
writing to such use. It was suggested that such language is probably unintentionally too restrictive and should be
modified by adding, ``except for customary and usual subcontractor or supplier off-site prefabrication or fabrication
of components where considered appropriate for cost or risk containment purposes.'' 
Several shipyards have requested that MARAD amend paragraph (a)(6), which requires that materials and supplies
of the United States be used, to delete this remnant of the former ``Buy American'' requirement in section 298.11,
which was amended in 1986.
With respect to paragraph (b)(4), which prescribes covenants by shipowners, including citizenship requirements
that were amended in the interim final rule to exclude Eligible Export Vessels from compliance, one commenter suggested
that the word ``registry'' is confusing in that while the term is common for documentation of foreign vessels in foreign
countries, it is a confusing term when used for documentation of a vessel under the laws of the United States. The commenter
suggested substituting for the term ``registry'', the term ``documentation'', to correct the confusion. In addition,
another commenter suggested that ``compliance with the provisions of 46 U.S.C. 3130131343'', is inappropriate
with regard to Eligible Export Vessels and reference to them should be stricken. 
MARAD received several comments by shipyards about paragraph (b)(8) that requires the Obligor to maintain insurance
on Title XI assets, suggesting the regulation be amended to allow shipyards to self-insure if those shipyards can
demonstrate their financial well-being to the satisfaction of the Secretary. Paragraph (b)(9) requires covenants
for Eligible Export Vessels to maintain additional types of insurance as may be required against such risks as those
of a political, financial, or economic nature, to reflect any risk of the foreign country associated with the shipowner.
One commenter expressed concern that compliance with this regulation may be impossible because the Vessel may be
purchased by one foreign national, sold to another foreign national, and flagged yet in another country. 
MARAD Response: MARAD believes that paragraph (a)(1) is written with sufficient qualifications to ensure that,
in a proper case, MARAD will not require a performance bond. In the case of mere suppliers of goods that need not be specially
constructed to meet the shipyard's specifications, a performance bond would not be required. Accordingly, MARAD
has not found it necessary to amend the regulation further to achieve this result.
With respect to paragraph (a)(5), concerning the constraints on work done outside the shipyard, the commenters misapprehend
MARAD's practice. MARAD merely needs to be aware of offsite prefabrication or fabrication practices; MARAD does
not discourage that practice. The requirement for written approval has not posed a problem for other projects and
it is not anticipated to pose a problem.
The Buy American issue concerning paragraphs (a)(6) and (b)(5)(ii) were addressed earlier in the discussion concerning
section 298.13. Accordingly, those provisions have been amended. 
As to paragraph (b)(4), MARAD agrees with the commenter who suggested that Eligible Export Vessels should not be required
to comply with the provisions of 46 U.S.C. 3130131343, Commercial Instruments and Maritime Liens. Instead,
the regulation has been amended to state that the Obligor shall covenant with the Secretary that the Mortgage on its
Eligible Export Vessel shall comply with the definition of a ``preferred mortgage'' under 46 U.S.C. 31301(6)(B),
to wit, it shall comply with the mortgage laws of the foreign country where the Vessel is documented and shall have been
registered under those laws in a public register. In addition, paragraph (b)(4) has been modified to state the requirement
for ``maintaining United States documentation of the Vessel or documentation under the laws of a country other than
the United States with regard to an Eligible Export vessel'', instead of ``registry'' of the Vessel.
Insurance of the Title XI assets is a critical and essential part of the Title XI program. Self-insurance by shipyards
as to its collateral is considered by MARAD to be unduly risky. Finally, MARAD does not agree that compliance with the
provisions of section (b)(9) on certain insurance for Eligible Export Vessels is ``impossible.'' In domestic Title
XI projects, such insurance has been procured. The requirement is not invalidated by the possibility of subsequent
transfer of the Vessel because such transfer requires MARAD's prior consent. MARAD's consent will not be given unless
the proposed purchaser agrees, among other things, to obtain the required insurance. 




