 

Availability of NPRM


Any person may obtain a copy of this notice by submitting a request to the Federal Aviation Administration, Office
of Public Affairs, Attention: Public Inquiry Center, APA230, 800 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC
20591; or by calling (202) 2673484. Communications must identify the notice number of this NPRM. Persons interested
in being placed on a mailing list for future rulemaking documents should also request a copy of Advisory Circular No.
112A, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking Distribution System, which describes the application procedure.



Background



The National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), the predecessor of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA), began an inflight gust measurement program in 1933 to assist in the refinement of gust load design criteria.
Using unsophisticated analog equipment, that program resulted in the development of the improved design requirements
for gust loads that were issued in part 04 of the Civil Aeronautics Regulations (CAR) in the 1940's. The corresponding
Civil Aeronautics Manual (CAM) 04 provided a simplified formula from which to derive the design gust loads from the
specified design gust velocities. These criteria were based on an analytical encounter of the airplane with a discrete
ramp-shaped gust with a gradient distance (the distance necessary for the gust to build to a peak) of 10 times the mean
chord length of the airplane wing. An alleviation factor, calculated from wing loading, was provided in order to account
for the relieving effects of rigid body motion of the airplane as it penetrated the gust. With the development of the
VGH (velocity, load factor, height) recorder in 1946, NASA began collecting a large quantity of gust load data on many
types of aircraft in airline service. Although that program was terminated for transport airline operations in 1971,
the data provided additional insight into the nature of gusts in the atmosphere, and resulted in significant changes
to the gust load design requirements. The evolution of the discrete gust design criteria from part 04 through part
4b of the CAR to current part 25 of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) (which contains the design requirements
for transport category airplanes) resulted in the establishment of a prescribed gust shape with a specific gust gradient
distance and increased peak gust design velocities. The prescribed shape was a ``one-minus-cosine'' gust shape
with a specified gust gradient distance of 12.5 times the mean chord length of the airplane wing. The gust gradient
distance, for that particular shape, was equal to one-half the total gust length. A simplified analytical method
similar to the methodology of CAM 04 was provided along with an improved alleviation factor that accounted for unsteady
aerodynamic forces, gust shape, and the airplane rigid body vertical response.

The increasing speed, size, and structural flexibility of transport airplanes resulted in the need to consider not
only the rigid body response of the airplane, but also structural dynamic response and the effects of structural deformation
on the aerodynamic parameters. Early attempts to account for structural flexibility led to a ``tuned'' gust approach
in which the analysis assumed a flexible airplane encountering gusts with various gradient distances in order to
find the most critical gust gradient distance for use in design for each major component. A tuned discrete gust approach
became a requirement for compliance with the British Civil Airworthiness Requirements.

Another method of accounting for the structural dynamic effects of the airplane involved the power spectral density
(PSD) analysis technique which accounted for the statistical distribution of gusts in continuous turbulence in
conjunction with the aeroelastic and structural dynamic characteristics of the airplane. In the 1960's, the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) awarded study contracts to Boeing and Lockheed for the purpose of assisting the FAA
in developing the PSD gust methodology into continuous gust design criteria with analytical procedures. The final
PSD continuous turbulence criteria were based on those studies and were codified in Appendix G to part 25 in 1980.

Recognizing that the nature of gusts was not completely defined, and that individual discrete gusts might exist outside
the normal statistical distribution of gusts in continuous turbulence, the FAA retained the existing criteria for
discrete gusts in addition to the new requirement for continuous turbulence. The current discrete gust criteria
in Subpart C of part 25 require the loads to be analytically developed assuming the airplane encounters a gust with
a fixed gradient distance of 12.5 mean chord lengths. For application of the current criteria, it is generally assumed
that the airplane is rigid in determining the dynamic response to the gust while the effects of wing elastic deflection
on wing static lift parameters are normally taken into account. The minimum value of the airplane design speed for
maximum gust intensity, V

B

, is also established from the discrete gust criteria.

Recent flight measurement efforts by FAA and NASA have been aimed at utilizing measurements from the digital flight
data recorders (DFDR) to derive gust load design information for airline transport airplanes. The Civil Aviation
Authority (CAA) of the United Kingdom has also been conducting a comprehensive DFDR gust measurement program for
transport airplanes in airline service. The program, called CAADRP (Civil Aircraft Airworthiness Data Recording
Program), uses data sampling rates that allow the measurement of a wide range of gust gradient distances. The CAADRP
program is still continuing and has resulted in an extensive collection of reliable gust data.

In 1988, the FAA, in cooperation with the JAA and organizations representing the American and European aerospace
industries, began a process to harmonize the airworthiness requirements of the United States and the airworthiness
requirements of Europe in regard to gust requirements. The objective was to achieve common requirements for the certification
of transport airplanes without a substantive change in the level of safety provided by the regulations. Other airworthiness
authorities such as Transport Canada have also participated in this process.

