 

Each standard defines the term ``children's sleepwear'' to mean ``any product of wearing apparel'' in the sizes covered
by the standard ``such as nightgowns, pajamas, or similar or related items, such as robes, intended to be worn primarily
for sleeping or activities related to sleeping.'' Each standard excludes diapers and underwear from its coverage.
See 16 CFR 1615.1(a) and 1616.2(a). 


B. Garments Subject to the Sleepwear Standards 


Before the effective date of the standard for children's sleepwear in sizes 0 through 6X, questions arose about the
specific types of garments which are subject to the requirements of that standard because they are ``intended to be
worn primarily for sleeping and activities related to sleeping.'' To respond to those questions, the Federal Trade
Commission (FTC), the agency responsible for enforcement of the standard at that time, published an enforcement
polity statement in the 

Federal Register

 of March 23, 1972 (37 FR 5982). Briefly summarized, that policy statement announced that in determining whether a
garment is ``intended to be worn primarily for sleeping or activities related to sleeping'' the FTC would consider
(1) the nature of the garment and its suitability for use by children for sleeping or activities related to sleeping;
(2) the manner in which the garment is distributed and promoted; and (3) the likelihood that the garment will be used
by children for sleeping or activities related to sleeping in a substantial number of cases. 
After the Commission issued the flammability standard for children's sleepwear in sizes 7 through 14, the agency
became aware of various ``borderline'' garments which may or may not be intended ``primarily for sleeping or activities
related to sleeping.'' Some of these garments were described in packaging, labeling, and advertising as ``playwear,''
``daywear,'' or ``underwear.'' Because the FTC policy statement applied only to sleepwear garments in sizes 0 through
6X, the Commission decided to issue a new policy statement concerning the scope of the standard for sleepwear in sizes
7 through 14, and to revise and reissue the policy statement concerning the scope of the standard for sizes 0 through
6X. 
The Commission published a proposed revision of the policy statement concerning the scope of the sleepwear standard
for sizes 0 through 6X and a new policy statement concerning the scope of the standard for sizes 7 through 14 in 1979;
in 1980 the Commission issued final policy statements. Those policy statements were the subject of an action for judicial
review and were set aside by a U.S. Court of Appeals in 1981. See 

National Knitwear Manufacturers Association v. CPSC,

 606 F2d 81 (4th Cir. 1981). 
In 1984, the Commission issued new policy statements to replace the ones set aside on judicial review. The Commission's
1984 policy statements incorporate and amplify the factors which were identified in the FTC policy as relevant to
determining whether a garment is an item of ``children's sleepwear'' because it is intended to be worn ``primarily
for sleeping and activities related to sleeping.'' (1)

2

 The 1984 policy statements are codified at 16 CFR 1615.64 and 1616.65. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


2

</FOOTNAME>
Numbers in parentheses identify reference documents listed in Bibliography at the end of this notice. Requests for
inspection of any of these documents should be made at the Commission's Public Reading Room, 4330 East-West Highway,
room 419, Bethesda, Maryland 20814, or by calling the Office of the Secretary (301) 5040800. 
</FOOTNOTE>


The Commission's issuance of policy statements in 1983 did not definitively resolve all questions about the differences
between those children's garments which are sleepwear and are subject to the sleepwear standards and those which
are not. In 1984, the Commission staff developed a pamphlet entitled 

Enforcement Policy on Children's Sleepwear,

 which described and illustrated various styles of sleepwear and non-sleepwear garments. Since its initial publication,
the Commission staff has revised this pamphlet five times. The last publication was in 1989, entitled 

Supplemental CPSC Staff Guide to the Enforcement Policy Statements of the Flammability Standard for Children's
Sleepwear

 (2). 
Nevertheless, the Commission staff continued to receive a large volume of inquiries about the status of particular
garments as sleepwear or non-sleepwear as well as complaints about alleged violations of the children's sleepwear
standards by firms manufacturing or importing garments which were subject to the standards' definitions of ``children's
sleepwear'' but which did not meet the requirements of the applicable standard. During the same time, the staff also
became aware of an increased demand by consumers for children's sleepwear made from 100 per cent untreated cotton
fabric. Although the standards do not prohibit any specific type of fabric in the production of children's sleepwear,
100 per cent cotton fabric cannot pass the flammability tests in the standards unless treated with a flame retardant.


