 




<USBUREAU>Food and Drug Administration</USBUREAU>


<CFRNO>21 CFR Part 109</CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 89N0014]</RINDOCK>



<RINDOCK>RIN 0905AC91</RINDOCK>


Requirements for Decorative Ceramicware To Be Deemed not for Food Use


<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Final rule.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is amending its regulations to require that decorative ceramicware bear a
conspicuous stick-on label on a surface that is clearly visible to consumers and a permanent statement on the exterior
surface of the base of the ceramicware stating that the piece is not for food use, and that it may poison food. Alternatively,
the regulation provides that a hole may be bored through the possible food-contact surface of the piece. This final
rule is intended to ensure that decorative ceramicware is not mistakenly used to hold food.


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

Effective July 13, 1994, for all affected products initially introduced or initially delivered for introduction
into interstate commerce on or after this date.


</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

Cora E. Weeks, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFS306), Food and Drug Administration, 200 C St.
SW., Washington, DC 20204, 2022054681.





SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
I. Background


In the 

Federal Register

 of June 1, 1989 (54 FR 23485), FDA issued a proposed rule: (1) To establish a regulatory limit on the amount of lead that
may leach from glazes and decorations on the food-contact surface of ceramic food service pitchers, excluding creamers;
and (2) to provide that all decorative or ornamental ceramicware that appears to be suitable for food use will be considered
to be for food use, and will be regulated as such, unless it bears a conspicuous, permanent statement molded or fired
onto the exterior surface of the base of the ceramic piece. The agency proposed to require that this statement say,
``Not for Food Use_May Poison Food,'' in letters at least 3.2 millimeters (mm) (0.125 inch (in)) in height, or that
a hole be bored through the potential food-contact surface to make it unsuitable for food use.
The proposal requested comments on various concerns regarding ceramic foodware and on the impact of the proposed
requirements on decorative ceramicware that resembles foodware and that contains leachable lead.
FDA received requests to extend the comment period on the proposed rule from representatives of domestic and foreign
ceramicware manufacturers, 3suppliers of glazes and decorations containing lead for the ceramics industry and
related trade associations, the European Economic Community, and the Italian Embassy. The requests stated that
additional time was needed to address the issues raised and to provide information solicited by FDA in the proposal.
FDA responded in a notice published in the 

Federal Register

 of September 1, 1989 (54 FR 36324), that reopened and extended the comment period until November 30, 1989.
In the 

Federal Register

 of July 6, 1992 (57 FR 29734), the agency announced the availability of revised Compliance Policy Guide (CPG) 7117.07
``Pottery (Ceramics); Imported and Domestic_Lead Contamination.'' This revision lowered the guidelines on lead
release from all ceramic foodware. This revision was based, among other things, on the agency's review of data submitted
pursuant to its proposal of June 1, 1989 (54 FR 23485), and the agency's concerns about the need to reduce human exposure
to lead.
The lead release levels in CPG 7117.07 are guides that the agency uses in evaluating ceramic foodware for possible
adulteration within the meaning of section 402(a)(2)(C) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the act) (21
U.S.C. 342(a)(2)(C)). In this final rule, the agency is not acting on its proposal regarding a legally binding regulatory
limit on the amount of lead that may leach from the food-contact surfaces of ceramic food service pitchers. The agency
is continuing to review whether the CPG provides adequate protection for the public health, which would mean that
the agency could withdraw its proposal to establish a regulatory limit, or whether further rulemaking is necessary.
This final rule pertains only to ornamental and decorative ceramicware. In the June 1, 1989 (54 FR 23485), proposal,
the agency stated that the then existing policy guidance concerning decorative and ornamental ceramicware in CPG
7117.07 was too general and vague, subject to misinterpretation, and not sufficient to ensure that decorative articles
will be distinguishable from food-service articles. Therefore, the agency's purpose in adopting this final rule
is to ensure that such ware, which may leach hazardous amounts of lead into food, bear adequate indications to distinguish
it from ceramic foodware (i.e., ceramicware intended for holding, storing, or serving food). The agency has made
revisions in the language of 109.16(a) and (b) (21 CFR 109.16(a) and (b)) to make clear that this regulation
pertains only to ornamental and decorative ceramicware and not to any ceramicware intended to hold or store food,
e.g., ceramic pitchers. 
FDA also notes that the provisions of this final rule are not applicable to items such as children's ceramic tea sets.
Such items are usually small copies of articles intended for food use. They are designed for use only by children in
play activities that may involve eating or drinking foods placed in or on these products (see 

HHS News

, April 20, 1993.) Lead in these products could leach into food. Those that leach excessive amounts of lead will be subject
to regulatory action, and such ware may not obtain status as a nonfood item by virtue of its bearing any statement that
it is not for food use.
On the effective date of this final rule, all ornamental or decorative ceramicware that appears to be suitable for
food use upon initial introduction or initial delivery for introduction into interstate commerce will be considered
to be foodware and will be evaluated for lead release by the agency as foodware. Ware that meets the requirements of
this final rule will not be considered to be for food use.
The agency is also providing notice that it is deleting the exemption for nonfood service plates from CPG 7117.07.
These articles will be subject to the provisions of this final rule.


II. Summary of and Response to Comments


A. Summary of Comments


Seven letters, containing one or more comments, were received in response to the proposal on the requirements for
decorative ceramicware that resembles foodware. The comments were submitted by consumer and environmental advocacy
organizations, ceramicware manufacturers and their suppliers, and individuals.


B. Responses to Comments


1. Several comments requested that FDA allow more flexibility regarding the exact wording of the permanent statement
of unsuitability for food use and suggested statements for inclusion in the final rule as alternatives to the proposed
statement. These comments expressed concern that the word ``poison'' would alarm potential purchasers and could
lead them to believe that handling the product is hazardous. The following alternative statements were suggested:
(a) ``Decorative_Not for Food Use. Pigments are Potentially Toxi66c if Ingested,'' (b) ``Not for Food Use_Metallic
Pigments Fired into Surface are Potentially Toxic. For Decorative Purposes Only,'' or (c) ``Warning. Glaze Contains
Soluble Lead. Not for Food Use.''
The agency accepts the recommendation to allow for alternative statements of unsuitability for food use. FDA agrees
that some number of alternative statements can convey the same basic concept as the proposed statement while providing
flexibility in the wording of the message. However, to adequately denote that the ceramicware is unsuitable for food
use, the permanent statement must clearly advise the purchaser or potential user that if the article is used to hold
food, a toxic substance may be added to the food as a result. Alternative (c) does not do so. The alternative statements
(a) and (b) suggested by the comments state that the surface of the ceramic piece itself contains a toxic substance,
but they do not make clear that if the ceramicware is used for food purposes, such use may result in the addition of a toxic
substance to the food. Therefore, the agency is not accepting the statements suggested in the comments as acceptable
alternatives.
In 109.16(b)(1)(i), FDA is providing three alternative statements of unsuitability that meet the criterion
of informing the purchaser that if the article is used for food, a toxic substance may be added to the food as a result.
The alternative statements are, ``Not for Food Use. May Poison Food,'' ``Not for Food Use. Glaze contains lead. Food
Use May Result in Lead Poisoning,'' and ``Not for Food Use_Food Consumed from this Vessel May be Harmful.''
The agency concludes that these three alternative statements of unsuitability provide the industry with a choice
without providing so many different statements as to confuse consumers. Limiting the number of variations in the
statement is necessary to ensure that consumers understand that a consistent message is being presented by the statements
that they find on decorative ceramicware.
As an additional matter, the agency believes that statements that the ware is intended to be decorative may provide
useful information to the consumer about the intended use of the ware. Therefore, FDA is providing in 109.16(c)(1)
for the use of additional optional statements such as ``Decorative'' or ``For Decorative Purposes Only'' when such
statements are placed after the required statement.
2. Some comments expressed concern that statements that ornamental or de2corative ceramicware is unfit for food
use will not protect very young, illiterate, or non-English speaking people. One of the comments suggested that FDA
permit the use of a symbol to designate ceramicware that is not suitable for food use. The comments stated that the symbol
should accompany the statement that the ceramicware is unfit for food use. One comment maintained that the symbol
is responsive to concerns regarding understanding by illiterate persons, non-English speaking people, and children.
The comment suggested that the following symbol, which includes a goblet and a fork, symbols used in the United Kingdom
to indicate materials and articles that are intended to come into contact with food, be enclosed within a circle with
a bar running diagonally across the design to indicate that food use is prohibited. 





<IMPORT>



E:GRAPHICSER12JA94.000


</IMPORT>



The agency agrees that the symbol may communicate to individuals, to whom a written statement may not be readily meaningful,
that an article is not foodware. However, because the agency does not have any information concerning the extent to
which the symbol is understood or recognized by consumers, it is not requiring use of the symbol but is making its use
optional in 109.16(c)(2), as an additional cautionary statement to those required in 109.16(b).
3. Some comments expressed concern that a statement placed on the exterior surface of the base of a piece, in letters
that are only 3.2 mm (0.125 inch) in height, may not be seen by many people. Some comments requested that the agency require
that the statement be placed on the side of the ceramicware, and that the required size of letters in the statement be
related to the size of the ceramicware on which it is placed.
FDA agrees that a statement on the side of a piece is more conspicuous than one placed on the exterior surface of the base.
However, a permanent statement on the side would likely render the piece useless for ornamental or decorative purposes.
To respond to the concern of the comments, and to better protect the public, FDA is requiring in 109.16(b)(1)(i)
that a stick-on temporary label bearing one of the alternative statements, in letters at least 3.2 mm (0.125 in) in
height, be placed on a surface of the piece that is clearly visible to the consumer. The temporary label will advise
the consumer that the piece is not for food use and of the reason why it is not for food use. The determination as to the
appropriate surface for the temporary label will depend on the shape of the piece. For example, the appropriate place
on a plate for the temporary label would be the potential food-contact surface, while on a pitcher a temporary label
on the exterior of the side would be suitable.
The requirement for a temporary label is in addition to the requirement of a permanent label that the agency proposed
(54 FR 23485). The purpose of the proposal was to ensure that decorative ceramicware would not be used in a manner that
is unsafe. The comments have convinced the agency that the additional requirement for a temporary label placed on
a conspicuous surface is necessary to ensure that the purposes of this final rule are realized. Without this requirement,
as the comments suggested, there is a significant chance that a consumer will miss the warning on the base of the ceramicware.
The agency does not agree that the size of the letters in the permanent statement must be directly related to the dimensions
of the ornamental or decorative ceramicware piece to be seen. If the statement meets the minimum letter height requirements
of 109.16(b)(1)(ii) and is adequately contrasted or otherwise differentiated or set out from the background
of the piece, the statement will fully serve its function. The agency notes that the requirement for conspicuousness
in declarations of net quantity of contents on food labels (101.105(i)) includes the specification that the
letter height is not less than one-eighth inch (or 3.2 mm (0.125 in)) if the declaration is blown, embossed, or molded
on a surface. Using this precedent, the agency believes that the minimal letter height of the statement of nonfood
use should generally be not less than 3.2 mm (or one-eighth in) because letters that are less than 3.2 mm (0.125 in) in
height may not be conspicuous enough to be readily seen.
However, the agency recognizes that there may be some ceramicware articles that appear to be suitable for food use
that have bases with surface areas that are too small to fit the required statement if it were to be in letters that are
3.2 mm (0.125 inch) in height. For such articles, the agency is providing in 109.16(b)(1)(ii) that the statement
be written in the largest letters possible, provided the letters are at least 1.6 mm (0.062 inch) high.
4. One comment stated that the agency should not impose a minimum letter size for the permanent statement because of
the limited space available on some articles.
The agency believes that ceramicware pieces that could be mistaken as being intended for holding, storing, or serving
food would have a size and configuration similar to food-use ware and would have bases sufficiently large for88 the
required statement. The agency has accommodated size problems in 109.16(b)(1)(ii). Therefore, the agency
rejects this comment.
5. One comment expressed concern that, in the past, it has been difficult, if not impossible, to keep decorative or
ornamental ceramicware from being used to hold food. Therefore, the comment argued that FDA should not rely on statements
to distinguish ceramicware used for food storage from decorative or ornamental ceramicware. The comment suggested
that FDA consider only ceramicware that has holes bored in the food-contact surface to be decorative or ornamental.
The agency disagrees with this suggestion. A hole bored through some decorative or ornamental ceramicware articles
would render them useless for their intended purpose, e.g., pieces in the shape of pitchers intended for use as vases
for fresh flowers, and would damage the decorative value of others, e.g., commemorative plates. The intent of this
regulation is to distinguish decorative ceramicware from food-service articles by using specified statements
and an optional symbol in a manner that ensures that those statements will be readily seen and understood by the consumer.
FDA concludes, based on the available information, that the measures required under this final rule are appropriate
for this purpose. 
6. One comment suggested that FDA also require that decorative ceramicware (when first sold) be accompanied by a booklet
in which the permanent statement is printed in large type. The comment stated that the booklet should include a paragraph
stating that the object is not to be used to hold, serve, or store food and provide a brief explanation of the dangers
of lead to pregnant women, infants, and children. The comment further suggested that FDA set out the exact wording
of the text of the suggested booklet in the final rule.
FDA does not have information and data that demonstrate that such a booklet is necessary to protect consumers from
the use with food of decorative ceramicware. Accordingly, FDA is not requiring manufacturers to provide such a booklet,
although FDA believes that a booklet describing the potential hazards of misusing decorative ceramicware may be
useful in helping to make consumers aware of the adverse effects of lead. Therefore, the agency has no objection to
the manufacturers providing such a booklet on their own initiative.
The requirement for a temporary label will respond to the comment's objective of ensuring that consumers are informed
about the intended use of the ware. In addition, FDA uses consumer education vehicles such as the 

FDA Consumer

 magazine to inform the public about issues concerning misuse of ornamental ceramicware to avoid lead exposure from
this source. The agency, in ``Lead Threat Lessens, But Mugs Pose Problem'' in the 

FDA Consumer

 of April 1993, and in ``Reducing Exposure to Lead from Ceramic Ware,'' an 

FDA Backgrounder

 of November 1991, advised consumers to follow label directions on any ornamental product with a warning that the article
is not for food use.
7. One comment stated that the requirement that ornamental or decorative pieces either bear a permanent statement
on the base or have a hole bored into the food-contact surface is not appropriate for antique or secondhand articles
of value.
The agency advises that this final rule applies to new ornamental or decorative articles initially introduced, or
initially delivered for introduction, into interstate commerce after the effective date of the rule and would not
apply to antique or secondhand articles of value.
The agency considers the safe use of antique or secondhand ceramicware to be a subject for consumer education. The
agency, in ``Pretty Poison: Lead and Ceramicware'' in the 

FDA Consumer

 of July/August 1987, and in ``Reducing Exposure to Lead from Ceramic Ware'' in the 

FDA Backgrounder

 of November 1991, recommended limiting food use of ceramicware manufactured before Federal standards were imposed.
Dealers and merchants can help inform consumers about the risk posed by such ware by affixing stick-on labels or decals
to articles of questionable origin or safety. The labels or decals should state that the articles are to be used only
for decorative or ornamental purposes. The agency intends to continue to caution consumers that substantial amounts
of lead may leach from antique and other ceramic collectibles into food.
8. One comment stated that certain types of hand-painted and hand-carved decorative ceramicware, such as ``coromandel
porcelain,'' are not subject to kiln firing as part of or after the decoration and painting processes. Thus, the required
statement cannot be fired onto the base of such articles. The comment requested that FDA permit the statement to be
painted on the base of the decorative ceramicware with a permanent paint. The comment further stated that this is the
only commercially practical and feasible method of applying a conspicuous and permanent statement to this type of
ceramicware.
FDA agrees that there is a need to provide for the application of the permanent statement to decorative or ornamental
ceramicware that are not fired after decoration. Accordingly, the agency is providing in 109.16(b)(1)(ii)
that the statement may be painted onto ceramicware using permanent paint when the ceramicware is not fired after decoration.
9. Ceramic product manufacturers commented that if FDA requires the use of the symbol in the final rule, 6 months is
not sufficient time to have molds or decals available. These manufacturers requested that the effective date of the
final rule be delayed in order to have time to phase in use of the symbol. 
Because FDA is making the use of the symbol optional, manufacturers who decide to use it are not subject to an FDA-imposed
time constraint in phasing in its use. Therefore, the agency is not extending the effective date. 


III. Conclusions


After review and consideration of comments received in response to the portion of its June 1, 1989, proposal that relates
to ornamental and decorative ceramicware (54 FR 23485), the agency is adopting that portion of the proposal as a final
rule. The purpose of the regulation that FDA is adopting is to distinguish ornamental or decorative ceramicware that
may leach excessive amounts of lead into food from ceramic foodware (i.e., ceramicware intended for holding, storing,
or serving food). Section 109.16 provides that FDA will consider all decorative or ornamental ceramicware that appears
to be suitable for food use to be for food use and will regulate it as such, unless a stick-on label bearing one of three
specified statements in letters that are at least 3.2 mm (0.125 in) in height is placed on a readily visible surface
of the ceramicware, and one of the three specified statements in letters that are at least 3.2 mm (0.125 in) in height
is permanently affixed to the exterior surface of the base of the ceramicware. However, if insufficient space exists
for the permanent statement to be presented in letters of such height, the statement shall be in the largest letters
that will allow it to fit on the base of the piece, provided that the letters are at least 1.6 mm (0.062 in) in height. In
the alternative, the manufacturer may bore a hole through the potential food-contact surface of the decorative ceramicware
to make it unsuitable for food use. The final rule also provides that the required statement can be painted onto the
exterior surface of the base if the piece is not fired after decoration. Further, the final rule provides that a symbol
may be used, in addition to the statement or hole bored through the ware, to advise the consumer that the article is not
for food use.


IV. Economic Impact


FDA has examined the economic implications of this final rule to amend 21 CFR part 109 as required by Executive Order
12866 and the Regulatory Flexibility Act (Pub. L. 96354). Executive Order 12866 compels agencies to use a cost-benefit
analysis as a component of decisionmaking. The Regulatory Flexibility Act requires regulatory relief for small
businesses where feasible. FDA has received no new information or comments that would alter its tentative finding
in the proposal that there is no substantive economic issue, and that this rule is not a major rule as defined by either
Executive Order 12866 or the Regulatory Flexibility Act.



V. Environmental Impact


The agency considered the environmental effects of this action in the context of the proposed rule (54 FR 23485). At
that time, the agency prepared an environmental assessment (EA) and concluded that the proposed action would not
have a significant impact on the human environment and that an environmental impact statement (EIS) was not required.
One comment received by the agency on the proposed rule stated that the continued use of lead in consumer products has
a major environmental impact when these products are disposed of, and that FDA had failed to consider fully the environmental
impact of its proposal. As explained above, the aspect of the proposed rule concerned with the reduction in limits
on the levels of lead leaching from ceramic foodware has been addressed by a compliance policy guide (CPG) that was
announced in the 

Federal Register

 of July 6, 1992 (57 FR 29734). At that time the agency prepared an EA for the issuance of this CPG in which, among other
things, it addressed the above comment. The conclusion of that EA was that the agency's action to reduce the limits
on the levels of lead leaching from ceramic foodware may also reduce the amount of lead that could potentially enter
the environment from landfill leachate. This EA is on public display at the Dockets Management Branch (address above).
The other part of the proposed rule is covered by this final rule, i.e., the establishment of labeling requirements
for decorative ceramicware that appears to be suitable for food use. FDA actions that establish regulations for labeling
requirements normally do not require the preparation of an EA or an EIS under 25.24(a)(11) (21 CFR 25.24(a)(11))
because such actions meet specific criteria that are intended to ensure that they will not cause significant environmental
effects. These criteria are that there will be no increase in the existing levels of use or change in the intended uses
of the product or its substitutes. Because the intent of this final rule is to prevent decorative ceramicware from
being used for food service, we conclude that these criteria are met, and that the categorical exclusion in 25.24(a)(11)
applies to the action in this final rule. Therefore, the comment cited above does not provide a basis to change the agency's
previous determination that there is no significant impact on the human environment from this action, and that an
EIS is not required.


List of Subjects in 21 CFR Part 109


Food labeling, Food packaging, Foods, Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB's).
Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and under authority delegated to the Commissioner of Food
and Drugs, 21 CFR part 109 is amended to read as follows:


PART 109_UNAVOIDABLE CONTAMINANTS IN FOOD FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION AND FOOD-PACKAGING MATERIALS


1. The authority citation for 21 CFR part 109 is revised to read as follows:





Authority: 

Secs. 201, 306, 402, 406, 408, 409, 701 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321, 336, 342, 346, 346a,
348, 371).



2. New 109.16 is added to subpart A to read as follows:


109.16 

Ornamental and decorative ceramicware.


(a) Lead is a toxic metal that is used as a component of glazes and decorative decals on ceramics, including some ornamental
and decorative ceramicware. The use of ornamental or decorative ceramicware to prepare, serve, or hold food may result
in the leaching of lead from the glaze or decoration into the food. The provisions of paragraph (b) of this section are
necessary to ensure that ornamental or decorative ceramicware bear adequate indications that they are not to be used
for food-handling purposes.
(b) Ornamental or decorative ceramicware initially introduced or initially delivered for introduction into interstate
commerce on or after July 13, 1994 appears to be suitable for food use will be considered to be for food use unless:
(1) It bears:
(i) A conspicuous stick-on label on a surface clearly visible to consumers that states in legible script in letters
at least 3.2 millimeters (0.125 inch) in height one of the following messages: ``Not for Food Use. May Poison Food,''
``Not for Food Use. Glaze contains lead. Food Use May Result in Lead Poisoning,'' and ``Not for Food Use_Food Consumed
from this Vessel May be Harmful,'' and
(ii) A conspicuous and legible permanent statement of the message selected from paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section
molded or fired onto the exterior surface of the base or, when the ceramicware is not fired after decoration, permanently
painted onto the exterior surface of the base. This permanent statement shall be in letters at least 3.2 millimeters
(0.125 inch) in height, except that if insufficient space exists for the permanent statement in letters of such height,
the statement shall be in the largest letters that will allow it to fit on the base of the piece, provided that the letters
are at least 1.6 millimeters (0.062 inch) in height; or
(2) A hole is bored through the potential food-contact surface.
(c) In addition to steps required under paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section, the following optional information
may be provided on the ware:
(1) A further explanatory statement concerning the decorative nature of the piece, such as ``Decorative'' or ``For
Decorative Purposes Only,'' may be used; however, such additional statement shall be placed after the required statement.
(2) A symbol may be used to advise that a piece of ornamental or decorative ceramicware is not to be used with food, as
illustrated below.





<IMPORT>



E:GRAPHICSER12JA94.001


</IMPORT>



The circle of the above symbol should be at least 2.54 centimeters (1 inch) in diameter. The symbol may be used on the
temporary label or applied to the base of the piece in the same manner as the permanent statement.




Dated: January 5, 1994.

</FURTHER>
<SIGNER>
Michael R. Taylor,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Commissioner for Policy.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 94706 Filed 11194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>

