 

21. 

Apparent contradiction with EB work test.

 The MDLIR commented that 617.11(a)(2)(vi)(B) and (vii)(B) and (C), which refer to the EB work test and the training
requirement, appear to be contradictory. The regulations state that the EB work test and the training requirement
shall not apply to an individual with respect to a claim for TRA for weeks of unemployment prior to the filing of an initial
claim for TRA, nor for any week which begins before the certification is issued and the individual is fully informed
of the requirement. The MDLIR points out that the language of these paragraphs appears to permit retroactive payments
of TRA. 


Department's response.

 The Department does not agree with the commenter. The cited paragraphs of the regulations do not authorize retroactive
payments of TRA. These paragraphs specifically provide that the requirements for eligibility in clauses (vi) and
(vii) may not be applied retroactively, to workers otherwise eligible for basic TRA, because workers cannot comply
retroactively with those requirements. This is a ``due process'' issue only. Therefore, no change is made in the regulations.

22. 

Completed training.

 The Unemployed Council of Southwestern Pennsylvania (UCSP), commenting on 617.11(a)(2)(vii)(D)(

2

), stated that the requirement ``the training occurred subsequent to the individual's total or partial separation''
goes beyond Congressional intent. The UCSP argues that in amended Section 231(a)(5)(B) Congress allowed TRA payments
to workers who have ``***after the date on which the worker became totally separated, or partially
separated, from adversely affected employment, completed a training program approved by the Secretary.***''
The UAW also commented along the same lines. 


Department's response.

 The Department agrees with the comments, and the regulations have been changed accordingly to delete the word ``occurred''
and insert in place thereof ``was completed'' in 617.11(a)(2)(vii)(D)(

2

). 
23. 

Enrolled in training.

 The Washington Employment Security Department (WESD), commenting on 617.11(a)(2)(vii)(D)(

1

), recommended that the definition for ``enrolled in training'' be amended by adding after ``within 30 calendar days''
the words ``or the next available time the training could begin at the training institution.'' The WESD explained
that in the cases where training is not available within 30 days of approval that to subject the worker to the EB work
test, which means a worker must accept any work the worker is physically capable of performing, would be to the detriment
of the worker when training is approved and planned for in the foreseeable future. 


Department's response.

 During the period the EB work test is applied under 617.19(b)(3), when the training requirement is waived,
the worker may find suitable employment which would eliminate the need for additional training. If the State agency
determines the job is not suitable (as defined in 617.22(a)(1)(ii)), and it is reasonable and necessary for
the worker to quit work in order to enter training, as provided in 617.18(b)(1)(iii), the individual may enter
training when the training program begins. Also, see the Department's response in item 20, above. Therefore, no change
is made in the final regulations. 
24. 

Certain waivers.

 The PDLI commented that 617.11(a)(3)(i)(C) appears to require that a worker must meet all the requirements
applicable to eligibility for basic TRA in the preceding sections, including the wage and employment qualifying
requirements, with respect to the total separation in 617.11(a)(3)(i)(B), to qualify for the waiver of the
basic TRA eligibility period and the 210-day filing requirement under Section 1425(b) of the OTCA. The PDLI commented
further that the reference in Section 1425(b) is to total separations from adversely affected employment within
the meaning of Section 247 of the Act. Section 247 defines both separation and adversely affected employment. The
definitions do not include references to wage and employment qualifying requirements. Requiring workers to meet
these additional conditions with respect to the total separation noted in section 1425(b) seems to be beyond the intent
of the law. Further, to the extent previous Federal operating instructions (GAL 788) direct the wage requirements,
including equivalent qualifying weeks, be met as provided under the law prior to the 1986 Amendments, the PDLI believes
those instructions are incorrect and should be revised. 


Department's response.

 The Department does not concur in these comments. Section 1425(b) does not remove the wage and employment qualifying
requirements of the Trade Act. This section, by specific reference to sections 233(a)(2) and 233(b), only eliminates
the time limit on the eligibility period for receiving basic TRA and the 210-day time limit for filing for training
to qualify for additional weeks of TRA. No waiver of any of the other basic eligibility requirements is implied in removing
these two time constraints. Therefore, no change is made in the regulations. 




