 

551.113 

Counseling. 



(a) When consistent with institution security and good order, pretrial inmates may be allowed the opportunity to
receive counseling services with convicted inmates. 

(b) Staff shall ensure that pretrial inmates who do not receive counseling services with convicted inmates have access
to other counseling services. 


551.114 

Medical, psychiatric and psychological. 



(a) Staff shall provide the pretrial inmate with the same level of basic medical (including dental), psychiatric,
and psychological care provided to convicted inmates. 

(b) Staff shall advise the court, through the U.S. Marshal, of medication the pretrial inmate receives which may alter
the inmate's courtroom behavior. 

(c) In event of serious illness or death of a pretrial inmate, staff shall notify the committing court, U.S. Marshal,
U.S. Attorney's Office, the inmate's attorney of record, and the designated family member or next of kin. 


551.115 

Recreation. 



(a) When consistent with institution security and good order, pretrial inmates may be allowed the opportunity to
participate with convicted inmates in recreational activities. Staff shall ensure that inmates who do not participate
in recreational activities with convicted inmates have access to other recreational activities. 

(b) At a minimum, and except as noted in paragraph (d) of this section, staff shall provide the pretrial inmate with
the following recreational opportunities: 

(1) One hour daily of outside recreation, weather permitting; or 

(2) Two hours daily of indoor recreation. 

(c) Staff shall make recreation equipment available to the pretrial inmate including, but not limited to, physical
exercise equipment, books, table games, and television. 

(d) Staff shall provide the pretrial inmate housed in Administrative Detention or Disciplinary Segregation with
exercise as provided by the Bureau of Prisons rules on Inmate Discipline. (See 28 CFR part 541, subpart B.) 

(e) Provisions of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section must be carried out unless compelling security or safety reasons
dictate otherwise. Institution staff shall document these reasons. 


551.116 

Discipline. 



(a) Staff shall require the pretrial inmate to abide by Bureau of Prisons rules on Inmate Discipline (see 28 CFR part
541, subpart B), subject to the limitations of 551.106 of this part. 

(b) Staff shall advise the court, through the U.S. Marshal, of repeated or serious disruptive behavior by a pretrial
inmate. 


551.117 

Access to legal resources. 



(a) The Warden shall provide the opportunity for pretrial inmate-attorney visits on a seven-days-a-week basis.


(b) Staff shall provide pretrial inmates with access to legal materials in the institution. 

(c) Staff shall allow the pretrial inmate, upon the inmate's request, to telephone the inmate's attorney as often
as resources of the institution allow. 


551.118 

Property. 



(a) A pretrial inmate may retain personal property as authorized for convicted inmates housed in administrative
detention units. (See 28 CFR part 541, subpart B.) 

(b) Staff may store the pretrial inmate's unauthorized personal property until the individual is released, transferred
to another facility, or sentenced and committed to a federal institution. 

(c) Staff may supply the pretrial inmate with clothing for court appearances, or the inmate may supply his or her own.



551.119 

Release of funds and property of pretrial inmates. 



(a) Staff shall establish procedures which allow for the release of funds and personal property to pretrial inmates
released during other than normal business hours. 

(b) Staff shall ensure that pretrial inmates are informed of existing policy relative to the commissary account and
the deposit/release of funds. 


551.120 

Visiting. 



Staff shall allow pretrial inmates to receive visits in accordance with the Bureau's rule and local institution guidelines
on visiting. Staff may allow a pretrial inmate special visits to protect the inmate's business interests or to help
prepare for trial.

 


<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9428829 Filed 112194; 8:45 am] 

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 441005P
</BILLING>

