 

J. ``Make-up Water'' means that volume of water needed to replace 
 process water lost due to evaporation and seepage in order to maintain 
 the quantity necessary for the operation of the beneficiation process. 
 
K. ``New Water'' means water from any discrete source such as a river, 
 creek, lake or well which is deliberately allowed or brought into the plant 
 site. 
 
L. ``Plant Site'' means the area occupied by the mine, necessary haulage 
 ways from the mine to the beneficiation process, the beneficiation area, 
 the area occupied by the wastewater treatment storage facilities and the 
 storage areas for waste materials and solids removed from the 
 wastewaters during treatment. 
 
M. ``Receiving Water'' means waters such as lakes, rivers, streams, creeks, or any other surface waters which receive
wastewater discharges. 
 
N. ``Severe property damage'' means substantial physical damage to 
 property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to 
 become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural 
 resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence 
 of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss 
 caused by delays in production. 
 
O. ``Short circuiting'' means ineffective settling ponds due to inadequate or insufficient retention characteristics,
excessive sediment deposition, embankment infiltration/percolation, lack of maintenance, etc. 
 
P. ``Upset'' means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with technology-based
permit effluent limitations because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the 
 permittee. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent 
 caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, 
 inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or 
 careless or improper operation. 
 
Q. ``Wastewater'' means all water used in and resulting from the 
 beneficiation process (including but not limited to the water used to 
 move the ore to and through the beneficiation process, the water used 
 to aid in classification, and the water used in gravity separation), mine 
 drainage, and infiltration and drainage waters which commingle with 
 mine drainage or waters resulting from the beneficiation process. 

 

IX. Special Conditions_Effluent Limits Below Detection Levels 

 

A. Reporting Levels 
 


1. For purpose of reporting, the permittee shall use the reporting threshold equivalent to the minimum level (ML).
The ML is defined as the 
 concentration in a sample equivalent to the concentration of the lowest 
 calibration standard analyzed in a specific analytical procedure, 
 assuming that all the method-specified sample weights, volumes and 
 processing steps have been followed. As such, the permittee must 
 utilize a standards equivalent to the concentration of the ML for arsenic 
 which is 4 &mu;g/L. 
 
2. For the purpose of reporting on the DMR, actual analytical results 
 should be reported whenever possible. All analytical values at or above 
 the ML shall be reported as the measured value. When the results 
 cannot be quantified, values below the method detection limit (1 &mu;g/L) 
 shall be reported as zero (0 &mu;g/L) and values above the method 
 detection level and below the ML shall be reported as 1/2 the ML or 
 2 &mu;g/L. 
 
 

B. Reporting Details



In the ``Comment'' section of the DMR, the permittee 
 shall report the lowest calibration standard used and the ML achieved.

