 




<CFRNO>14 CFR Part 39 

</CFRNO>


<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 93NM200AD; Amendment 398911; AD 941004]

</RINDOCK>

Airworthiness Directives; Jetstream Model 4101 Airplanes



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Federal Aviation Administration, DOT.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Final rule.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 This amendment adopts a new airworthiness directive (AD), applicable to certain Jetstream Model 4101 airplanes,
that requires a visual inspection of an area beneath the flooring for foreign objects and debris, removal of any foreign
object or debris found, and installation of a protective guard on the rear cabin attendant seat. This amendment also
requires a revision to the FAA-approved maintenance program to include repetitive visual inspections of the area
above the protective guard for foreign objects and debris, and removal of any foreign object or debris found. This
amendment is prompted by reports that foreign objects and debris have been found in the area around the elevator and
rudder trim cables below the floor. The actions specified by this AD are intended to prevent foreign objects and debris
from lodging in the control circuits and jamming the elevator and rudder trim systems.


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Effective June 15, 1994.



The incorporation by reference of certain publications listed in the regulations is approved by the Director of the
Federal Register as of June 15, 1994.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 The service information referenced in this AD may be obtained from Jetstream Aircraft, Inc., P.O. Box 


16029, Dulles International Airport, Washington, DC 200416029. This information may be examined at the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA), Transport Airplane Directorate, Rules Docket, 1601 Lind Avenue, SW., Renton, Washington;
or at the Office of the Federal Register, 800 North Capitol Street, NW., suite 700, Washington, DC.



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 William Schroeder, Aerospace Engineer, Standardization Branch, ANM113, FAA, Transport Airplane Directorate,
1601 Lind Avenue, SW., Renton, Washington 980554056; telephone (206) 2272148; fax (206) 2271320.


 
</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 A proposal to amend part 39 of the Federal Aviation Regulations to include an airworthiness directive (AD) that is
applicable to certain Jetstream Model 4101 airplanes was published in the 

Federal Register

 on January 25, 1994 (59 FR 3636). That action proposed to require a visual inspection of an area beneath the flooring
for foreign objects and debris, removal of any foreign object or debris found, and installation of a protective guard
on the rear cabin attendant seat. That action also proposed to require a revision to the FAA-approved maintenance
program to include repetitive visual inspections of the area above the protective guard for foreign objects and debris,
and removal of any foreign object or debris found. 



Interested persons have been afforded an opportunity to participate in the making of this amendment. Due consideration
has been given to the two comments received. 

Both commenters support the proposed rule. 

After careful review of the available data, including the comments noted above, the FAA has determined that air safety
and the public interest require the adoption of the rule as proposed. 

The FAA estimates that 7 airplanes of U.S. registry will be affected by this AD, that it will take approximately 2 work
hours per airplane to accomplish the required actions, and that the average labor rate is $55 per work hour. Required
parts will be supplied by the manufacturer at no cost to operators. Based on these figures, the total cost impact of
the AD on U.S. operators is estimated to be $770, or $110 per airplane. 

The total cost impact figure discussed above is based on assumptions that no operator has yet accomplished any of the
requirements of this AD action, and that no operator would accomplish those actions in the future if this AD were not
adopted. 

The regulations adopted herein will not have substantial direct effects on the States, on the relationship between
the national government and the States, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities among the various levels
of government. Therefore, in accordance with Executive Order 12612, it is determined that this final rule does not
have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the preparation of a Federalism Assessment. 

For the reasons discussed above, I certify that this action (1) is not a ``significant regulatory action'' under Executive
Order 12866; (2) is not a ``significant rule'' under DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures (44 FR 11034, February
26, 1979); and (3) will not have a significant economic impact, positive or negative, on a substantial number of small
entities under the criteria of the Regulatory Flexibility Act. A final evaluation has been prepared for this action
and it is contained in the Rules Docket. A copy of it may be obtained from the Rules Docket at the location provided under
the caption 

ADDRESSES.

 



List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 39 



Air transportation, Aircraft, Aviation safety, Incorporation by reference, Safety.



Adoption of the Amendment 



Accordingly, pursuant to the authority delegated to me by the Administrator, the Federal Aviation Administration
amends 14 CFR part 39 of the Federal Aviation Regulations as follows: 

</SUPPLEM>
