 

d. The applicable ``First-Class Mail Enclosed'' or ``Third-Class Mail Enclosed'' 
marking must be placed on or in the host publication if it contains a nonincidental 
First- or third-class enclosure. If placed on the outer wrapper, polybag, envelope, 
or cover of the host publication, the marking must be set in type no smaller than 
any used in the required ``POSTMASTER: Send change of address ...'' statement. If 
placed in the identification statement, the marking must meet the applicable 
standards. The marking must not be on or in copies not accompanied by a First- or 
third-class enclosure unless additional information is provided under the applicable 
postage payment standards in P070. 


1.4Enclosures at Second-Class Rates 


Only the following material may be included loose as an enclosure in a second-class mailpiece and be paid at second-class
rates, subject to the corresponding 
conditions: 
a. An incidental First-Class piece that must be closely related but secondary 
to the second-class publication with which it is enclosed, and that consists of 
matter that, if mailed separately, would require First-Class postage. Examples of 
an incidental First-Class enclosure are a bill for the publication, a statement of 
account for past publication purchases, or a personal message or greeting included 
with the publication. 
b. A receipt, request, or order for a subscription that may be printed or 
written; prepared as a card or envelope, including business reply, or as a 
combination form for the host and one or more second-class publications issued by 
the same publisher; arranged to include a coin receptacle; and inserted in an 
envelope within the publication. The receipt or request may be part of or 
accompanied by a single sheet of printed matter containing information related exclusively to a receipt or request
or order for a subscription to the host second-class 
publication (or a combination of the host and other second-class publications of the 
same publisher), if that printed matter does not advertise, promote, or offer for sale 
other products or services. 
c. A card or form for the recipient's use in providing address correction 
information to the publisher that may be printed or written; prepared as a card or 
envelope, including business reply, or as a combination form for two or more 
second-class publications issued by the same publisher; inserted in an envelope 
that is attached to, bound in, or loose within the publication; or prepared as a 
detachable part of another permissible enclosure. Enclosures listed in 1.4b and 
1.4c are not counted when determining the percentage of advertising in the 
publication, but they are included in the total weight of the publication reported on 
the mailing statement. If the publication otherwise consists entirely of 
nonadvertising matter, an incidental First-Class enclosure as described in 1.4a may 
be treated as nonadvertising matter. In all other cases, an incidental First-Class 
enclosure is considered part of the advertising portion of the publication. 


1.5Supplements 


A supplement is one or more pages (subject to 1.1) formed by one or more printed 
sheets that are not bound into a publication. A bound publication with one or 
more supplements must be enclosed in a wrapper (see 3.3 and 3.4). If a 
supplement to a bound publication is formed of more than one sheet, all sheets 
comprising the supplement must be bound together. Except where the mailpiece is 
enclosed in a wrapper (see 3.4), a supplement to an unbound publication must be 
combined with, and inserted within, the publication. A loose supplement may be 
included with an unbound publication only if the mailpiece is enclosed in a wrapper 
(see 3.4). A supplement may be devoted to a single topic, and may contain 
material different from that in the host publication. The external dimensions of a 
supplement (i.e., its length and height) may not exceed those of the host 
publication. Each supplement to a bound publication and loose supplements 
included with unbound publications must bear the printed endorsement 
``Supplement to'' followed by the name of the publication or publisher. 


1.6Covers 


A cover may be placed on the outside of a second-class publication. A protective 
cover is an additional cover placed around the outside of a publication; preparation 
is subject to 3.5. Advertising, nonadvertising, or both may be printed on the 
cover or protective cover. The cover and protective cover on a publication are 
included when measuring advertising percentage. Nothing may be attached to the 
cover or protective cover except as permitted under 1.8. 





