 




Group I vehicles and equipment 

means large-sized trucks, buses, and mobile equipment.


Group II vehicles 

means passenger cars, small-sized trucks and vans, medium-sized trucks and vans, and motorcycles.


Heatset 

means a class of web-offset lithography which requires a heated dryer to solidify the printing inks.


Heatset-web-offset lithographic printing unit 

means a lithographic printing unit in which a blanket cylinder is used to transfer ink from a plate cylinder to a substrate
continuously fed from a roll or an extension process and an oven is used to solidify the printing inks.


Heavy off-highway vehicle products 

means heavy construction, mining, farming, or material handling equipment; heavy industrial engines; diesel-electric
locomotives and associated power generation equipment; and the components of such equipment or engines.


Heavy off-highway vehicle products coating facility 

means a facility that includes one or more heavy off-highway vehicle products coating unit(s).


Heavy off-highway vehicle products coating unit 

means a coating unit in which any protective, decorative, or functional coating is applied onto the surface of heavy
off-highway vehicle products.


Highway 

means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
Highway includes street.


Industrial or commercial solvent use facility 

means any industrial or commercial facility that uses solvents which contain VOCs or substances that contain solvents
which contain VOCs. Industrial and commercial solvent use facilities include, but are not limited to, perchloroethylene
dry cleaning, petroleum dry cleaning, metal cleaning, degreasing, aerospace component coating, motor vehicle
and mobile equipment assembly line coating, motor vehicle and mobile equipment refinishing, can coating, coil coating,
fabric coating, film coating, flatwood product coating, graphic arts coating, large appliance coating, magnet
wire coating, marine vessel coating, metal and wood furniture coating, miscellaneous metal parts and products coating,
paper coating, and plastic parts coating facilities. Substances that contain solvents include, but are not limited
to, coatings, inks, fountain solutions, adhesives, thinners, and clean-up solvents.


Ink 

means a coating used in printing, impressing, or transferring an image onto a substrate.


Laminating unit 

means a printing unit in which an adhesive is used to form two or more layers of material into a single, multiple-layer
sheet.


Large appliance 

means the component metal parts (including, but not limited to, doors, cases, lids, panels, and interior support
parts) of residential and commercial washers, dryers, ranges, refrigerators, freezers, water heaters, dish washers,
trash compactors, air conditioners, and other similar products under SIC Code 363.


Large appliance coating facility 

means a facility that includes one or more large appliance coating unit(s).


Large appliance coating unit 

means a coating unit in which any protective, decorative, or functional coating is applied onto the surface of component
metal parts of large appliances.


Letterpress printing unit 

means a printing unit in which the image area is raised relative to the nonimage area on the roll printer and the ink is
transferred to the paper directly from the image surface.


Light-duty truck 

means any motor vehicle rated at 3864 kg (8500 lb) gross vehicle weight or less, designed mainly to transport property.


Lithographic printing unit 

means a printing unit in which the image and nonimage areas are on the same plane of the roll printer.


Magnet wire coating facility 

means a facility that includes one or more magnet coating unit(s).


Magnet wire coating unit 

means a coating unit in which electrically insulating varnish or enamel is applied onto the surface of wire to be used
in electrical machinery.


Marine vessel 

means a ship or boat used to travel on, or a submarine used to travel through, the sea.


Marine vessel coating facility 

means a facility that includes one or more marine vessel coating unit(s).


Marine vessel coating unit 

means a coating unit in which any protective, decorative, or functional coating is applied on the fabricated part,
assembly of parts, or completed unit of any marine vessel.


Metal furniture 

means any furniture piece made of metal or any metal part which is or will be assembled with other metal, wood, fabric,
plastic, or glass parts to form a furniture piece including, but not limited to, tables, chairs, waste baskets, beds,
desks, lockers, benches, shelving, file cabinets, lamps, and room dividers. This definition shall not apply to any
coating unit coating miscellaneous metal parts or products.


Metal furniture coating facility 

means a facility that includes one or more metal furniture coating unit(s).


Metal furniture coating unit 

means a coating unit in which any protective, decorative, or functional coating is applied onto the surface of metal
furniture.


Miscellaneous metal part or product 

means any metal part or metal product, even if attached to or combined with a nonmetal part or product.


Miscellaneous metal parts or products coating facility 

means a facility that includes one or more miscellaneous metal parts or products coating unit(s).


Miscellaneous metal parts or products coating unit 

means a coating unit in which any protective, decorative, or functional coating is applied onto the surface of miscellaneous
metal parts or products.


