 

We calculated FMV on a monthly, weighted-average basis. Where possible, we compared sales of identical merchandise
in the two markets. For each instance in which identical merchandise was not sold in Italy during the relevant contemporaneous
period, we used as FMV contemporaneous home market sales of the product that was the most similar to the merchandise
involved in the U.S. sale, in accordance with section 771(16) of the Act. Because filled and unfilled resins generally
are not similar in terms of their physical characteristics, we compared, whenever possible, home market sales of
filled resins to U.S. sales of filled resins, and home market sales of unfilled resins to U.S. sales of unfilled resins.
We matched filled resins in the U.S. and home markets according to the amounts and types of fillers in the products sold
and the percentages of those fillers. 

See 
Antidumping Duty Order on Granular Polytetrafluoroethylene Resin from Italy_Analysis Memorandum for Preliminary
Results of Fifth Review,

 August 5, 1994. 
We made adjustments to home market prices for rebates. To adjust for differences in circumstances of sale between
the home market and the United States in accordance with 19 CFR 353.56(a), we deducted post-sale inland freight, inland
insurance, and credit expenses from FMV. Where applicable, we made adjustments for differences in the physical characteristics
of the merchandise. We also deducted from FMV indirect selling expenses, in an amount not exceeding the amount of indirect
selling expenses incurred in the United States, in accordance with 19 CFR 353.56(b)(2). 
In order to adjust for differences in packing between the two markets, we deducted home market packing from FMV and
added U.S. packing to FMV. We also adjusted the amount of the Italian VAT included in FMV in accordance with our decision
in 

Silicomanganese.

 No other adjustments were claimed or allowed. 
In accordance with section 773(a)(2) of the Act, we used CV as the basis for FMV when there were no usable sales of such
or similar merchandise in the home market. 
We calculated CV in accordance with section 773(e) of the Act. We included the cost of materials, fabrication, general
expenses, profit, and packing. To calculate CV we used: (1) actual general expenses, or the statutory minimum of 10
percent of materials and fabrication, whichever was greater; (2) actual profit or the statutory minimum of 8 percent
of materials, fabrication, and general expenses, whichever was greater; and (3) packing costs for merchandise exported
to the United States. Where appropriate, we made adjustments to CV, in accordance with 19 CFR 353.56, for differences
in circumstances of sale. We deducted home market direct selling expenses, and home market indirect selling expenses
not exceeding the amount of U.S. indirect selling expenses in accordance with 19 CFR 353.56(b)(2). 


Preliminary Results of the Review 


As a result of our comparison of USP with FMV, we preliminarily determine that the following weighted-average dumping
margins exist: 





