 

Section 34.35, Labels, storage, and transportation precautions, is a proposed new section that would place requirements
that specify labeling and security precautions for radioactive material storage and transportation in part 34.
Section 34.23 of the current rule describes storage precautions for exposure devices and storage containers but
does not address transportation or labeling requirements. In 34.35 of the proposed rule, labeling requirements
for source changers and storage containers are specified. The proposed rule contains specific requirements to lock
and physically secure transport packages. The proposed rule would also require licensees to store licensed material
in a manner which minimizes the danger from explosions or fire. The requirement for a Quality Assurance (QA) program,
as described in 71.105, has been added to the proposed rule. While radiography licensees have always had to
comply with 71.105, there have been numerous cases where radiography licensees were unaware of this requirement
and, therefore, failed to comply. The addition of requirements addressing labeling and transportation is necessary
because in the past personnel and public exposures have occurred from the failure to properly safeguard radioactive
material during storage and transportation. 



Subpart D_Radiation Safety Requirements 




This subpart describes basic radiation safety requirements for radiographic operations and includes training,
safety procedures, personnel monitoring and surveys. New requirements describing the duties of the radiation safety
officer are proposed. 


Section 34.41, Conducting radiographic operations, would be added to address the practice of conducting radiography
at sites where the special safety features of a shielded facility are not available. The proposed requirement specifies
that, as a minimum, either two radiographers or a radiographer and an individual who has met the requirements to be
a radiographer's assistant must be present any time radiographic operations occur outside a permanent installation.
The basis for this proposed requirement is to ensure that, in the absence of the safety features outlined in 34.33,
there will be a significant increase in assurance that operational safety measures will be implemented effectively.
The expectation is that violations involving failures to perform adequate radiation surveys of radiographic exposure
devices and the surrounding area, failures to adequately post and monitor the restricted area, and failures to lock
and secure the camera when not in use will become less frequent. Furthermore, if an incapacitating injury to a radiographer
should occur at a remote location, the presence of a second individual could be an important factor in preventing unnecessary
radiation exposures. Section 34.41(b) is proposed to require that radiographic operations conducted at locations
listed on the license be conducted in a permanent radiographic installation. If licensees would need to perform radiography
outside of a permanent facility due to some unique circumstances Commission authorization would be required, and
the requirements of 34.41(a) would need to be met. 


Section 34.42, Radiation Safety Officer (RSO), lists the qualifications and duties of the RSO. This section would
be added to place in the regulations the requirements for this key individual. Previously, these requirements were
referenced in regulatory guides and included as license conditions on a case-by-case basis, but not specified in
the regulations. The NRC believes that the RSO is the key individual for ensuring safe operations. The qualifications
listed for the RSO in the proposed rule include: (1) Completion of the training required for a radiographer as described
in part 34; and (2) 2000 hours of documented experience in industrial radiography with at least 40 hours of formal classroom
training with respect to the establishment and maintenance of radiation protection programs. It is anticipated
that most existing RSOs already meet these requirements. It is proposed that licensees would have two years from the
effective date of the rule to meet this 40 hour training requirement for existing RSOs. A key duty of the RSO is to ensure
the safe conduct of operations and to stop unsafe operations and institute corrective actions. Other duties of the
RSO in the proposed rule include overseeing procedure implementation and employee training, and monitoring radiation
surveys, leak tests, and personnel monitoring results. 


Section 34.43, Training, contains several new requirements. Section 34.43(a) has been revised to require radiographers
to be certified by a certifying entity meeting the criteria specified in Appendix A of the proposed rule. To be recognized
as a certifying entity, an independent organization meeting the criteria specified in part I of appendix A would have
to apply as specified in 34.43(a)(2). Certifying programs would be periodically reviewed by the NRC to ensure
that the conditions of approval are being met. A list of approved certifying entities would be made available to licensees
on request by contacting the appropriate regional office listed in appendix D to 10 CFR part 20, and would be published
annually in the 

Federal Register

. Under the proposed rule licensees would have 2 years to implement the proposed change. The change in the verification
of training requirements was included in the proposed rule to provide assurance of the quality of radiographers'
training in the safe handling of radioactive material. NRC and Agreement States must reciprocally recognize valid
radiographer certifications issued by either an independent certifying entity approved by the NRC or an Agreement
State certification program meeting the requirements of appendix A, parts II and III, of the proposed rule. Also included
in this section is training in 30.7, 30.9, and 30.10, applicable sections of 10 CFR part 71, and some instructions
in applicable Department of Transportation (DOT) regulations as referenced in 10 CFR part 71 in addition to other
parts of NRC regulations. 


Section 34.43(b), which lists training requirements for radiographers' assistants, has been revised to require
training in 30.7, 30.9, 30.10, and parts 19, 20, 34, 71, and instructions in applicable DOT regulations
as referenced in 10 CFR part 71, in addition to the licensee's operating and emergency procedures. These changes are
to ensure that radiographers and radiographers' assistants are knowledgeable of the safety requirements applicable
to handling radioactive material in the conduct of radiography. In 34.43(b)(3) the option of providing an
oral test has been omitted. The proposed rule would only allow a written test to be given. Section 34.43(c) describes
a proposed requirement to conduct annual safety reviews of radiographers and radiographers' assistants. In the
current rule, periodic training is required but required topics to be addressed are not included. Because a number
of violations involving personnel overexposures have resulted from licensees' failures to provide adequate training,
the proposed amendment for annual safety reviews includes training on revised operating and emergency procedures,
new equipment, and safety issues. 




