 

The epidemiological and clinical studies, taken in aggregate, indicate that exposure to environmental tobacco
smoke may produce mucous membrane irritation, pulmonary, cardiovascular, reproductive, and carcinogenic effects
in nonsmokers. Exposure to ETS may aggravate existing pulmonary or cardiovascular disease in nonsmokers. In addition,
animal studies show that both mainstream and sidestream tobacco smoke produce similar adverse effects. 


D. Case Reports 


1. Sick Building Syndrome and Building-Related Illness 



Many case reports of material impairment of health due to occupational exposure to poor IAQ have been reported to OSHA
through submission to the indoor air quality docket [H122]. These adverse health effects range from irritation
effects to more severe, life-threatening building-related illnesses, such as Legionnaire's disease, and cancer.



Ford Motor Company responded in docket comment 3447, that ``[p]resently, at Ford, we investigate an average
of two IAQ complaints per month which are predominantly classified as Sick Building Syndrome. We have seen Building-Related
Illness, but these incidents have been rare and associated with specific contaminant episodes. The IAQ complaints
we generally investigate are characterized by general malaise, headache, and flu-like symptoms that are said to
disappear when the occupants leave the building***Of the IAQ problems investigated,
about 20 percent can be attributed to PTS [passive tobacco smoke]/ETS. Upper respiratory irritation or eye irritation
typically are associated with these complaints.'' Similar types of health effects were reported to the agency in
docket comments 31, 322, 358, 3142C, 3367, 3413, 3529, 3632,
3634, 3642, 3659, and 3698. 

One comment [Ex. 3433 reported that ``based upon approximately 30 IAQ investigations in a member company over
the past two and one-half years, the following adverse health effects have been reported in office environments:
eye, nose, and throat irritations; headaches, nausea, dizziness, fatigue; cough, shortness of breath, chest tightness.
These so-called ``sick building syndrome (SBS)'' symptoms often disappear when the person leaves the building environment.
These symptoms are usually subjective and non-specific, lacking a physician's diagnosis of a definite illness.''
Others have reported [Ex. 3377] that ``as air flow and ventilation are cut back, our workers are becoming sick.
Many are exposed to contaminants or other harmful substances; and, without ventilation, these sources linger and
cause nausea, skin irritations and other unhealthy symptoms of illness. In severe cases, these contaminants and
bacteria have been known to contribute to upper respiratory infections.'' Comment 3570 reported similar
health effects due to poor indoor air quality. 


More serious health conditions have been reported ranging from severe asthma to central nervous systems disorders.
For example, Comment 3158 responded that ``I have developed a serious asthma condition due to indoor air quality
problems. Besides, three of the remaining five employees at the branch office have been diagnosed with chronic fatigue
syndrome. In conversations with various health care professionals, I have come to the conclusion that the diagnoses
of chronic fatigue syndrome were actually sick building syndrome. Of the six employees at the branch office, four
of the six are moderate to heavy smokers. This does not take into consideration the other factors that could be causing
poor indoor air quality problems in the office.'' 


Comment 3631 was a collection of reports from the workers in one building that illustrate the poor conditions
of a building that can lead to serious health effects in workers. Health problems experienced by workers in this building
included chronic sinus infections; headaches; fatigue; eye, nose and throat irritations; difficulty breathing
and congestion; allergies; and asthma. These health problems seem to clear up when the workers were out of the building
over a weekend or a vacation. 


The physical condition of this building was obviously in disrepair since the commenters reported pails of stagnant
water, collected from leaks in the roof, were left in hallways. Water in ``[t]hese pails ha[d] overflowed and run down
the stairs. What [wa]s left in the pails evaporate[d] leaving a gross residue of who knows what.'' The water leaks from
the roof caused mold infestation and water damage. Water logged insulation hung in the ceiling out in a hallway. There
was an obvious lack of routine, sufficient cleaning. Dust and particulate matter were visible in the air. The bathrooms
were dirty. Smells of sewer gas, mold, and diesel and other vehicular fumes permeated the office space. Ventilation
problems were evident since paint or varnish fumes lingered whenever part of the inside physical structure of the
building was painted. Tar fumes were evident from constant patching of the leaky roof. Insect infestation of the building
was evident. Pesticide fumes lingered whenever the building was spray[ed] for roaches and steam bugs. Workers sighted
cockroaches, silverfish, and steam bugs near the coffee shop and on back stairs. The comment continued that ``a sink
faucet in the lunch room has been leaking for years and water runs on the counter under the toaster and microwave. The
water heater had leaked for about 2 months before it was fixed. At that time the carpet was soaked and water was running
under the wall into a supervisor's office. There is a moldy odor from this carpet and the floor below.'' 


Cancer has also been reported to be associated with poor indoor air quality. A courthouse in San Diego, California
[Ex. 355], ``is notorious for poor air quality and employee respiratory illness and cancer.'' It was reported
to OSHA that many long-term employees have cancer (stomach and lung cancer), terminal lung disease, chronic ear and
throat infections, and bronchial problems'' [Exs. 3585, 3635, 3637, 368]. 


Comment 3630 from a union reported that ``[a]fter surveying thousands of workers across the country, SEIU
compiled actual survey responses that list adverse health effects caused by indoor air pollution. These include
headaches, nose congestion or irritation, throat irritation, dry cough, dry or itchy skin, dizziness, nausea, lethargy
or fatigue, colds, asthma/wheezing, chest tightness, runny nose/post nasal drip, eye or contact lens irritation,
respiratory difficulties. In addition, EPA estimates that pollutants found in indoor air are responsible for 2,500
to 6,500 cancer deaths each year'' [refer to Ex. 3630L]. 





