 

Memorandum for the Executive Staff



From: Robert B. Reich.

Subject: The Freedom Information Act.




Date: November 17, 1993.




The President has recently declared his strong commitment to the basic purposes of the Freedom of Information Act
(FOIA). Like President Clinton, I believe that this Act is a vital part of a participatory system of government. I enthusiastically
join the President and pledge to renew this Department's commitment to openness in government and to the sound administration
of the FOIA.

Attorney General Reno has issued the attached memorandum implementing the President's mandate. I have asked the
Solicitor of Labor to take the necessary steps to ensure that each official and employee of this Department reflects
this new spirit of government openness and accountability. Specifically, I have asked Solicitor Williamson to do
the following:

(1) Provide guidance to all DOL agencies on the President's and Attorney General's memoranda;

(2) Prepare the report, requested by Attorney General Reno, describing the extent of any present FOIA backlog as well
as any FOIA staffing difficulties. The Justice Department has asked that this report be submitted by early November;
and

(3) Periodically report to me on the progress made by DOL agencies to examine and improve their procedures with the
objective of making our handling of FOIA requests more customer-friendly, including enhanced use of electronic
information systems.

I ask that each component of the Department cooperate fully with the Solicitor as the first step to renew our efforts
to keep the public informed while at the same time protecting information only when it is legally justified and necessary
to protect an important Labor Department interest, or the interests of private entities or individuals.

Please join me in reinventing this Department's enhanced communication with the public. Let us commit this Department
to seek more ways to distribute information without being requested to do so, to withhold documents only when it is
necessary to protect an important interest, and to handle each request for records in a customer-friendly manner.




Attachments






Note: 

The memorandum from Attorney General Reno is not included in this document.




<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9410874 Filed 5494; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 451023M
</BILLING>




