 

(vi) Staff development to provide the services under this part. 
(3) Activities that encourage students to complete secondary school and pursue postsecondary education by requiring
each student to enter into an agreement under which the State will provide postsecondary tuition assistance to a student,
during a period of time to be established by the State, if the student agrees to achieve certain academic milestones,
such as_ 
(i) Completing the prescribed set of secondary courses required for an individual to be eligible for a Presidential
Access Scholarship under chapter 3, subpart 2, part A, title IV of the HEA; and 
(ii) Maintaining satisfactory academic progress according to the requirements in 34 CFR 668.7 in a postsecondary
education program. 
(4) Prefreshman summer programs that_ 
(i) Are at institutions of higher education that also have academic support services for disadvantaged students
through projects regulated by 34 CFR part 646, Student Support Services, or through comparable projects as certified
by the SEA or other appropriate State agency funded by the State or other sources; 
(ii) Assure the participation of students who qualify as disadvantaged students or who are eligible for comparable
programs funded by the State and certified under paragraph (a)(4)(i) of this section; 
(iii) Provide summer services, including_ 
(A) Instruction in remedial, developmental, or supportive courses; 
(B) Counseling, tutoring, or orientation; and 
(C) Grant aid to students to cover prefreshman summer costs for books, supplies, living costs, and personal expenses;
and 
(iv) Assure that participating students will receive financial aid during each academic year they are enrolled at
the participating institution after the prefreshman summer. 
(5) Other activities as the State proposes and the Secretary approves as supportive of the purposes of the NEISP Program.

(b) The State shall indicate to the Secretary which of the following permissible service providers will conduct the
early intervention component activities: 
(1) Community-based organizations. 
(2) Elementary or secondary schools. 
(3) Institutions of higher education. 
(4) Public and private agencies. 
(5) Nonprofit and philanthropic organizations. 
(6) Businesses. 
(7) Institutions and agencies sponsoring programs authorized under the State Student Incentive Grant Program,
subpart 4, part A, title IV of the HEA. 
(8) Institutions and agencies sponsoring programs authorized under the Federal TRIO Programs, chapter 1, subpart
2, part A, title IV of the HEA. 
(9) Religious organizations. 
(10) Other organizations proposed by the State that are subsequently deemed appropriate by the Secretary. 
(c) The State shall describe how the service providers listed in paragraph (b) of this section will administer the
early intervention component activities. 
(d) The State shall propose for review by and approval of the Secretary the methods by which it will target its early
intervention services on priority students. 



(Authority: 20 U.S.C. 1070a23) 



(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 18400677) 


693.12 

What requirements must be met by the State under the program's scholarship component? 


A State shall provide for a scholarship component that_ 
(a) As described in the State's plan approved by the Secretary under 693.10, is closely coordinated with other Federal,
State, local, and private scholarship programs within the State; 
(b) Awards scholarships only to students who meet the eligibility requirements in 693.40; 
(c) Places a priority on awarding scholarships to students who will receive Federal Pell Grant awards for the academic
year in which the award is being made under this part by_ 
(1) Selecting those eligible students who will receive Federal Pell Grants and who_ 
(i) Have the lowest expected family contributions as calculated under part F of title IV of the HEA; or 


