 



Comment. 

Entrances covered by ADAAG 12.2.2 must be accessible according to ADAAG 4.14 (Entrances) which requires, in part,
that entrances ``be connected by an accessible route to public transportation stops, to accessible parking and passenger
loading zones, and to public streets or sidewalks if available ***'' As noted in ADAAG 11.5, one corrections
official indicated that entrances used only by inmates or detainees should not be required to be connected by an accessible
route to such elements since inmates usually arrive from system-operated vehicles and not from public transportation
stops, parking spaces, or public streets and sidewalks. 

 

Response. 

As discussed under ADAAG 11.5 (Restricted and Secured Entrances), language has been added to the exception indicating
that entrances used only by inmates or detainees are not required to be connected by an accessible route to public transportation
stops, accessible parking, or to public streets or sidewalks. However, such entrances are subject to a requirement
in ADAAG 4.14 that accessible entrances be connected to passenger loading zones if provided. Language has been added
to this provision clarifying that where passenger loading zones are provided at such entrances, they must comply
with ADAAG 4.6.6 (Passenger Loading Zones).

 

Comment. 

In existing or altered facilities, it was recommended that public entrances or alternative entrances be allowed
to serve as entrances for inmates or detainees.

 

Response. 

These guidelines apply only to new construction or alterations. In either case, an entrance serving only inmates
or detainees is not required to be provided. Rather, if such entrances are provided, then at least one is required to
be accessible under ADAAG 12.2.2. In the case of alterations, this requirement would be triggered only where such
an existing entrance is to be altered or where a new one is to be installed as part of the planned scope of work. If so, then
at least one entrance of this type would have to be accessible to the extent technically feasible under alteration
provisions in ADAAG 4.1.6. In addition, under ADAAG 4.1.6(3), such an entrance may be required to be accessible if
it is part of the path of travel to an altered primary function area. 

 

Comment. 

The NPRM asked for information on the new construction cost of making accessible at least one entrance used only by
inmates or detainees. Almost all responses to this question characterized the cost as either ``minimal,'' ``negligible,''
or ``insignificant.'' Several operators of correctional systems, including New York City and the State of California,
indicated that this requirement would have little or no impact on their facilities since the accessibility of such
entrances is already required. Few comments provided actual cost estimates. One State disability organization
estimated a new construction cost of $450, and a local government entity estimated a cost of $3,000 for ``altering''
a secured entrance but did not provide a new construction cost estimate.

 

Response. 

A more detailed discussion of the cost involved is contained in the Regulatory Impact Analysis.



12.2.3Security Systems

 

This section requires that an accessible route be provided through or around security screening devices. These devices,
which may be similar to those used at airports, may not allow passage of certain mobility aids, such as wheelchairs.
This provision originally addressed only those systems located at public entrances required to be accessible. 

 

Comment. 

The NPRM asked whether there were any existing security or screening procedures that could not be effectively carried
out under this requirement. Practically all comments, including those from correction or detention officials and
the Bureau of Prisons, indicated that there were no existing security or screening procedures that could not be carried
out under this requirement. Some indicated that security systems may already have an adjacent route around the system
for staff use. Also, several commenters noted that hand-held metal detection devices are used to screen persons using
wheelchairs or other mobility aids that cannot pass through the system.
 
 

Response. 

This provision remains substantively unchanged. However, it has been clarified to apply to security systems located
at either public entrances covered by ADAAG 12.2.1 or inmate or detainee entrances covered by ADAAG 12.2.2. As noted
above, the exception originally proposed for doors and gates at security systems has been revised and is applicable
to entrances themselves, not just the doors or gates that may be provided along alternative routes around security
systems. 



12.3Visiting Areas

 

The requirements of this section for visiting areas are similar to those addressed in ADAAG 11 (Judicial, Legislative,
and Regulatory Facilities). The section requires that in non-contact visiting areas, a minimum of 5 percent, but
not less than one, of fixed cubicles be accessible on both the visitor and the inmate or detainee sides. 

 

Comment. 

As discussed under ADAAG 11.4.3 (Visiting Areas), the NPRM asked whether this provision should further specify that
an accessible cubicle on each side be paired in order to accommodate those situations in which both the inmate or detainee
and the visitor need an accessible cubicle. A majority of the comments to this question, including its applicability
to visiting areas in detention and correctional facilities, supported such a requirement. 

 

Response. 

As discussed under ADAAG 11.4.3 (Visiting Areas), this provision clarifies that counters and cubicles must be accessible
on both the visitor side and on the inmate or detainee side.

 

Comment. 

Several commenters recommended that the guidelines address contact visiting areas. 

 

Response. 

Both contact and non-contact visiting areas, as public or common use areas, are required to be accessible under ADAAG
12.1. Non-contact visiting areas are addressed in this section since they contain elements, such as safety glass
or security glazing, that may pose barriers to communication. Requirements for fixed cubicles are based on ADAAG
4.32 (Fixed or Built-in Seating and Tables) which is referenced in this section for clarity.

 

Comment. 

One commenter considered the five percent scoping requirement to be excessive. 


