 




<DOCTITLE>Receipt of Applications for Permit </DOCTITLE>



The following applicants have applied for a permit to conduct certain activities with endangered species. This notice
is provided pursuant to Section 10(c) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended (16 U.S.C. 1531, 

et seq.

): 






Applicant:

 Wildlife Conservation Society, Prospect Park Wildlife Center, Brooklyn, NY 11225, PRT790081.


 

The applicant requests a permit to purchase in interstate commerce four female, captive born, white-fronted wallabies
(

Macropus parma

) from the Oklahoma City Zoo for breeding to enhance the propagation and survival of the species. 






Applicant:

 Tigerin Peare, Columbus, OH, PRT790349.


 

The applicant requests a permit to collect blood samples from 50 nesting female and 300 emerging hatchlings of green
sea turtles (

Chelonia mydas

) at Melbourne Beach, Florida, for DNA analysis to enhance the survival of the species.






Applicant:

 Tortoise Group, Las Vegas, NV, PRT789731.




The applicant requests a permit to euthanize Desert tortoises (

Gopherus agassizii

) donated from the general public. These tortoises will be part of a continual selection process as needed to remove
those with upper respiratory tract disease and to prevent tortoise numbers from exceeding the holding capacity of
applicant's facilities to enhance the survival of the species. 






Applicant:

 Michael Brandman Associates, Sacramento, CA, PRT782274.




The applicant requests an amendment to their current permit to take (conduct focused field surveys, approach and
inspect nests) the least Bell's vireo (

Vireo bellii pusillus

) in Southern California for the purpose of determining the presence or absence of this species. 






Applicant:

 Wildlife Conservation Society, New York, NY, PRT790230.




The applicant requests a permit to import two male and two female Black tamarins (

Leontopithecus chrysopygus

) from Fundacao Parque Zoologico, Sao Paulo, Brazil, to enhance the propagation and survival of the species through
breeding. 






Applicant:

 Laboratory of Molecular Systematics, Washington, DC, 
PRT789980.


 

The applicant requests a permit to import one blood sample taken from a captive-held male woodrail (

Tricholimnas sylvestris

) from the Taronga Zoo, Mosman, Australia, for genetic research aimed to enhance the survival of the species. 






Applicant:

 Greenfalk Consultants, Worthington, OH, PRT790001.


 

The applicant requests a permit to import blood, feathers and addled eggs from Peregrine falcons (

Falco peregrinus

) and gyrfalcons (

Falco rusticolus

) in the wild for the purposes of genetic and environmental research to enhance the survival of the species. 






Applicant:

 Exotic Feline Breeding Compound Inc., Rosamond, CA, 
PRT790140.


 

The applicant requests a permit to import two captive-bred male Chinese leopards (

Panthera pardus japonensis

) from the Magdeburg Zoological Gardens, Magdeburg, Germany, to enhance the propagation and survival of the species
through breeding. 






Applicant:

 Daniel Varland, Hoquiam, WA, PRT790136.


 

The applicant requests a permit to take (capture, band, color mark, and release) Peregrine falcons (

Falco peregrinus

) in Western Washington, for the purpose of enhancement of the survival of the species. 






Applicant:

 Biosystems Analysis, Tiburon, CA, PRT789996.


 

The applicant requests a permit to take (capture/release) the Cui-ui sucker (

Chasmistes cujus

), Lost River sucker (

Deltistes luxatus

), Shortnose sucker (

Chasmistes brevirostris

), and Modoc sucker (

Catastomus microps

) throughout the historic range of the species for the purpose of determining the presence or absence of this species.







Applicant:

 David Germano, Bakersfield, CA, PRT789957.


 

The applicant requests a permit to take (capture/hold/release) Tipton's kangaroo rat (

Dipodomys nitratoides nitratoides

), Fresno kangaroo rat (

D. n. exilis

), Giant kangaroo rat (

D. ingens

), and Blunt-nosed leopard lizard (

Gambelia sila

) in Southern California for the purpose of enhancing the survival of the species. 






Applicant:

 Brian Foster, San Diego CA, PRT789253.


 

The applicant requests a permit to take the California least tern (

Sterna antillarum browni

) in Southern California for the purpose of enhancement of survival of the species. 






Applicant:

 University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, PRT790167.


 

The applicant requests a permit to take (capture, hold, release, and sacrifice) the Tidewater goby (

Eucyclogobius newberryi

) in Southern California for the purpose of determining the presence or absence of this species. Up to three fish will
be sacrificed for voucher specimens from previously unknown areas where this species may occur for the purpose of
enhancement of the survival of the species. 






Applicant:

 Philip Behrends, Solana Beach, CA, PRT756268.


 

The applicant requests an amendment to his current permit to take (live-trap and release) the Pacific pocket mouse
(

Perognathus longimembris pacificus

) in Southern California for species identification and scientific research aimed at the enhancement of survival
of the species. 






Applicant:

 World Center for Birds of Prey, Boise, ID, PRT787554.


 

Applicant requests a permit to import one female captive-bred Harpy eagle 
(

Harpia harpyia

) from PROFAUNA, Venezuela, to enhance the propagation and survival of the species through breeding. 






Applicant:

 Arthur McGowan, Colorado Springs, CO, PRT790002.


 

The applicant requests a permit to import the sport-hunted trophy of one male bontebok (

Damaliscus dorcas dorcas

) culled from the captive-herd maintained by Mr. F. Bowker, ``Thornkoof'', Grahamstown, South Africa, for the purpose
of enhancement of survival of the species. 






Applicant:

 Robert Patton, San Diego, CA, PRT789255.


 

The applicant requests a permit to take the California least tern (

Sterna antillarum browni

) in Southern California for the purpose of enhancement of survival of the species. 






Applicant:

 Elizabeth Copper, Coronado, CA, PRT789254.


 

The applicant requests a permit to take the California least tern (

Sterna antillarum browni

) in Southern California for the purpose of enhancement of survival of the species. 

Written data or comments should be submitted to the Director, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Office of Management
Authority, 4401 North Fairfax Drive, room 420(c), Arlington, Virginia 22203 and must be received by the Director
within 30 days of the date of this publication. 

Documents and other information submitted with these applications are available for review, 

subject to the requirements of the Privacy Act and Freedom of Information Act,

 by any party who submits a written request for a copy of such documents to the following office within 30 days of the date
of publication of this notice: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Office of Management Authority, 4401 North Fairfax
Drive, room 420(c), Arlington, Virginia 22203. Phone: (703/3582104); FAX: (703/3582281). 




Dated: May 27, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Margaret Tieger, 


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Chief, Branch of Permits, Office of Management Authority. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9413412 Filed 6194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 431055P
</BILLING>


