 

2. The proposed Multi-Class Arrangement does not involve borrowings and does not affect the Funds' existing assets
or reserves. In addition, the proposed arrangement will not increase the speculative character of the shares in a
Fund, since all shares will participate in all of a Fund's appreciation, income, and expenses in the manner described
above.

3. Applicants believe that the proposed allocation of expenses and voting rights under the Multi-Class System is
equitable and will not discriminate against any group of shareholders. Investors purchasing shares offered in connection
with a Plan and/or bearing Class Expenses will bear the costs associated with the related services and have exclusive
shareholder voting rights with respect to matters affecting the applicable Plan. Conversely, investors purchasing
shares that are not covered by a plan or not bearing Class Expenses will not be burdened with such expenses or enjoy such
voting rights.





4. Accordingly, applicants assert that the requested amendment is appropriate in the public interest and is consistent
with the protection of investors and the purposes fairly intended by the policy and provisions of the Act.




Applicants' Conditions





Applicants agree that the amended order granting the requested relief shall be subject to the following conditions:



1. Each class of shares of a Fund will represent interests in the same portfolio of investments, and be identical in
all respects, except as set forth below. The only differences between the classes of shares of a Fund will relate solely
to one or more of the following: (a) Expenses assessed to a class pursuant to a Plan, if any, with respect to such class;
(b) the impact of Class Expenses, which are limited to any or all of the following: (i) Transfer agent fees identified
as being attributable to a specific class of shares, (ii) stationery, printing, postage, and delivery expenses related
to preparing and distributing materials such as shareholder reports, prospectuses, and proxy statements to current
shareholders of a specific class, (iii) Blue Sky registration fees incurred by a class of shares, (iv) SEC registration
fees incurred by a class of shares, (v) expenses of Administrative Services Agreements and other administrative
personnel and services as required to support the shareholders of a specific class, (vi) Trustees' fees or expenses
incurred as a result of issues relating to one class of shares, (vii) accounting expenses relating solely to one class
of shares, (viii) auditors' fees, litigation expenses, and legal fees and expenses relating to a class of shares,
and (ix) expenses incurred in connection with shareholders meetings as a result of issues relating to one class of
shares; (c) the fact that the classes will vote separately with respect to matters relating to the Fund's Distribution
Plan, if any, or any other matters appropriately limited to such class(es); (d) the different exchange privileges
of the class of shares, if any; and (e) the designation of each class of shares of a Fund. Any additional incremental
expenses not specifically identified above that are subsequently identified and determined to be properly applied
to one class of shares shall not be so applied unless and until approved by the SEC.




2. The Board of Trustees (the ``Board''), including a majority of the Trustees who are not interested persons of the
Trust (``Independent Trustees'') will have approved the Multiple Class System with respect to a particular Fund
prior to the implementation of the system by that Fund. The minutes of the meetings of the Board of the Trust regarding
the deliberations of the Trustees with respect to the approvals necessary to implement the Multiple Class System
will reflect in detail the reasons for the determination by the Board that the proposed Multiple Class System is in
the best interests of each Fund and its shareholders.




3. The initial determination of the Class Expenses that will be allocated to a particular class and any subsequent
changes thereto will be reviewed and approved by a vote of the Board of Trustees of the Trust, including a majority of
the Independent Trustees. Any person authorized to direct the allocation and disposition of monies paid or payable
by a Fund to meet Class Expenses shall provide the Board and the Trustees shall review, at least quarterly, a written
report of the amounts so expended and the purposes for which such expenditures were made.



4. If any class is subject to a Shareholder Services Plan, the Plan will be adopted and operated in accordance with the
procedures set forth in rule 12b1 (b) through (f) as if the expenditure made thereunder were subject to rule
12b1, except that shareholders need not enjoy the voting rights specified in rule 12b1.



5. On an ongoing basis, the Board of the Trust, pursuant to its fiduciary responsibilities under the Act and otherwise,
will monitor each Fund, as applicable, for the existence of any material conflicts among the interests of the classes
of its shares, if there is more than one class. The Board, including a majority of the Independent Trustees, shall take
such actions as is reasonably necessary to eliminate any such conflicts that may develop. AMR and each Fund's manager
investment adviser(s) and distributor, if any, will be responsible for reporting any potential or existing conflicts
to the Board. If such a conflict arises, AMR, and the investment adviser(s) and distributor, if any, at their own expense,
will take such actions as are necessary to remedy such conflict, including establishing a new registered management
investment company, if necessary.


