 

NHTSA received only two specific comments about the 
benefits of the proposed rulemaking to establish requirements 
for CNG vehicles. Both Atlantic Research Corporation and NGVC 
commented that the agency's assumption about estimating future 
CNG vehicle fires is flawed because it assumes that CNG 
vehicles will have the same fire rate as gasoline powered 
vehicles. Both commenters stated that the fuel systems and 
the fuel flammability characteristics are completely different 
and thus would result in much lower fire rates for CNG 
vehicles. 
NHTSA acknowledges the favorable flammability 
characteristics of CNG relative to gasoline. CNG is lighter 
than air, and therefore should quickly dissipate upward. At 
the same time, however, CNG is under high pressure onboard the 
vehicle in contrast to conventional fuels. This high pressure 
could make a crash situation more volatile. However, without 
real-world crash data on CNG vehicles, no conclusions can be 
drawn. In assuming that CNG vehicles had the same fire rate 
as gasoline vehicles, the agency wished to provide some 
estimate of benefits, given the lack of real world accidents 
because of the relatively few CNG vehicles on the road. 
NHTSA analyzed data submitted by the American Gas 
Association (AGA) on 8,000 natural gas fleet vehicles. Based 
on vehicle miles travelled (VMT) during a three-year period, 
the fire rate for CNG vehicles is 2.52 per 100 million VMT, 
compared with a gasoline vehicle fire rate of 1.87, or 35 
percent higher. However, the agency notes that the small 
sample does not allow a reliable analysis of the crash fire 
potential in CNG vehicles. With seven fires, the standard 
errors or the fire rates for these CNG vehicles are too big to 
make meaningful comparisons between CNG-equipped vehicles and 
their gasoline counterparts. While the agency does not have 
the data to determine comparable fire rates between gasoline 
and CNG vehicles, the benefits of this final rule are obtained 
by ensuring at least equivalent safety with gasoline vehicles. 


3. Costs 


In the NPRM, NHTSA estimated that testing associated with 
the proposed vehicle requirements would cost approximately 
$58,530$63,080 per CNG body style. The agency estimated 
that the cost to perform a frontal, lateral or rear impact 
test would be $5,000 (with a total cost of $15,000 for three 
tests). The cost of the vehicle, which is destroyed during 
the test, is approximately $13,160 ($39,480 for the three 
vehicles to be used in the three tests). Thus, the total 
vehicle testing costs would be approximately $54,480. The 
agency requested comments about the costs of complying with 
the proposed requirements. 
NHTSA received two comments that addressed the cost of 
implementing fuel system integrity requirements for CNG 
vehicles. Navistar and Blue Bird stated that the agency 
underestimated the costs associated with testing school buses 
to the new CNG standard. Each stated that the cost associated 
with purchasing and testing school buses was substantially 
higher than the NPRM's estimate. Navistar estimated that for 
a six fuel tank design school bus, the costs would be as 
follows: chassis_$35,000, six fuel containers at $1,200 
each_$7,200; six fuel container cages at $150 each_$900; 
associated valves, tubes, fittings, etc. $1,000; crash testing 
at $12,000 per test ($36,000 for three tests). Navistar 
stated that a minimum of two school buses and six crash tests 
would be needed for a total of at least $160,000. Blue Bird 
estimated that vehicle costs are in the range of $75,000 to 
$85,000 and each test costs approximately $15,000. It further 
stated that test costs could be several hundred thousand 
dollars per vehicle configuration given that multiple impact 
tests are often necessary to document conformance to a 
standard that requires impacts at any point and angle. If 
Blue Bird performed six tests on two school buses, the total 
cost would range from $240,000 to $260,000. 
After reviewing the comments, NHTSA believes that the 
cost estimates provided by Navistar and Blue Bird are 
reasonable. Thus, the total cost of testing school buses 
would be $160,000 per chassis and $260,000 for a school bus. 
NHTSA continues to believe that its estimate of $54,480 for 
light vehicles is still appropriate. 


4. Leadtime 


In the NPRM, NHTSA proposed to make the vehicle 
requirements effective on September 1, 1994. The agency 
believed that this would provide a reasonable time period for 
manufacturers to make any vehicle modifications required by 
the rulemaking. Nevertheless, the agency stated that the 
proposed dynamic vehicle crash test requirements could make it 
necessary for vehicle manufacturers to make significant design 
modifications in order to comply with the proposal, especially 
since most CNG vehicles are currently manufactured in 
accordance with NFPA Standard 52. That standard specifies 
design-oriented requirements and does not specify a barrier 
crash test. The agency requested comment on the feasibility 
of this effective date. 





