 

8. Proposed respondents have read the proposed complaint and order contemplated hereby. They understand that once
the order has been issued, they will be required to file one or more compliance reports showing that they have fully
complied with the order. Proposed respondents further understand that they may be liable for civil penalties in the
amount provided by law for each violation of the order after it becomes final.



Order



I





It is ordered 

that respondents Notations, Inc., a corporation, its successors and assigns, and its officers, and Kurt Erman, individually
and an officer of said corporation, and respondents' representatives, agents and employees, directly or through
any corporation, subsidiary, division or any other device, in connection with the introduction, delivery for introduction,
manufacture for introduction, sale, advertising, or offering for sale, in commerce, or the transportation or causing
to be transported in commerce, or the importation into the United States of any textile fiber product, as ``commerce''
and ``textile fiber product'' are defined in the Textile Fiber Products Identification Act, 15 U.S.C. 70, hereinafter
``Textile Fiber Act,'' and the Rules and Regulations Under the Textile Fiber Products Identification Act, 16 U.S.C.
303, hereinafter ``Rule(s),'' do forthwith cease and desist from misbranding or falsely or deceptively advertising
any such product by:

A. Mentioning or implying fiber content without using the generic fiber names in a manner consistent with the Textile
Fiber Act and the Rules thereunder; and 

B. Mentioning or implying fiber content for a fiber that is not present in such textile fiber product.



II





It is further ordered 

that respondents shall forthwith file with the Commission a continuing guaranty applicable to all textile products
handled by respondents, in the form prescribed by Rule 38, 16 CFR 303.38.



III





It is further ordered

 that respondent Notations, Inc., shall:

A. For a period of five (5) years after the service of this order, keep copies of each stamp, tag, label or other form of
identification that shows information required by the Textile Fiber Act as well as such records as will show the textile
fiber products in which each stamp, tag, label or other form of identification was affixed for each product it introduces,
manufactures for introduction, sells, advertises, offers for sale or imports; and

B. For a period of five (5) years after the service of this order, maintain and upon request make available to the Federal
Trade Commission for inspection and copying, the documents in Paragraph III.A. above and such other documents and
materials as shall demonstrate full compliance with this order.



IV





It is further ordered 

that respondent, Notations, Inc., shall within thirty (30) days after the date of service of this order, provide a
copy of this order to each of its current directors and officers, and to each employee, agent and representative having
managerial, purchasing, importing, sales, advertising, or policy responsibility with respect to the subject matter
of this order.



V





It is further ordered 

that respondent, Notations, Inc., shall, in writing, notify the Federal Trade Commission at least thirty (30) days
prior to any proposed change in the respondent such as dissolution, assignment or sale resulting in the emergence
of a successor corporation, the creation or dissolution of subsidiaries or any other such change in the corporation
that may affect compliance obligations arising out of the order.



VI





It is further ordered 

that, for a period of five (5) years from the date of service of this order, respondent Kurt Erman, shall, in writing,
notify the Federal Trade Commission within thirty (30) days of the discontinuance of his present business or employment
and of his affiliation with a new business or employment, each such notice to include the respondent's new business
address and a statement of the nature of the business or employment in which the respondent is newly engaged as well
as a description of respondent's duties and responsibilities in connection with the business or employment.



VII





It is further ordered 

that respondents shall, within sixty (60) days after the date of service of this order, submit a verified report in
writing, to the Federal Trade Commission setting forth in detail the manner and form in which they have complied with
this order.

