 

(a) The Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation shall charge fees for records requested by or on behalf of educational
institutions and noncommercial scientific institutions in an amount which equals the cost of reproducing the documents
responsive to the request, excluding the costs of reproducing the first 100 pages. For a request to be included in this
category, requesters must show that the request being made is authorized by and under the auspices of a qualifying
institution and that the records are not sought for a commercial use but are sought in furtherance of scholarly research
(if the request is from an educational institution) or scientific research (if the request is from a noncommercial
scientific institution). 
(b) The Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation shall charge fees for records requested by representatives of the
news media in an amount which equals the cost of reproducing the documents responsive to the request, excluding the
costs of reproducing the first 100 pages. For a request to be included in this category, the requester must qualify
as a representative of the news media and the request must not be made for a commercial use. A request for records supporting
the news dissemination function of the requester shall not be considered to be a request that is for a commercial use.

(c) The Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation shall charge fees for records requested by persons or entities making
a commercial use request in an amount that equals the full direct costs for searching for, reviewing for release, and
reproducing the records sought. Commercial use requesters are not entitled to 2 hours of free search time nor 100 free
pages of reproduction of documents. In accordance with 1402.26, commercial use requesters may be charged
the costs of searching for and reviewing records even if there is ultimately no disclosure of records. 
(d) The Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation shall charge fees for records requested by persons or entities that
are not classified in any of the categories listed in paragraphs (a), (b), or (c) of this section in an amount that equals
the full reasonable direct cost of searching for and reproducing records that are responsive to the request, excluding
the first 2 hours of search time and the cost of reproducing the first 100 pages of records. In accordance with 1402.26,
requesters in this category may be charged the cost of searching for records even if there is ultimately no disclosure
of records, excluding the first 2 hours of search time. 
(e) For purposes of the exceptions contained in this section on assessment of fees, the word 

pages

 refers to paper copies of ``81/2 &times; 11'' or ``11 &times; 14.'' Thus, requesters are not entitled to 100 microfiche
or 100 computer disks, for example. A microfiche containing the equivalent of 100 pages or a computer disk containing
the equivalent of 100 pages of computer printout meets the terms of the exception. 
(f) For purposes of paragraph (d) of this section, the term 

search time 

has as its basis, manual search. To apply this term to searches made by computer, the Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation
will determine the hourly cost of operating the central processing unit and the operator's hourly salary plus 16 percent
of that rate. When the cost of search (including the operator time and the cost of operating the computer to process
a request) equals the equivalent dollar amount of 2 hours of the salary of the person performing the search, i.e., the
operator, the Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation will begin assessing charges for computer search. 


1402.22 


Fees to be charged. 


(a) Generally, the fees charged for requests for records shall cover the full allowable direct costs of searching
for, reproducing, and reviewing documents that are responsive to a request for information. 
(b) Manual searches for records will be charged at the salary rate(s) (i.e., basic pay plus 16 percent of that rate)
of the employee(s) making the search. 
(c) Computer searches for records will be charged at the actual direct cost of providing the service. This will include
the cost of operating the central processing unit for that portion of operating time that is directly attributable
to searching for records and the operator/programmer salary apportionable to the search. A charge shall also be made
for any substantial amounts of special supplies or materials used to contain, present, or make available the output
of computers, based upon the prevailing levels of costs to the Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation for the type
and amount of such supplies of materials that are used. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to entitle any
person or entity, as a right, to any services in connection with computerized records, other than services to which
such person or entity may be entitled under the provisions of this subpart. 
(d) Only requesters who are seeking documents for commercial use may be charged for time spent reviewing records to
determine whether they are exempt from mandatory disclosure. Charges may be assessed only for the initial review;
i.e., the review undertaken the first time the Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation analyzes the applicability
of a specific exemption to a particular record or portion of a record. Records or portions of records withheld in full
under an exemption that is subsequently determined not to apply may be reviewed again to determine the applicability
of other exemptions not previously considered. The costs for such a subsequent review is assessable. 
(e) Records will be reproduced at a rate of $.15 per page. For copies prepared by computer, such as tapes or printouts,
the requester shall be charged the actual cost, including operator time, of production of the tape or printout. For
other methods of reproduction, the actual direct costs of producing the document(s) shall be charged. 
(f) The Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation will recover the full costs of providing services such as those enumerated
below when it elects to provide them: 
(1) Certifying that records are true copies; or 
(2) Sending records by special methods such as express mail. 
(g) Remittances shall be in the form either of a personal check or bank draft drawn on a bank in the United States, or a
postal money order. Remittances shall be made payable to the order of the Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation.

(h) A receipt for fees paid will be given upon request. 


1402.23 


Waiver or reduction of fees. 


(a) The Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation may grant a waiver or reduction of fees if the Farm Credit System Insurance
Corporation determines that the disclosure of the information is in the public interest because it is likely to contribute
significantly to public understanding of the operations or activities of the Government, and the disclosure of the
information is not primarily in the commercial interest of the requester. 



