 

Success Sales_Clarification to determine whether certain holiday pillar candles are within the scope of the order.



A570502: Iron Construction Castings



Jack's International_Clarification to determine whether certain cast iron area drains are within the scope of the
order.



Country: Korea

A580809: Circular Welded Non-Alloy Steel Pipe



Allied Tube  Conduit Corp., American Tube Co., Century Tube Corp., CSI Tubular Productions, Inc., Laclede Steel
Co., LTV Tubular Productions Co., Sawhill Tubular Division, Sharon Tube Co., Tex-Tube Division, Western Tube 
Conduit Corp., Wheatland Tube Co._Clarification to determine whether pipe produced to API 5L line pipe specifications
or to both ASTM A53 standard pipe specification and the API 5L line pipe specification (dual-certified pipe),
when intended for use as standard pipe or when actually used as standard pipe, is within the scope of the order. Affirmative
preliminary scope ruling issued on 1/13/94.



Country: Venezuela

A307805: Circular Welded Non-Alloy Steel Pipe



Self-initiation. Clarification to determine wither pipe produced to API 5L line pipe specifications or to both ASTM
A53 standard pipe specification and the API 5L line pipe specification (dual-certified pipe), when intended
for use as standard pipe or when actually used as standard pipe, is within the scope of the order. Affirmative preliminary
scope ruling issued on 1/13/94.



Country: Japan

A588802: 31/2
&rsquo;
&rsquo; Microdisks



TDK Inc., TDK Electronics Co._Clarification to determine whether certain web roll media are within the scope of the
order.



A5588014: Tuners



Alpine Electronics_Clarification to determine whether certain car radio/stereo and/or replacement parts, comprised
of four subassemblies and their components, are within the scope of the finding.

Fujitsu Ten Corporation of America_Clarification to determine whether certain ``front end'' components of car
tuners are within the scope of the finding.



A588405: Cellular Mobile Telephones and Subassemblies 



Matsushita Communication Industrial Co., Ltd., and its related entities_Clarification to determine whether certain
portable telephones, subassemblies, and components thereof are within the scope of the order (five products).

Mitsubishi Electric Corp., Mitsubishi Electronics America, Inc., Mitsubishi Consumer Electronics America, Inc._Clarification
to determine whether model 2000 cellular mobile telephone is within the scope of the order.

TDK Corporation of America_Clarification to determine whether Duplexers, Voltage Control Oscillators, and Isolators
are within the scope of the order.

JRC International_Clarification to determine whether model PTR830 portable cellular telephone is within
the scope of the order.



