 

It should be noted that six State Plan States (Alaska, California, Hawaii, Michigan, Oregon, and Washington) have
developed logging standards that cover all logging operations and are not limited to just pulpwood logging. 

This Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) has been prepared by OSHA in compliance with Executive Order 12866 and the
Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 (5 U.S.C. 601 et seq.). The analysis was developed based on information and comments
in the OSHA logging docket and informal public hearings. 



B. Affected Industries and Workers 



For purposes of analysis, logging operations in the United States were divided in four relevant geographical regions_the
North, the South, the Rocky Mountains, and the Pacific Coast. The leading States in logging employment in 1987 were
Oregon, Washington, Alabama and Georgia, which accounted for 40 percent of logging employment. The final rule will
affect approximately 72,100 employees engaged in logging operations covered by the final rule and 11,936 logging
establishments. Almost 94 percent of all logging establishments employ fewer than 20 employees and 60 percent of
all logging employees work in small establishments. These estimates do not include independent contractors. 

Affected workers include, but are not limited to, fellers and buckers, who cut the trees; skidder and yarder operators,
choker setters, and chasers, who are responsible for delivering a felled tree to the landing; and loader operators
and truck drivers, who load the trees onto trucks for transport to a mill. Although all stages of logging present hazards
to workers, the loggers most at risk are manual felling crews rather than those who operate mechanical harvesting
equipment and are protected by enclosed cabs. 



C. Technological Feasibility Determination 



The work practice and training provisions as well as the requirements regarding personal protective equipment and
equipment protective devices in the final rule are technologically feasible. The fact that the requirements of the
standard already are being achieved in the logging industry is the best evidence of feasibility. The record shows
that many logging establishments are currently providing the training, equipment protection devices and personal
protective equipment that would meet the requirements of the new standard. In addition, the record also shows they
are operating under the same work practices as those required by the standard. Based on the record, OSHA has determined
that numerous logging establishments of all sizes are already in compliance with most of the provisions of the final
standard. In addition, equipment protective devices and personal protective equipment which are required by the
final rule are all commercially available. Therefore, OSHA has determined that the final rule is technologically
feasible. 



D. Costs of Compliance 



OSHA estimated compliance costs using data in the record on current practices and exposed population, including
a report prepared by Centaur Associates, Inc. (Ex. 3). Based on all the data and evidence in the record, OSHA estimates
that first-year costs associated with compliance will be $14.3 million. Total annualized cost of compliance with
the standard is estimated to be $12.5 million. Table 22 shows the summary of costs of compliance with the final rule.







