 

627.205 

Public service employment prohibition. 



No funds available under titles I, IIA, IIC, or IIIA of the Act may be used for public service employment
(sections 141(p) and 314(d)(2)). 



627.210 

Nondiscrimination and nonsectarian activities. 



(a)(1) Recipients, SDA grant recipients, title III substate grantees, and other subrecipients shall comply with
the nondiscrimination provisions of section 167 of the Act. 

(2) Nondiscrimination and equal opportunity requirements and procedures, including complaint processing and
compliance reviews, are governed by the provisions of 29 CFR part 34 and are administered and enforced by the DOL Directorate
of Civil Rights. 

(3) Funds may be used to meet a recipient's or subrecipient's obligation to provide physical and programmatic accessibility
and reasonable accommodation in regard to the JTPA program as required by Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of
1973, as amended, and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. 

(b) The employment or training of participants in sectarian activities is prohibited. 



627.215 

Relocation. 



(a) No funds provided under the Act shall be used, or proposed for use, to encourage or to induce the relocation of an
establishment, or part thereof, that result in the loss of employment for any employee or such establishment at the
original location. 

(b) For 120 days after the commencement or the expansion of commercial operations of a relocating establishment,
no funds provided under this Act shall be used for customized or skill training, on-the-job training, or company-specific
assessments of job applicants or employees, for any relocating establishment or part thereof at a new, or expanded
location, if the relocation of such establishment or part thereof results in a loss of employment for any employee
of such establishment at the original location. 

(c) For the purposes of this section, 

relocating establishment 

means a business entity, including a successor-in-interest, which is moving any operations from a facility in one
labor market area within the United States and its territories to a new or expanding facility in another labor market
area. For the purposes of this section, a labor market area is an area within which individuals can readily change employment
without changing their place of residence. 

(d) 

Pre-award review.

 To verify that an establishment which is new or expanding is not, in fact, relocating employment from another area,
standardized pre-award review procedures developed by the State shall be completed and documented jointly by the
service delivery area or substate grantee and the establishment as a prerequisite to JTPA assistance. The review
should include names under which the establishment does business, including successors-in-interest; the name,
title, and address of the company official certifying the information; the name and address of the facility in the
other geographic location which is being closed or from which business is being transferred; a statement from the
employer about job losses at that location; the nature of the products or business being transferred; the date the
facility will commence or expand operations, and whether JTPA assistance is sought in connection with past or impending
job losses at other facilities. 

(e) 

Violations and sanctions.

 The Department will promptly review and take appropriate action with regard to alleged violations of the provisions
of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section. Procedures for the investigation and resolution of the violations are provided
for under subpart F of this part. Sanctions and remedies are provided for under subpart G of this part. 


627.220 

Coordination with programs under title IV of the Higher Education Act including the Pell grant program. 



(a) 

Coordination. 

Financial assistance programs under title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965, as amended (HEA) (the Pell Grant
program, the Supplemental Education Opportunity Grant program, the Work-study program, and Federal loan programs
such as Federal Perkins Loans. Federal Stafford Loans and Federal Direct Stafford Loans) provide student financial
aid and are available to JTPA participants enrolling in postsecondary level education programs. SDA's and title
III SSG's shall establish coordination procedures and contractual safeguards to ensure that JTPA funds are used
in addition to funds otherwise available in the area and are coordinated with these funding sources. 
(b) 

Affordable programs. 

(1) The SDA shall assist the participant early in the objective assessment, as appropriate, to establish eligibility
for Pell Grants, student loans and other forms of financial aid. 

(2) The SDA or SSA shall record in the ISS or participant record the participant's training-related financial assistance
needs and the mix of JTPA and other funds, including Pell Grant funds (sections 141(b), 107(b), 205(b) and 265(b)).


(3) The SDA shall ensure, to the extent practicable, that available Federal, State, and local resources are coordinated
sufficiently to meet the training and education-related costs of services, so that the participant can afford to
complete the agreed-upon program successfully. 

(4) Participants shall not be required to apply for or access student loans, or incur personal debt as a condition of
JTPA participation. 

(c) 

Information sharing. 

To prevent duplication of funding and to streamline the tracking of the participant's financial needs and use of funds
when HEA, title IV programs are involved, contracts and agreements with educational institutions shall require
the educational institution's financial aid officer to inform the SDA's/SSG's of the amounts and disposition of
any HEA, title IV awards and other types of financial aid to each JTPA participant awarded after the enrollment of the
participant, as part of a continuing, regular information sharing process (section 141(b)). 



627.225 

Employment generating activities. 



(a)(1) No funds available under the Act shall be used for employment generating activities, economic development
activities, investment in revolving loan funds, capitalization of businesses, investment in contract bidding
resource centers, or similar activities. 

(2) No funds available under titles I, II, or III of the Act shall be used for foreign travel for employment generating
activities, economic development activities, or similar activities. 




