 

(iii) That the party offering the deposition has endeavored to procure the attendance of the witness by subpoena,
but has been unable to do so; or

(iv) That such exceptional circumstances exist as to make it desirable, in the interests of justice, to allow the deposition
to be used. If the party upon whose motion the deposition was taken refuses to offer it in evidence, any other party may
offer the deposition or any part thereof in evidence. If only part of a deposition is offered in evidence by a party,
any other party may require the introduction of any other part which is relevant be considered with the part introduced,
and any party may introduce any other parts.

(b) 

Interrogatories, requests for admissions and requests for production of documents

_(1) 

Interrogatories.

 A party may submit written interrogatories to any other party to an appeal. The time for submitting and responding
to written interrogatories shall be set by the ALJ at the pre-hearing conference, but in no event shall the time for
response be less than 20 days from the date of service or within such time as determined upon motion to the ALJ. The number
of interrogatories submitted by each party shall not exceed twenty-five questions including subparts, unless additional
interrogatories are authorized by the ALJ. Each interrogatory should be answered separately and fully in writing,
unless it is objected to, in which event the reasons for objection should be stated in lieu of an answer. The answers
are to be signed under penalty of perjury by the person making them. Objections shall be signed by the attorney of record
in the appeal or by the responding party's authorized representative.

(2) 

Request for admissions.

 A party may submit a written request for admission of the truth of any matters relevant to the appeal to any other party
to the appeal. The time for submitting a written request for admission shall be set by the ALJ at the pre-hearing conference.
The number of admissions contained in a request submitted by a party shall not exceed twenty-five unless additional
admissions are authorized by the ALJ. The matter is admitted unless, within 20 days after service thereof, or within
such time as determined upon motion to the ALJ, the party to whom the request is directed serves upon the party requesting
the admission a written answer or objection addressed to the matter signed by the party, counsel or designated representative.
If objection is made, the reasons therefor should be stated. The answer should specifically deny the matter or set
forth in detail why the answering party cannot truthfully admit or deny the matter. An answering party may not give
lack of information or knowledge as a reason for the failure to admit or deny unless it is stated that reasonable inquiry
has been made and that the information known or readily obtainable is insufficient to enable the party to admit or deny.
A party who considers that a matter for which an admission has been requested presents a genuine issue for hearing may
not, on that ground alone, object to the request; the party may deny the matter or set forth reasons why the matter cannot
be admitted or denied.

(3) 

Request for production of documents.

 (i) Any party may serve upon any other party to the appeal a request for production of documents which are in the possession
or control of the party upon whom the request is served. The time for service and response to such a request shall be set
by the ALJ at the pre-hearing conference. Upon payment of fees for search and duplication of documents, any party to
the appeal may obtain copies of such documents.

(ii) Parties may request production of any documents regarding any matter, not privileged, which is relevant to the
subject matter involved in the pending action. Grounds for objection will not exist if the information sought appears
reasonably calculated to lead to the discovery of admissible evidence.

(iii) If such documents include privileged information or information the disclosure of which is proscribed by the
Food Stamp Act of 1977, as amended, such documents need not be produced.

(c) 

Supplementation of response.

 A party who knows or later learns that a response is incorrect is under a duty to correct such response as soon as possible.
A party who has responded to a request for discovery with a response that was complete when made is under a duty to supplement
the response to include information thereafter acquired. A party is under a duty to supplement responses with respect
to any question directly addressed to:

(1) The identity and location of persons having knowledge of discoverable matters, and

(2) The identity of each person expected to be called as an expert witness at the hearing, the subject matter on which
such expert(s) is expected to testify, and the substance of the testimony.

(d) 

Frequency and use of discovery.

 The ALJ shall limit, upon motion of a party, the frequency or extent of discovery if the ALJ determines that:

(1) The discovery sought is unreasonably cumulative or duplicative, or is obtainable from some other source that
is more convenient, less burdensome, or less expensive;

(2) The party seeking discovery has had ample opportunity by discovery in the action to obtain the information sought;
or

(3) The discovery is unduly burdensome or expensive, taking into account the needs of the case, the amount in controversy,
limitations on the parties' resources, and the importance of the issues at stake in the litigation.

(e) 

Protective orders

_(1) 

Request for protective order.

 A party served with such a request may file a motion for a protective order before the date on which a response to the discovery
request is due, stating why discovery should be limited or should not be required.






