 

Best Information Available 



Diafoil did not respond to the Department's questionnaire. Therefore, we are using best information available for
the purposes of this review. As best information for Diafoil, we preliminarily determine the dumping margin to be
14.00 percent, the highest margin calculated in the original investigation. 



United States Price 



For Toray, we calculated the United States price based on purchase price as all U.S. sales were made to unrelated parties
prior to importation into the United States, in accordance with section 772(b) of the Tariff Act. 

For Toray, we calculated purchase price based on f.o.b. Japanese port or delivered U.S. customer prices. We made deductions,
where appropriate, for price adjustments (rebates). We also made deductions, where appropriate, for the costs of
foreign inland freight, containerization, warehousing, credit expense, foreign brokerage and handling, ocean
freight, marine insurance, U.S. duty, U.S. brokerage and handling, and U.S. inland freight in accordance with section
772(d)(2) of the Tariff Act. 

For Teijin, we calculated purchase price based on f.o.b. Japanese port or delivered U.S. customer prices. We made
deductions, where appropriate, for price adjustments (rebates). We also made deductions, where appropriate, for
the costs of foreign inland freight and insurance, bank charges, foreign brokerage and handling, ocean freight,
warehousing, commissions, credit insurance, indirect selling expenses (U.S. and non-U.S.), inventory carrying
charges, other expense, U.S. duty, harbor and U.S. Customs user fees, U.S. brokerage and handling, and U.S. inland
freight and insurance in accordance with section 772(d)(2) of the Tariff Act. 

In addition, for both Toray and Teijin, we made adjustments for the value added tax applied in the home market. On October
7, 1993, the United States Court of International Trade (CIT), in 

Federal-Mogul Corp. and The Torrington Co. 

v. 

United States, 

Slip Op. 93194 (CIT, October 7, 1993), rejected the Department's methodology for calculating an addition
to U. S. price (USP) under section 772(d)(1)(C) of the Tariff Act to account for taxes that the exporting country would
have assessed on the merchandise had it been sold in the home market. The CIT held that the addition to USP under section
772(d)(1)(C) of the Tariff Act should be the result of applying the foreign market tax rate to the price of the United
States merchandise at the same point the chain of commerce that the foreign market tax was applied to foreign market
sales. 

Federal-Mogul,

 Slip Op. 93194 at 12. 

The Department has changed its methodology in accordance with the 

Federal-Mogul

 decision. The Department will add to USP the 
result of multiplying the foreign market tax rate by the price of the United States merchandise at the same point in
the chain of commerce that the foreign market tax was applied to foreign market sales. The Department will also adjust
the USP tax adjustment and the amount of tax included in FMV. These adjustments will deduct the portions of the foreign
market tax and the USP tax adjustment that are the result of expenses that are included in the foreign market price used
to calculate the foreign market tax and are included in the United States merchandise price used to calculate the USP
tax adjustment and that are later deducted to calculate FMV and USP. These adjustments to the amount of the foreign
market tax and the USP tax adjustment are necessary to prevent our new methodology for calculating the USP tax adjustment
from creating antidumping duty margins where no margins would exist if no taxes were levied upon foreign market sales.





