 

There are two basic life history spawning strategies for coho salmon: Short-run populations which utilize the smaller
coastal streams, and long-run coho that will migrate up to 320 miles to utilize tributaries of large coastal rivers.
Coho salmon may begin to enter freshwater in September but usually enter from October to March, peaking in December
and January. In Scott and Waddell Creeks, spawning of coho salmon primarily takes place from the end of December through
mid-February, usually coinciding with increased storm flows. After spending one year in freshwater, juvenile coho
salmon migrate to sea where they usually spend two growing seasons before they return as adults to freshwater to spawn
as 3-year-old fish. A relatively small portion of adult male coho salmon return to spawn after only one year at sea,
and are termed jacks or grilses. 



Consideration as a ``Species'' 



To qualify for listing as a threatened or endangered species, the Scott and Waddell Creeks coho salmon populations
would have to be a ``species'' under the ESA. The ESA defines a ``species'' to include any ``distinct population segment
of any species of vertebrate *** which interbreeds when mature.'' NMFS published a policy (November
20, 1991; 56 FR 58612) on how it will apply the ESA species definition in evaluating Pacific salmon. This policy states
that a salmon population will be considered distinct, and hence a species under the ESA, if it represents an evolutionarily
significant unit (ESU) of the biological species. 

The population must satisfy two criteria to be considered an ESU:

(1) It must be reproductively isolated from other conspecific population units; and

(2) It must represent an important component in the evolutionary legacy of the biological species. The first criterion,
reproductive isolation, need not be absolute, but must be strong enough to permit evolutionarily important differences
to accrue in different population units.

The second criterion is met if the population contributed substantially to the ecological/genetic diversity of
the species as a whole. Further guidance on the application of this policy is contained in, ``Pacific salmon (

Oncorhynchus

 spp.) and the 
Definition of Species under the Endangered Species Act,'' which is available upon request (see 

ADDRESSES

). 



Reproductive Isolation 



For this criterion, NMFS considered information provided by the petitioner, information provided by knowledgeable
sources, scientific documents, and commercial reports concerning the isolation of Scott and Waddell Creeks from
other coho salmon spawning streams, the distance of the Scott and Waddell Creek populations to other coho salmon populations,
the time of peak spawning, and a north-south genetic difference. 

 Available information does not make a strong case for reproductive isolation of Scott and Waddell Creeks coho salmon.

Marked coho salmon from Scott and Waddell Creeks have been caught in the Noyo River 200 miles to the north near Fort Bragg,
CA, and in the San Lorenzo River 15 miles to the south in the City of Santa Cruz, CA. Therefore, distance in the ocean is
not a good measure of reproductive isolation from other coho salmon populations. 






