 

For your information the Borrower is currently considering the following terms:

(1) 

Amount:

 U.S. $20 million.

(2) 

Term:

 30 years.

(3) 

Grace Period:

 Ten years grace on repayment of principal. (During grace period, semi-annual payments of interest only). If 

variable

 interest rate, repayment of principal to amortize in equal, semi-annual installments over the remaining 20-year
life of the loan. If 

fixed

 interest rate, semi-annual level payments of principal and interest over the remaining 20-year life of the loan.

(4) 

Interest Rate:

 Alternatives of fixed and variable rates, and variable rates with interest ``caps'', are requested.

(a) 

Fixed Interest Rate:

 If rates are to be quoted based on a spread over an index, the lender should use as its index a long bond, specifically
the 71/2% U.S. Treasury Bond due November 15, 2024. Such rate is to be set at the time of acceptance.

(b) 

Variable Interest Rate:

 To be based on the six-month British Bankers Association LIBOR, preferably with terms relating to Borrower's right
to convert to fixed. The rate should be adjusted weekly.

(c) 

Variable Interest Rate With ``Cap'':

 Offers should include a maximum (cap) rate ranging from 10% to 12% per annum, and are to be based on the six-month British
Bankers Association LIBOR. The rate should be adjusted weekly.

(5) 

Prepayment:

(a) Offers should include any options for prepayment and mention prepayment premiums, if any, and specify the earliest
date the option can be exercised without penalty.

(b) Only in an extraordinary event to assure compliance with statutes binding USAID, USAID reserves the right to accelerate
the loan (it should be noted that since the inception of the USAID Housing Guaranty Program in 1962, USAID has not exercised
its right of acceleration).

(6) Fees:

 Offers should specify the placement fees and other expenses, including USAID fees and Paying and Transfer Agent fees.
Lenders are requested to include all legal fees and out-of-pocket expenses in their placement fee. Such fees and expenses
shall be payable at closing from the proceeds of the loan. 

All fees should be clearly specified in the offer.

(7) Closing Date:

 Not to exceed 60 days from date of selection of lender.

Selection of investment bankers and/or lenders and the terms of the loan are initially subject to the individual discretion
of the Borrower, and thereafter, subject to approval by USAID. Disbursements under the loan will be subject to certain
conditions required of the Borrower by USAID as set forth in agreements between USAID and the Borrower.

The full repayment of the loan will be guaranteed by USAID. The USAID guaranty will be backed by the full faith and credit
of the United States of America and will be issued pursuant to authority in section 222 of the Foreign Assistance Act
of 1961, as amended (the ``Act'').

Lenders eligible to receive the USAID guaranty are those specified in section 238(c) of the Act. They are: (1) U.S.
citizens; (2) domestic U.S. corporations, partnerships, or associations substantially beneficially owned by
U.S. citizens; (3) foreign corporations whose share capital is at least 95 percent owned by U.S. citizens; and, (4)
foreign partnerships or associations wholly owned by U.S. citizens.

To be eligible for the USAID guaranty, the loan must be repayable in full no later than the thirtieth anniversary of
the disbursement of the principal amount thereof and the interest rates may be no higher than the maximum rate established
from time to time by USAID.

Information as to the eligibility of investors and other aspects of the USAID housing guaranty program can be obtain
from: Mr. Peter M. Kimm, Director, Office of Environment and Urban Programs, U.S. Agency for International Development,
Room 401, SA2, Washington, D.C. 205230214, Fax Nos: (202) 6632552 or 6632507, Telephone:
(202) 6632530.




Dated: November 16, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Michael G. Kitay,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant General Counsel, Bureau for Global Programs, Field Support and Research, Agency for International Development.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9428740 Filed 112194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 611601M
</BILLING>

