 

Section 

XX

.310(e)(1)(i) of the interim final rule requires that a facility obtain a prevailing wage determination from the
SESA. Although the SESA and ETA administrative system provide an avenue for a facility to challenge a SESA determination
through the Employment Service (ES) complaint process (see 20 CFR part 658, subpart E), the interim final rule did
not specifically identify that process. The final rule provides needed clarification by directing the facility
to the ES complaint process and alerting the facility that a challenge of a SESA determination may be made only prior
to filing an attestation in which that SESA determination is used. Implicit and essential in this process is the requirement
that once a facility obtains a prevailing wage determination from the SESA and files the attestation without challenging
the SESA's determination through the ES complaint system, the facility has in effect accepted the determination
and waived its right to challenge the determination. Permitting a facility to operate under a determination and later
contest it in the course of an investigation or enforcement action is contrary to sound public policy; such a delayed,
disruptive challenge would have a harmful effect on U.S. and H1B nurses, competing hospitals, and other parties
who may have relied on the wage provided by the facility on the attestation. Section 

XX

.310(3)(1)(i) of the final rule explicitly states the Department's clarification of the use and consequence of the
ES complaint process.
Regarding working conditions, the final rule, as did the interim final rule, applies an adverse effect standard on
a facility basis, due to the administrative infeasibility of making prevailing practice determinations on an area-wide
basis.
Concerning the documentation requirements for pay and compensation, a Member of Congress commented that the interim
final rule did not require specific enough documentation. He suggested that the rule should require specific wage
and job data for individual nurses and positions, not summaries. However, a statewide employer association expressed
concern that the interim final rule made confidential information available to the public. This commenter suggested
that such information should be available only to the Department of Labor and/or others as hospital policy allows.
Former Representative Morrison, in commenting on the NPRM, which contained documentation requirements much like
the interim final rule, voiced his support for the kinds of supporting documentation required.
After careful consideration of the comments received, the Department has determined that there will be no changes
made to the interim final rule's requirements concerning documentation of no adverse effect on wages and working
conditions. Employers should note that if a complaint is filed, an investigation conducted, and a hearing held, any
employer information submitted as evidence for the hearing will become a matter of public record. Such information
may well be more extensive than that which the employer must make available for public examination. See 8 U.S.C. 1182(m)(2)(E).


5. Notification of Strike or Lockout


One employer commented that the requirement that the facility notify ETA within 3 days of the occurrence of a strike
or lockout at the facility involving registered nurses should be changed to allow the facility 10 days to notify ETA.
The Department has determined that the current requirement that ETA be notified within 3 days of the occurrence of
a strike or lockout provides the facility with adequate time for making the required notification, since the facility
will be aware of any such occurrence immediately. The current protections offered to U.S. nurses would be weakened
if the 3-day notification period were lengthened. Therefore, no change is being made in the requirements governing
notification of strike or lockout.


6. Notification of Filing


An attorney commented that the requirement that facilities notify their employees when they file an attestation
is burdensome to employers and goes beyond what is in the statute. The attorney recommended that facilities be required
to provide notice only of the filing of H1A visa petitions with INS and only from the time of filing until the alien
begins work. The attorney also commented that the current requirement concerning the availability for public examination
of the supporting documentation goes beyond what should be required.
While INRA amendments to the INA call for notice of filing when the visa petition is filed, the accompanying House Judiciary
Committee report on INRA (then called H.R. 3259) recommending that the bill pass without amendment, stated on page
5 that:



