 

(3) Delineate a specific population of children_i.e., by age, disability, diagnosis, level of functioning, and
membership in a special population, if appropriate_and their families; 
(4) Produce detailed procedures and materials that enable others to replicate the model as implemented at the original
site; 
(5) As appropriate, develop and evaluate the model in integrated, age-appropriate settings that facilitate the
interaction between project participants and their peers without disabilities, including models developed for
use in home or in hospital settings (such as neonatal intensive care units); and 
(6) Evaluate the model at the original model development site and_if approved for funding beyond the initial three
years of the project period_at other sites to determine whether the model can be adopted by other sites and yield similar
positive results. In its evaluation, a project must use multiple outcome measures to determine the effectiveness
of the model and its component strategies, including measures of multiple, functional child and family outcomes,
other indices of the effects of the model, and cost data associated with implementing the model. 
(b) In determining whether to continue a project for the fourth and fifth years of the project period, in addition to
considering factors in 34 CFR 75.253(a), the Secretary considers the following: 
(1) The degree to which the model developed by the project is, or would be by the end of year three, designed soundly and
replicable by other agencies, and provides state-of-the-art interventions for the target population. 
(2) The extent to which dissemination of the model would meet a significant or unique service need in other geographic
locations. 
(3) The degree to which the project has initially produced compelling, quantifiable evidence of the effectiveness
of the model as implemented at the original development site. 
(4) Availability of funding for the model from sources other than the Early Education Program for Children with Disabilities
to support the operation of the model at the original development site during years four and five. 
(5) The extent to which the project has documented the commitment of other agencies not affiliated with the original

project to adopt its model and participate in evaluation of the model during years four and five of the project period.

(6) The extent to which the project has sound plans for aiding in replication and for evaluating its model at replication
sites during years four and five of the project period. 
A project that applies for funding for the fourth and fifth years must set aside in its budget for the third year funds
to cover costs associated with the services to be performed by the review team appointed by the Secretary to evaluate
the project in the third year. These funds are estimated to be approximately $4,000. 


Competitive Priority.

 Within Absolute Priority 1, the Secretary, under 34 CFR 75.105(c)(2)(i), gives preference to applications that
meet the following competitive priority. The Secretary awards up to 10 points to an application that meets this competitive
priority in a particularly effective way. These points are in addition to any points the application earns under the
selection criteria for the program: 
Projects designed to develop, implement, evaluate, and disseminate models that_
(a) Incorporate the appropriate use of assistive technology to enhance services to young children with disabilities;
or 
(b) Address the unique needs of young children with low incidence disabilities, such as deaf-blindness. 


Project Period:

 Up to 60 months. 


Absolute Priority 2_Early Childhood Model Inservice Training Projects

 (84.024P). A model inservice training project considered for funding under this priority must_
(a) Identify the target population to be trained, including their roles and responsibilities, and the national needs
addressed by the model; 
(b) Delineate a conceptual framework upon which the training model is to be based, including the changes in personnel
roles and responsibilities and the skills needed to implement the new roles or responsibilities; 
(c) Identify the content of training and the format for delivery of training and other activities of the model; 
(d) Develop and demonstrate an inservice training model for professionals, paraprofessionals, or both, who are
currently providing services to infants, toddlers, and preschool-aged children with disabilities and their families,
or to those individuals who through retraining could provide those services; 
(e) Include goals, objectives, and activities to ensure that personnel participating in the training acquire skills
to work effectively with children and families who are members of cultural, linguistic, and racial minority groups.

(f) Include within the model an array of follow-up and support activities that ensure that personnel participating
in the training acquire the skills being taught and use that knowledge in meeting the service needs of young children
with disabilities and their families; 
(g) Coordinate with the State agencies responsible for the Comprehensive System of Personnel Development (CSPD)
under part H or part B of IDEA, and arrange for credit to be granted to trainees by appropriate agencies, organizations,
or institutions of higher education; and 
(h) Evaluate the inservice training model through direct assessment of participants' skills following the training
and, after a period of time, include some direct observation measures of trainees in the service setting using standardized
observational rating techniques. 


Competitive Priority.

 Within Absolute Priority 2, the Secretary, under 34 CFR 75.105(c)(2)(i), gives preference to applications that
meet the following competitive priority. The Secretary awards up to 10 points to an application that meets this competitive
priority in a particularly effective way. These points are in addition to any points the application earns under the
selection criteria for the program: 
Projects that provide evidence that they will develop, demonstrate, evaluate, and disseminate models that_
(a) Incorporate collaborative, multi-disciplinary, team training approaches to personnel development; or 
(b) Focus on paraprofessionals and address their unique training needs. 


Project Period:

 Up to 36 months. 


For Applications and General Information Contact: 

Sonja Jenkins, U.S. Department of Education, 400 Maryland Avenue, SW., room 4716, Switzer Building, Washington,
DC 202022732. Telephone (202) 2059377. Individuals who use a telecommunications device for the deaf
(TDD) may call the TDD number at (202) 2058169. 


For Technical Information Contact:

 Gail Houle, U.S. Department of Education, 400 Maryland Avenue, SW., room 4613, Switzer Building, Washington, DC
202022644. Telephone: (202) 2059045. Individuals who use a telecommunications device for the deaf
(TDD) may call the TDD number at (202) 2058169. 


Program Authority:

 20 U.S.C. 1423. 



