 

For example, used oil generated during on- and off-shore drilling activities (e.g. from compressors, trucks and
other heavy equipment) is routinely mixed with crude oil in units (e.g. production separators, seagoing vessels,
stock tanks, etc.) located at the exploration and production site and then transported, as a mixture, to the pipeline
or petroleum refining facility. Depending on the location of the drilling activities, the mixture of used oil and
crude oil may need to be transported (by vessel, truck, rail, etc.) to a separate location for introduction into the
pipeline or the petroleum refining facility. In the case of off-shore drilling sites for example, conveyance of the
mixture may involve multiple modes of transportation (i.e., from the off-shore platform to land by vessel or pipeline
and then to the crude oil pipeline by land-based transport). Today's exemption covers all modes of transportation
of mixtures of used oil and crude or natural gas liquids, as long as the mixture contains less than 1% used oil and is destined
for insertion into a petroleum refining facility process at a point prior to crude distillation or catalytic cracking.
In addition, today's exemption covers storage of mixtures of used oil and crude oil, provided that the mixture contains
less than 1% used oil and is inserted into a petroleum refining facility process prior to crude distillation or catalytic
cracking. 

Used oil that is generated at exploration and production sites continues to be subject to used oil generator standards
prior to being mixed with crude oil such that it is exempt under today's rule. Used oil that is generated off-site and
transported to or stored at an exploration and production site is subject to the transporter and transfer facility
standards, as applicable, up until the point at which the used oil is mixed with crude oil such that it is exempt under
279.10(g)(2). 

EPA is exempting mixtures of used oil and crude oil held in discrete units at a refinery or at remote locations because
the Agency understands that the amount of used oil contained in these mixtures is extremely small relative to the large
quantities of crude oil. In developing today's rule, EPA held numerous discussions with petroleum refinery industry
representatives regarding the maximum amount of used oil contained in mixtures of used oil and crude oil that are destined
for insertion into a petroleum refining process prior to crude distillation or catalytic cracking. Industry representatives
repeatedly informed the Agency that used oil constitutes less than 1% of these mixtures. In gathering information
for today's rule, EPA held conference calls with representatives from a number of petroleum refining companies (e.g.,
Mobil Oil Corporation and Phillips Petroleum Inc.,). The Agency also conducted several site visits, including visits
to an Amoco refinery in Whiting, Indiana and a Mobil Oil Corporation refinery in Paulsboro, New Jersey. In each case,
EPA was informed that used oil does not currently, and will not comprise greater than 1% of the crude oil/used oil mixture
because of the sheer volumes of crude oil that are continuously being produced and processed relative to the amount
of used oil that is generated at production sites or refineries. This recent information is consistent with comments
submitted in response to the 1985 Used Oil Proposed Rule in which Exxon Company, USA stated that the average percentage
of used oil in refinery feed stock streams is less than 0.02% and Texaco, Inc., indicated that used oil would constitute
no more than 0.01% of the refinery input. 

EPA does not believe it is necessary to apply the used oil management standards to the less than 1% fraction of used oil
that is being held temporarily in discrete units or transported from those units to the pipeline or the petroleum refinery
for recycling as part of a mixture that is composed overwhelmingly of crude oil. In essence, because of the high ratio
of crude oil to used oil, EPA considers the mixture to be equivalent to crude oil for regulatory purposes. EPA's part
279 standards were designed to control those particular risks associated with the management of used oil (e.g., uncontrolled
burning, improper storage practices by used oil handlers) pursuant to section 3014 of RCRA. 

The reason for EPA's imposition of a 1% limit on the amount of used oil contained in mixtures of used oil and crude oil
being stored or transported to a crude oil pipeline or petroleum refinery prior to insertion into the refining process
is that, while we have determined that the small amounts of used oil that are being added to crude oil under current practices
pose no incremental risk over normal crude oil, we have not evaluated whether larger amounts of used oil also pose no
incremental risk. Given the information provided to EPA by the petroleum refining industry regarding the inherent
limitations on the amount of used oil that is or should be contained in mixtures of used oil and crude oil (i.e., less
than 1%), and given that EPA has received no information, either recently, or in response to previous rulemakings
that provides basis for an alternative limit, the Agency sees no point in imposing a higher cap. Imposition of a higher
cap could have the effect of encouraging mixing of used oil with crude oil that would not otherwise occur during the
normal course of petroleum refining operations. Such an incentive might lead to increased incremental risk from
management of large amounts of used oil, exempt from the part 279 standards, at petroleum refineries. EPA also concluded
that a less precise limit (i.e., ``

de minimis

'' or ``small amounts''), as was suggested by some commenters from the petroleum refining industry, would needlessly
cause uncertainty, given that EPA was told repeatedly that amounts currently introduced are far less than 1%. 



