 

As suggested above, time/temperature abuse can occur during processing as well as before the raw materials are received.
It is important that processors identify critical control points and suitable controls that will protect fish and
fish products that can form scombrotoxin from time/temperature abuse. As the guideline for scombrotoxin states
in Appendix B, section 5., many of the controls for time and temperature in the guideline for cooked, ready-to-eat
products should be applicable to the processing of scombrotoxin forming species. Such handling conditions are necessary
to control histamine production. In addition, Appendix B, section 4. provides that products that are undergoing
processing not be exposed to ambient temperatures of 40 
&cir;F (4.4 
&cir;C) or higher for more than 4 hours during that processing. The agency recognizes that for many products, manipulation
under unrefrigerated conditions is necessary. The processor must be aware, however, that during such periods the
product will be exposed to conditions that can lead to histamine formation. Appendix B, section 4. describes how to
minimize this possibility. 
To comply with Appendix B, section 4., the processor should monitor the length of time that the product is exposed to
ambient temperatures of 40 
&cir;F or higher. Documentation of the time/temperature monitoring controls will facilitate management and regulatory
review. 


L. Guideline for Product Integrity 


1. Economic Adulteration 


Economic adulteration occurs when a consumer is misled about the worth, amount, or identity of a food product and,
therefore, unknowingly pays for value not received. Economically deceptive practices in the representation of
a food's value may occur in a number of ways. Sections 402(b) and 403 of the act define the conditions and practices that
result, respectively, in the economic adulteration and misbranding of a food. In addition, the Fair Packaging and
Labeling Act, 15 U.S.C. 1451 

et seq., 

requires that food packages and their labeling provide consumers with accurate information about the identity and
net quantity of the contents, so that consumers can make fair value comparisons among products. 
While any food may be subjected to economic adulteration or to misbranding, fish and fishery products present distinctive
characteristics and processing procedures that make them more susceptible to abusive economic practices than most
foods. The great variety of finfish, shellfish, and crustacean species, as well as the multiplicity of products prepared
from them, including fabricated surimi-based products that imitate actual seafoods, provide ample opportunity
for both inadvertent and deliberate economic adulteration and misbranding practices that result in economic loss
to the consumer. 
Most important among the characteristics that make seafoods vulnerable to abuse is the similar appearance of many
finfish, in the whole, raw state, in the form of fillets, or as ingredients. Unlike the situation with the limited types
of red meats and fowl, it is very difficult for most consumers to detect the substitution of an economically inferior
species for a more valuable one that is declared on the label or in labeling (e.g., the substitution of rockfish for
red snapper). 
Irrespective of the relative economic value of the substitute species, section 403(a)(1) of the act states that a
food shall be deemed to be misbranded if its labeling is false and misleading in any particular. More specifically,
a food is misbranded under section 403(b) of the act if it is offered for sale under the name of another food. If the substituted
fish is less valuable than the species represented on the label or labeling, the product is also adulterated under
section 402(b)(2) of the act, which states that a food shall be deemed to be adulterated if any substance has been substituted
wholly or in part therefor. Consequently, it is a clear violation of the act when a finfish, shellfish, or crustacean
is not correctly identified on its label or in its labeling. 
Furthermore, the misidentification of species may also have adverse public health consequences. Should an illness
or outbreak occur from a seafood product, it is essential for proper diagnoses and treatment that public health investigators
not be prevented from quickly identifying the exact cause or agent responsible in the food, and from tracing it back
to the correct source of the food to prevent further sale and consumption. 
For example, in a seafood related incident that occurred in 1982, in New York, two men became ill shortly after eating
a fish dinner in a restaurant. Species substitution caused investigators to erroneously suspect that the illnesses
were caused by ciguatoxin because the food was identified as being red snapper, a species which could cause that illness.
The food actually was mahi, a fish which is often associated with scombroid poisoning (Ref. 122). Scombroid poisoning
is associated with high levels of histamine.

