 

(8) Was appointed under 315.608 and Executive Order 12721 as a family member formerly stationed overseas.



* * * * *



(d) Upon noncompetitive appointment to the competitive service under the Postal Reorganization Act (39 U.S.C. 101


et seq.

), an employee of the Postal Career Service (including substitute and part-time flexible) who has not completed 1
year of Postal service, must serve the remainder of a 1-year probationary period in the new agency.

6. Section 315.802 is revised to read as follows:



315.802

Length of probationary period; crediting service.



(a) The probationary period required by 315.801 is 1 year and may not be extended. 

(b) Prior Federal civilian service (including nonappropriated fund service) counts toward completion of probation
when the prior service:

(1) Is in the same agency, e.g., Department of the Army;

(2) Is in the same line of work (determined by the employee's actual duties and responsibilities); and

(3) Contains or is followed by no more than a single break in service that does not exceed 30 days.

(c) Periods of absence while in a pay status count toward completion of probation. Absence in nonpay status while on
the rolls (other than for compensable injury or military duty) is creditable up to a total of 22 workdays. Absence (whether
on or off the rolls) due to compensable injury or military duty is creditable in full upon restoration to Federal service.
Nonpay time in excess of 22 workdays extends the probationary period by an equal amount. An employee serving probation
who leaves Federal service to become a volunteer with the Peace Corps or ACTION serves the remainder of the probationary
period upon reinstatement provided the employee is reinstated within 90 days of termination of service as a volunteer,
or training for such service.

(d) The probationary period for part-time employees is computed on the basis of calendar time, in the same manner as
for full-time employees. For intermittent employees, i.e., those who do not have regularly scheduled tours of duty,
each day or part of a day in pay status counts as 1 day of credit toward the 260 days in a pay status required for completion
of probation. (However, the probationary period cannot be completed in less than 1 year of calendar time.)

7. In 315.804, the existing text is designated as paragraph (a) and paragraph (b) is added, to read as follows:



315.804

Termination of probationers for unsatisfactory performance or conduct.



* * * * *



(b) Probation ends when the employee completes his or her scheduled tour of duty on the day before the anniversary date
of the employee's appointment. For example, when the last workday is a Friday and the anniversary date is the following
Monday, the probationer must be separated before the end of the tour of duty on Friday since Friday would be the last
day the employee actually has to demonstrate fitness for further employment.

8. Section 315.902 is revised to read as follows:



315.902

Definitions.






