 

Another question related to the debtor-creditor 
requirement was raised by the PPC work group. The issue 
involves situations in which a borrower relies upon a 
spouse's income for repayment of the loan and wishes to 
purchase credit or term life and disability insurance on the 
spouse, but the spouse is not a co-maker of the loan. The 
FCA considers it to be unlikely that a spouse who 
significantly contributes to the loan's repayment would not 
have signed the note. Nevertheless, because spouses may 
have contractual liability for the debt by operation of 
state law, the proposed regulation would permit the sale of 
credit insurance on a borrower's spouse. As with all other 
situations, the amount of insurance offered could not exceed 
the total amount of the loan commitment to the borrower. 

The FCA's review of the legislative history on the 
enactment of section 4.29 of the Act indicates that a 
debtor-creditor relationship is not necessary for System 
institutions to provide other insurance necessary to protect 
the member's farm or aquatic unit, such as hail and 
multiple-peril crop insurance.
<FOOTCITE>7</FOOTCITE>
 Accordingly, this 
restriction has been deleted in the proposed regulation. 
Purchasers of other insurance would, however, have to be 
either members or borrowers. Proposed 618.8040(b)(2) 
would define members (for subpart B only) to include a 
stockholder or participation certificate holder who acquired 
stock or participation certificates to obtain a loan, for 
investment purposes, or to qualify for other services of the 
association or bank. Therefore, the reference in existing 
618.8030(b)(1) to eligibility for landlords of tenants and 
tenants of landlords having a debtor-creditor relationship 
would be removed as unnecessary. Such tenants or landlords 
would be eligible to receive hail or multiple-peril crop 
insurance upon becoming members of a bank or association. 
Similar to the debtor-creditor requirement in proposed 
618.8040(b)(1), the purchaser of other types of insurance 
does not have be to a borrower or member of the offering 
bank or association, but can be a borrower or member of any 
System bank or association. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
7

</FOOTNAME>


See, 

H.R. Rep. No. 1287, 96th Cong., 2nd Sess., 44 (1980).

</FOOTNOTE>


2. Section 618.8040(b)(5)_Incentive Compensation for 
Sale of Insurance 



Section 618.8040(b)(5) is proposed to be amended to 
clarify how incentive compensation for sale of insurance may 
be provided to employees. The existing regulation states 
that ``Bank or association personnel shall not benefit, 
directly or indirectly, from insurance sales by receipt of 
commissions, gifts, or incentive awards.'' The proposed 
regulations would allow incentive compensation for sale of 
insurance with some limitations. 

The prohibition of compensation for insurance sales was 
included in the existing regulation to prevent conflicts of 
interest between System employees and borrowers and to 
implement the requirement in section 4.29 of the Act that 
borrowers not be coerced into buying insurance from System 
institutions. The FCA believes that unrestricted 
compensation of loan officers or other employees, based on 
volume of insurance sales can lead to abusive, high-pressure 
sales practices. In addition, other Federal financial 
regulators agree and continue to place limitations on 
employee compensation derived from insurance sales. At the 
same time, however, the FCA recognizes that if sale of 
insurance is a part of an employee's regular job, incentive 
compensation should be allowed to some extent. 
Additionally, the FCA is aware that some institutions have 
instituted bonus pools that are shared by employees who may 
not be involved in selling insurance. The proposed 
regulation accommodates those arrangements as well. 

The issue of employee compensation for insurance sales 
was raised in 1992 when it became known that some 
institutions had employee compensation programs that allowed 
direct compensation for insurance sales. On May 20, 1992, 
the FCA issued Bookletter 327OE, which recognized that some 
System employees were compensated for insurance sales in one 
of two ways: (1) Incentive bonuses were directly tied to 
the insurance sales generated by each employee; or (2) 
incentive bonuses were tied in some way to the net income of 
the institution, part of which was derived from sales of 
insurance. The bookletter stated that compensation that is 
tied directly to insurance sales is not in compliance with 
current regulations. However, the FCA did not intend to 
apply that determination to the second type of plan where 
compensation is tied to the net income of an institution. 
Since that bookletter was issued, the FCA has received a 
number of inquiries from System institutions requesting 
clarification on whether specific compensation plans would 
be considered acceptable. In addition, the PPC work group 
requested that the FCA consider the issue of compensation 
for sale of insurance as part of its project to amend 
618.8000. 

Proposed 618.8040(b)(6) allows for incentive 
compensation for sale of insurance in line with what is 
currently allowed in the commercial banking industry. In 
any single year, the amount of incentive compensation 
attributable to insurance sales cannot exceed 5 percent of 
the recipient's annual base salary. This limitation applies 
to individual incentive plans, as well as bonus pools or any 
other type of plan. If an employee participates in both an 
individual plan and some form of bonus pool, the amount of 
incentive compensation attributable to sale of insurance 
received from each plan must be aggregated for purposes of 
determining whether it meets the 5-percent limitation. 




