 

Public use is increasing about ten percent annually on the Kodiak National Wildlife Refuge and available information
indicates the rate of increase is even greater in the O'Malley River area. Also, a trend of increasing adverse interactions
between people and bears has occurred in the O'Malley River area in recent years. Generally, brown bears are negatively
impacted by expanding human use. Bears are often killed ``in defense of life or property'' as a consequence of increased
levels of human activity in areas that are used heavily by bears. In addition to mortality, interaction between bears
and people can impose stress on bears that ultimately affect survival and/or productivity of bears as well as jeopardize
human safety. 

In 1991, a research camp was established on the O'Malley River to study bear use of the area and potential impacts of
public use on bears. Research data document human impacts on bears in the O'Malley River area and confirm the need to
control or restrict human uses in this area. The O'Malley River area supports approximately 33% of the entire brown
bear population in the Karluk Lake basin. At least 110 different bears used the O'Malley River area during JulySeptember
1991, with peak use occurring during the second and third weeks of July. More importantly, refuge research data suggest
that frequently sighted bears represent only a small portion of the total population utilizing the O'Malley River
area. 

During approximately 250 hours of intensive observation of bear groups in the O'Malley River area in 1991, 66 interactions
between bears and people were recorded. One-third of the interactions disturbed and/or displaced the bears by causing
them to run or walk away from people. In one instance, people caused the separation of a female from one of her first-year
cubs; while trying to locate its mother, the cub was subsequently killed by another bear. 

Alternatives considered in response to the public use/bear problems in the O'Malley River area include closing the
area to all public use, which would satisfy the need to conserve bears, but would eliminate all opportunity for public
use during the period of closure. The area could be left open to provide ample public use opportunity, but this use would
have incompatible impacts on refuge bear populations. Seasonal closure in support of a bear viewing program not only
would satisfy the need to conserve bears, but would also make possible continued public use. No other alternative
could provide both benefits. 

The refuge's trial bear viewing program initiated at Dog Salmon Creek was moved to the O'Malley River area in 1992 because
of the documented problems and incompatibility between high and unregulated public use and bears in the O'Malley
area. A temporary closure, pursuant to 50 CFR 36.42, was utilized to avoid conflicts between people and bears at this
important seasonal bear concentration area. Goals of the trial O'Malley bear viewing program were: 



