 







<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Immigration and Naturalization Service</USBUREAU>



<CFRNO>8 CFR Part 340</CFRNO>




<RINDOCK>[INS No. 163493]</RINDOCK>




<RINDOCK>RIN 1115AD45</RINDOCK>



Revocation of Naturalization



<AGENCY>
agency: 

Immigration and Naturalization Service, Justice.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
action: 

Proposed rule.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
summary: 

This proposed rule would amend the regulations of the Immigration and Naturalization Service (Service) relating
to revocation of naturalization under section 340 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (Act). Specifically, this
rule proposes an administrative process whereby a district director may reopen and reconsider applications for
naturalization pursuant to section 340(i) of the Act. The purpose of this rule is to facilitate the transfer of naturalization
authority contemplated by Congress while retaining the protection for the individual provided under judicial naturalization.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
dates: 

Written comments must be submitted on or before September 26, 1994.



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
addresses: 

Please submit written comments in triplicate, to the Record Systems Division, Director, Policy Directives and Instructions
Branch, Immigration and Naturalization Service, 425 I Street NW., Room 5307, Washington, DC 20536. To ensure proper
handling, please reference INS No. 163493 on your correspondence.


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
for further information contact: 

Ron Chirlin, Senior Immigration Examiner, Naturalization and Special Projects Branch, Adjudications Division,
Immigration and Naturalization Service, 425 I Street NW., Room 3214, Washington, DC 20536, Telephone: (202) 5145014.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

Background



The purpose of this proposed rule is to provide a procedure for the Service to reopen administrative naturalization
proceedings pursuant to section 340(i) of the Act, as amended by the Immigration Act of 1990, (IMMACT), Public Law
101649, dated November 29, 1990. Congress amended section 340 of the Act, Revocation of Naturalization, to
bring the reopening process of section 340(i) of the Act into conformity with the change to Administrative Naturalization.
That section now provides the Attorney General with the power to correct, reopen, alter, modify, or vacate an application
granted under Administrative Naturalization. Such power had heretofore rested within the discretion of the courts,
which had held exclusive jurisdiction over naturalization prior to the enactment of IMMACT.

Section 340 of the Act sets forth the requirements and procedure for revoking an order of naturalization. In this statute,
Congress has given the Attorney General two distinct avenues by which to set aside an order of naturalization. Section
340(a) provides that the United States Attorney may institute revocation proceedings in Federal court based on the
ground that naturalization was procured by concealing or misrepresenting a material fact or by illegality. The United
States Attorney may institute such proceedings at any time based on an affidavit of good cause prepared by the Service.
The purpose of revocation proceedings under section 340(a) of the Act is to set aside an order of naturalization and
to cancel a certificate of naturalization. The burden rests with the Government to establish that naturalization
should be revoked.

Alternatively, section 340(i) allows for reopening of orders of naturalization. Prior to amendment by IMMACT, section
340(i) permitted a court to reopen naturalization proceedings before expiration of the term of court. The Government
would move, pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 60(b), to seek the court's reopening and reconsideration
of a naturalization petition, usually on the grounds of fraud, mistake, or in light of new, previously undiscoverable
evidence. If the court granted the Service's motion, it would reopen naturalization proceedings and render a new
decision on the petition for naturalization. The burden remained upon the petitioner to establish eligibility for
naturalization. Section 340(i) was viewed as a means to ensure that courts would not be restricted in their power to
consider motions made pursuant to applicable rules of civil procedure.

With the change to Administrative Naturalization brought about by IMMACT, however, courts no longer hold jurisdiction
over naturalization applications. It is now the responsibility of the Service to receive applications for naturalization
and conduct examinations to determine statutory eligibility for citizenship. Additionally, the Service renders
formal determinations on grants and denials of applications for naturalization, and provides for administrative
review of applications subject to denial for cause before a final determination is made. It follows therefore that
Congress has amended section 340(i) of the Act to provide the Attorney General with the reopening power previously
held by the courts.

The IMMACT's amendment to section 340(i) of the Act simply replaces the court's jurisdiction with that of the Attorney
General, leaving the authority described in that statute unchanged. Taking this into account, the Service has attempted
to develop a regulatory framework that resembles the way in which courts conducted proceedings under the pre-amended
section 340(i) of the Act. To this end, the Service has relied upon Fed. R. Civ. P. 60(b) and related jurisprudence.
In so doing, the Service believes that the proposed framework will facilitate the transfer of naturalization authority
contemplated by Congress, while retaining the protection for the individual provided under judicial naturalization.



The Proposed Rule



The Service proposes to add to Title 8 of the Code of Federal Regulations a new 340.1, which sets forth the process
for reopening naturalization applications pursuant to section 340(i) of the Act. Under this proposed rule, the Service's
power to reopen would be limited to situations where the Service obtains evidence, unavailable during the original
naturalization proceeding, that it granted naturalization by mistake, that the applicant procured naturalization
by fraud or misrepresentation, or that the applicant was not in fact eligible for naturalization. In determining
when reopening of naturalization is appropriate, the Service found instructive the grounds described in Fed. R.
Civ. P. 60(b), as that provision codified the common-law concept that courts have the authority to relieve a party
of a final judgment for the reasons described above. Moreover, there exists a developed body of administrative and
judicial case law for reopening on these grounds.


</SUPPLEM>
