 



Response: 

The Department believes that this point need not be explicitly stated in the rule. The statute and this final rule require
the PHA to disclose its plan for securing additional housing resources that will be sufficient to provide assistance
to not less than the number of non-elderly disabled families that would have been housed but for the designation. If
the PHA has the ``additional'' housing resources on hand, and need not secure other housing resources, then this is
what the PHA will state in its allocation plan.



Comment:

 One commenter stated that it was trivial for the Department to require the PHA to describe any incentives offered to
implement voluntary transfers to achieve the objectives of the designation.



Response:

 The Department is interested in how a PHA is successful in motivating families to move to a designated project, or motivating
families to move from a project proposed to be designated. Additionally, the information provided by PHAs on this
matter may be useful to other PHAs.



Comment:

 Many comments were received on the types of additional housing resources to be provided to non-elderly disabled families.
Persons within the disability community were divided on what constitutes acceptable additional housing resources.
Some commenters stated that section 8 certificates and vouchers were not suitable housing resources for persons
with disabilities. The majority of individual commenters (as opposed to advocacy organizations) requested the
use of more section 8 certificates and vouchers for persons with disabilities. Other commenters stated that replacing
public housing units with residency in a group home, or shared housing is not comparable to residency in a private apartment
and should not be acceptable.



Response:

 The statute provides for consideration of a variety of alternative housing resources for non-elderly disabled families,
including section 8 certificates and vouchers, mixed housing, congregate housing, shared housing, and group homes.
Accordingly, the Department cannot exclude consideration of use of these types of housing assistance by regulation.
The final rule, however, provides for greater public input in the allocation plan than did the proposed rule. This
provides an opportunity for persons with disabilities, and their representatives, to voice their objections, if
any, to the additional housing resources for non-elderly disabled families proposed to be used by the PHA. The Department
will look very carefully at any plan about which there were strong objections raised by persons with disabilities.



Comment:

 A few commenters asked how the allocation plan is to indicate that it gave fair consideration of comments received
on the allocation plan.



Response:

 The PHA should explain how it did or did not revise its plan in response to public comment. Generally, the Department
will be interested in a PHA's response to substantial negative comment on a proposed allocation plan.



Comment:

 Three commenters objected to the fact that the proposed rule did not include a list of various housing options for elderly
families.



Response:

 As noted earlier in this preamble, the Congress and the Department anticipate that most, if not all, allocation plans
will provide for designation of public housing projects for occupancy by elderly families. This is why the statute
specifically requires PHAs to address housing resources that will be available for non-elderly disabled families.
In the event a PHA designates a project for occupancy by disabled families, and the designation will result in denial
of or delay in housing assistance to elderly families, then the PHA must address this issue in its allocation plan.



Comment:

 Nine commenters stated that approval or disapproval of an allocation plan should be based only on the statutory requirements.
Another commenter stated that the only basis for disapproval should be an indication that there will be disparate
waiting times for groups waiting to be housed. Three commenters stated that the rule should make clear that the Department
will not approve an allocation plan which fails to promote fair housing or which is submitted by a PHA for which there
is documented history of discrimination against various types of families. 



Response:

 The Department has made only a few editorial changes to 945.203(d) which addresses the allocation plan approval
criteria. This section tracks the statutory language. The statute provides that the allocation plan shall be approved
if the Department determines that based on the plan ``and the comments submitted on the plan''_``the information
contained in the plan is complete and accurate and the projections are reasonable, implementation of the plan will
not result in excessive vacancy rates, and the plan (as described in the statute) can reasonably be achieved.'' The
fact that the approval section of the regulation may focus on particular information to be contained in the plan (and
the completeness and accuracy of this information), or emphasize the reasonableness of certain projections to be
made does not mean that the Department has departed from the statutory approval criteria.



Comment:

 One commenter suggested that the final rule require that a PHA whose plan has been disapproved by the Department, must
undergo public review and comment before resubmission of the plan to the Department.



Response:

 As discussed in section III of this preamble, the Department shared the concern expressed by the commenter, and has
revised the provision in the rule that addresses when a revised plan may be submitted. The rule now provides that if
a revised plan is submitted within the period set by the Department which will be no less than 45 days, but no more than
90 days, the PHA need not undergo a second consultation process. However, after 90 days, the Department is concerned
that factors and data may have changed that will affect families served by the PHA, and that therefore make it necessary
for the PHA to once again invite public review and comment. Accordingly, the Department established a maximum time
limit of 90 days.



Comment:

 Three commenters requested that the final rule provide for PHAs to follow the same public participation requirements
on updated plans that govern the initial plans.


