 

The NASD also believes the proposed N

&bull;

PROVE system is consistent with Sections 15A(b)(6), 15A(b)(9), 15A(b)(11), and 11A(a)(1)(C) of the Act. Section
15A(b)(6) requires that the rules of a national securities association be designed to prevent fraudulent and manipulative
acts and practices, to promote just and equitable principles of trade, to foster cooperation and coordination with
persons engaged in regulating, clearing, settling, processing information with respect to, and facilitating transactions
in securities, to remove impediments to and perfect the mechanism of a free and open market and a national market system
and in general to protect investors and the public interest. Section 15A(b)(9) requires that rules of an Association
not impose any burden on competition not necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the purposes of the Act. Section
15A(b)(11) requires the NASD to formulate rules governing the quality of fair and informative quotations. Section
11A(a)(1)(C) finds that it is in the public interest to, among other things, assure economically efficient execution
of securities transactions. The fundamental purpose of N

&bull;

PROVE is to assist investors in achieving prompt, efficient executions of their small orders and to provide an opportunity
for price improvement within an automated execution environment. The integrity and efficiency of Nasdaq for public
investors and market-making participants is critical and the NASD believes that N

&bull;

PROVE will provide benefits to both constituencies. The design of N

&bull;

PROVE is not anti-competitive as it affords all market and limit orders an equal opportunity for price improvement
regardless of whether the orders are preferenced or unpreferenced. In addition, to the extent that preferenced orders
may be handled differently than unpreferenced orders, because market makers have entered into preferencing arrangements
with known customers, market maker's effectively will have waived the protections offered them by the system. N

&bull;

PROVE may also enhance the quality of quotations in the Nasdaq marketplace as market makers participating in the service
may be encouraged to narrow the spread and improve the best inter-dealer quotations in Nasdaq in order to be first in
priority and continue to receive unpreferenced order flow through N

&bull;

PROVE.

Lastly, the NASD believes the N

&bull;

PROVE is fully consistent with the significant national market system objectives contained in Section 11A of the
Act. The facilities of N

&bull;

PROVE would advance these objectives by offering efficient execution of investors' small orders, by maintaining
market maker participation through the automated delivery of orders with the ability to reject those orders if trades
have already occurred, and by offering the opportunity for price improvement to N

&bull;

PROVE orders. The system's functionality will more accurately reflect market makers' affirmative obligations
to provide liquidity to the market, without depriving market makers of legitimate exceptions from the firmness requirements
contained in SEC Rule 11Ac11.



B. Self-Regulatory Organization's Statement on Burden on Competition



The NASD believes that the proposed rule change will not result in any burden on competition that is not necessary or
appropriate in furtherance of the purposes of the Act.



C. Self-Regulatory Organization's Statement on Comments on the Proposed Rule Change Received From Members, Participants,
or Others



Comments were neither solicited nor received.



III. Date of Effectiveness of the Proposed Rule Change and Timing for Commission Action



Within 35 days of the date of publication of this notice in the 

Federal Register

 or within such longer period (i) as the Commission may designate up to 90 days of such date if it finds such longer period
to be appropriate and publishes its reasons for so finding or (ii) as to which the NASD consents, the Commission will:

A. By order approve such proposed rule change, or 

B. Institute proceedings to determine whether the proposed rule change should be disapproved.



IV. Solicitation of Comments



Interested persons are invited to submit written data, views, and arguments concerning the foregoing. Persons making
written submissions should file six copies thereof with the Secretary, Securities and Exchange Commission, 450
Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20549. Copies of the submission, all subsequent amendments, all written statements
with respect to the proposed rule change that are filed with the Commission, and all written communications relating
to the proposed rule change between the Commission and any person, other than those that may be withheld from the public
in accordance with the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 552, will be available for inspection and copying in the Commission's
Public Reference Room. Copies of such filing will also be available for inspection and copying at the principal office
of the NASD. All submissions should refer to file number SRNASD9413 and should be submitted by
August 25, 1994.




For the Commission, by the Division of Market Regulation, pursuant to delegated authority.
<FOOTCITE>4</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
4

</FOOTNAME>
17 CFR 200.303(a)(12) (1994).

</FOOTNOTE>


<SIGNER>
Margaret H. McFarland,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Secretary.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9418965 Filed 8394; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 801001M
</BILLING>




