 

Paragraph (f) would address the specifications for objects used to test screening equipment, and equipment parameters,
and paragraph (g) would address any security communications equipment and procedures. Knowledge of the devices
used to perform various security functions could lead to a plan to defeat those devices. Accordingly, details of such
devices should be protected.
Paragraph (h) would address any information pertaining to: (1) Threats of any criminal acts directed against air
transportation; and (2) the details of an alleged violation of parts 107, 108, 109, or 129, and any information that
could reasonably lead to the disclosure of such details, i.e., the airport name, the location of the gate or access
point; the air carrier, indirect air carrier, or foreign air carrier. Paragraph (h) would apply only to the release
of information by the FAA. There is less risk of harm from the casual disclosure of this information by individuals.
Paragraph (i) would include any draft, proposed, or recommended change to sensitive security information or records.
The FAA frequently issues proposed revisions for sensitive security documents to air carriers and airport operators
and requests comments on the proposals. These proposals contain sensitive security information that also should
be protected.
Paragraph (j) would include any other information that the Administrator determines should not be disclosed under
the criteria in 191.3(b). While we have attempted to anticipate all sources of information that should be protected
from unauthorized disclosure, additional information may be discovered in the future. As with the current rule,
this paragraph would allow the Administrator to determine whether other information should be considered to be sensitive
security information.



Parts 107, 108, 109, and 129



The FAA proposes to make changes to the specific parts that apply to airport operators, air carriers, indirect air
carriers, and foreign air carriers, to correspond to the proposed changes to part 191. Parts 107, 108, 109, and 129
require these organizations to protect security information as required in part 191, and would require them to direct
requests for such information to the administrator. These parts would be redundant with the proposed changes to part
191. These organizations currently refer to their specific parts of the FAR for security requirements. Including
a cross-reference to part 191 in parts 107, 108, 109, and 129, alerts organization to the new requirements, and makes
it clear that part 191 is part of their security duties.



Economic Evaluation



This section summarizes the regulatory evaluation prepared by the FAA. The regulatory evaluation provides more
detailed discussion of the potential economic consequences of this proposal.
Executive Order 12866, dated September 30, 1993, directs Federal agencies to promulgate new regulations or modify
existing regulations only if benefits to society for each regulatory change outweigh potential costs. The order
also requires the preparation of an economic analysis of all ``significant regulatory actions'' except those responding
to emergency situations or other narrowly-defined exigencies.
The FAA has determined that this proposed rule is not a ``significant regulatory action'' as defined by Executive
Order 12866 (Regulatory Planning and Review). A synopsis of the costs and benefits associated with this rule are summarized
below. (A more detailed discussion is contained in the full regulatory evaluation placed in the docket for this proposed
rule.)



Costs and Benefits



This proposed rule would help protect persons and property at airports and aboard aircraft against terrorist and
other criminal acts by strengthening the rules protecting sensitive security information from being released to
unauthorized persons. It would require the affected entities to be responsible for safeguarding this security information
from unauthorized disclosure. The accidental divulgence of such material could lead, directly or indirectly, to
injuries, the loss of life, and/or the loss of an aircraft.
These rules could be implemented at no cost. Given the lack of cost and given the potential benefits of avoided fatalities
and injuries, the FAA finds this proposed rule to be cost beneficial.



