 

(vii) Is needed elsewhere in the national security interest of the United States, as determined by the Secretary of
the Military Department concerned. This authority may not be redelegated.


(6) Personal property to be transferred to the local redevelopment authority in support of its redevelopment plan
is not subject to sections 202 and 203 of Public Law 81152, ``Federal Property and Administrative Services
Act of 1949, as amended'' of June 30, 1949, 40 U.S.C. 483484. If the real property is transferred without consideration,
the personal property shall also be transferred without consideration. If the real property is transferred at or
near estimated fair market value, the value of the personal property shall be included in the estimated fair market
value of the real property. If the property is conveyed separately from the real property, the value of the personal
property shall be that at which it is carried on the installation's property account or estimated fair market value
as agreed to between the parties at the time of transfer.


(7) In addition to the exemptions in paragraph (h)(5) of this section, the Military Department or Defense Agency is
authorized to substitute an item similar to one requested by the redevelopment authority. The substitute items may
be drawn from another installation or from the Defense Reutilization and Marketing Service. It is the responsibility
of the Military Department or Defense Agency that owns the property to find a similar item that may be suitable as a substitute.
In this context, ``similar'' means the original and the proposed substitute item are designed and constructed for
the same specific purpose. However, before substituting another item for the one being requested, the base commander
shall consult with the redevelopment authority.


(8) Personal property that is not needed by a major command (or its subordinates), a Federal Agency, or a local redevelopment
authority (or a State or local jurisdiction in lieu of a local redevelopment authority) shall be transferred to a Defense
Reutilization and Marketing Office for processing in accordance with the Federal Property and Administrative Services
Act of 1949, as amended, 40 U.S.C. 483 et seq.


(i) Minimum level of maintenance and repair to support nonmilitary purposes.


(1) Facilities and equipment located on closing bases are often important to the eventual reuse. This section provides
procedures to protect their condition while the redevelopment plan is being put together. The level of maintenance
will be determined in consultation with the redevelopment authority.


(2) Public Law 103160, section 2902 states that the Secretary may not reduce the level of maintenance and repair
of facilities or equipment at the installation below the minimum levels required to support the use of such facilities
or equipment for nonmilitary purposes, except when the Secretary of the Military Department concerned determines
that such reduction is in the National Security interest of the United States. This requirement remains in effect
until one of the time periods in paragraph (h)(4) of this section has expired.




