 

What factors place female adolescents at risk for ATOD abuse, sexually-transmitted diseases (STDs) including HIV/AIDS,
early pregnancy/childbirth and single parenting, school dropout and delinquency, and poverty and un/under-employment?
What strategies can be devised that will address these factors, and that will successfully reach out to young women
not often targeted by traditional school, social service or medical programs? What prevention strategies will result
in changes in attitudes and behaviors of young women with respect to their ATOD use and related problems, and how can
we measure such outcomes? 

This Announcement will support demonstration programs that seek to answer questions such as those above, and to develop,
implement, document, evaluate, and disseminate information about comprehensive strategies to address and respond
to the unique needs of female adolescents. 



Program Goals and Objectives: 

The overriding goal of this program priority area is to demonstrate strategies that decrease ATOD use among female
adolescents and promote optimal health at the individual, family, and community levels. More specifically, the
goals are: 

1. 

Primary Prevention: 

To decrease (and delay) the incidence of ATOD use among female adolescents by: 

(a) Identifying and specifying methods to reduce factors in the individual, family and/or significant others, school,
peer group, neighborhood/community, and society/media that increase young women's vulnerability to initiating
ATOD use; and 

(b) Enhancing factors in the individual, family and/or significant others, school, peer group, neighborhood/community
and society/media that strengthen young women's resiliency and protect them against using alcohol, tobacco, and
other drugs. 

2. 

Secondary Prevention: 

To decrease the prevalence of ATOD use among female adolescents by providing appropriate early intervention strategies
to female adolescents who have already initiated ATOD use or who have engaged in other problem behaviors which are
associated with ATOD use, such as early sexual activity, truancy, or running away from home. 

3. To decrease the incidence and prevalence of negative outcomes associated with ATOD use among female adolescents
by addressing risk factors that significantly contribute to these outcomes, especially childhood sexual and physical
abuse. Related negative outcomes include early pregnancy and parenthood; HIV transmission and AIDS, and other sexually-transmitted
diseases; adolescent mental disorders, including eating disorders, depression, and suicidal behaviors; school
dropout; involvement in prostitution, delinquency, or violent behaviors that may lead to criminal justice involvement;
and homelessness. 



Target Population: 

Where appropriate, applicants are encouraged to target the following populations who, traditionally, have been
underserved: (a) Female adolescents, ages 1021, not normally targeted by traditional school, social service
or medical programs, such as young women who have dropped out of school or female adolescents in the work force. 

(b) Female adolescents who have been involved with the criminal/juvenile justice system; 

(c) Female adolescents with HIV/AIDS or other STDs, or those at especially high risk for these diseases; 

(d) Female adolescents with disabilities; 

(e) Female adolescents who are lesbian or bisexual; 

(f) Female adolescents who have a current or past 
history of physical/sexual abuse or incest. 

The applicant must clearly document that the target group chosen is at high risk for ATOD use by specifying the relevant
risk factors. 




