 

We also requested the public's views and suggestions regarding this policy, and any other issues, including whether
it is necessary to impose special storage requirements for safe-keeping of EPO, considering that the drug contains
no preservatives and that its presence might entail possible risks to children in the household. 

B. Other minor changes. 

We also made minor changes to codify in the rules the coverage of EPO in general and to reflect the expansion of that coverage
to include EPO used at home by home dialysis patients. (As explained in the ``Background'' section of the preamble
to the interim rule, previous coverage of EPO was implemented through general instructions issued by HCFA, but not
reflected in the rules.) 

Section 410.10

We amended this section to show that EPO used at home by home-dialysis patients is now covered as one of the services
included in ``Medical and other health services'', as defined in section 1861(s) of the Social Security Act. 



Section 410.29

We amended this section to show that EPO may be covered as an exception to the general exclusion of drugs that may be self-administered.




Section 410.50

We amended this section to show that medically necessary drugs and biologicals are covered as part of institutional
dialysis services furnished in a dialysis facility. (EPO covered as a dialysis facility service is paid as an add-on
to the facility payment rate.) 



Section 410.52

We amended this section to show that EPO for use by competent patients in the home is now included in the scope of ESRD
services furnished in the patient's home. 



Section 413.170(a)(1)

We amended this section to update the cross references to the ESRD program coverage provisions in the regulations.




Section 413.170(c)

We added a new paragraph (c)(6) to describe reimbursement for EPO when it is furnished by a Medicare-approved dialysis
facility or a supplier of home dialysis equipment and supplies. 



Sections 414.300 and 414.335

We added a new paragraph (d) to 414.300 and a new 414.335 to specify method of payment for EPO that the beneficiary
obtains directly from a supplier of home dialysis equipment and supplies. 



IV. Discussion of Comments 



We received fifteen letters of comment from two nephrologists, three renal dietitians, three nephrology nurses,
two dialysis centers, two professional associations, one home health agency, one medicare carrier, and one law firm.




A. Patient Selection 





Comment: 

Two commenters, both nephrologists, recommended that EPO be given for patients with hematocrits greater than 30
percent, even up to 35 percent. One of the commenters stated that a hematocrit of 30 percent is not normal and that in
a male, for whom normal hematocrit would be closer to 40 percent, a 30 percent reading means that the individual is functioning
at three-quarters of his or her ability to do exercises as well as other things. That, combined with the chronic uremic
state, which all dialysis patients have, makes it much more difficult for these patients to function in a useful manner.
The commenter believes hematocrits closer to 35 percent would make much more sense for keeping these patients in a
normal state and making them generally much more functional. The other commenter stated that his dialysis center
is not required to justify continuation of EPO to patients with hematocrits of up to 35 percent. Commenters asked whether
justification would be required each month or a single letter of justification would suffice. 



Response: 

The drug labeling for EPO recommends dosage to maintain a patient's hematocrit in the range of 3033 percent
(target range) with a maximum of 36 percent. It also states that the dose of EPO should be reduced when the hematocrit
reaches the target range of 3033 percent or increases by more than 4 points in any two-week period. Therapy with
EPO can result in an abnormal increase in red blood cells if the hematocrit is not carefully monitored and the dose appropriately
adjusted. 

We believe we are justified in requiring a hematocrit of less than 30 percent for initiation of EPO therapy at home.
Thirty percent is the low end of the target range. Medical review guidelines in the manuals used by Medicare intermediaries
and carriers provide for payment of subsequent claims for EPO without documentation of medical necessity as long
as the hematocrit is below 36 percent. We have revised 405.2163(g)(2) to clarify that the 30 percent hematocrit
threshold applies only to initiation of EPO therapy. 



Comment: 

One commenter, operating a renal dialysis program in a university hospital, pointed out that, due to the close working
relationship that exists between the renal physicians, dialysis staff and outpatient department, a physician may
order EPO for an ESRD patient, note that order in the patient's chart, and verbally inform the pharmacist of the order
without providing a written prescription. The commenter believes this procedure to be the norm. However, the fiscal
intermediary processing those claims will not pay for any claims for which a written prescription is not provided.
The commenter believes this process to be burdensome, especially since the order is documented in the patient's medical
chart. The commenter also asked whether there will be any policy affecting refillable prescriptions. 



Response: 

We are sympathetic to the concerns expressed by the commenter and remain sensitive to requirements that may appear
to be overly burdensome. However, we believe the intermediary is justified in requiring a written prescription.
While in the case the commenter presented it might seem to create additional paperwork, a written prescription protects
the pharmacist as well as providing a basis for payment by the intermediary. The intermediary or carrier has discretion
to determine whether to require documentation on refillable prescriptions on the basis of reasonableness and necessity.




Comment: 

The same commenter suggested that we establish more specific guidelines for ``regular monitoring'' of patients
who self-administer EPO, especially with regard to maximum hematocrit readings. Two commenters recommended including
guidelines similar to those in the manufacturer's labeling. Two other commenters suggested that we include a mechanism
for monitoring patient compliance such as the completion of a patient log. 



Response: 

The drug labeling for EPO provides general therapeutic guidelines with regard to the starting dose and maintenance
dose, as well as when the dose should be reduced or increased. We believe the labeling provides adequate guidelines
and that physicians should have the flexibility to interpret those guidelines with regard to their patients. Since
drug regimens will vary depending on the individual patient's prescribed plan of treatment, we do not wish to be overly
prescriptive with respect to specific monitoring protocols. We have, however, revised language at 405.2163(g)(2)(iii)
to require that the physician follow the drug labeling instructions when monitoring the EPO home therapy as well as
in developing appropriate protocols. We also agree that a patient log is a valid means to monitor compliance. To encourage
use of that mechanism or similar effective mechanisms, we have added ``(such as a patient log)'' in 405.2137(b)(7).






