 

(b) Services are focused on the family as a whole; service providers work with families as partners in identifying
and meeting individual and family needs; family strengths are identified, enhanced, respected, and mobilized to
help families solve the problems which compromise their functioning and well-being. 
(c) Services promote the healthy development of children and youth, promote permanency for all children, and help
prepare youth emancipating from the foster care system for self-sufficiency and independent living. 
(d) Services may focus on intervention, protection, treatment, or other services to meet the needs of the family and
the best interests of the individual who may be placed in out-of-home care. 
(e) Services are flexible, coordinated, and accessible to families and individuals, often delivered in the home
or the community, and are delivered in a manner that is respectful of and builds on the strengths of community and cultural
groups. 
(f) Services are organized as a continuum, designed to achieve measurable outcomes, and are linked to a wide variety
of supports and services outside the child and family services system (e.g., housing, substance abuse treatment,
mental health, health, education, and job training, child care, informal support networks) which can be crucial
to meeting families' and children's needs. 
(g) Many child and family services are community-based and involve community organizations and residents (including
parents) in their design and delivery. 
(h) Services are intensive enough to meet family needs and keep children safe. The level of intensity and duration
of services needed to achieve these goals may vary greatly between preventive (family support) and crisis intervention
services (family preservation), based on the changing needs of children and families at various times in their lives.
A family or an individual does not need to be in crisis in order to receive services. 
7. Section 1355.30 is revised to read as follows: 


1355.30 

Other applicable regulations. 


Except as specified, the following regulations are applicable to all programs funded under titles IVB and
IVE of the Act. 

(a) 45 CFR part 16_Procedures of the Departmental Grant Appeals Board. 
(b) 45 CFR part 30_Claims Collection. 
(c) 45 CFR part 74_Administration of Grants (Applicable only to title IVE foster care and adoption assistance,
except that: (1) Subpart G, Cost sharing or Matching, and Subpart I, Financial Reporting Requirements, will not apply.
ACF will provide forms and instructions for financial reporting; and (2) 74.4(a)(2) contains requirements
applicable to title IVB (Subparts 1 and 2) and the Independent Living Program.). 
(d) 45 CFR part 76_Governmentwide Debarment and Suspension (Nonprocurement) and Governmentwide Requirements
for Drug-Free Workplace (Grants). 
(e) 45 CFR part 80_Nondiscrimination Under Programs Receiving Federal Assistance Through the Department of Health
and Human Services Effectuation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. 
(f) 45 CFR part 81_Practice and Procedure for Hearings Under part 80 of this title. 

(g) 45 CFR part 84_Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Handicap in Programs and Activities Receiving Federal Financial
Assistance. 
(h) 45 CFR part 91_Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Age in HHS Programs or Activities Receiving Federal Financial
Assistance. 
(i) 45 CFR part 92_Uniform Administrative Requirements for Grants and Cooperative Agreements to State and Local
Governments (Applicable only to the title IVB programs and the Independent Living Program under Section 477
of the Act). 
(j) 45 CFR part 93_New Restrictions on Lobbying. 
(k) 45 CFR part 95_General Administration_Grant Programs (Public Assistance and Medical Assistance). (Applicable
to title IVB and title IVE except that, notwithstanding 
45 CFR 95.1(a), subpart A, Time Limits for States to File Claims, does not apply to title IVB (subparts 1 and 2)
and the Independent Living Program.) 
(l) 45 CFR part 97_Consolidation of Grants to the Insular Areas. (Applicable only to the title IVB programs).






