 







<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Centers for Disease Control and Prevention</USBUREAU>



<RINDOCK>[Program Announcement No. 478] </RINDOCK>



National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health; Implementing Lead-Based Paint Abatement Training for Workers
and Supervisors 



Introduction 



The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) announces the availability of fiscal year (FY) 1994 funds for
a grant program to provide training for workers and supervisors engaged or expected to be engaged in lead-based paint
abatement work. 

The Public Health Service (PHS) is committed to achieving the health promotion and disease prevention objectives
of Healthy People 2000, a PHS-led national activity to reduce morbidity and mortality and improve the quality of life.
This announcement is related to the priority area of Occupational Safety and Health. (For ordering a copy of Healthy
People 2000, see the section 

Where To Obtain Additional Information

). 






Authority: 

This program is authorized under section 22(g) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act (29 U.S.C. 671(g)), as amended
by section 1033 of Pub. L. 102550, the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992. 



Smoke-Free Workplace 



The PHS strongly encourages all grant recipients to provide a smoke-free workplace and promote the non-use of all
tobacco products. This is consistent with the PHS mission to protect and advance the physical and mental health of
the American people. 



Eligible Applicants 



Only non-profit organizations (including colleges and universities, joint labor-management trust funds, States,
and non-profit government employee organizations) who have experience in the implementation and operation of health
and safety training for lead-based paint abatement workers and supervisors will be considered for funding. 

For the purposes of this notice, the term ``lead-based paint abatement activity'' means activities engaged in by
workers that include the removal, disposal, handling, and transportation of lead-based paint and materials containing
lead-based paint from public and private dwellings, public and commercial buildings, bridges and other structures
or superstructures where lead-based paint presents or may present an unreasonable risk to health and safety of the
environment. 

Grants made under this program shall be awarded only to those organizations that fund at least 30% of their lead-based
paint training programs from non-Federal sources excluding in-kind contributions. 

In-kind contributions are defined as the value of a non-cash contribution to meet a recipient's cost-sharing requirement.
An in-kind contribution may consist of charges for real property and equipment, or the value of goods and services,
directly benefiting the NIOSH-funded project. 

The above stipulations are mandated by section 22(g) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act (29 U.S.C. 671(g)),
as amended. 



Availability of Funds 



Approximately $500,000 is available in FY 1994 to fund approximately four awards. It is expected that the average
award will be $125,000, ranging from $100,000 to $150,000. The awards will begin on or about September 30, 1994, for
a 12-month budget period within a project period of up to four years. Funding estimates may vary and are subject to change.


Continuation awards within the project period will be made on the basis of satisfactory progress and the availability
of funds. 



Purpose 



The purpose of these awards is to ensure that lead-based paint abatement workers and supervisors receive adequate
training and education concerning the health and safety issues of working with and abating lead-based paint. 



Program Requirements 



In conducting activities to achieve the purpose of this program, the recipient shall be responsible for conducting
activities as follows: 

1. Develop and conduct a four-year training program for workers and supervisors involved or expected to be involved
in lead-based paint abatement activity. 

2. Identify and select regions and populations for training, based on a list of criteria determined by the applicant.


3. Designate specific levels of training, amount of training, and number of trainees to be trained each year. Course
materials utilized will be those which meet the most up-to-date Federal (EPA/HUD) requirements. 

4. Evaluate the effectiveness of such training. 



Evaluation Criteria 



Applications will be reviewed and evaluated according to the following criteria: 



1. Program Experience (35%) 






