 



Family and community services 

are social services, including protective services, provided through the social work skills of casework, group
work or community development to resolve social problems involving children, adults or communities. These services
usually do not include financial assistance. 



Foster care services 

are social services provided when an Indian child or dependent adult person lives away from his/her family home. 



Household 

means persons living together as a family with a head of household who may or may not be related to the head of household,
and who function as members of the family. 



Indian 

is any person who is a member, or a one-fourth degree or more blood quantum descendant of a member, of any Indian tribe.




Indian court 

is an Indian tribal court or court of Indian offenses. 

Indian tribe

 is any Indian tribe, band, nation, rancheria, pueblo, colony, or community, including any Alaska Native village
or regional or village corporation as defined in, or established pursuant to, the Alaska Native Claims Settlement
Act (85 Stat. 688), which is federally recognized as eligible by the U.S. Government for the special programs and services
provided by the Secretary to Indians because of their status as Indians. 



In-home care 

means non-medical care services intended to prevent out-of-home placement or to stabilize a child or adult in her/his
family home, and includes protective day care, homemaker services, parenting skills training, and/or respite care.




Liquid assets 

are those properties in the form of cash or financial instruments that can be converted to cash, such as savings or checking
accounts, promissory notes, mortgages, and similar properties. 



Near reservation 

means those areas or communities adjacent or contiguous to reservations that are designated by the Assistant Secretary_Indian
Affairs upon recommendation of the local BIA Superintendent. 



Need 

is the financial deficit after consideration of income and other liquid assets are deducted from the standard of assistance.




Non-medical care 

is the provision of any remedial or custodial care or service in or out of the recipient's home. 



Out-of-home care agreement 

means the contractual relationship established between an out-of-home care provider and the BIA program requesting
services on behalf of an eligible recipient. The agreement establishes: (a) The goals, objectives, and methods of
service provision; (b) the rate of payment for care, which is not to exceed the prevailing state payment rate; and (c)
conditions of reimbursement. 



Public assistance 

is a program of financial assistance provided under title IV of the Social Security Act, as amended, including the
Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) Program provided under title IVA, and Supplemental Security
Income (SSI) provided under title XVI. 



Purchase of service agreement 

is a contractual fiscal arrangement between BIA and a service provider for personal and/or foster care of children
or adults. 



Recipient 

is an individual or group of persons who have been deemed eligible, and are receiving financial assistance or services
under this part. 



Redetermination 

means a periodic review of basic eligibility requirements specified in 20.20(a) and 20.20(b), and
financial need eligibility requirements for each program identified in 20.21, 20.22, 20.23, 20.24,
20.26, and 20.27. 



Reservation 

is a Federally recognized Indian tribe's reservation, pueblo, or colony, including former reservations in Oklahoma,
Alaska Native regions established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (85 Stat. 688), and Indian
allotments. 



Residency 

means living permanently on a reservation or within an officially designated near-reservation service area. 



Resources 

are income and other liquid assets available to an Indian person or household to meet current living costs, unless
otherwise specifically excluded by Federal statute. 



Secretary 

is the Secretary of the Interior. 



Service provider 

is an entity, individual or organization that is awarded a contract from BIA to provide services under this part. 



Special needs 

may be recurring or nonrecurring requirements beyond basic needs, and may include unusual diet items or special clothing
that cannot be defined as a basic need. Medical or legal needs are not included under this provision. 



Standard of assistance 

is the established state rate of payment for any of the services of financial assistance authorized under this part.




State general assistance 

is a non-federally matched public financial assistance program available from a state or county to meet the basic
living needs of all eligible citizens. 



State payment rate 

is the level of payment, established by a state agency, for the cost of care and services provided for foster care, group
home, non-medical institutional care, and in-home care for children or adults. 



Superintendent 

is the official in charge of a BIA agency office. 



Tribal governing body 

is the officially recognized government of an Indian tribe. 




