 

(iv) Contributions to or funds deposited in the legal and accounting compliance fund may not be used to retire debts
remaining from the Presidential primaries, except that, if after payment of all expenses set out in paragraph (a)(2)(i)
of this section, there are excess campaign funds, such funds may be used for any purpose permitted under 2 U.S.C. 439a
and 11 CFR Part 113, including payment of primary election debts.
(3) 

Deposit and disclosure.
(i) Amounts received pursuant to paragraph (a)(1) of this section shall be deposited and maintained in an account
separate from that described in 11 CFR 9005.2 and shall not be commingled with any money paid to the candidate by the
Secretary pursuant to 11 CFR 9005.2.
(ii) The receipts to and disbursements from this account shall be reported in a separate report in accordance with
11 CFR 9006.1(b)(2). All contributions made to this account shall be recorded in accordance with 11 CFR 102.9. Disbursements
made from this account shall be documented in the same manner provided in 11 CFR 9003.5.
(b) Contributions to defray qualified campaign expenses_major party candidates.
(1) A major party candidate or his or her authorized committee(s) may solicit contributions to defray qualified campaign
expenses to the extent necessary to make up any deficiency in payments received from the Fund due to the application
of 11 CFR 9005.2(b).
(2) Such contributions must either be deposited in a separate account or be deposited with federal funds received
under 11 CFR 9005.2. Disbursements from this account shall be made only to defray qualified campaign expenses and
to defray the cost of soliciting contributions to such account. All disbursements from this account shall be documented
in accordance with 11 CFR 9003.5 and shall be reported in accordance with 11 CFR 9006.1.
(3) A candidate may make transfers to this account from his or her legal and accounting compliance fund.
(4) The contributions received under this section shall be subject to the limitations and prohibitions of 11 CFR Parts
110, 114 and 115 and shall be aggregated with all contributions made by the same persons to the candidate's legal and
accounting compliance fund under paragraph (a) of this section for the purposes of such limitations.
(5) Any costs incurred for soliciting contributions to this account shall not be considered expenditures to the extent
that the aggregate of such costs does not exceed 20 percent of the expenditure limitation under 11 CFR 9003.2(a)(1).
These costs shall, however, be reported as disbursements in accordance with 11 CFR Part 104 and 11 CFR 9006.1. For purposes
of this section, a candidate may exclude from the expenditure limitation an amount equal to 10% of the payroll (including
payroll taxes) and overhead expenditures of his or her national campaign headquarters and state offices as exempt
fundraising costs.
(6) Any costs incurred for legal and accounting services which are provided solely to ensure compliance with 2 U.S.C.
431 et seq. 

and 26 U.S.C. 9001 

et seq. 

shall not count against the candidate's expenditure limitation. Such costs include the cost of producing, delivering
and explaining the computerized information and materials provided pursuant to 11 CFR 9003.6 and explaining the
operation of the computer system's software. For purposes of this section, a candidate may exclude from the expenditure
limitation an amount equal to 10% of the employee payroll (including payroll taxes) and overhead expenditures of
his or her national campaign headquarters and state offices. In addition, a candidate may exclude from the expenditure
limitation an amount equal to 50% of the costs (other than payroll) associated with computer services.
(i) For purposes of this paragraph, overhead costs include, but are not limited to, rent, utilities, office equipment,
furniture, supplies and all telephone charges except for telephone charges related to a special use such as voter
registration and get out the vote efforts.
(ii) For purposes of this paragraph, costs associated with computer services include, but are not limited to, rental
and maintenance of computer equipment, data entry services not performed by committee personnel, and related supplies.
(7) If the candidate wishes to claim a larger compliance or fundraising exemption under paragraph (b)(5) or (b)(6)
of this section for employee payroll and overhead expenditures, the candidate shall establish allocation percentages
for each individual who spends all or a portion of his or her time to perform duties which are considered compliance
or fundraising. The candidate shall keep detailed records to support the derivation of each percentage. Such records
shall indicate which duties are considered compliance or fundraising and the percentage of time each person spends
on such activity.


