 

(E) Fishing depth of trawl. 
(F) The ratio of the number of chinook salmon to the total round weight of groundfish. 
(G) The ratio of the number of other salmon to the total round weight of groundfish. 
(H) The ratio of total round weight of halibut to the total round weight of groundfish. 
(I) The ratio of total round weight of herring to the total round weight of groundfish. 
(J) The ratio of the number of king crab to the total round weight of groundfish. 
(K) The ratio of the number of 

C. bairdi

 Tanner crab to the total round weight of groundfish. 
(L) Sea surface temperature (where available). 
(M) Sea temperature at fishing depth of trawl (where available). 
(ii) The identity of the vessels from which the data in paragraph (f)(2)(i) of this section are collected will not be
released. 
(3) In exceptional circumstances, the owners and operators of vessels may provide to the Regional Director written
justification at the time observer data are submitted, or within a reasonable time thereafter, that disclosure of
the information listed in paragraphs (f) (1) and (2) of this section could reasonably be expected to cause substantial
competitive harm. The determination whether to disclose the information will be made pursuant to 15 CFR 4.7. 
(g) 

Vessel safety requirements applicable after December 31, 1995.

 Any vessel that is required to carry observers under paragraph (b)(1) of this section must have onboard either: 
(1) A valid Commercial Fishing Vessel Safety Decal issued within the past 2 years that certifies compliance with regulations
found in Titles 33 CFR chapter I and 46 CFR chapter I, 
(2) A certificate of compliance issued pursuant to 46 CFR 28.710, or 
(3) A valid certificate of inspection pursuant to 46 U.S.C. 3311. NMFS will not station observers aboard vessels that
do not meet this requirement. 



677.11 

Annual Research Plan specifications. 


(a) 

Proposed Research Plan specifications.

 Annually, after consultation with the Council, and, in the case of observer coverage levels in the crab fisheries,
the State of Alaska, NMFS will publish for public comment in the 

Federal Register

: Proposed standard exvessel prices, total exvessel value, fee percentage, levels of observer coverage for Research
Plan fisheries, and embarkment/disembarkment ports for observers, for the calendar year. 
(1) 

Standard exvessel prices.

 Standard exvessel prices will be used in determining the annual fee percentage for the calendar year and will be the
basis for calculating fee assessments. Standard exvessel prices for species harvested in Research Plan fisheries
for each calendar year will be based on: 
(i) Exvessel price information by applicable season, area, gear, and processing sector for the most recent 12-month
period for which data are available; 
(ii) Factors that are expected to change exvessel prices in the calendar year; and 
(iii) Any other relevant information that may affect expected exvessel prices during the calendar year. 
(2) 

Total exvessel value.

 The total exvessel value of Research Plan fisheries will be calculated as the sum of the product of the standard exvessel
prices established under paragraph (a)(1) of this section and projected retained catches, by species. The value
of whole fish processed into meal product will not be included in this calculation. 
(3) 

Research Plan fee percentage.

 The Research Plan fee percentage for a calendar year will equal the lesser of 2 percent of the exvessel value of retained
catch in the Research Plan fisheries or the fee percentage calculated using the following equation: 

 

Fee percentage = [100 &times; (RRPC ^ FB ^ OF)/V]/(1 ^ NPR) 



where RRPC is the projection of recoverable Research Plan costs for the coming year, FB is the projected end of the year
balance of funds collected under the Research Plan, OF is the projection of other funding for the coming year, V is the
projected exvessel value of retained catch in the Research Plan fisheries for the coming year, and NPR is the percent
(expressed as a decimal) of fee assessments that are expected to result in nonpayment. 


(4) 

Observer coverage.

 For the period January 1, 1995, through December 31, 1995, observer coverage levels in Research Plan fisheries will
be as required by 677.10(a). After December 31, 1995, the level of observer coverage will be determined annually
by NMFS, after consultation with the Council and the State of Alaska, and may vary by fishery and vessel or processor
size, depending upon the objectives to be met for the groundfish, halibut, and king and Tanner crab fisheries. The
Regional Director may change observer coverage inseason pursuant to 677.10(b)(2)(ii). 
(5) 

Embarkment/disembarkment ports.

 Ports to be used to embark and disembark observers will be selected on the basis of convenience to the affected industry
and on the availability of facilities, transportation, and accommodations deemed by the Regional Director to be
necessary for the safe and reasonable deployment of observers. 
(b) 

Final Research Plan specifications. 

NMFS will consider comments received on the proposed specifications and, following consultation with the Council,
and with the State, in the case of observer coverage in the crab fisheries, will publish the final total exvessel value;
standard exvessel prices; fee percentage; levels of observer coverage for Research Plan fisheries, including names
of observer contractors and information for contacting them; and embarkment/disembarkment ports in the 

Federal Register

 annually prior to the beginning of the calendar year. 



677.12 

Compliance. 


The operator of any fishing vessel subject to this part, and the manager of any shoreside processing facility that
receives groundfish, halibut, or king and Tanner crab from vessels subject to this part, must comply with the requirements
of this part. The owner of any fishing vessel subject to this part, or any shoreside processing facility that received
groundfish, halibut, or king and Tanner crab from vessels subject to this part, must ensure that the operator or manager
complies with the requirements of this part and is liable, either individually or jointly and severally, for compliance
with the requirements of this part. 


Subpart B_General Provisions of Risk-Sharing Pool for Insurance Purposes [Reserved] 



