 

Proposed Federal Information Processing Standards Publication 



(date) 



Announcing the Standard for Federal Building Grounding and Bonding Requirements for Telecommunications 



Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUBS) are issued by the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) after approval by the Secretary of Commerce pursuant to Section 111(d) of the Federal Property
and Administrative Services Act of 1949 as amended by the Computer Security Act of 1987, Public Law 100235.


1. Name of Standard. Federal Building Grounding and Bonding Requirements for Telecommunications. (Former Draft
Federal Standard 1093). 

2. Category of Standard. Telecommunications Standard; Grounding and Bonding. 

3. Explanation. This standard, by adoption of ANSI/TIA/EIA6071994, Commercial Building Grounding
and Bonding Requirements for Telecommunications, specifies the requirements for a uniform telecommunications
grounding and bonding infrastructure that should be followed within Federal buildings where telecommunications
equipment is installed. The standard provides the requirements for a ground reference for telecommunications systems
within the telecommunications entrance facility, the telecommunications closet, and equipment room; it also provides
the requirements for bonding and connecting pathways, cable shields, conductors, and hardware at telecommunications
closets, equipment rooms, and entrance facilities. 

This standard supports the telecommunications infrastructure which encompasses telecommunications equipment
spaces, cable pathways, grounding, wiring, termination hardware, and other devices, and which provides the basic
support for the distribution of all forms of information within a building or campus. 

The grounding and bonding approach described in this standard is consistent with the cabling topology specified
in Federal Information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS PUB) 174, Federal Building Telecommunications
Wiring Standard (ANSI/EIA/TIA5681991) and installed in accordance with Federal Information Processing
Standards Publication (FIPS PUB) 175, Federal Building Standard for Telecommunications Pathways and Spaces (ANSI/EIA/TIA5691990).


4. Approving Authority. Secretary of Commerce. 

5. Maintenance Agency. National Communications System, Office of Technology and Standards. 

6. Related Documents. 

a. Federal Information Resources Management Regulations subpart 20120.303, Standards, and subpart 20139.1002,
Federal Standards. 




