 







<USDEPT>FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM</USDEPT>



<DOCTITLE>Fairbanco Holding Company, Inc., ESOP, et al.; Formations of; Acquisitions by; and Mergers of Bank Holding Companies</DOCTITLE>


The companies listed in this notice have applied for the Board's approval under section 3 of the Bank Holding Company
Act (12 U.S.C. 1842) and  225.14 of the Board's Regulation Y (12 CFR 225.14) to become a bank holding company or to acquire
a bank or bank holding company. The factors that are considered in acting on the applications are set forth in section
3(c) of the Act (12 U.S.C. 1842(c)).
Each application is available for immediate inspection at the Federal Reserve Bank indicated. Once the application
has been accepted for processing, it will also be available for inspection at the offices of the Board of Governors.
Interested persons may express their views in writing to the Reserve Bank or to the offices of the Board of Governors.
Any comment on an application that requests a hearing must include a statement of why a written presentation would
not suffice in lieu of a hearing, identifying specifically any questions of fact that are in dispute and summarizing
the evidence that would be presented at a hearing.
Unless otherwise noted, comments regarding each of these applications must be received not later than October 14,
1994.


A. Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta

 (Zane R. Kelley, Vice President) 104 Marietta Street, N.W., Atlanta, Georgia 30303: 


1. Fairbanco Holding Company, Inc., ESOP

, Fairburn, Georgia; to become a bank holding company by acquiring 31 percent of the voting shares of Fairbanco Holding
Company, Inc., Fairburn, Georgia, and thereby indirectly acquiring Fairbanco Banking Company, Fairburn, Georgia.


2. Gulf West Banks, Inc.

, St. Petersburg, Florida; to become a bank holding company by acquiring 100 percent of the voting shares of Mercantile
Bank, St. Petersburg, Florida.


B. Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas

 (Genie D. Short, Vice President) 2200 North Pearl Street, Dallas, Texas 75201-2272:


1. First Bancorp, Inc.

, Denton, Texas; to acquire 100 percent of the voting shares of Kaufman Bancshares, Inc., Kaufman, Texas, and thereby
indirectly acquire Farmers and Merchants National Bank, Kaufman, Texas.


2. First Delaware Bancorp, Inc.

, Dover, Delaware; to acquire 100 percent of the voting shares of Kaufman Bancshares, Inc., Kaufman, Texas, and thereby
indirectly acquire Farmers and Merchants National Bank, Kaufman, Texas.


3. Texas Financial Bancorporation, Inc.

, Minneapolis, Minnesota; to acquire 100 percent of the voting shares of Kaufman Bancshares, Inc., Kaufman, Texas,
and thereby indirectly acquire Farmers and Merchants National Bank, Kaufman, Texas.


C. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco

 (Kenneth R. Binning, Director, Bank Holding Company) 101 Market Street, San Francisco, California 94105:


1. First Interstate Bancorp

, Los Angeles, California; to merge with Levy Bancorp, Ventura, California, and thereby indirectly acquire Bank
of A. Levy, Ventura, California.




Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 


<SIGNER>
Jennifer J. Johnson,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Secretary of the Board.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9423288 Filed 92094; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 621001F
</BILLING>


