 

Although many computerized tests appear to tap similar neurobehavioral domains as 
noncomputerized batteries, the visual mode of presentation, the manual mode of response, and the emphasis on speed
of responding are believed to have led to significant differences in results obtained from computerized versus noncomputerized
forms of similar tests. Attempts to clarify the differences between computerized and noncomputerized test batteries
have met with difficulty. Although some tests are similar in each type of battery, size and duration of stimuli, presentation
and response modality, number of trials, and scoring vary arbitrarily, preventing direct comparison. An example
is the digit-symbol test on the NCTB and the symbol-digit test on the NES. Although almost identical in task requirements,
procedural and scoring differences prevent direct comparison of the results from these two tests. 

Postural stability is an aspect of integrated sensory and motor function that increasingly is being evaluated in
clinical, epidemiologic, and laboratory investigations of effects of pesticides and solvents, and would be useful
for assessing therapeutic drug-induced movement disorders such as neuroleptics. Measurement of postural stability
requires a computer, special software, monitor, and a force transduction platform on which the subjects 
must stand (Dick et al., 1990). Mechanical and capacitive field methods for assessing the amplitude and frequency
of tremor also are seeing more frequent use. 

An advantage of computerized testing is the standardization of test presentation, but a disadvantage is the need
for delicate, expensive computers and measurement devices that require transport for field studies. Noncomputerized
test batteries may be less costly to purchase and easier to transport, enhancing their desirability in field studies,
but test administrators require training and small differences in test administration may affect the data.
 


3.3.2. Neurophysiologic Methods 



With improvements in the capabilities and size of equipment, quantitative 
neurophysiologic measurement of sensory and motor function will be increasingly useful in human neurotoxicity
evaluations. A major advantage of these methods for risk assessment is that they can be assessed in both human and animal
subjects and the data can be interpreted in an homologous manner. 

Electromyographic responses (EMG) and nerve conduction velocity (NCV) have been used in the assessment of peripheral
nerve neurotoxicity. Some techniques require that needle electrodes be placed beneath the skin for stimulation
and recording and are therefore somewhat uncomfortable for the subject. However, the methods are quantitative,
provide multiple endpoints of PNS function, and have clinical relevance. 

The adverse effects of solvents, pesticides, and metals have been identified with EMG/NCV neurophysiologic measures.
Although not reduced as a function of duration of employment, maximum nerve conduction velocity (MCV) has been reported
to vary systematically with cumulative exposure to carbon disulfide (Johnson et al., 1983), suggesting that this
measure may be particularly valuable for quantitative risk assessment of some types of peripheral motor nerve toxicity.


Noninvasive neurophysiologic test methods used in neurotoxicity evaluations include the electroencephalogram
(EEG), visually evoked response (VER), somatosensory evoked potential (SEP), and the brainstem auditory evoked
response (BAER). The EEG is the summed electrical activity of neurons measured with scalp electrodes; voltage and
frequency are primary measures. Evoked methods employ specific eliciting stimuli applied to the sense organs to
measure nervous system electrical response. Visual patterns, sounds, and cutaneous stimuli are presented to the
subject, and ``evoked'' voltage changes in the nervous system are measured with skin electrodes. 

While EEGs were developed as a tool in the neurologic diagnosis of seizure disorders and other brain diseases, dose-related
EEG changes in chemically exposed (especially solvents and styrene) individuals have been noted (Seppalainen and
Harkonen, 1976). EEG measurement requires large recording devices that can be used in the laboratory or clinic, but
are difficult to use in field studies. However, compact computerized recording equipment 
has been developed, and automated spectral analyses of EEGs have recently been applied to neurotoxicity evaluation
(Piikivi and Tolonen, 1989). 

In contrast to EEGs, evoked response technology is improving, and equipment, while expensive, is becoming more portable.
VERs have been used to detect the sensory toxicity of solvents and carbon monoxide in human subjects, and a relationship
has been suggested between BAER and blood lead levels in children exposed to lead-containing dust in the environment
(Otto and Hudnell, 1990). Evoked potentials also may be conditioned, allowing the use of sensory methods to investigate
associative processes. 

Dose-response functions have been found with evoked methods. A curvilinear relationship was found between BAER
and blood lead concentrations in children (Otto and Hudnell, 1990), and a biphasic function described visual evoked
potential (VEP) latency and visual contrast sensitivity and perchloroethylene exposure concentration in a laboratory
study (Altmann et al., 1991). In the latter study, the direction of the response was jointly dependent on dose and stimulus
parameters. In addition, changes over time in the effect of the solvent on VEP were dose and stimulus parameter dependent.


Two important methodologic considerations are illustrated by BAER and VEP data. One is that low concentrations of
some chemical agents may produce effects (shorter latencies in these examples) that could be inaccurately interpreted
as facilitation rather than impairment. Changes in neuronal latencies in either direction could be a result of a neurotoxic
process. The second is that the detection of neurotoxic effects is dependent on dose-time-testing parameter interactions.
A thorough understanding of the effects of testing parameters on the dose-response relationship and the time course
of chemical effect will be necessary for interpreting neurotoxicity studies. 

The development of neurophysiologic methods, such as evoked and conditioned potentials, for neurotoxicity risk
assessment should be encouraged. These methods provide relatively unambiguous quantitative data on sensory function
that may have clear implications for health, are influenced by fewer extraneous variables than are self-report and
neurobehavioral performance tests, and allow relatively direct extrapolation of effects between animals and humans.






