 

Procurement Standards



12.940

Purpose of procurement standards.



Sections 12.941 through 12.948 set forth standards for use by recipients in establishing procedures for the procurement
of supplies and other expendable property, equipment, real property and other services with Federal funds. These
standards are furnished to ensure that materials and services are obtained in an effective manner and in compliance
with the provisions of applicable Federal statutes and executive orders. No additional procurement standards or
requirements shall be imposed by the Federal awarding agencies upon recipients, unless specifically required by
Federal statute or executive order or approved by OMB.



12.941

Recipient responsibilities.



The standards contained in this section do not relieve the recipient of the contractual responsibilities arising
under its contract(s). The recipient is the responsible authority, without recourse to the Federal awarding agency,
regarding the settlement and satisfaction of all contractual and administrative issues arising out of procurements
entered into in support of an award or other agreement. This includes disputes, claims, protests of award, source
evaluation or other matters of a contractual nature. Matters concerning violation of statute are to be referred to
such Federal, State or local authority as may have proper jurisdiction.



12.942

Codes of conduct.



The recipient shall maintain written standards of conduct governing the performance of its employees engaged in
the award and administration of contracts. No employee, officer, or agent shall participate in the selection, award,
or administration of a contract supported by Federal funds if a real or apparent conflict of interest would be involved.
Such a conflict would arise when the employee, officer, or agent, any member of his or her immediate family, his or her
partner, or an organization that employs or is about to employ any of the parties indicated herein, has a financial
or other interest in the firm selected for an award. The officers, employees, and agents of the recipient shall neither
solicit nor accept gratuities, favors, or anything of monetary value from contractors, or parties to subagreements.
However, recipients may set standards for situations in which the financial interest is not substantial or the gift
is an unsolicited item of nominal value. The standards of conduct shall provide for disciplinary actions to be applied
for violations of such standards by officers, employees, or agents of the recipient.



12.943

Competition.



All procurement transactions shall be conducted in a manner to provide, to the maximum extent practical, open and
free competition. The recipient shall be alert to organizational conflicts of interest as well as noncompetitive
practices among contractors that may restrict or eliminate competition or otherwise restrain trade. In order to
ensure objective contractor performance and eliminate unfair competitive advantage, contractors that develop
or draft specifications, requirements, statements of work, invitations for bids and/or requests for proposals
shall be excluded from competing for the related procurements. Awards shall be made to the bidder or offeror whose
bid or offer is responsive to the solicitation and is most advantageous to the recipient, price, quality and other
factors considered. Solicitations shall clearly set forth all requirements that the bidder or offeror shall fulfill
in order for the bid or offer to be evaluated by the recipient. Any and all bids or offers may be rejected when it is in the
recipient's interest to do so.



12.944

Procurement procedures.



(a) All recipients shall establish written procurement procedures. These procedures shall provide, at a minimum,
that:

(1) Recipients avoid purchasing unnecessary items. 

(2) Where appropriate, an analysis is made of lease and purchase alternatives to determine which would be the most
economical and practical procurement for the Federal Government; and

(3) Solicitations for goods and services provide for all of the following.

(i) A clear and accurate description of the technical requirements for the material, product or service to be procured.
In competitive procurements, the description shall not contain features which unduly restrict competition.



