 

III. Definitions


The following definitions shall apply for purposes of this policy:
A. 

Adverse Credit Decision_

a decision, made by the RTC as conservator of an insured depository institution, to deny funds or a request for a new
extension of credit for commercial or business purposes to a non-defaulting commercial borrower. 
B. 

Credit Agreement_

a construction loan agreement, commercial mortgage agreement, commercial business loan agreement, line of credit
agreement or other commercial credit agreement for commercial or business purposes. 
C. 

Non-defaulting Commercial Borrower_

a person or entity, 
(1) who entered into a credit agreement with either: 
(a) the predecessor institution prior to the appointment of the RTC as receiver of the predecessor institution, or

(b) the depository institution in conservatorship prior to the appointment of the RTC as conservator, where there
is no predecessor institution, and 
(2) who is not in default of any obligations owed to the predecessor institution or the institution in conservatorship.

D. 

Predecessor Institution_

the insured depository institution in receivership from which the assets, deposits and certain other liabilities
were transferred to the depository institution in conservatorship which made the adverse credit decision. 


IV. General Policies


A. Right of Appeal


A non-defaulting commercial borrower shall have the right to appeal an adverse credit decision made by a Managing
Agent or other person or entity authorized to act on behalf of the RTC as conservator of an insured depository institution.



B. Notice to Non-Defaulting Commercial Borrower 


A Managing Agent or other person or entity authorized to act on behalf of the RTC as conservator shall give notice to
a non-defaulting commercial borrower of (1) any adverse credit decision within the scope of this directive as outlined
in the Paragraph I above, and (2) the right to appeal such decision. The notice should be sent via certified/registered
mail-return receipt requested to document receipt by the borrower. (Two sample forms of such notice are included
as Appendices A and B.) This notice is in addition to any notice by the conservator terminating a line of credit, or other
credit agreement, or notice by the receiver of the predecessor institution repudiating a loan commitment or other
credit agreement. 


C. Procedure for the Appeal


(1) The Senior Credit Review Committee of the field office with jurisdiction over the conservatorship shall normally
decide the appeal of the non-defaulting commercial borrower. However, if the adverse credit decision under appeal
was made by a field office's Senior Review Committee, or by a person or entity at a level of authority above the field
office Senior Credit Review Committee, then the person or entity at the next level of authority above the initial decision
maker, as determined by the RTC's delegations of authority, shall decide the appeal of the non-defaulting borrower.
(The person or entity deciding the appeal is hereafter referred to as the ``hearer of the appeal.'')
(2) A non-defaulting commercial borrower must file an appeal, in writing, with the hearer of the appeal within 60 calendar
days of receipt of the notice described in subparagraph IV.B above. 
(3) A non-defaulting commercial borrower must state the grounds for the appeal. The non-defaulting commercial borrower
may submit only documentary evidence in support of the appeal. 
(4) The hearer of the appeal shall make a good faith effort to decide the appeal within 30 calendar days of receipt of
the appeal and all documentation necessary to act on the appeal. 
(5) (a) The record of an appeal shall consist of the written appeal and documentary evidence submitted by the non-defaulting
commercial borrower and any other evidence and information within the possession or control of the RTC that relates
to the appeal. 
(b) The non-defaulting commercial borrower shall have the right to review any documentation submitted by such borrower,
along with the appeal or prior to the filing of the appeal, for purposes of determining the accuracy of the RTC's records.
The hearer of the appeal may extend the period for deciding the appeal of such reasonable time as may be necessary to
permit any such review of the documentation submitted by the borrower. 
(6) The hearer of the appeal may reverse an adverse credit decision if the hearer determines that (a) the extension
of credit is likely to reduce a conservatorship's overall losses, or (b) the extension of credit would not be likely
to increase the conservatorship's overall losses. 


