 

C. The Competitive Effect of the Acquisition



The Complaint alleges that the acquisition of MCI shares by BT may substantially lessen competition in the provision
of international telecommunications services between the United States and the United Kingdom. BT will have increased
incentives and the ability, using its dominant position in the United Kingdom, to favor MCI and to disfavor its United
States competitors in international telecommunications services in various ways, making competitors' offerings
less attractive in quality and price than those of MCI, and so lessening the ability of MCI's rivals to compete effectively
in these services. As a result of this anticompetitive conduct, the price of international telecommunications services
to the United Kingdom available to United States consumers could be increased, and the quality lessened, relative
to what United States consumers would pay and receive in a competitive market.

International telecommunications services are generally provided today on a ``correspondent'' basis, meaning
that providers in different countries enter into commercially negotiated bilateral agreements with one another
to complete each other's traffic. International correspondent telecommunications services primarily consist
of the basic switched voice telephone call, which is known either as International Direct Dial (``IDD'') or International
Message Telephone Service (``IMTS''), and International Private Line Service (``IPLS''). They also include certain
other switched telecommunications and enhanced telecommunications services.

``Switched'' traffic makes use of switching facilities and common lines. Consumers typically obtain switched correspondent
services from the provider in the country where a call originates, and calls are handed off to the provider in the other
country without direct customer involvement. IPLS consists of circuits dedicated to the use of a single customer,
and the providers of IPLS in each country typically sell their ``half'' of the circuit to the user separately. Switched
services constitute the great majority of international telecommunications services in terms of both traffic and
revenues.

The Complaint alleges that acquiring a 20% ownership interest in MCI will increase BT's incentive to discriminate
in favor of MCI and against other United States international carriers in the market or markets for international
telecommunications services between the United States and the United Kingdom. BT's incentive to favor MCI is reinforced
by the provision in the Investment Agreement that subjects BT to loss of its special rights if it competes in the Americas
in the provision of telecommunications services and equipment.

MCI could receive various forms of favorable treatment from BT with respect to its international correspondent services
between the United States and the United Kingdom. For example, BT could favor MCI or disfavor its competitors with
respect to the prices, terms and conditions on which international services are provided, as well as the quality of
provisioning of those services, and could provide to MCI advance information about planned changes to its network.
Such discrimination could place other United States international carriers at a competitive disadvantage to MCI,
enabling MCI to charge more for its services or to provide a lower quality of service than it would otherwise be able
to do without losing customers.

In addition, the Complaint alleges that BT's ownership interest in MCI would increase BT's incentive to provide MCI
confidential, competitively sensitive information that BT obtains from other United States carriers through their
correspondent relationships with BT. In order to use BT's correspondent switched and private line services and to
negotiate terms of use, United States international telecommunications providers must provide BT various types
of competitively sensitive information, including private line customer identities, service requirements, plans
for the introduction of new services, changes in existing services, and future traffic projections. If BT were to
share this information with MCI, then MCI could gain an anticompetitive advantage over its United States competitors.
Allowing MCI access to such competitively valuable information about its competitors would also increase the risk
of collusion.

Finally, the Complaint alleges that the agreements will give BT the increased incentive and ability to send its international
switched traffic to the United States exclusively or largely to MCI. Such diversion of traffic could harm competition
among international telecommunications service providers in the United States, and United States consumers, by
increasing the net settlement payments that other United States carriers must make to BT.
<FOOTCITE>5</FOOTCITE>
 If BT diverted all or most of its traffic to MCI, unaffiliated United States international carriers would lose offsetting
return traffic from BT and would have to make larger settlement payments to BT, putting them at a competitive disadvantage
in the market for United States-United Kingdom telecommunications, and this could result in MCI charging higher
prices. The ability to divert the bulk of its traffic to an affiliated United States carrier could also give BT an increased
incentive to keep international accounting rates above costs.
<FOOTCITE>6</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
5

</FOOTNAME>
The correspondent agreements governing switched services establish an ``accounting rate'' per minute of traffic,
for each type of traffic sent over a particular international route. The carriers in each country pay half the accounting
rate (the ``settlement rate'') to their foreign correspondents for each minute of traffic completed. Settlement
payments for outgoing traffic are offset by the settlement payments for incoming traffic. When there is an imbalance
in the amount of outgoing and incoming traffic between carriers, the carrier with the most outgoing traffic makes
a net settlement payment to its correspondent. Today, United States carriers accept the same proportion of the total
switched traffic from each of their correspondents in a foreign country as the proportion of total switched traffic
to the correspondent that each of the United States carriers send. This protects each carrier from being competitively
disadvantaged by having to make large net settlement payments that other competitors can avoid. Federal Communications
Commission policy supports this proportionate allocation of switched traffic, although the FCC has not adopted
regulations governing proportionate allocation.


</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
6

</FOOTNAME>
Because United States carriers send substantially more traffic to the United Kingdom than United Kingdom carriers
send to the United States, United States carriers must make large net settlement payments to United Kingdom carriers,
most of which go to BT. Current accounting rates between the United States and the United Kingdom are substantially
above the cost of providing service.

</FOOTNOTE>

