 

There are approximately 3,343,000 persons of Hispanic origin with a disability. In other words, one out of every fifteen
Americans with a disability is Hispanic (McNeil, Americans with Disabilities: 19911992, Current Population
Reports, U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1993). In 1990, 17.4 million persons reported that they spoke Spanish at home.
Of these persons, 8.3 million persons, or 50.8 percent, reported that they do not speak English ``very well'' (U.S.
Census Bureau, Language Spoken at Home and Ability to Speak English for U.S. Regions and States, 1993). Hispanics
with disabilities whose proficiency in English is limited, as well as Hispanic business owners and service providers
whose proficiency in English is limited, need to understand the requirements of the ADA. Federal agencies have made
a number of their ADA publications available in Spanish, and NIDRR has piloted an effort with its Region 6 Southwest
DBTAC to provide training and technical assistance to persons in the Spanish-speaking community. This pilot project
has included the publication of additional documents in Spanish as well as efforts to provide popular Hispanic media
with information about the ADA that is sensitive to cultural norms regarding disability. While these efforts have
made certain ADA materials and technical assistance available to persons whose proficiency in English is limited,
more needs to be done. Reaching a target population that is broadly dispersed and as diverse as Hispanics whose proficiency
in English is limited is particularly challenging. The Hispanic population includes people from different cultural
backgrounds and different countries and regions of the world, such as Mexico (63.6 percent), Puerto Rico (10.6 percent),
Cuba (4.7 percent), and Central and South America (14.0 percent) (National Council of La Raza Census Information
Center, Hispanic Population Factsheet, November 1993). For the purposes of this priority, ``Hispanics whose proficiency
in English is limited'' includes all persons from those countries and regions listed above who do not speak English
very well, if at all. In order to reach as wide an audience as possible a training project must collaborate with Hispanic
organizations that currently provide training and information to their members. It must also utilize TV, radio,
and print media that are popular in the targeted Hispanic community. Applicants for this project must demonstrate
Spanish fluency, knowledge, cultural understanding, and experience in providing training and technical assistance
to Hispanic organizations and individuals. Applicants must also include a substantial number of Hispanic individuals
with disabilities in all phases of the project's activities. 


Proposed Priority


An ADA training project for Hispanics with right or duties under the ADA whose proficiency in English is limited shall_

&bull;Identify and select for training organizations that provide services and information to Hispanics with rights
and duties under the ADA whose proficiency in English is limited; 
&bull;Develop a strategy and a schedule for training the membership and staff of selected organizations using a variety
of approaches including, but not limited to, on-site training, regional, State, and local meetings, teleconferences,
and audioconferences; 
&bull;Utilizing existing federally-approved materials to the maximum extent appropriate, develop an array of
training materials and activities that vary in length and content in order to accommodate the information and scheduling
needs of selected organizations; 
&bull;Provide training to the membership and staff of selected organizations on the provisions of the ADA and the
resources available to them to facilitate the implementation of the ADA; 
&bull;To the maximum extent possible, utilize as trainers those individuals with disabilities who have been trained
as trainers on the ADA by a NIDRR, EEOC, or DOJ technical assistance or training project; 
&bull;For the length of the project, provide selected organizations with quarterly ADA information updates, before
and after training, regarding legal and policy developments; and 
&bull;Provide information about the ADA and technical assistance resources in areas with high concentrations of
persons who are Spanish-speaking utilizing popular mass media such as local Hispanic TV and radio programming as
well as Spanish print media. 




