 

The agency believes that the proposed processing 
requirements for cold-process smoked and smoke-flavored products, 
air-packed and vacuum- or modified atmosphere-packaged, will 
produce a safe and commercially acceptable product. However, 
because less data and information are available for these 
products than for hot-process products, the agency is requesting 
specific comments, data, and information about these processing 
parameters and any alternative processing parameters that should 
be included in the guideline. 

3. 

Cooling and storage of finished products.

 Rapid cooling 
and storage at temperatures of 40 
&cir;F (4.4 
&cir;C) or below are 
essential for all smoked, smoke-flavored, and salted fish 
products to minimize microbial growth. The exceptions are 
cold-process air-packaged products that contain a water-phase 
salt content of 2.5 percent, which should be frozen immediately 
after processing and remain frozen throughout distribution 
because of the lower water-phase salt content and lower 
processing temperatures that may provide an opportunity for food 
spoilage microorganisms to flourish during storage (see section 
5.a.3. of Example 6 of this appendix) and the discussion above).

Outgrowth of 

C. botulinum

 spores, types A and proteolytic B, 
and toxin production are inhibited at temperatures of 50 
&cir;F (10 

&cir;C) and lower. Spore types E and nonproteolytic B are completely 
inhibited at temperatures of 38 
&cir;F (3.3 
&cir;C) and lower (Refs. 174 
and 185 through 188). 

At section 6 of Example 6 of the appendix, the agency is 
recommending specific time/temperature controls for processing 
after smoking. These proposed controls are the same as those 
proposed for after cooking in the cooked, ready-to-eat section of 
this document (Appendix A, section 6). A full discussion of the 
controls is provided in section VII.J.3. of this document. 

4. 

Alternative processing parameters.

 As this preamble 
indicates, FDA has tentatively concluded that the TTS processing 
parameters reflected in this appendix are the minimum necessary 
to ensure that these products are free from botulinum toxin over 
their shelf life. FDA has also tentatively concluded that the 
T-T-S parameters, coupled with good sanitation practices, will 
also render these products listeria free. Nonetheless, the 
agency does not wish to discourage the development and use of 
alternative procedures that are capable of achieving the same 
outcome. 

Consequently, section 11 of Example 6 of this appendix calls 
for the use of alternative processing parameters when the user 
can demonstrate the following: (1) For botulism, zero toxin 
production slightly beyond the expected shelf life of the 
product, demonstrated through inoculated pack studies under 
normal and moderate abuse conditions and (2) for listeria, no 
detectable 

L. monocytogenes

 in the final product. The data 
demonstrating these outcomes would have to be available to FDA to 
enable the agency to determine whether they have been achieved. 

Example 6 of this appendix states that those data should be 
part of a processor's HACCP records. FDA asks for comment on 
whether a third-party scientific expert, or processing authority, 
should be involved in the development of the data that 
demonstrate the effectiveness of the alternative procedure. 





