 

Additionally, the shifts in proportions of chemicals used in the formulation result in less waste than is normally
generated through the traditional manufacturing process, resulting in a lower probability of overall adverse effects
to the general population. The Agency also investigated the production of waste before and after the actual cleaning
process and found that waste generation at these points in the production process would not be greater than what is
seen with CFC113 or MCF use. 

This acceptability listing also applies to water-removable fluxes and inert gas soldering. 

(c) Straight organic solvent cleaning. Straight organic solvent cleaning is an acceptable substitute for CFC113
and MCF in the electronics cleaning sector. This acceptability determination extends to organic solvents used as
individual chemicals as well as in combinations. The Agency's justification for this decision is described in the
section on acceptable substitutes for metals cleaning. 

(d) Other chlorinated solvents. Trichloroethylene (TCE), perchloroethylene (perc) and methylene chloride (meth)
are all acceptable substitutes for CFC113 and MCF in the electronics cleaning sector. The reasons for this
decision are described in the metals cleaning discussion. Although these solvents have not received as much commercial
interest for electronics cleaning as for metals cleaning applications, the Agency did receive a request to review
these chemicals for electronics cleaning. 

Although the Agency's risk screen focused on use of these chemicals in metals cleaning operations, the screen suggests
that release profiles for these chemicals in electronics cleaning will be either the same or lower. As a result, the
Agency has reached the same conclusion with respect to electronics cleaning as in the metals cleaning analysis, namely
that any risks due to the inherent toxicity of these chemicals could be controlled by existing and future regulatory
standards. 

(e) Supercritical fluid cleaning, plasma cleaning, UV-ozone cleaning. Supercritical fluid cleaning, plasma cleaning,
UV-ozone cleaning are all acceptable as substitutes for CFC113 and MCF in electronics cleaning. The Agency
did not identify any environmental issues associated with use of these substitutes. While ozone is hazardous to human
health, OSHA has already set standards for use of this compound in the workplace. 

(f) Volatile methyl siloxanes (dodecamethylcyclohexasiloxane, hexamethyldisiloxane, octamethyltrisiloxane,
decamethyltetrasiloxane). The volatile methyl siloxanes dodecamethylcyclohexasiloxane, hexamethyldisiloxane,

octamethyltrisiloxane, and decamethyltetrasiloxane are acceptable substitutes for CFC113 and MCF in the
electronics cleaning sector. The Agency's risk screen for these chemicals indicated that exposure to these substitutes
are generally below levels that would raise concern for health risks. Two of the volatile methyl siloxanes, octamethylcyclotetrasiloxane
and decamethylcyclopentasiloxane, have low company-set exposure limits, and these chemicals will be handled under
a separate rule-making. 

(3) Precision cleaning. (a) 

Semi-aqueous/aqueous cleaners.

 Semi-aqueous and aqueous cleaners are acceptable substitutes for CFC113 and MCF in precision cleaning. The
reasons for this decision are the same as those described in the metals cleaning section. Each of these alternatives
has the potential to service approximately 65 percent of the precision cleaning market. This figure may overestimate
the technical potential for water-based cleaners in this sector, since this end use sector faces the greatest technical
constraints in implementing new cleaning alternatives. 

The Agency did not specifically examine risks from water-based formulations used in precision cleaning since the
processes are typically either similar to those used in metals cleaning or have lower throughputs and therefore fewer
discharges. Therefore, the analysis assumed that these risks from precision cleaning would be either comparable
to or less than risks associated with use of water-based formulations for metals cleaning. 

(b) Other chlorinated solvents. Other chlorinated solvents are acceptable substitutes for CFC113 and MCF
in precision cleaning. The reasons for this decision are described in the section on metals cleaning. For the analysis
of risks from these substitutes in the precision cleaning end use sector, the Agency made the same assumptions as in
its analysis for electronics cleaning applications of water-based formulations, namely that exposures would be
equal to or less than exposures in the metals cleaning sector since the processes for precision cleaning are similar
or even of lower emissions than those for metals cleaning. Consequently, the Agency believes that risks would also
be either equivalent or lower. 

(c) Straight organic solvent cleaning. Straight organic solvent cleaning is an acceptable substitute for CFC113
and MCF in precision cleaning. This acceptability determination extends to organic solvents used as individual
chemicals as well as in combinations. The Agency's justification for this decision is described in the section on
acceptable substitutes for metals cleaning. 

(d) Supercritical fluid cleaning, plasma cleaning, UV-ozone cleaning. Supercritical fluid cleaning, plasma cleaning,
UV-ozone cleaning are all acceptable as substitutes for CFC113 and MCF in precision cleaning. The Agency did
not identify any environmental issues associated with use of these substitutes. While ozone is hazardous to human
health, OSHA has already set standards for use of this compound in the workplace. 

(e) Volatile Methyl Siloxanes (dodecamethylcyclohexasiloxane, hexamethyldisiloxane, octamethyltrisiloxane,
decamethyltetrasiloxane). The volatile methyl siloxanes dodecamethylcyclohexasiloxane, hexamethyldisiloxane,
octamethyltrisiloxane, and decamethyltetrasiloxane are acceptable substitutes for CFC113 and MCF in the
precision cleaning sector. The Agency's risk screen for these chemicals indicated that exposure to these substitutes
are generally below levels that would raise concern for health risks. Two of the volatile methyl siloxanes, octamethylcyclotetrasiloxane
and decamethylcyclopentasiloxane, have low company-set exposure limits, and these 
chemicals will be handled under a separate rule-making. 

b. Substitutes acceptable subject to use conditions. (None).





