 

Background 



The Federal Meat Inspection Act (FMIA) (21 U.S.C. 601 

et seq.

) and the Poultry Products Inspection Act (PPIA) (21 U.S.C. 451 

et seq.

) authorize the Secretary of Agriculture to establish and maintain inspection programs designed to assure consumers
that meat and poultry products distributed to them (including imports) are wholesome, not adulterated, and are properly
marked, labeled, and packaged. FSIS's authority to require nutrition labeling on meat and poultry products is based
upon the statutory provisions on misbranding in the FMIA and PPIA (21 U.S.C. 601(n)(1), (6), (10), and (12) for the
FMIA and 21 U.S.C. 453(h)(1), (6), (10), and (12) for the PPIA), and the general rulemaking provisions of these Acts
(21 U.S.C. 621 and 453, respectively). 

Based upon the Secretary of Agriculture's belief that meat or poultry product labeling would be false or misleading
without nutrition information, FSIS published final regulations on nutrition labeling in the 

Federal Register

 on January 6, 1993 (58 FR 632). Corrections and technical amendments to the final regulations were published on August
18, 1993 (58 FR 43787), and September 10, 1993 (58 FR 47624), respectively. The final regulations permit voluntary
nutrition labeling on single-ingredient, raw meat and poultry products and establishes mandatory nutrition labeling
for all other meat and poultry products, with certain exceptions. The final regulations parallel to the maximum extent
possible FDA's nutrition labeling regulations promulgated under the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990
(NLEA). 



NLEA Provisions 



The NLEA (Pub. L. 101535) requires mandatory nutrition labeling for most FDA-regulated packaged food products.
The NLEA addresses health claims by amending the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to specify, in part, that a food
is misbranded if it bears a claim that expressly or by implication characterizes the relationship of certain nutrients
to a disease or health-related condition unless the claim is made in accordance with a regulation authorizing its
use. FDA is directed by the NLEA to adopt health claim regulations to describe the relationship between the nutrient
and the disease or health-related condition, and the significance of the nutrient in affecting the disease or health-related
condition. 

The NLEA requires the regulations to prohibit health claims for foods which FDA determines contain any nutrient in
an amount which increases to persons in the general population the risk of a diet-related disease or health condition,
taking into account the significance of the food in the total daily diet. However, the NLEA also provides that FDA may
by regulation permit such a claim based on a finding that it would assist consumers in maintaining healthy dietary
practices, and based on a requirement that the label or labeling disclose the presence of the nutrient in conjunction
with the claim. 

To assure the validity of health claims, the NLEA requires that such claims be supported by a sound body of scientific
evidence that establishes the relationship between a food or food component and a particular disease or health-related
condition. The data must clearly demonstrate that the proposed claim is valid, and that the benefits featured in the
claim pertain to the general U.S. population or to an identified U.S. population subgroup, e.g., the elderly. A few
unconfirmed studies, preliminary or incompletely documented data, or significantly contradictory findings do
not constitute a sound body of evidence. In addition, the NLEA requires that significant agreement exists among qualified
experts that the claim is valid. ``Qualified experts'' include individuals whose training and experience have produced
a general or specific scientific expertise in the diet/health topic being considered for a specific claim. 



Current FSIS Policy 



FSIS does not permit health claims explicitly linking foods or food components to diet-related diseases or health
conditions. FSIS does permit statements informing consumers that a food can be part of a specific dietary pattern
to meet an organization's dietary guidelines or that a product was developed to help consumers follow a specific dietary
pattern. The rationale adopted by FSIS for approving such statements is to encourage labeling which supplements
the information contained in the nutrition label with information that provides truthful data about a product's
nutritional characteristics, and provides generally accepted information about how a product satisfies consumers'
total dietary requirements. 

To implement the use of health-related claims on labeling, FSIS provides general guidelines and objectives which
permit statements if they are based on a consensus of medical and scientific information, emphasize that good nutrition
is a function of the total diet, and are reasonably uniform from product to product. The following is an example of a
health-related claim that would be permitted currently: 




This product was specifically developed to help you follow the Dietary Guidelines for Americans for sodium, fat,
and cholesterol. For further information on the Dietary Guidelines call ***.



FSIS Regulatory Actions 



FSIS published an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) in the 

Federal Register

 on April 2, 1991 (56 FR 13564), advising of its intent to publish a proposed rule on nutrition labeling. In regard to
health claims, FSIS stated that it expected to adopt the health claim policies established by FDA, as appropriate,
to meet the needs of meat and poultry products. In its proposed regulations on nutrition labeling published in the


Federal Register

 on November 27, 1991 (56 FR 60302), and in its final nutrition labeling regulations, FSIS reiterated its intent to
publish a proposed regulation on health claims in line with FDA's policies. At the time FSIS's final nutrition labeling
regulations were published, the health claims issue was still under study by FSIS. 





