 

INTERIOR/DOI07


System name:


Federal and Non-Federal Aviation Personnel, Equipment, and Mishap Information System_Interior, DOI07.


System location:


(1) National Headquarters: Office of Aircraft Services, Office of the Director, Aviation Safety Office, 2350 West
Robinson Road, Boise, Idaho 837055355. 
(2) Office of Aircraft Services, Division of Technical Services, 2350 West Robinson Road, Boise, Idaho 837055355.

(3) Office of Aircraft Services, Alaska Regional Office, 4343 Aircraft Drive, Anchorage, Alaska 99502. 
(4) Office of Aircraft Services, Northwest Area Office, 2741 Airport Way, Boise, Idaho 83705. 
(5) Office of Aircraft Services, Southwest Area Office, One West Deer Valley Road, Suite 115, Phoenix, Arizona 85027.

(6) Office of Aircraft Services, East Area Office, 1954 Airport Road, Suite 101, Chamblee, Georgia 30341.


Categories of individuals covered by the system:


(1) Professional, dual-function and incidental pilots, air crews, mechanics and ground personnel employed by Interior
bureaus; (2) Pilots, aircrews, mechanics, and ground personnel of commercial operators utilized by Interior bureaus;
(3) Pilots, aircrews, mechanics, and ground personnel of cooperating government agencies, organizations and private
individuals.


Categories of records in the system:


The system contains information relative to certificates, qualifications, experience levels, training and proficiency,
and performance of individuals. Identifying information pertaining to individuals includes name, birth date,
and social security number or FAA certificate number. The system also contains aviation mishap data pertaining to
accidents, incidents, aviation hazards and maintenance deficiencies. This information includes accident summary,
accident and other mishap reports, type of mishap, and pilot, crew member, and mechanic certificate number.


Authority for maintenance of the system:


5 U.S.C. 301, Reorganization Plan 3 of 1950.


Routine uses of records maintained in the system, including categories of users and the purposes of such uses:


Disclosures within the Department of the Interior may be made to employees of the Department: (1) To determine aircraft/crew/mechanic/ground
personnel qualifications to comply with Office of Aircraft Services procedures and directives; (2) To perform aircraft
mishap trend analysis and develop statistical data for use in the Interior Aircraft Accident Prevention Program.
Disclosures outside the Department of the Interior may be made: (1) To the U.S. Department of Justice or in a proceeding
before a court or adjudicative body when (a) the United States, the Department of the Interior, a component of the Department,
or, when represented by the government, an employee of the Department is a party to litigation or anticipated litigation
or has an interest in such litigation, and (b) the Department of the Interior determines that the disclosure is relevant
or necessary to the litigation and is compatible with the purpose for which the records were compiled; (2) Of information
indicating a violation or potential violation of a statute, regulation, rule, order or license, to appropriate Federal,
State, local or foreign agencies responsible for investigating or prosecuting the violation or for enforcing or
implementing the statute, rule, regulation, order or license; (3) To a Federal agency that has requested information
necessary or relevant to the hiring, firing, or retention of an employee, or the issuance of a security clearance,
contract, license, pilot qualification card, grant or other benefit, but only to the extent that the information
disclosed is relevant and necessary to the requesting agency's decision on the matter; (4) To Federal, State, and
local agencies, or to commercial businesses where necessary to obtain information relevant to the hiring or retention
of an employee, or the issuance of a security clearance, license, pilot qualification card, contract, grant, or other
benefit; and (5) To a congressional office from the record of an individual in response to an inquiry the individual
has made to the congressional office.


Policies and practices for storing, retrieving and accessing, retaining and disposing of records in the system:
Storage:


Records are maintained manually, in file folders or on microfiche film, or electronically, in computer files.


