 

5. The Plan pays no fees or commissions in regard to the transaction. 


Summary of Facts and Representations 


1. The Plan is an apprenticeship training plan established and administered pursuant to the provisions of section
302 of the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947. As of January 31, 1994, the Plan had 580 participants and total assets
of $1,248,499. On the same date, the number of employers contributing to the Plan totaled 21. 
2. The Property consists of 2.74 acres of land and improvements located adjacent to property of the Union. The improvements
include three one and two-story buildings, constructed by the Union in 1968 and 1978, designed for use as classroom
and apprenticeship training facilities for the Plan and its participants. From 1968 to 1988 the Plan operated an apprenticeship
program on the Property pursuant to a lease of the Property by the Union to the Plan.
<FOOTCITE>1</FOOTCITE>
 In August 1988 the Union sold the Property to the Plan. The Plan partially financed this purchase by obtaining a loan
from the Sabine Area Pipefitters Local 195 Pension Trust Fund (Local 195 Pension Plan). The Local 195 Pension Plan,
which was later merged into the Plumbers and Pipefitters National Pension Fund, had interlocking trustees with the
Plan and the Plan made some contributions to the Local 195 Pension Plan on behalf of its participants. The loan was repaid
in June 1991. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
1

</FOOTNAME>
Prohibited transaction exemption (PTE) 785 (43 FR 23024, May 30, 1978) permits, under certain conditions,
the leasing of real property by an apprenticeship plan from a sponsoring employee organization. The Department expresses
no opinion as to whether the above lease satisfied the conditions of PTE 785 nor is any relief provided herein.

</FOOTNOTE>


In September 1990 the Department commenced an investigation of the Plan regarding the sale of the Property by the Union
to the Plan and the loan between the Plan and the Local 195 Pension Plan.

2

 Also, an application for exemption for retroactive relief from the prohibited transaction provisions of the Act
was submitted to the Department for these transactions. In a letter in January 1992, the Department cited as reasons
for denying the exemption application, among other factors, the lack of the review and prior approval of the transactions
by an independent fiduciary. Following this exemption denial, an agreement was reached with the Department which
required that the Property be sold back by the Plan to the Union. Such sale occurred in December 1992. Since that date,
the Plan has utilized the Property as a training facility without charge from the Union. However, the applicant represents
that because of an economic downturn in the area, the Union considers it a hardship to continue this arrangement. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


2

</FOOTNAME>
The above described transactions may have constituted prohibited transactions under section 406 of the Act. Such
section prohibits, in part, a sale or exchange of property between a plan and a party in interest, a use of plan assets
for the benefit of a party in interest, and the acting of a fiduciary in a plan transaction on behalf of a party whose interests
are adverse to those of the plan or its participants. 

</FOOTNOTE>


3. The applicant obtained an appraisal on the Property on January 14, 1994, from Donnie M. Jones, MAI (Jones), a real
estate appraiser located in Port Arthur, Texas. Jones represents that he is not related in any way to the Plan or the
Union. Utilizing the income, cost and sales comparison approaches to value, Jones estimated that the Property had
a fair market value of $462,800 as of the date of the appraisal. By letter dated March 1, 1994, Jones stated that he was
aware, in preparing the appraisal, that the Plan was the prospective buyer of the Property and that this knowledge
had no influence on his calculation of value. 
4. The Plan now proposes to purchase the Property from the Union so that the Plan itself will own the training and educational
facilities used to train journeymen and apprentices. Plan fiduciaries note that ownership of the Property will give
the Plan full control of the buildings, grounds and parking lots and will enable the Plan to make improvements to the
Property as needed. The Plan will pay no more than current fair market value for the Property, as established by an updated
independent appraisal. The purchase will be a one-time transaction for cash and the Plan will pay no fees or commissions
in regard to the purchase. The applicant represents that, after the purchase of the Property, the Plan will have more
than enough funds for operational purposes of the training program. 
5. The Plan and the Union have selected Joseph P. 
Connors, Sr. (Connors), an attorney with the firm of Connors Associates, Inc. in Washington, D.C. to serve as independent
fiduciary in regard to the proposed transaction. The applicant represents that Connors is independent of the Plan
and the Union.
Connors states that he has had extensive experience working with Taft-Hartley plans, including serving as chairman
of funds of the United Mine Workers. Connors further states that he is well aware that while acting as independent fiduciary
he assumes personal liability and he must act solely in the interest of the Plan and its participants. 
Connors maintains that the proposed transaction is definitely in the best interests of the Plan. In this regard, Connors
has met with officers of the Union and trustees of the Plan and has made an inspection of the Property with Russell Allen,
the training director for the Plan. The Plan has operated an apprenticeship program utilizing the Property since
the initial time of construction in 1968. As independent fiduciary, Connors will make certain that the Plan pays no
more than fair market value for the Property and will enforce all rights of the Plan in regard to the proposed transaction.

6. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction will satisfy the statutory criteria of section
408(a) of the Act because: (1) the purchase of the Property will give the Plan ownership of the facilities it uses for
its apprenticeship training program; (2) an independent fiduciary has determined that the proposed transaction
is in the best interests of the Plan and its participants; (3) the Plan will pay no more than fair market value for the
Property, based on an updated independent appraisal; (4) the purchase will be a one-time transaction for cash; and
(5) the Plan will pay no fees or commissions in regard to the transaction. 




<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Paul Kelty of the Department, telephone (202) 2198883. (This is not a toll-free number.) 






</FURTHER>
