 

641.309

 Assessment and reassessment of enrollees.



(a) 

General.

 The recipient or subrecipient shall assess each enrollee under the grant or subgrant, respectively, to determine
the most suitable SCSEP assignment for the individual and to identify appropriate employment and training objectives.
The assessment shall be made in consultation with the new enrollee and should consider the individual's preference
of occupational category, work history, skills, interests, talents, physical capabilities, need for supportive
services, aptitudes, potential for performing proposed community service employment duties, and potential for
transition to unsubsidized employment.

(b) 

Assignment.

 The recipient or subrecipient shall seek a community service employment assignment which will permit the most effective
use of each enrollee's skills, interests, and aptitudes.

(c) 

Individual development plans.

 The recipient and subrecipient shall use the assessment or reassessment as a basis for developing or amending an individual
development plan (IDP). The IDP shall be developed in partnership with the enrollee to reflect the needs of the enrollee
as indicated by the assessment, as well as the expressed interests and desires of the enrollee.

(d) 

Review of IDP plan.

 The recipient and subrecipient shall review the IDP at least once a program year for the following purposes: to evaluate
the progress of each enrollee in meeting the objectives of the service strategy; to determine each enrollee's potential
for transition to unsubsidized employment; to determine the appropriateness of each enrollee's current community
service employment assignment; and to review progress made toward meeting their training and employment objectives.

(e) 

Alternative assignment.

 Upon completion of the review, the sponsor may develop an alternative assignment, when feasible, should there be
one of the following determinations:

(1) That a different community service employment assignment will provide greater opportunity for the use of an enrollee's
skills and aptitudes;

(2) That an alternative assignment will provide work experience which will enhance the potential for unsubsidized
employment; or

(3) That an alternative community assignment will otherwise serve the best interests of the enrollee.

(f) 

Minimum requirements.

 The assessments and reassessments required by this section shall meet minimum requirements issued by the Department
on assessment, and subsequent determinations are to be recorded in the enrollee's IDP, to become a part of each enrollee's
permanent record.

(g) 

Recent assessments.

 Assessments of an enrollee, prepared by another employment or training program (such as a program under the JTPA or
the Carl D. Perkins Vocational and Applied Technology Act) may be substituted for one prepared by the recipient or
subrecipient.



641.310

 Community service employment assignments.



(a) 

Assignment to community service employment.

 After the completion of an enrollee's orientation and initial training, if any, the recipient or subrecipient shall
refer the enrollee, as soon as possible, to a useful part-time community service employment assignment.

(1) Each enrollee shall be employed in an assignment which contributes to the general welfare of the community and
which provides services related to publicly owned and operated facilities and projects or projects sponsored by
organizations, other than political parties, exempt from taxation under the provisions of section 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. The enrollee shall be employed to provide ``community services''. To the fullest
extent feasible, the enrollee shall be given first consideration for assignments involved in the operation of projects.

(2) The enrollee shall not be assigned to work involving the construction, operation, or maintenance of any facility
used or to be used as a place for sectarian religious instruction or worship, or to work which primarily benefits private,
profit-making organizations. [Sections 502(b)(1) (A), (C), and (D) and 507(2).]

(b) 

Hours of community service employment assignments.

 (1) Each enrollee's community service employment assignment shall not exceed 1,300 hours during the 12-month period
specified in the recipient's agreement. The 1,300 hours includes paid hours of orientation, training, sick leave,
and vacation and hours of enrollment provided by all recipients and subrecipients. No enrollee shall be reimbursed
for more than 1,300 hours in any 12-month period. [Section 508(a)(2).]

(2) The recipient or subrecipient shall not require an enrollee to participate more than 20 hours during one week;
however, hours may be extended with the consent of the enrollee. Shorter periods may be authorized by the grant agreement,
in writing by the Department, or by written agreement between an enrollee and a recipient or subrecipient.

(3) The recipient or subrecipient shall not offer an enrollee an average of fewer than 20 hours of paid participation
per week. [Section 508(a)(2).]

(4) The recipient or subrecipient shall, to the extent possible, ensure that the enrollee works during normal business
hours, if the enrollee so desires.

(c) 

Location.

 The enrollee shall be employed at work sites in or near the community where the enrollee resides. [Section 502(b)(1)(B).]

(d) 

Working conditions for enrollees.

 Enrollees shall not be permitted to work in a building or surroundings or under conditions which are unsanitary, hazardous,
or dangerous to the enrollees' health or safety. The recipient or a subrecipient shall make periodic visits to the
enrollees' work site(s) to assure that the working conditions and treatment of the enrollee are consistent with the
Act and this part. [Section 502(b)(1)(J).]






