 

<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

Office of Academic Programs, Specialized Programs Unit_E/ASU, Room 349, U.S. Information Agency, 301 4th Street,
SW., Washington, DC 20547, (202) 6195289 (phone), (202) 4011433 (fax), to request an Application Package,
which includes detailed award criteria; all application forms; and guidelines for preparing proposals, including
specific criteria for preparation of the proposal budget. Please specify USIA Program Officer Robin Kline or Mary
Ann Garlic on all inquiries and correspondence. Interested applicants should read the complete 

Federal Register

 announcement before addressing inquiries to the Specialized Programs Unit or submitting proposals. Once the RFP
deadline has passed, Specialized Programs Unit program officers may not discuss this competition in any way with
applicants until the Bureau proposal review process has been completed.


</FURTHER>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Applicants must follow all instructions given in this announcement and the Application Package and send only complete
applications to: U.S. Information Agency, Ref.: E/ASU9503, Office of Grants Management, E/XE, Room
336, 301 4th Street, SW., Washington, DC 20547.


</ADDRESS>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

Pursuant to the Bureau's authorizing legislation, programs must maintain a non-political character and should
be balanced and representative of the diversity of American political, social, and cultural life. Programs must
also maintain their scholarly integrity and meet the highest standard of academic excellence or artistic achievement.
``Diversity'' should be interpreted in the broadest sense and encompass differences including but not limited to
race, gender, religion, geographic location, socio-economic status, and physical challenges. Applicants are
strongly encouraged to adhere to the advancement of this principle.


Overview


The specific purpose of this program is to assist Central and East European countries in their transformation to free
market economies through the development of business management training capabilities in academic institutions.
An important goal of the program is to create enduring linkages between designated foreign and U.S. institutions.
Proposals that are extensions or enhancements of past or current relationships with a partner institution will be
accepted.


Guidelines


A. Programs must comply with J1 visa regulations; program participants must carry the requisite level of health
and accident insurance. U.S. project directors must ensure that all participants are covered by a comprehensive
health insurance plan, and the proposal must reflect insurance coverage.
B. 

Institutional Eligibility: 

In the U.S., participation in the program is open to accredited two- and four-year colleges and universities, graduate
schools, and non-profit scholarly/professional organizations. Consortia of institutions are also eligible.
Proposals from consortia must be submitted by a single member institution with authority to represent the consortium.
Overseas, participation is limited to recognized degree-granting institutions of higher education and internationally
recognized and highly regarded independent research institutes. Special note: USIA encourages proposals from
eligible Historically Black Colleges and Universities, community colleges, and other institutions in the U.S.
with significant minority student enrollment.

</SUPPLEM>
