 

_Describe the key elements of the participant training, in-service 
education, or service-learning curriculum employed to improve 
participants' skills, prepare them for placement, and foster positive civic 
values, and promote an ongoing interest in community service. (Note 
that the program must, in a non-partisan manner, encourage participants 
to vote.)

 

(v) Participant placement and supervision. 



_Explain how participants will be placed (in teams or individually) and 
matched with assignments. 
_Describe how service sponsors or host-sites will be oriented and 
prepared for that placement. 
_Explain how participants will be supervised. 
_Outline the standards of conduct for participants (all community and 
national service programs will be required to establish a standard of 
conduct to be stringently enforced.)

 

(vi) Nondisplacement. 



_Explain what steps have been taken to ensure that no displacement or 
supplantation of other employees will occur as a result of the project, or 
the project will not result in other employees not being hired or not 
receiving promotions. Include a summary of any discussions or contacts 
with labor organizations in related fields of work. The written 
concurrence of any local labor organization representing employees 
engaged in the same or substantially similar work must be obtained. 




d. Participant profile, recruitment strategy, and benefits.

 Provide a description of the total number (full- or part-time) of participants to be recruited in the program, including
the expected characteristics, attributes or skills of participants. Describe the benefits these participants
will receive.




(i) 

Number and characteristics of participants. 




_State the expected number and characteristics of participants, including racial or ethnic background, socio-economic
status, gender, and educational attainment.

_If the program will recruit fewer than 20 participants, please explain why this smaller number is appropriate to
the purpose and design of the program.




(ii) Participant recruitment. 



_Explain the methods that will be used or the strategies undertaken to 
recruit participants. 
_Explain what measures will be taken to recruit diverse participants based 
on economic background, race, ethnicity, age, gender, marital status, 
education levels, and disabilities. 



(iii) Participant selection. 



_Explain the methods or strategy that you will use to select participants. 
_Describe selection criteria, including minimum qualifications for 
participants. 
_Identify any specialized skills that participants will be required to possess 
in order to carry out service assignments. 



(iv) Participant benefits. 



_Identify the benefits that the participants will receive. (Note that all 
participants must receive health benefits and, if needed, child care.) 
_Describe the amount of the living allowance provided to each participant. 
(Note that the living allowance must be at least $7,440 for fiscal year 
1994 for full-time participants and must be at least $3,960 for each part-time participant, and cannot exceed twice
these amounts.) 
_Describe the amount of the educational awards to be provided to each 
participant. (Note that proposals should provide for participants to 
receive educational awards (either from the National Service Corporation 
or from some other source) in an amount of $4,725 for one full-time 
term of service or $2,360 for one part-time term of service, for up to 
two terms of service.) 

_Describe how national service educational awards will be apportioned 
among program participants if not provided to all participants. (In 
general, the distribution should treat equally all participants doing the 
same or essentially similar work. Distribution based solely on economic 
needs of participants is not encouraged.) 
_Describe any alternative post-service benefits that might be used (e.g., 
tuition credits at an institution of higher education or transition 
assistance).




(v) Participant welfare.

 

_Describe what measures will be taken to ensure the safety and well-being 
of participants while working on service projects. 



e. Internal Evaluation and Monitoring Activities.

 Describe internal evaluation and monitoring activities. 




(i) 

Internal evaluation and monitoring. 



_Explain how you will monitor progress toward your program objectives 
(Note that monitoring approaches such as community advisory councils, 
participant advisory councils, peer reviews, quality control inspections, 
and customer participant surveys are encouraged). 
_Explain how you will assess, on an ongoing basis, the quality of services 
and the satisfaction of both the participants and the individuals or 
institutions served. 
_Explain how you will collect required descriptive and demographic data 
(e.g., reporting requirements will include data regarding the 
characteristics of participants and data regarding services to be conducted 
in areas of economic or environmental distress.) 



(ii) Previous evaluations. 



_If your proposal is to replicate an existing program in other areas, state 
whether the original program has been evaluated. 
_Explain who conducted the evaluation and describe the results of the 
evaluation regarding community and participant impact. 
_If the original program has not been evaluated, explain what evidence 
exists of successful performance or of a track record to demonstrate its 
appropriateness for replication or expansion. 



f. Institutional and personnel information.

 Provide a description of the 
administering organization's past experience and institutional capacity to operate 
or coordinate a program comparable to the program(s) proposed, including the 
organization's ability to recruit and train staff. 




(i) 

Principal staff. 




