 

The SIAPs contained in this amendment are based on the criteria contained in the U.S. Standard for Terminal Instrument
Approach Procedures (TERPs). In developing these SIAPs, the TERPS criteria were applied to the conditions existing
or anticipated at the affected airports. The FAA has determined through extensive testing that current non-localizer
type, non-precision instrument approaches developed using the United States Standard for Terminal Instrument
Approach Procedures (TERPS) criteria can be safely flown by aircraft equipped with Global Positioning System (GPS)
avionics which are FAA approved. In consideration of the above, the applicable Instrument Approach Procedures (IAPs)
will be recharted to include ``or GPS'' in the title without otherwise reviewing, modifying, or amending the procedure.
This will allow those IAPs to be conducted without consideration of the status of the navigation aid or avionics that
defines the underlying approach in the existing rule. Because of the close and immediate relationship between these
SIAPs and safety in air commerce, I find that notice and public procedure before adopting these SIAPs are unnecessary,
impracticable, and contrary to the public interest and, where applicable, that good cause exists for making some
SIAPs effective in less than 30 days.

The FAA has determined that this regulation only involves an established body of technical regulations for which
frequent and routine amendments are necessary to keep them operationally current. It, therefore_(1) is not a ``major
rule'' under Executive Order 12291; (2) is not a ``significant rule'' under DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures
(44 FR 11034; February 26, 1979); and (3) does not warrant preparation of a regulatory evaluation as the anticipated
impact is so minimal. For the same reason, the FAA certifies that this amendment will not have a significant economic
impact on a substantial number of small entities under the criteria of the Regulatory Flexibility Act.



List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 97



Air traffic control, Airports, Incorporation by reference, Navigation (Air), Standard instrument approaches,
Weather.




Issued in Washington, DC on March 11, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Thomas C. Accardi,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Director, Flight Standards Service.



Adoption of the Amendment



Accordingly, pursuant to the authority delegated to me, part 97 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR part 97)
is amended by establishing, amending, suspending, or revoking Standard Instrument Approach Procedures, effective
at 0901 UTC on the dates specified, as follows:



PART 97_STANDARD INSTRUMENT APPROACH PROCEDURES



1. The authority citation for Part 97 continues to read as follows:






Authority:

 49 U.S.C. App. 1348, 1354(a), 1421 and 1510; 49 U.S.C. 106(g) (Revised Pub. L. 97449, January 12, 1983); and
14 CFR 11.49(b)(2).




2. Part 97 is amended to read as follows:

</SIGNJOB>
