 




<CFRNO>21 CFR Part 166</CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 90P0025]</RINDOCK>


Margarine; Standard of Identity To Permit Use of Any Form of Oil of Marine Species Affirmed as GRAS or Approved as a Food
Additive for This Use


<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Final rule.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is amending the U.S. standard of identity for margarine to permit the use of
any form of oil of marine species that has been affirmed as generally recognized as safe (GRAS) or approved as a food
additive for this use. This action is in response to a petition submitted by the National Fish Meal and Oil Association
(NFMOA). FDA believes that this action will provide increased flexibility to manufacturers in the selection of lipid
ingredients in margarine and will promote honesty and fair dealing in the interest of consumers.


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

Effective July 25, 1994. All products initially introduced or initially delivered for introduction into interstate
commerce shall comply on or after this date.


</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

Nannie H. Rainey, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFS158), Food and Drug Administration, 200
C St. SW., Washington, DC 20204, 2022055099.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:


I. The Proposal


In the 

Federal Register

 of August 30, 1990 (55 FR 35439), FDA published a proposal based on a petition from NFMOA, 1525 Wilson Blvd., suite 500,
Arlington, VA 22209, to amend the U.S. standard of identity for margarine (166.110 (21 CFR 166.110)) to permit
the use of any form of marine oil that has been affirmed as GRAS or approved as a food additive for this use as an additional
optional edible fat or oil ingredient in margarine. Interested persons were given until October 29, 1990, to submit
comments.


II. The Tentative Final Rule


The NFMOA petition was filed under section 701(e) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the act) (21 U.S.C. 371(e)),
which requires formal rulemaking in any action for the amendment of a food standard. However, in November 1990, the
Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101535) was signed into law, and it removed food standard
rulemaking proceedings, except for actions for the amendment or repeal of food standards of identity for dairy products
or maple sirup, from the formal rulemaking proceedings of section 701(e) of the act. Therefore, further action on
the NFMOA petition would be subject to the informal notice and comment rulemaking proceedings of section 701(a) of
the act. Thus, the agency published a tentative final rule in the 

Federal Register

 of August 17, 1993 (58 FR 43580), under those procedures. Because there had been an opportunity to comment on the proposal
when it was published in 1990, the comment period on that tentative final rule was 30 days.


III. Comments


FDA received one comment in response to the tentative final rule. This comment, submitted by the petitioner, expressed
support for the rule and urged the agency to finalize the rule as soon as possible. NFMOA also stated that it would like
to make clear for the record that its petition did not ask FDA to approve the use of any form of marine oil but was instead
restricted to ``any safe and suitable form of menhaden oil.'' The comment stated that, nevertheless, it had no objection
to FDA's enlargement of the range of oils to be permitted by the amended regulation, from menhaden oil to marine oil,
provided that this change does not result in any further delay in the rulemaking proceeding.
The agency acknowledges that the petitioner only sought to provide for safe and suitable forms of menhaden oil in margarine.
However, FDA believes that it is appropriate to provide for oil of any marine species where such oil has been affirmed
as GRAS or approved as a food additive for this use. The broader provision in the standard of identity will eliminate
the need to amend the standard of identity for margarine should other oils of marine species be found to be safe and suitable
for use in this food. FDA also notes that ingredient labeling will inform consumers of the presence of such oils when
used in margarine.
Therefore, having received no adverse comments, the agency is revising the margarine standard as proposed in the
tentative final rule. The agency believes that providing for optional oils of marine species that have been affirmed
as GRAS or listed as a food additive for this use will increase manufacturers' options in the selection of oil ingredients
for margarine and will provide for a wider variety of margarine products in the marketplace. Thus, the agency concludes
that the proposed change in the standard of identity for margarine will promote honesty and fair dealing in the interest
of consumers.
Accordingly, after consideration of the comments, the agency is issuing this final rule to amend the standard of identity
for margarine in 166.110 as set forth below.


IV. Economic Impact


FDA has examined the economic implications of this final rule to amend the standard of identity for margarine in 21
CFR part 166 as required by Executive Order (E.O.) 12866 and the Regulatory Flexibility Act (Pub. L. 96354).
E.O. 12866 directs agencies to assess all costs and benefits of available regulatory alternatives and, when regulation
is necessary, to select regulatory approaches that maximize net benefits (including potential economic, environmental,
public health, and safety effects, distributive impacts, and equity). The Regulatory Flexibility Act requires
that the agency analyze options for regulatory relief for small businesses.
In the August 17, 1993, tentative final rule, FDA announced that it had analyzed the economic impact of the new provision
that FDA is adopting under the previous E.O. 12291 and found that it would not have a significant impact. E.O. 12291
compelled agencies to use cost-benefit analysis as a component of decisionmaking. The agency also tentatively concluded
in the August 30, 1990, proposal that this action would not result in a significant economic impact on a substantial
number of small entities. Manufacturers may continue to produce margarine using current formulations. Thus, no
changes are required in formulations unless manufacturers wish to reformulate their products. FDA has received
no new information or comments that would alter its tentative finding that there is no substantive economic issue
in this rulemaking. Thus, FDA concludes that this is not a major rule as defined by E.O. 12291, nor is it a significant
rule as defined by E.O. 12866. In compliance with the Regulatory Flexibility Act, the agency certifies that the final
rule will not have a significant impact on a substantial number of small businesses.


V. Environmental Impact


In the preamble to the August 30, 1990, proposed rule, FDA reported its finding that this action qualified for categorical
exclusion under 21 CFR 25.24(b)(1) and that neither an environmental assessment (EA) nor an environmental impact
statement was required. As noted in the tentative final rule, FDA received one comment on the proposed rule that claimed
that this action would result in increased fishing pressure that could adversely affect the menhaden fishery, and
that the agency had not considered this potential impact prior to issuing the proposed rule. Although the comment
did not provide evidence to support the contention that the menhaden fishery would be adversely affected, FDA requested
an EA from the petitioner. The decision to ask for an EA takes into consideration the agency's assessment of this issue
as part of its previous action to affirm partially hydrogenated menhaden oil and hydrogenated menhaden oil as GRAS
for use as edible fats or oils (54 FR 38219, September 15, 1989). The agency also has information indicating that the
market for menhaden oil as a component of margarine is large, approximately 40 million pounds per year.
Based on information in the petitioner's EA submitted for the current action and on the agency's analysis of the reports
on the menhaden fisheries issued subsequent to FDA approval of GRAS petition (GRASP 6G0316 (54 FR 38219)), FDA concluded
in the August 17, 1993, tentative final rule that the proposed action would not have a significant impact on the menhaden
fishery. Amending the margarine standard of identity will not increase the volume of crude menhaden oil that is produced.
The only change will be that crude menhaden oil will more often be retained in the United States for further processing
into food grade products, instead of being shipped to Europe and elsewhere for this same use.
Thus, FDA carefully considered the potential environmental effects of this action, including the effects on the
menhaden fishery and concluded that the action will not have a significant impact on the human environment, and that
an environmental impact statement is not required. The agency's finding of no significant impact, and the evidence
supporting that finding, which includes the petitioner's EA, the finding of no significant impact for FDA's approval
of GRASP 6G0316 (54 FR 38219), and a copy of ``National Marine Fisheries Service Final Purse-seine Landings of Gulf
and Atlantic Menhaden in the 1990 and 1991 Fishing Seasons'' have been placed on file in the Dockets Management Branch
(HFA305), Food and Drug Administration, rm. 123, 12420 Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD 20857, and may be
seen by interested persons between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.
The agency has not received any additional information that would cause it to revise its finding of no significant
impact on the human environment. Therefore, neither an environmental assessment nor an environmental impact statement
is required.


List of Subjects in 21 CFR Part 166


Food grades and standards, Food labeling, Margarine.



Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and under authority delegated to the Commissioner of Food
and Drugs, 21 CFR part 166 is amended as follows:


PART 166_MARGARINE


1. The authority citation for 21 CFR part 166 is revised to read as follows:





Authority: 

Secs. 201, 401, 403, 407, 409, 701, 721 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321, 341, 343, 347, 348,
371, 379e).



2. Section 166.110 is amended by adding new headings for the introductory text of paragraph (a) and paragraph (c),
by revising paragraph (a)(1), and in the introductory text of paragraph (b) and paragraph (d) the headings ``Optional
ingredients'' and ``Label declaration'', respectively, are italicized to read as follows:


166.110 

Margarine.


(a) 

Description

. * * *
(1) Edible fats and/or oils, or mixtures of these, whose origin is vegetable or rendered animal carcass fats, or any
form of oil from a marine species that has been affirmed as GRAS or listed as a food additive for this use, any or all of
which may have been subjected to an accepted process of physico-chemical modification. They may contain small amounts
of other lipids, such as phosphatides or unsaponifiable constituents, and of free fatty acids naturally present
in the fat or oil.


* * * * *


(b) 

Optional ingredients

. * * *


* * * * *


(c) 

Nomenclature

. * * *
(d) 

Label declaration. * * *




Dated: May 16, 1994.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Michael R. Taylor,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Commissioner for Policy.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9412804 Filed 52494; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>

