 

Additional recommendations by ATSDR include conducting a door-to-door well survey and well sampling to determine
the extent and level of any groundwater contamination. ATSDR also suggests restricting digging into contaminated
subsurface soil to prevent human contact with contaminated soils and released cyanide gas. 

EPA's assessment is that the site poses a significant threat to human health and anticipates that it will be more cost-effective
to use remedial authority than to use removal authority to respond to the site considering the costs and time involved
in an extensive groundwater study and potential groundwater remediation. This finding is set out in a memorandum
dated August 30, 1993, from William E. Muno, Region 5 Waste Management Division Director, to Larry Reed, Hazardous
Site Evaluation Division Director. This memorandum and the ATSDR advisory are available in the Superfund docket
for this proposed rule. Based on this information, and the references in support of proposal, EPA believes that the
Lower Ecorse Creek Dump site is appropriate for the NPL pursuant to 40 CFR 300.425(c)(3). 



Tennessee Products 



The Tennessee Products site, is an aggregation of Southern Coke Corporation (Southern Coke), Chattanooga Creek
Tar Deposit Site and Hamill Road Dump No. 2. The site is located in a heavily populated, low-income, urban and industrial
area in the Chattanooga Creek (the creek) basin in Chattanooga, Hamilton County, Tennessee. The site consists of
the former Tennessee Products coke plant and its associated uncontrolled coal-tar dumping grounds in Chattanooga
Creek and its floodplain. Uncontrolled dumping of coal-tar wastes has contaminated the facility, groundwater resources
underlying the facility, and surface water resources downstream of the facility including wetlands and fisheries.


The former Tennessee Products coke plant (a.k.a. Southern Coke) is located at 4800 Central Avenue, south of Hamill/Hooker
Road and approximately one mile west of the creek. The coal-tar wastes are located along an approximate 2.5 mile section
of the creek extending from just upstream of Hamill Road bridge to the creek's confluence with Dobbs Branch. The coal-tar
deposits are the result of dumping coal-tar wastes directly into the creek and onto the floodplain within the immediate
vicinity of the creek channel. The largest coal-tar deposits have been found in the creek bed and along its banks within
a 1 mile segment of the creek between Hamill Road and 38th Street. Analyses for polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons
(PAHs) as well as visual inspection of sediment cores confirm that coal-tar has heavily contaminated this segment
of the creek plus an additional 1.5 miles of the creek downstream from this segment. 

ATSDR issued a Public Health Advisory for the Tennessee Products Site on August 20, 1993, based on the chemical and
physical hazard presented by the coal-tar deposits at the site. The Advisory recommends the following actions: 

(1) Dissociate residents from the coal-tar deposits; 

(2) Continue site characterization to address the potential for migration of contaminants; 

(3) Consider the Tennessee Products Site for inclusion on the NPL; 

(4) As appropriate, consider other coal-tar contaminated sites along the creek for inclusion on the NPL. 

Studies have been conducted on Chattanooga Creek on several occasions by EPA and other agencies since 1973. Several
of these studies indicate that coal-tar constituents have contaminated the creek and its sediments. The latest of
these studies, conducted in 1992 by EPA, has revealed the extent of the coal-tar dumping along the creek. This new information,
in combination with historical file information, supports the aggregation of the above mentioned sites. The aggregation
criteria is discussed in a memo to the file, from Loften Carr, Site Assessment Manager, EPA Region 4, dated June 8, 1993,
which is included in the nomination package. 

Historical sampling and aerial photographic evidence indicate that the tar was dumped into the creek, on the banks
and in areas near the creek over several years during the 1940s and 1950s. During World War II, the U.S. Government purchased
the Tennessee Products facility and operated it for the war effort. The facility was sold back to the company after
the end of the war. Due to increased coke production during the war, a substantial increase in waste generated by Tennessee
Products may have strained waste handling procedures practiced by Tennessee Products before 1941. Documentation
of the disposal practices of Tennessee Products during this time period is not available; however, Tennessee Products
maintained a private sewer line which discharged directly into the creek. 





