 

TFI argues in its petition that EPA should reconsider the entire 1992 rule revising subpart R because the 1989 notice
convening the reconsideration proceeding did not specify, or provide an opportunity for comment on, the details
of the technical methodology which EPA subsequently utilized in analyzing the risks associated with alternative
uses of phosphogypsum. However, EPA does not believe that it was obligated to select and specify each of the technical
models to be utilized in its analysis and to describe all of the analytic assumptions to be utilized before convening
the reconsideration proceeding. TFI also argues in its petition that a number of the elements of the rule as it was promulgated
were not specifically proposed for notice and comment. In general, EPA believes that the provisions of the rule adopted
in 1992 were a logical outgrowth of the options described in the 1989 reconsideration notice and the comments received
concerning those options.
EPA acknowledges that TFI did not have sufficient information to state many of the detailed technical objections
set forth in its petition for reconsideration within the period provided for public comment. However, under the criteria
set forth in CAA section 307(d)(7)(B), it is still necessary for EPA to assess the substantive significance of each
of these objections to determine whether it is of central relevance to the outcome of the rule and therefore an appropriate
basis for reconsideration.
Applying the criteria for reconsideration set forth in section 307(d)(7)(B) to the August 3, 1992 TFI petition, EPA
has concluded that certain objections raised by TFI do warrant convening a reconsideration proceeding concerning
particular provisions included in the 1992 revisions to Subpart R, but that the remaining objections by TFI do not
warrant reconsideration of the remaining provisions of the 1992 rule.


III. Decision to Partially Grant Petition


In its petition, TFI objects that the EPA analysis of the potential risks associated with the use of phosphogypsum
in research and development assumes an emanation rate for radon from phosphogypsum in the laboratory 40 times greater
than the rate for phosphogypsum in stacks, and that EPA has therefore greatly overestimated the risk presented by
the research and development use. TFI also argues that the analysis by EPA assumed that normal good laboratory practices,
such as segregated storage of hazardous materials, limiting removal of materials to an as needed basis, appropriate
ventilation, and appropriate disposal of used material, would be disregarded.
The analysis by EPA of the potential risks associated with the research and development use assumed that all of the
free radon generated by phosphogypsum containing 26pCi/g radium-226 would be released to a small laboratory room
with a total volume of 64 cubic meters and an air volume of 50 cubic meters. The EPA analysis thus assumed that none of
the radon would be retained in the physical matrix of the phosphogypsum long enough to permit further decay the radon
and adsorption of the decay products, which would prevent release of gaseous radon to the laboratory environment.
While there are certainly some experiments or circumstances where all of the radon generated by decay of radium in
the phosphogypsum could be released in the laboratory, EPA has concluded that this would be unusual and that such high
emanation rates would be infrequent.
In addition, EPA discovered during its review of the analysis of potential risks associated with the research and
development use that EPA assumed in its estimation of radon emissions to the laboratory environment that five 700
pound drums would be stored or utilized in the same area of the laboratory, rather than the single 700 pound drum permitted
by the rule. As a consequence, the portion of the risk to laboratory personnel attributable to radon emissions was
overestimated by a factor of five. In view of these conclusions, EPA has determined that the objections by TFI are of
central relevance to the provision limiting use of phosphogypsum in research and development to no more than 700 pounds,
and that EPA should request further comment on the assumptions to be utilized in analyzing the risks associated with
the research and development use.
In its petition, TFI also argues that it is not clear from the text of the 1992 rule whether more than one research and
development activity utilizing 700 pounds of phosphogypsum would be permitted at a single facility, as well as whether
or not a single research activity would be limited to a total of 700 pounds or only to 700 pounds at any given time. TFI
states that it assumes that multiple research and development activities each utilizing 700 pounds of phosphogypsum
would be permitted at a single facility, and that the 700 pound limit applies only to the amount of phosphogypsum on
hand at any given time, but requests that EPA clarify the rule. EPA believes that TFI has correctly construed the rule
and questions the need for further clarification of the existing rule. However, the fact that a given laboratory worker
might be exposed to radiation as a result of more than one research and development activity utilizing phosphogypsum
was not considered in the EPA risk analysis. Accordingly, EPA has decided that it will also request comment on whether
there should be any limit on multiple research and development activities at a single facility or by a particular investigator,
and how the possibility of greater exposures attributable to multiple research and development activities should
be accounted for in the EPA analysis.


