 

The General Provisions do not specify the reporting requirements for sources not operating continuous monitoring
systems. Therefore, the reporting requirements in 63.807(c) of the proposed rule apply. In lieu of the above
monitoring requirements, the proposed rule contains continuous compliance provisions in 63.804(g) for
sources complying through the use of reformulated materials. 



L. Relationship Between Operating Permit Program and Proposed Rule 



Under the operating permit regulations codified at 40 CFR part 70, any source that is a major source under the Act, or
any nonmajor source subject to standards under sections 111 or 112 of the Act, must obtain an operating permit (see
70.3(a)(1).). Therefore, all major sources subject to these proposed standards must obtain an operating
permit. Area sources in this source category are not regulated by the proposed standards and would therefore not be
required to obtain an operating permit, unless a State with an approved operating permit program chooses to permit
all nonmajor sources. 

There are many major sources in this source category that are major based solely on their potential to emit. Such sources
may choose to obtain a Federally enforceable limit on their potential to emit such that they are no longer considered
major sources and not subject to the proposed rule. Sources that opt to limit their potential to emit are referred to
by the EPA as ``synthetic area'' sources. The limiting of a source's potential to emit is identified as Federally enforceable
by 70.6(b) of part 70. 

The Committee agreed that this source category was one that could benefit from the development of a general permit.
Under part 70, State permitting authorities are allowed to develop general permits for categories of sources containing
numerous similar sources. In deciding which source should be covered by general permits, State regulators must consider
three primary criteria: (1) source categories covered by general permits should contain similar operations and
emit pollutants with similar characteristics; (2) sources should not be subject to case-by-case standards; and
(3) sources should be subject to the same or substantially similar requirements governing operation, emissions,
monitoring, reporting, and recordkeeping. General permits were developed primarily to alleviate some of the permitting
burden to area sources that are subject to section 112 standards and therefore required to obtain a title V permit.
However, the preamble to part 70 states that general permits may be issued to cover any category of numerous similar
sources, including major sources. Therefore, the Committee recommends that State permitting agencies pursue a
general permit for wood furniture operations. 

There are several benefits to a general permit. If a general permit developed by a permitting authority has been approved
after public participation, and the EPA and affected State review, the permitting authority may then grant or deny
a general permit to a source without further public participation or the EPA and affected State review. The action
of granting or denying a general permit is also not subject to judicial review. Another benefit of a general permit
that would be particularly advantageous for the wood furniture industry is that sources may use general permits strictly
for the purposes of becoming synthetic area sources; i.e., limiting the potential to emit. Finally, for owners and
operators with sources in multiple source categories located in a contiguous area, a general permit can be issued
to a discrete affected source at an industrial complex. 



M. Solicitation of Comments 



This section was drafted as the EPA developed the proposed standards. It lists issues the Agency is soliciting comments
on. The preamble requests comments on: 

1. Exempting sources that commit to using no more than a total of 250 gallons of finishing, gluing, cleaning, and washoff
materials per month, or 3,000 gallons per rolling 12-month period, from the proposed standards as long as the source
maintains records of their usage including specific comments on: 



