 

C. Fee Determination:

1. The annual rental fee shall be determined by appraisal and other sound business management principles. (36 CFR
251.57(a)). The fee shall be 5 percent of the appraised fair market fee simple value of the lot for recreation residence
use.

Fees will be predicated on an appraisal of the lot as a base value, and that value will be adjusted in following years
by utilizing the percent of change in the Implicit Price Deflator-Gross National Product (IPDGNP) index as
of the previous June 30. A fee from a prior year will be adjusted upward or downward, as the case may be, by the percentage
change in the IPDGNP, except that the maximum annual fee adjustment shall be 10 percent when the IPDGNP
index exceeds 10 percent in any one year with the amount in excess of 10 percent carried forward to the next succeeding
year where the IPDGNP index is less than 10 percent. The base rate from which the fee is adjusted will be changed
with each new appraisal of the lot, at least every 20 years.

2. If the holder has received notification that a new permit will not be issued following expiration of this permit,
the annual fee in the tenth year will be taken as the base, and the fee each year during the last 10-year period will be
one-tenth of the base multiplied by the number of years then remaining on the permit. If a new term permit should later
be issued, the holder shall pay the United States the total amount of fees forgone, for the most recent 10-year period
in which the holder has been advised that a new permit will not be issued. This amount may be paid in equal annual installments
over a 10-year period in addition to those fees for existing permits. Such amounts owing will run with the property
and will be charged to any subsequent purchaser of the improvements.

D. Initial Fee: The initial fee may be based on an approved Forest Service appraisal existing at the time of this permit,
with the present day value calculated by applying the IPDGNP index to the intervening years.

E. Payment Schedule: Based on the criteria stated herein, the initial payment is set at $*

XXXXX

 per year and the fee is due and payable annually on *

XXXXX

 (insert date). Payments will be credited on the date received by the designated collection officer or deposit location.
If the due date(s) for any of the above payments or fee calculation statements fall on a nonworkday, the charges shall
not apply until the close of business of the next workday. Any payments not received within 30 days of the due date shall
be delinquent.

F. Interest and Penalties:

1. A fee owed the United States which is delinquent will be assessed interest based on the most current rate prescribed
by the United States Department of Treasury Financial Manual (TFM68020). Interest shall accrue on
the delinquent fee from the date the fee payment was due and shall remain fixed during the duration of the indebtedness.

2. In addition to interest, certain processing, handling, and administrative costs will be assessed on delinquent
accounts and added to the amounts due.

3. A penalty of 6 percent per year shall be assessed on any indebtedness owing for more than 90 days. This penalty charge
will not be calculated until the 91st day of delinquency, but shall accrue from the date that the debt became delinquent.

4. When a delinquent account is partially paid or made in installments, amounts received shall be applied first to
outstanding penalty and administrative cost charges, second to accrued interest, and third to outstanding principal.

G. Nonpayment Constitutes Breach: Failure of the holder to make the annual payment, penalty, interest, or any other
charges when due shall be grounds for termination of this authorization. However, no permit will be terminated for
nonpayment of any monies owed the United States unless payment of such monies is more than 90 days in arrears.

H. Applicable Law: Delinquent fees and other charges shall be subject to all the rights and remedies afforded the United
States pursuant to federal law and implementing regulations. (31 U.S.C. 3711 

et seq.

)



VII. Transfer, Sale, and Rental



A. Nontransferability: Except as provided in this section, this permit is not transferable.

B. Transferability Upon Death of the Holder:

1. If the holder of this permit is a married couple and one spouse dies, this permit will continue in force, without amendment
or revision, in the name of the surviving spouse.



