 

B. New York State 



On Sept. 24, 1993 New York State submitted an application for adequacy determination. On March 14, 1994, May 10, 1994
and June 28, 1994 New York State submitted revisions to the original application. EPA reviewed the application together
with the subsequent revisions and has tentatively determined that all portions of New York's subtitle D program are
adequate to provide compliance with the revised Federal Criteria. 

The New York Department of Environmental Conservation adopted its initial set of regulations relative to the regulatory
permitting requirements for solid waste management facilities in 1977. These regulations underwent substantial
amendment in 1981, and again were significantly amended in 1988. 

Since December 31, 1988, the effective date of the existing Part 360 Solid Waste Management Facilities regulations,
numerous technological advances have taken place in solid waste reduction, reuse and recycling, composting, construction
and demolition debris processing, and other solid waste treatment, storage, and disposal activities. These changes,
combined with ever diminishing landfill disposal capacity, have exacerbated the complexities of managing solid
waste in New York State. In response to the increased environmental awareness surrounding the siting, design, construction,
operations and closure of solid waste management facilities, as well as the requirements of 40 CFR Part 258, the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation again revised its Part 360 Solid Waste Management Facilities
regulations to include full public involvement, including workshops, public hearings, environmental impact/assessment,
and responsiveness summary. The revised regulations were approved by the State Environmental Board on June 30, 1993
and filed with the New York Department of State on August 5, 1993. The amended regulations became effective on October
9, 1993. 

The Part 360 regulations contain provisions whereby the Department of Environmental Conservation, in appropriate
circumstances, may grant variances from one or more specific provisions of the Part 360 requirements. New York has
stated that such a variance will not be granted in any way that is less stringent than the Part 258 requirements. The
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation will also formally amend its Part 360 regulations to clarify
that variances to Part 360 provisions will not be granted in any way that is less stringent than the Part 258 requirements.


There are currently 41 active landfills in New York State subject to both the 40 CFR Part 258 and 6 NYCRR Part 360 regulations.
There was a significant decrease in the number of active MSWLFs as a result of the April 9, 1994 federal deadline for
small landfills to either close or be subject to all of the federal criteria. Twenty-eight (28) facilities are under
Part 360 permits, eleven (11) facilities are under consent order, and two (2) facilities are operating without either
a permit or consent order. 

New York State is concentrating its efforts to bring all landfills that receive municipal solid waste into compliance
with the Part 360 regulations through one or more forms of enforcement actions. Landfills that are permitted under
the revised Part 360 regulations, effective October 9, 1993, will meet the federal criteria. For existing facilities
all owners or operators must file a renewal application if they intend to continue construction or operation beyond
the expiration date of existing permits. For those facilities with Part 360 permits that will expire over the next
23 years, the Department will ensure that each such facility meets the applicable federal and state regulations
before a renewal permit is issued. Further, for the estimated seven facilities with permits that will expire three
or more years beyond the date of program approval, the Department will pursue permit modifications in accordance
with requirements contained in 6 NYCRR Part 621 Uniform Procedures. New York State expects to complete those seven
permit modifications so as to ensure compliance with both federal and state regulations within three years of program
approval. Those facilities operating under a consent order will either be required to close or be upgraded to meet
the applicable regulations in accordance with the terms and conditions of their consent order. 

New York does not have the statutory authority to enforce the MSWLF permit program on Indian Lands. MSWLFs located
on Indian Lands are subject to the Federal Criteria. 














