 

I accept this recommendation, and Appendix L, Regarding Release into the 
Environment, of the NIH Guidelines will be deleted accordingly. 



II. Summary of Actions 



A. Amendment to Appendix MID of the NIH Guidelines Regarding Informed 
Consent for Human Gene Transfer Protocols 



Appendix MID will read as follows: 



Appendix MID. Informed Consent 



In accordance with the requirements of DHHS regulations for the Protection of Human Subjects (45 CFR Part 46), investigators
should indicate how subjects will be informed about the proposed study and the manner in which their consent will be
solicited. They should also indicate how the Informed Consent document makes clear the special requirements of gene
transfer research. 



Appendix MID1. Communication About the Study to Potential Participants 



Appendix MID1a



 Which members of the research group and/or institution will be responsible for contacting potential participants
and for describing the 
study to them? What procedures will be used to avoid possible conflicts of 
interest if the investigator is also providing medical care to potential subjects? 



Appendix MID1b



How will the major points covered in Appendices MIA through MIC be disclosed to potential
participants and/or their parents or guardians in language that is understandable to them? 



Appendix MID1c



What is the length of time that potential participants will have to make a decision about their participation in the
study? 



Appendix MID1d


If the study involves pediatric or mentally handicapped subjects, how will the assent of each person be obtained?




Appendix MID2. Informed Consent Document 



``Investigators submitting human gene transfer proposals for Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee review must include
the Informed Consent document as 
approved by the local Institutional Review Boards. A separate Informed Consent document should be used for the gene
transfer portion of a research project when gene transfer is used as an adjunct in the study of another technique, e.g.,
when a gene is used as a `marker' or to enhance the power of immunotherapy for cancer. 

