 

Some gasoline detergents have been shown to cause intake system deposits when used in M85 applications. Likewise,
lubricating oils containing calcium have been shown to cause injector tip deposits in M100 applications. Therefore,
EPA recommends that F/FA producers determine the methanol compatibility of lubricating oils as well as fuel additives
used in the gasoline portion of the M85 base fuel. EPA requests comments on this issue. 


2. Ethanol 


In the NPRM, EPA proposed two baseline groups for the ethanol fuel family: E100 group and E85 group. However, EPA is
now considering defining only one group for baseline ethanol formulations. This single baseline ethanol group would
be represented by E85 base fuel. The rationale behind this proposal is that fuel ethanol is required to contain at least
5 percent denaturant, which means that, in actuality, E100 formulations contain only 95 percent ethanol (i.e., E95).
Furthermore, gasoline is normally used as the denaturant for ethanol fuels. EPA believes that there would be little
incremental value in requiring tests of E95 in addition to E85, and thus proposes to create a single baseline ethanol
group represented by an E85 base fuel. 
The E85 base fuel would contain no elements other than carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, chlorine, and
copper. The chlorine (as chloride) would be permitted as a contaminant remaining from ethanol production, and would
be limited to no more than 0.0004 percent by mass. The sulfur content in the E85 base fuel may not exceed 0.004 percent
by mass. Copper, also a contaminant from ethanol production, would be limited to 0.07 mg/L. 
The E85 base fuel would contain 85 percent by volume chemical grade ethanol, blended with 15 volume percent unleaded
gasoline base fuel. No additives, beyond those included in the gasoline base fuel portion of the ethanol blends, would
be included in the E85 base fuel. Additives used in the gasoline component of E85 should be ethanol-compatible. A summary
of the ethanol base fuel specifications is provided in Table 4. 


3. Methane (CNG, LNG) 


The methane fuel family would be represented by a natural gas base fuel whose elemental composition is limited to CHONS,
with the sulfur present only as an odorant for leak detection purposes and limited to 16 parts per million (by volume).
The added odorant should be used at a level such that at ambient conditions the fuel must have a distinctive odor potent
enough for its presence to be detected down to a concentration in air of not over 1/5 (one-fifth) of the lower limit of
flammability. No other additives would be included in the base fuel. The proposed methane base fuel specifications
are presented in Table 5. 


4. Propane (LPG) 


Special-duty propane, as defined in ASTM specification D1835, is proposed to serve as the propane base fuel.
The propane base fuel may contain no elements other than CHONS, with the sulfur present as an added odorant for leak
detection purposes and limited to 120 ppm (by weight). The added odorant should be used at a level such that at ambient
conditions the fuel must have a distinctive odor potent enough for its presence to be detected down to a concentration
in air of not over 1/5 (one-fifth) of the lower limit of flammability. No other additive would be allowed included in
the base fuel. The proposed base fuel specifications for propane are presented in Table 6. 


IV. Public Participation 


EPA desires full public participation in arriving at its final decisions, and therefore solicits comments on all
aspects of this notice from all interested parties. However, EPA does request that comments be limited to the specific
issues identified and discussed in this notice. EPA does not intend to respond to comments submitted at this time which
concern other aspects of the proposed program. Ample opportunity for such comments was already provided at the public
hearings and during the comment periods which followed publication of the ANPRM and NPRM. For those submitting 
comments, whenever applicable, full supporting rationale, data, and detailed analysis should be submitted to allow
EPA to make maximum use of the comments. All comments should be directed to the EPA Air Docket, Docket No. A9007
(see 

ADDRESSES

). Comments will be accepted until March 28, 1994. 


V. Statutory Authority 


The statutory authority for this proposal is provided by sections 205(b) and (c), 211, and 301(a) of the Clean Air Act
as amended [42 U.S.C. 7524(b) and (c), 7545, and 7601(a), Public Law 9595]. 


List of Subjects in 40 CFR Part 79 


Environmental protection, Fuels, Fuel additives, Gasoline, Motor vehicle pollution, Penalties. 





Dated: February 15, 1994. 


<SIGNER>
Mary D. Nichols, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant Administrator for Air and Radiation. 






</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 944047 Filed 22394; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050P
</BILLING>


