 

Overall, NRC's implementation criteria set forth a rigorous program governing the reclamation of the disposal sites
so that closure will (1) last for 1,000 years to the extent reasonable, but in any event at least 200 years, and (2) limit
radon release to 20 pCi/m2-s throughout that period. The design must be able to withstand extreme weather and other
natural forces. Upon review, EPA believes the NRC criteria comprise a comprehensive response to EPA's general standards
at 40 CFR part 192, subpart D. However, as noted above, nothing in either EPA's general standards or NRC's implementing
criteria previously compelled sites to proceed towards final closure by a certain date. This was the reason for EPA's
decision in 1989 to promulgate the subpart T NESHAP under the CAA. Moreover, neither EPA's general UMTRCA regulations,
nor NRC's implementing criteria previously required appropriate monitoring to ensure compliance with the 20 
pCi/m2-s standard. Nevertheless, as discussed below, the CAA was subsequently amended to allow the EPA not to regulate
NRC licensees if it concludes that the NRC regulatory scheme provides an ample margin of safety to protect the public
health. 




B. Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990: Section 112(d)(9) (``Simpson Amendment'') 




The purpose of this provision is to preserve governmental resources and avoid needless, burdensome, and potentially
contradictory CAA regulations. Specifically, section 112(d)(9) makes explicit that EPA need not regulate radionuclides
under the CAA for radionuclide sources that are sufficiently regulated by NRC or its Agreement States (under the Atomic
Energy Act or its component acts, such as UMTRCA). More particularly, section 112(d)(9) allows EPA to decline to regulate
under section 112 if the Administrator determines ``by rule, and after consultation with the [NRC],'' that NRC's
regulatory program for a particular source ``category or subcategory provides an ample margin of safety to protect
the public health.'' 


As EPA interprets section 112(d)(9), the Agency may rescind the subpart T NESHAP as it applies to non-operational
uranium mill tailings disposal facilities licensed by NRC or an affected Agreement State 

if 

the Agency (1) consults with NRC, (2) engages in public notice and comment rulemaking, and (3) finds that the separate
NRC regulatory program provides an equivalent level of public health protection (i.e., an ample margin of safety)
as would implementation of subpart T. While this rulemaking may commence prior to final development of NRC's regulatory
program, that program 

must

 fully satisfy the statute at the time EPA takes final action. In so doing, EPA must find that the NRC regulatory program
satisfies the CAA standard, not that full and final implementation of that program has already successfully occurred.





C. Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) 




EPA, NRC and the affected Agreement States entered intensive discussions about these matters. This inter-agency
consultation and review resulted in the execution of a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), a copy of which was printed
at the end of the proposed rule to rescind subpart T published December 31, 1991 (56 FR 67568). The primary purpose of
the MOU is to ensure that non-operational uranium mill tailings piles and impoundments licensed by NRC or an affected
Agreement State achieve compliance through emplacement of a permanent radon barrier with the 20 pCi/m2-s flux standard
specified in EPA's UMTRCA standards (40 CFR 192.32(b)(1)) as expeditiously as practicable considering technological
feasibility (including factors beyond the control of the licensee). The goal is that this occur as to all current disposal
sites by the end of 1997, or within seven years of when the existing operating and standby sites enter disposal status.


The MOU called for EPA to modify its UMTRCA regulations (at 40 CFR part 192, subpart D) to address the timing concern
that resulted in EPA's 1989 decision to promulgate subpart T. In addition, the MOU called for NRC to modify its implementing
regulations at 10 CFR part 40, appendix A, as appropriate, and to immediately commence efforts to amend the licenses
of the non-operational mill tailings disposal site owners and operators to include reclamation plans that require
compliance with the 20 pCi/m2-s standard as expeditiously as practicable considering technological feasibility
(including factors beyond the control of the licensee). This was to be accomplished either through voluntary cooperation
with the licensees, or through administratively enforceable orders. In accordance with the MOU, the NRC and affected
Agreement States have agreed to amend the licenses of all sites whose milling operations have ceased and whose tailings
piles remain partially or totally uncovered. The amended licenses would require each mill operator to establish
a detailed tailings closure plan for radon to include key closure milestones and a schedule for timely emplacement
of a permanent radon barrier on all non-operational tailings impoundments to ensure that radon emissions do not exceed
a flux of 20 pCi/m2-s. These actions, coupled with NRC's commitment to enforce the amended licenses, are intended
to provide the basis for EPA to make the requisite findings under CAA section 112(d)(9) for rescission of subpart T.






