 



Authority:

 16 U.S.C. 1801 

et seq.

 




2. From September 12, 1994 until December 10, 1994 672.20, paragraphs (f)(3)(ii) and (g)(4)(i) are suspended
and new paragraphs (f)(3)(iv) and (g)(4)(iii) are added as follows: 



672.20 

General limitations. 



* * * * * 



(f) ***

(3) ***

(iv) 

Hook-and-line fisheries

_(A) 

Groundfish other than demersal shelf rockfish in the Southeast Outside District.

 Except as provided under paragraph (f)(3)(iv)(B) of this section, if, during the year, the Regional Director determines
that the catch of halibut by operators of vessels using hook-and-line gear in groundfish fisheries other than the
directed fishery for demersal shelf rockfish in the Southeast Outside District will reach the halibut bycatch allowance,
or seasonal apportionment thereof, specified for hook-and-line gear under paragraph (f)(1) of this section, NMFS
will publish a document in the 

Federal Register

 prohibiting directed fishing for groundfish, other than demersal shelf rockfish in the Southeast Outside District,
by operators of vessels using hook-and-line gear for the remainder of the season to which the halibut bycatch allowance
or seasonal apportionment thereof applies. 

(B) 

Sablefish.

 Directed fishing for sablefish by operators of vessels using hook-and-line gear is authorized from 12 noon Alaska
local time (A.l.t.) September 12, 1994, to 12 noon A.l.t. September 14, 1994, in the Western and Central Regulatory
Areas and the West Yakutat District of the Eastern Regulatory Area. 

(C) 

Demersal shelf rockfish in the Southeast Outside District.

 If, during the year, the Regional Director determines that the catch of halibut by operators of vessels using hook-and-line
gear in the directed fishery for demersal shelf rockfish in the Southeast Outside District will reach the halibut
bycatch allowance, or seasonal apportionment thereof, specified for this fishery under paragraph (f)(1) of this
section, NMFS will publish a document in the 

Federal Register

 prohibiting directed fishing for demersal shelf rockfish in the Southeast Outside District by vessels using hook-and-line
gear for the remainder of the season to which the halibut bycatch allowance or seasonal apportionment thereof applies.




* * * * * 



(g) ***

(4) ***

(iii) 

Sablefish.

 (A) Except as provided under paragraphs (g)(4)(iii) (B) and (C) of this section, the operator of a vessel is engaged
in directed fishing for sablefish if he retains at any particular time during a trip sablefish caught using hook-and-line
gear in an amount equal to or greater than 4 percent of the total amount of all other fish species retained at the same
time by the vessel during the same trip. 

(B) In the Southeast Outside District of the Eastern Regulatory Area during the time period from 12 noon Alaska local
time (A.l.t.) September 12, 1994 to 12 noon A.l.t. September 14, 1994, the operator of a vessel is engaged in directed
fishing for sablefish if he retains at any particular time during a trip sablefish caught using hook-and-line gear
in an amount equal to or greater than 30 percent of the total amount of all other fish species retained at the same time
by the vessel during the same trip. 

(C) The Regional Director may increase, by publication of a document in the 

Federal Register

, the directed fishing standard for sablefish for an area of the Gulf of Alaska for which directed fishing for sablefish
is closed, provided that: 

(

1

) The increase would occur in a Gulf of Alaska regulatory area or district and during a time that the International Pacific
Halibut Commission has authorized an opening for Pacific halibut, under 50 CFR part 301; 

(

2

) A sufficient amount of sablefish total allowable catch would remain unharvested in the area to support an increased
harvest of sablefish consistent with any increase in the directed fishing standard for this species; and 

(

3

) The duration of the Pacific halibut fishery opening and the anticipated fishing effort would not result in an overharvest
of a sablefish total allowable catch amount. 



* * * * * 



<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9421472 Filed 82694; 12:19 pm]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 351022W
</BILLING>



