 

These states are required to revise their State Implementation Plans (SIPs) to 
ensure that ``covered fleet'' owners will include, through purchase or lease, a minimum 
percentage of CFVs among the new vehicles they purchase for their fleets. (A 
``covered fleet'' is defined in CAA section 241 as a fleet of ten or more motor vehicles 
which are owned or operated, leased, or otherwise controlled by a single person.) 
Both private business and government (federal, state, and local) fleets are subject to 
the statute. However, certain fleets and vehicles are exempt from the regulations, 
including fleets with vehicles that cannot be fueled at a central location, vehicles that 
are normally garaged at a personal residence, or vehicles that belong to vehicle 
classes without applicable CFV standards. (See the Definitions Rule: 58 FR 64679, 
December 9, 1993). In their SIP revisions, states must include provisions to require 
that CFVs used in the clean fuel fleet program operate on fuels on which they comply 
with the CFV standards. 


Covered fleet operaters can also meet the requirements by converting 
conventional vehicles to CFVs, or by obtaining credits. CAA section 246(a)(3) requires 
that all states containing all or part of an ozone and/or CO nonattainment area 
described above that is reclassified in the future as a serious, severe, or extreme 
ozone nonattainment area, or has a CO design value at or above 16.0 parts per 
million, must prepare revised SIPs implementing the CFF program within one year of 
reclassification. 

Three vehicle classes are included in the CFF program: light-duty vehicles 
(LDVs) and light-duty trucks (LDTs) up to 8,500 lbs GVWR,
<FOOTCITE>1</FOOTCITE>
 and heavy-duty vehicles 
(HDVs) between 8,500 lbs and 26,000 lbs GVWR.
<FOOTCITE>2</FOOTCITE>
 To qualify as a CFV, a vehicle 
must meet one of three sets of increasingly stringent standards. These are referred to 
as low-emission vehicle (LEV) standards, ultra low-emission vehicle (ULEV) standards, 
and zero-emission vehicle (ZEV) standards. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
1

</FOOTNAME>
Gross Vehicle Weight Rating.


</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
2

</FOOTNAME>
HDVs over 26,000 lbs GVWR are not included in the mandatory program.

</FOOTNOTE>


CAA section 242(a) requires EPA to promulgate CFV emission standards for 
purposes of compliance with the CFF program and the Pilot program (LEV standards). 
In addition, section 246(f)(4) requires EPA to promulgate emission standards for 
purposes of the CFF program credit program (ULEV and ZEV standards). Under 
section 249(d)(3), the CFF credit program standards will also apply to the Pilot credit 
program. Therefore, vehicles that meet ULEV or ZEV standards are eligible for 
vehicle purchase credits under the CFF program and for manufacturers' credits under 
the Pilot program. 

The CAA Amendments of 1990 require EPA to promulgate a Pilot program for 
the sale of CFVs in the State of California. Whereas the CFF program will be run by 
individual states, the Pilot program is a federal program that will be administered in 
California. Manufacturers with motor vehicle sales in California are required to sell a 
minimum number of light-duty CFVs (CFVs up to 8,500 lbs. GVWR) in California on 
an annual basis. Manufacturers may meet their share of required sales by selling the 
required number of CFVs or by using earned credits or credits they have acquired 
from other manufacturers. (EPA established the credits program in a previous 
rulemaking (57 FR 60038; December 17, 1992)). To earn credits, a manufacturer may 
sell more CFVs than required or sell CFVs which meet stricter exhaust emission 
standards. Except for heavy LDTs, for model years 1996 through 2001, the 
compliance standards for the Pilot program are known as the TLEV standards and 
credits are available for LEV, ULEV and ZEV purchases. Beginning in 2001, the 
compliance vehicle shifts to the LEV standards, and credits are only available for 
ULEV and ZEV purchases. This provision commences in the 1998 model year for 
heavy LDTs. 

The CAA also directs EPA to establish a voluntary opt in program for states 
that want to adopt the Pilot program. States which contain all or part of any ozone 
nonattainment areas classified under subpart D of Title II as serious, severe, or 
extreme are eligible to participate. To do so, states are to revise their state 
implementation plans (SIPs) to include incentives for the sale and use of CFVs as well 
as the production and distribution of clean alternative fuels. States may not establish 
CFV sales or production mandates, however. 

The remainder of today's action covers light- and heavy-duty CFV exhaust 
emission standards, requirements for vehicle conversions to CFVs, and the Pilot 
program, as well as regulatory impacts of the CFF and Pilot programs. In addition, 
EPA has included several technical amendments and clarifications related to the 
Definitions rule (58 FR 64679) and the rulemaking for the CFF credits program and 
transportation control measure exemptions (58 FR 11888; March 1, 1993). 


