 



Attorney for Licensee: 

J. W. Durham, Sr., Esquire, Sr. V. P. and General Counsel, Philadelphia Electric Company, 2301 Market Street, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19101 



NRC Project Director: 

Charles L. Miller. 



Power Authority of The State of New York, Docket No. 50286, Indian Point 
Nuclear Generating Unit No. 3, Westchester County, New York 





Date of amendment request: 

June 29, 1994.



Description of amendment request: 

The proposed changes would alter the Plant Operating Review Committee's (PORC's) membership requirements and would
delegate a portion of PORC's procedure review responsibilities for nuclear safety related procedures and procedure
changes to the line organizations. Section 6.5, ``Review and Audit,'' of the Technical Specifications (TSs) would
be revised to modify the composition of the PORC and delete review and audit responsibilities for the Emergency and
Security Plans from the TSs. The review and audit responsibilities would be relocated to the respective Emergency
and Security Plans consistent with Generic Letter 9307, ``Modification of the Technical Specification Administrative
Control Requirements for Emergency and Security Plans.'' The proposed changes would also revise Section 6.5 and
Section 6.8, ``Procedures,'' of the TSs to delegate a portion of the PORC's procedure review responsibilities for
nuclear safety related procedures to the line organizations. The PORC would continue to perform safety reviews associated
with procedures that are of safety significance. 



Basis for proposed no significant hazards consideration determination: 

As required by 10 CFR 50.91(a), the licensee has provided its analysis of the issue of no significant hazards consideration,
which is presented below: 

Consistent with the criteria of 10 CFR 50.92, the enclosed application is judged to involve no significant hazards
based on the following information: 

1. Does the proposed license amendment involve a significant increase in the probability or consequences of an accident
previously analyzed? 

Response: The proposed changes do not involve a significant increase in the probability or consequences of an accident
previously evaluated since: (1) PORC will continue to review environmental impact and 10 CFR 50.59 safety evaluations
associated with procedures and procedure changes; (2) Only personnel knowledgeable in the affected functional
areas will review procedures and procedure changes; (3) Review and approval personnel (designated technical reviewers,
qualified safety reviewers and responsible procedure owners) will be identified in the appropriate administrative
procedures; (4) Designated technical reviewers shall meet or exceed the qualifications described in Section 4 of
ANSI N18.11971 [***] for applicable positions and are designated by the Department Managers;
5) The designated technical reviewers will be responsible for identifying whether additional cross disciplinary
reviews are required; (6) The qualified safety reviewers will be responsible for reviewing the procedure changes
from a safety perspective; (7) The responsible procedure owners are designated by the Resident Manager; and (8) The
responsible procedure owners will be responsible for verifying that procedure reviews are performed in accordance
with the administrative procedure governing the procedure review and approval process. 

The proposed changes (1) will add more detailed requirements regarding procedure review and approval to the Technical
Specifications which will strengthen the controls over the process, and (2) will free PORC from reviewing items that
are outside the charter of a ``safety review'' committee [***] [because non-safety significant
items can reduce the time that PORC members can spend on matters that are safety significant. The proposed Technical
Specification change establishes a highly structured review and approval program for procedures.] 

The proposed change to the PORC membership requirements would not significantly increase the probability or consequences
of an accident because it does not adversely affect the level of expertise applied to the PORC review function or its
effectiveness. The PORC quorum is currently composed of five members including up to two designated alternates and
a Chairman. [***] [This composition is not changed by the proposed amendment.] 

The miscellaneous administrative changes not related to the procedure review and approval process or the PORC membership
requirements cannot affect the probability or consequences of an accident because they do not affect plant operations[,]
[***] equipment[, or any safety-related activity.] 

2. Does the proposed license amendment create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident from any accident
previously evaluated? 



Response:

 [***] [No physical changes to the plant or changes in plant equipment operating procedures are being
proposed.] The changes are administrative and will not have any direct effect on equipment important to safety. Changing
the process by which procedures are reviewed and approved cannot in itself create the possibility of a new or different
kind of accident. Furthermore, a documented safety review, utilizing screening criteria, will be performed for
all nuclear safety related procedures and procedure changes. The proposed change establishes detailed controls
while allowing PORC to spend more time on safety significant issues. 

The proposed change to the PORC membership requirements would not create the possibility of a new or different kind
of accident from any previously evaluated since no physical alterations of plant configuration or changes to setpoints
or operating parameters are proposed. 

The miscellaneous administrative changes not related to the procedure review and approval or the PORC Membership
requirements cannot create the possibility of an accident because they do not affect plant operations[,] [***]
equipment [or any safety-related activity.] 



