 

3. 

Fuel switching. 

Several of the comments in this area dealt with the 
standards selection criteria for specific products. For example, Peoples 
Natural Gas Company stated a concern that standards could unintentionally 
increase energy consumption by forcing a switch from gas water heaters to 
electric. Peoples Natural Gas Company recommended limiting standards-induced 
price increases to consumers for gas water heaters to 120 percent of the 
standards-induced price increases for electric resistance water heaters. 
Peoples Natural Gas Company contended that this would avoid switching from gas 
to electric by price-sensitive consumers, such as home builders and low-income 
homeowners. (Peoples Natural Gas Company, No. 28 at 1). 
In response, the Department analyzed standard levels by the methodology 
proposed in the September 1990 advance notice, wherein fuel switching was 
accounted for as part of the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory Residential Energy 
Model's forecasting of economic impacts. While some fuel switching did occur 
(electric water heaters are projected to increase their share of the market 
from 45.5 percent to 50.3 percent, as shown by Table 3.4 of Volume F of the 
Technical Support Document), the Department does not believe it occurred 
because of the relative equipment price increases since the price of electric 
water heaters are projected to increase much faster than that of gas, as 
presented in Section IV below. The Department ascribes the fuel switching 
that is projected to occur to the relative increase in the price of gas 
compared to electricity as shown in Table 5.5 of Volume A of the Technical 
Support Document. 


Impacts on Manufacturers


The Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers contracted with 
Arthur D. Little, Inc. to prepare a report on the Department's analysis of 
top-loading, horizontal-axis clothes washers. In that report, entitled 
``Financial Impact of DOE Top-Loading Horizontal Axis Standards on U.S. Washing 
Machine Manufacturers,'' Arthur D. Little listed a number of criticisms of the 
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory-Manufacturer Impact Model and suggested that the 
Department use a ``Cash Flow Model,'' instead. (Association of Home Appliance 
Manufacturers, Nos. 61D and 61E). Although clothes washers have been dropped 
from this rulemaking, as discussed below, many of Arthur D. Little's comments 
have general applicability to the other appliances. 
One of Arthur D. Little's criticisms of Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory- 
Manufacturer Impact Model involved that model's consumer preference 
assumptions. Arthur D. Little stated, ``The combination of price and energy 
savings account for under two-thirds of the basis of selection. Thus, the 
Manufacturer Impact Model at best is taking into account a little less than 
two-thirds of the consumer's decision to purchase.'' Arthur D. Little 
concluded, ``neglected features seriously distort the prediction of 
consumer's *** well being.'' (Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers, No. 
61E at 25.) 
The Department intends to set standards that do not reduce consumer 
utility, a gauge of well being, by establishing product classes that protect 
utility. While utility is sometimes a matter of degree, instead of an open 
and shut case, the basic concept is the establishment of classes that protect 
a less efficient, but desirable, feature such as the through-the-door ice 
service for refrigerators. Since the establishment of classes is performed 
before the manufacturer impact analysis, it is appropriate for the Lawrence 
Berkeley Laboratory-Manufacturer Impact Model to assume there is no difference 
in consumer utility between an appliance meeting the different trial standard 
levels. Furthermore, since standards are intended to affect only an 
appliance's energy efficiency (which usually is positively related to price), 
modeling consumer response only to changes in those variables is reasonable. 
The Arthur D. Little report was also critical of the Lawrence Berkeley 
Laboratory-Manufacturer Impact Model's treatment of market power issues. The 
report stated that the manufacturer analysis concludes that manufacturers can 
set their own prices because the manufacture of the product is concentrated in 
the hands of a small number of producers. (Association of Home Appliance 
Manufacturers, No. 61E at 27.) Furthermore, the report asserted that within 
the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory-Manufacturer Impact Model, mark-up is 
countered only by a very weak consumer reaction, as measured by the elasticity 
of demand relative to the purchase price of the appliance and its operating 
expense. (Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers, 

Id.

) 
A major difference that exists in the manufacturer impact analysis 
performed for today's notice and typical manufacturer experience to increasing 
prices is that the analysis assumes that all manufacturers in the industry 
will have to increase prices to meet the standard. This is a very different 
scenario from an individual firm raising its prices independently from its 
competitors. To accomplish the analysis, the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory-
Manufacturer Impact Model uses two elasticities; an individual firm 
elasticity, which is used to establish price, and an industry elasticity, 
which is used to establish sales. The individual firm elasticity used by the 
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory-Manufacturer Impact Model is greater than the 
industry elasticity, and is such that if a firm raises prices it loses sales. 
It is this price elasticity faced by the individual firm that determines how 
much the firm can mark up price. However, the initial effect of this 
elasticity is tempered in the model by the fact that the firm's competitors 
are also raising prices until equilibrium is reached between increased costs 
to meet the standard and increased prices. The consumer reaction to this 
higher price is then calculated by the industry elasticity, which is the 
consumers' responsiveness to having the appliance or not, as opposed to buying 
it from a competing seller for less. Since the Department considers the whole 
industry to be affected by standards, a resulting rise in the general level of 
prices for an appliance would likely have a relatively weak aggregate consumer 
reaction. 






