 

(g) Economic impact and effects. What are the suggested escort zone boundaries? How long (time and distance) are the
escorted routes?

What are the costs for escort services (hourly rates for tugs of various sizes)?

(h) Existing vessel traffic services. Is the waterway served by a vessel traffic system?

Are there regulated navigation areas (RNAs), safety zones, or areas to be avoided?

(i) Local practices and customs. Are there existing (or anticipated) escort requirements for the waterway, such
as State regulations or local Federal requirements? If so, how do they compare with the 33 CFR part 168 escort regulations?

Are there informal escorting programs already in effect?

(j) Disabled vessel response strategies. What self-help measures could be utilized by a disabled ship (for example,
how feasible is anchoring)?

Are escort vessels needed continuously at all points along the waterway, or can a rescue tug be stationed at a strategic
point? Is there adequate sea room for a disabled ship to safely drift while waiting for assistance?

How available are suitable tugs-of-opportunity of various sizes?

(k) Effectiveness of escort vessels. Can the waterway effectively benefit from vessel escorting?

In constrained or congested waterways, can escort vessels accompany a ship without increasing the risk of collision
with other vessels?

Can the escort keep position where it can maneuver and react in time to assist the disabled ship?

Are there other environmental or operating factors which reduce an escort vessel's ability to safely respond?

(1) Graduated requirements. Are graduated requirements appropriate? For example, should escorts only be required
for ships that exceed a size threshold, or when sea or weather conditions degrade below a minimum threshold? If so,
what are those thresholds?

(m) Other risk management strategies. Are there other ways that collision or grounding risks of a disabled ship can
be reduced, such as establishing one-way traffic lanes, designating areas to be avoided, or other measures?

Rulemaking issued under PWSA authority must discuss these factors with respect to each affected waterway. Therefore,
when waterways are nominated for escorting in the future, the nominations should include information related to
these factors.

These criteria will be the principle topic at the public meeting. The Coast Guard is seeking comment on the criteria,
as well as additional criteria which could be used in evaluating waterways with respect to escorting.




Dated: December 15, 1994.



<SIGNER>
G.A. Penington,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Rear Admiral, U.S. Coast Guard Chief, Office of Navigation Safety and Waterway Services.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9431366 Filed 122194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 491014M
</BILLING>



