 

The following sections discuss key factors which EPA will consider in identifying the need for and content of Tier
3 testing. 


1. Statistical Issues 


As previously mentioned, scientific judgment will be exercised in determining whether Tier 3 testing is indicated.
An important factor in such judgments will be the interpretation of and significance ascribed to ``negative'' results
obtained in Tiers 1 and 2. To address this issue, EPA will consider statistical information such as the probability
of Type I and Type II errors. 
A Type I error occurs when a false positive conclusion is made, while a Type II error is a false negative conclusion.
The acceptability of a specific Type II error is related to the acceptability of false negatives in the particular
study being performed. For example, from a toxicological perspective, screening assays often have a relatively
high probability of producing false negative (Type II) outcomes, since some major aspects of organ or tissue toxicity
are not being examined. Thus, an acceptable Type II error for screening assays will typically be high. However, the
level of Type II error considered acceptable should be tempered by the goal of the study. A higher false negative conclusion
(e.g., Type II error of 0.2) will generally be acceptable if it refers to an effect of minimal severity at a high-exposure
test level relative to ambient concentration and if few people are likely to be exposed. The converse will also hold
true. 
Scientifically sound statistical analyses are a crucial part of any reliable study and will provide key information
for EPA to make judgments on whether or not Tier 3 testing is needed. While it is not feasible to list all possible scenarios
and results for each Tier 2 endpoint, the above discussion describes how some of the statistical factors will be incorporated
into EPA's decisions. 


2. Exposure Assessment 


The Tier 1 requirements will provide EPA with information on the composition of F/FA emissions and potential exposures
to F/FA products. This information includes: (1) Types and emission rates of speciated emission components, (2)
possible literature search findings on ambient, occupational, or epidemiological exposures, (3) literature information
on the potential fate and environmental effects, and (4) a qualitative exposure analysis (submitted by the manufacturer
or group) based on the production and use of the F/FA product(s). As mentioned above, this information will be considered
qualitatively by EPA in determining the extent of potential exposures and whether additional testing or analysis
is needed to assess risks quantitatively. As discussed earlier, EPA has the authority to require exposure modeling
or analysis under Tier 3. 
Significant public health concerns might sometimes be revealed by the submitted information on product composition,
total annual production volume and market distribution data, and emissions data. This might be the case, for example,
if there was a significant annual release of emission compounds with known toxicities, or if the anticipated exposures
approached or exceeded current estimates of apparently safe levels of known toxicants. In the case of high-volume
fuels and their associated bulk additives, EPA will generally assume that human and environmental exposures will
be of sufficient level and extent that significant observed adverse effects could indicate a need for follow-up in
Tier 3. This exposure assumption reflects the high production and consumption of these products, either at the present
time or as anticipated in the future. Thus, decisions to refer these products to Tier 3 will be based on the degree to
which additional testing is needed to clarify the results and potential health effect and environmental implications
identified in the previous tiers. On the other hand, it cannot be assumed that fuel additives used in relatively low
concentrations or produced in relatively low volumes will automatically be excused from Tier 3. For these products,
test results indicative of severe health effects and/or high exposure levels (e.g., during consumer use) might be
cause for escalation to Tier 3. 


3. Health Assessment 


General criteria for evaluating the potential public health effects associated with fuel and additive emissions
will include: (1) The number of positive and negative outcomes related to each endpoint, (2) the identification of
a concentration-effect relationship, (3) the statistical sensitivity and significance of such studies, (4) the
severity of the observed effects (e.g., whether the effects will likely lead to incapacitating or irreversible conditions),
and (5) the consistency and clarity of apparent mechanisms, target organs, and outcomes. Additional parameters
which will influence the decision on whether to require Tier 3 will include: (1) The nature and amount of known toxic
agents in the emissions stream and (2) the observation of lesions which specifically implicate inhalation as an important
exposure route for inducing adverse health effects. 
These criteria will be evaluated in conjunction with the Tier 1 and Tier 2 results to determine whether or not higher
level testing is needed. In this decision, both the biological and statistical significance of the Tiers 1 and 2 results
will be taken into account. Generally, escalation to Tier 3 may be judged necessary when remaining uncertainties
about the significance of observed outcomes and/or potential exposures interfere with EPA's ability to make reasonable
estimates of potential health risks. On the other hand, if no statistically significant effects are obtained at any
exposure level in a scientifically sound Tier 2 study (or existing test submitted in lieu of Tier 2 testing and not contradicted
by other published reports of equal or greater reliability), and if other major sources of concern do not arise (e.g.,
toxic effects of structurally related compounds), then Tier 3 testing is not likely to be required for the endpoint
in question. 





