 

(vii) Each danger tree shall be carefully checked for signs of loose bark, broken branches and limbs or other damage
before they are felled or removed. Accessible loose bark and other damage that may create a hazard for an employee shall
be removed or held in place before felling or removing the tree. 

(viii) Felling on any slope where rolling or sliding of trees or logs is reasonably foreseeable shall be done uphill
from, or on the same level as, previously felled trees. 

(ix) Domino felling of trees, including danger trees, is prohibited. 

(2) 

Manual felling. 

(i) Before felling is started, the feller shall plan and clear a retreat path. The retreat path shall extend diagonally
away from the expected felling line unless the employer demonstrates that such a retreat path poses a greater hazard
than an alternate retreat path. 

(ii) Before each tree is felled, conditions such as, but not limited to, snow and ice accumulation, the wind, the lean
of tree, dead limbs, and the location of other trees, shall be evaluated by the feller and precautions taken so a hazard
is not created for an employee. 

(iii) Each tree shall be checked for accumulations of snow and ice. Accumulations of snow and ice that may create a hazard
for an employee shall be removed before felling is commenced in the area or the area shall be avoided. 

(iv) When a spring pole or other tree under stress is cut, no employee other than the feller shall be closer than two trees
lengths when the stress is released. 

(v) An undercut shall be made in each tree being felled unless the employer demonstrates that felling the particular
tree without an undercut will not create a hazard for an employee. The undercut shall be of a size so the tree will not
split and will fall in the intended direction. 

(vi) A backcut shall be made in each tree being felled. The backcut shall allow for sufficient hinge wood to guide the
tree and prevent it from prematurely slipping or twisting off the stump. 

(vii) The backcut shall be above the level of the horizontal cut of the undercut. Exception: The backcut may be at or
below the horizontal cut in tree pulling operations. 

(3) 

Bucking and limbing. 

(i) Bucking and limbing on any slope where rolling or sliding of trees or logs is reasonably foreseeable shall be done
on the uphill side of each tree, unless the employer demonstrates that it is not feasible to buck or limb on the uphill
side. Whenever bucking or limbing is done from the downhill side, the tree shall be secured with chocks to prevent it
from rolling, sliding or swinging. 

(ii) Before bucking or limbing wind-thrown trees, precautions shall be taken to prevent the root wad, butt or logs
from striking an employee. These precautions include, but are not limited to, chocking or moving the tree to a stable
position. 

(4) 

Chipping (in-woods locations). 

(i) Chipper access covers or doors shall not be opened until the drum or disc is at a complete stop. 

(ii) Infeed and discharge ports shall be guarded to prevent contact with the disc, knives, or blower blades. 

(iii) The chipper shall be shut down and locked out in accordance with the requirements of 29 CFR 1910.147 when an employee
performs any servicing or maintenance. 

(iv) Detached trailer chippers shall be chocked during usage on any slope where rolling or sliding of the chipper is
reasonably foreseeable. 

(5) 

Yarding. 

(i) No log shall be moved until each employee is in the clear. 

(ii) Each choker shall be hooked and unhooked from the uphill side or end of the log, unless the employer demonstrates
that is it not feasible in the particular situation to hook or unhook the choker from the uphill side. Where the choker
is hooked or unhooked from the downhill side or end of the log, the log shall be securely chocked to prevent rolling,
sliding or swinging. 

(iii) Each choker shall be positioned near the end of the log or tree length. 

(iv) Each machine shall be positioned during winching so the machine and winch are operated within their design limits.


(v) No yarding line shall not be moved unless the yarder operator has clearly received and understood the signal to
do so. When in doubt, the yarder operator shall repeat the signal as it is understood and wait for a confirming signal
before moving any line. 

(vi) No load shall exceed the rated capacity of the pallet, trailer, or other carrier. 

(vii) Towed equipment, such as but not limited to, skid pans, pallets, arches, and trailers, shall be attached to each
machine or vehicle in such a manner as to allow a full 90 degree turn; to prevent overrunning of the towing machine or
vehicle; and to assure that the operator is always in control of the towed equipment. 

(viii) The yarding machine or vehicle, including its load, shall be operated with safe clearance from all obstructions.






