 

(4) 

Political or officially connected expenses. 

The use of campaign funds for an expense that would be a political expense under the rules of the United States House
of Representatives or an officially connected expense under the rules of the United States Senate is not personal
use to the extent that the expense is an expenditure under 11 CFR 100.8 or an ordinary and necessary expense incurred
in connection with the duties of a holder of Federal office. Any use of funds that would be personal use under 11 CFR 113.1(g)(1)
will not be considered an expenditure under 11 CFR 100.8 or an ordinary and necessary expense incurred in connection
with the duties of a holder of Federal office. 

(5) 

Third party payments.

 Notwithstanding that the use of funds for a particular expense would be a personal use under paragraph (g)(1) of this
section, payment of that expense by any person other than the candidate or the campaign committee shall be a contribution
to the candidate unless_ 

(i) The payment is a donation to a legal expense trust fund established in accordance with the rules of the United States
Senate or the United States House of Representatives; 

(ii) The payment is made from funds that are the candidate's personal funds as defined in 11 CFR 110.10(b), including
an account jointly held by the candidate and a member of the candidate's family; 

(iii) The payment would have been made irrespective of the candidacy and payments for that expense were made by the
person making the payment before the candidate became a candidate. Payments that are compensation shall be considered
contributions unless_ 

(A) The compensation results from bona fide employment that is genuinely independent of the candidacy; 

(B) The compensation is exclusively in consideration of services provided by the employee as part of this bona fide
independent employment; and 

(C) The compensation does not exceed the amount of compensation which would be paid to any other similarly qualified
person for the same work over the same period of time. 

(6) 

Members of the candidate's family. 

For the purposes of 113.1(g), the candidate's family includes: 

(i) The spouse of the candidate; 

(ii) Any child, parent, grandparent, sibling, half-sibling or step-sibling of the candidate or the candidate's
spouse; 

(iii) The spouse of any child, parent, grandparent, sibling, half-sibling or step-sibling of the candidate; and


(iv) A person who has a committed relationship with the candidate, such as sharing a household and having mutual responsibility
for each other's personal welfare or living expenses. 

7. In Section 113.2, the introductory text is republished and paragraph (a) is revised to read as follows: 



113.2 

Use of funds (2 U.S.C. 439a). 



Excess campaign funds and funds donated: 

(a) May be used to defray any ordinary and necessary expenses incurred in connection with the recipient's duties as
a holder of Federal office, if applicable. 

(1) Examples of uses that defray ordinary and necessary expenses incurred in connection with the duties of a holder
of Federal office include: 

(i) The use of funds for the expenses of a Federal officeholder and an accompanying spouse for travel that is part of
the ordinary and necessary duties of a holder of Federal office, such as a fact-finding meeting or an event at which
the officeholder's services are provided through a speech or appearance in an official capacity; and 

(ii) The use of funds for the costs of winding down the office of a former Federal officeholder for a period not to exceed
6 months after he or she leaves office. 

(2) Any use of funds that would be personal use under 11 CFR 113.1(g)(1) is not an ordinary and necessary expense incurred
in connection with the duties of a holder of Federal office; or 




* * * * * 



Dated: August 11, 1994. 



<SIGNER>
Trevor Potter,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Chairman. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9420193 Filed 81694; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 671501M
</BILLING>





