 

Parker-Davis Comments 


Operation and Maintenance Costs 




Comment:

 Western's ``General Western Allocation'' expenses are too high and they are unfairly charged to PDP. Western
should explain the justification of the allocating of costs from its Washington, D.C., and Golden, Colorado, offices.



Response:

 Western's indirect costs are divided into three categories: Associated direct expense (ADE), administrative and
general expense (AGE), and general Western allocation (GWA). ADE consists of undistributed costs and expenses for
all types of direct costs which possess a clear relationship to benefiting activities and are recovered in the power
rate base. AGE costs are general and administrative expenses benefiting ratepayers and represent primarily costs
for nonmanagerial staff and support. GWA is a subset of AGE and includes ADP expenses, general office supplies, contracted
administrative services, etc. Independent auditors have determined that AGE and GWA exclusively benefit ratepayers
and should be recovered as part of the costs included in the power rate base. The indirect cost distribution system
was designed and endorsed by a major accounting firm and is consistent with industry standards. Western does not believe
these costs are excessive in the manner in which they are distributed. 


Comment:

 In light of the extensive replacement and addition program being carried out by Western, OM costs are not projected
to decline in the future as supposedly older, high maintenance equipment is replaced with newer, lower maintenance
equipment. 


Comment:

 Western feels it is necessary to overestimate operation and maintenance expenses as some sort of safeguard in the
budget and planning process. This is most recently seen by comparison of budget to actual numbers for FY 92. We believe
a sharper pencil should be taken to those OM projections in the process. 


Response:

 OM costs are projected in the future in accordance with DOE Order No. RA 6120.2. It is Western's policy, as in section
10, paragraph 2(f) of DOE Order No. RA 6120.2, to estimate OM costs based on historical cost trends and actual
project costs from the past. During the cost evaluation period, OM expense is based on the FY 1993 budget, and
projections for FY 1999 through FY 2047 are held constant based on the last year in the cost evaluation period less extraordinary
maintenance. OM does decline in the cost evaluation period. Western has a cost containment committee which
reviews and evaluates the OM budget. The committee's goals are to achieve the lowest OM budget possible
for Western. Therefore, Western does not believe that projections for the operation and maintenance budgets are
overstated. 


Comment:

 Rate impact analysis was not performed prior to seeking congressional authorization for budgeted OM expenditures.



Comment:

 Western and Reclamation have not attempted to limit OM expense. 




