 

2. In Vitro Digestibility Studies


In its original submission, Calgene presented the results of in vitro digestibility studies that demonstrated that
APH(3
&rsquo;)II enzymatic activity is rapidly decreased in simulated gastric fluid and in simulated intestinal fluid.
One comment asserted that Calgene should provide a more thorough study of degradation of APH(3
&rsquo;)II in the digestive tract because the conditions of the in vitro digestibility study submitted by Calgene
did not fully mimic the complex environments of the human gut. The comment further asserted that it was not clear whether
the digestibility data also apply to neonates and to people with coeliac disorders or ulcers who can absorb peptides
and intact proteins through their intestines. The comment noted that the applicability of the data to neonates would
be of special importance should 

kan



r

 be used in soybeans because soy protein is a major component of some infant formulas. Importantly, however, the comment
presented no information to provide a basis for concluding that the absorption of APH(3
&rsquo;)II occurs, or that if it does, such absorption presents a health concern greater than that posed by the absorption
of any other protein in the diet.
As discussed above, FDA has evaluated the studies presented by Calgene to demonstrate the normal digestibility of
the enzyme and concurs with Calgene's conclusion that APH(3
&rsquo;)II is rapidly degraded under normal conditions in the GI tract. Therefore, FDA believes that the intestinal
transfer of intact or large fragments of APH(3
&rsquo;)II is not likely to occur in individuals with normal GI tracts.
In regard to the possibility of increased intestinal absorption of proteins in neonates and individuals with special
conditions (e.g., ulcers), FDA has concluded that there is no reason to expect that absorption of the intact or partially
digested APH(3
&rsquo;)II protein would present a safety problem different from absorption of any other protein in the diet. As discussed
above, proteins, as a class, are rarely toxic. Furthermore, APH(3
&rsquo;)II is a phosphorylating enzyme and does not contain any properties that would distinguish it toxicologically
from any other phosphorylating enzymes that historically have been part of the food supply without adverse consequences.
Finally, because Calgene did not petition FDA for the use of APH(3
&rsquo;)II in soybeans, it is not necessary to address the comment concerning the applicability of Calgene's digestibility
data to neonates fed soybean-derived formulas.


3. Copy Number of the 

kan



r

 Gene and Expression Level of APH(3
&rsquo;)II


In its submission of November 26, 1990, Calgene stated that it did not intend to commercialize lines that contained
more than 10 copies of the 

kan



r

 gene. In addition, Calgene also declared that, in tomatoes, the APH(3
&rsquo;)II level would be no more than 0.1 percent of the total protein of the tomato and that processing procedures
would destroy APH(3
&rsquo;)II in processed tomatoes and edible oils extracted from cottonseed and rapeseed.
One comment asserted that Calgene inadequately described the methods by which it would ensure that no lines with greater
than 10 copies of the 

kan



r

 gene would be marketed. The comment further asserted that many of the analyses offered by Calgene to prove the safety
of the 

kan



r

 gene depend on estimates of the number of genes per cell and that, if the company cannot ensure this relatively low level
of gene incorporation, many of its safety arguments are undermined. The comment, however, did not identify which
of Calgene's safety analyses depended on estimates of the numbers of genes per cell.
The comment may have been referring to Calgene's assumption that each plant cell would contain 10 copies of the gene
when it calculated a worst-case frequency of transformation of microorganisms with the 

kan



r

 gene that would result from use of the gene in transgenic plants. However, the agency notes that the outcome of those
calculations, i.e., Calgene's conclusion that the transformation frequency of microorganisms with the 

kan



r

 gene is insignificant, would not change had Calgene assumed much higher gene copy numbers in its calculations. Therefore,
FDA's safety assessment does not depend on precise estimates of gene copy number. Nor does the comment provide a basis
for concluding that it is necessary to have precise methods for ensuring that no plants with more than 10 copies of the
gene will be marketed.
A second comment maintained that Calgene provided an inadequate description of the quality control and assurance
procedures the company would use to ensure that APH(3
&rsquo;)II would be kept to no more than 0.1 percent of total protein of the tomato, and that a number of the company's
safety analyses rely on the amount of APH(3
&rsquo;)II in the food. The comment, however, did not identify which of Calgene's safety analyses relied on estimates
of the concentration of APH(3
&rsquo;)II in the food.


