 

Upon expiration of the proposed SFAR, [Insert date 3 years after date of publication of the final rule], the Mode C transponder
requirement would become effective for aircraft operations to and from the designated airports. However, during
the effective period of the SFAR, the FAA will continue to conduct field evaluations, as the remaining Class B airspace
areas receive and commission the new radar systems, to reassess the radar coverage within the associated Mode C veil.
Additionally, the FAA will explore the feasibility of making permanent exclusions based on safety, operational
impact, and radar coverage. The public will be invited to provide comment on any such proposals through further notice
published in the 

Federal Register

.



Paperwork Reduction Act



This proposed rule contains no information collection requests requiring approval of the Office of Management and
Budget pursuant to the Paperwork Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3507 et seq.).



International Civil Aviation Organization and Joint Aviation Regulations



In keeping with the U.S. obligations under the Convention on International Civil Aviation (ICAO), it is the FAA policy
to comply with ICAO Standards and Recommended Practices (SARP) to the maximum extent practicable. For this notice,
the FAA has determined that this proposal, if adopted, would not present any difference.



Regulatory Evaluation Summary



The FAA has determined that this proposed rule is not a ``significant regulatory action,'' as defined by Executive
Order 12866 (Regulatory Planning and Review). The anticipated costs and benefits associated with this proposed
rule are summarized below.



Overview



When SFAR No. 62 was adopted (December 1990), the FAA designated 306 airports located within the 24 Class B airspace
Mode C veils at which the Mode C requirement would be temporarily suspended. SFAR No. 62 allowed aircraft operations
into and out of these designated airports without an operable Mode C transponder if these operations were conducted
at and below the altitude specified, within 2-nautical miles from the airport's center, and along a direct route (or
as directed by ATC) between that airport and the outer boundary of the Mode C veil. In this evaluation, the term ``Designated
Airports'' refers to those outlying airports located within the 24 Class B airspace areas Mode C veils where local
airport operations were beyond or below ATC radar coverage and, as such, were temporarily suspended from Mode C requirements
by the forerunner of this SFAR.



Benefits



This proposed rule is expected to generate potential benefits in the form of: (1) Increased convenience to pilots
operating aircraft not equipped with operable Mode C transponders, and (2) enhanced operational efficiency to FAA
air traffic control. 

Prior to SFAR No. 62, aircraft not equipped with operable Mode C transponders could operate at an airport within a Mode
C veil only after receiving ATC authorization. This requirement was valid at all airports within the Mode C veil, even
those airports that were located beyond existing ATC radar coverage. Because ATC authorization can only be granted
on a case-by-case basis, the process of obtaining ATC authorization can be inefficient and time consuming for pilots,
as well as the FAA. The benefit of this proposed rule would be temporary relief from the burden of obtaining individual
ATC authorizations for those aircraft operations at airports located beyond existing radar coverage.

For FAA air traffic control, this proposed rule would provide benefits in the form of enhanced operational efficiency.
Such enhanced efficiency would be the temporary relief of ATC from assigning authorizations, particularly during
busy periods. This proposed rule would allow TAC to allocate temporarily its personnel and equipment resources to
more productive functions.

Although the benefits of this proposed rule have not been quantified, they are expected to be large for both aircraft
operators and the FAA.



Costs



This proposed rule is not expected to impose costs on the FAA or society. In addition, this proposed rule would not impose
significant costs on the aviation community (namely, fixed based operators).



