 

A. SBIR Program Phases, Award Amounts, and Period of Support 


The SBIR Program consists of the following three phases: 


Phase I 


The objective of this phase is to establish the technical merit and feasibility of proposed research or RD efforts
and to determine the quality of performance of the small business awardee organization before furnishing further
Federal support in Phase II. Phase I awards will be approximately $35,000 to $50,000 (for both direct and indirect
costs) for a period not to exceed 12 months. 


Phase II 


The objective of this phase is to continue the research or RD efforts initiated in Phase I and to actually create
the proposed product and test it before marketing. Funding is based on the results of Phase I and the scientific and
technical merit of the Phase II application, including its potential for commercialization. (Only Phase I awardees
are eligible to apply for Phase II funding.) Phase I awardees are eligible to apply for Phase II funding only from the
Federal agency that supported their Phase I project. Phase II awards will be approximately $100,000 (for both direct
and indirect costs) for a period normally not to exceed 12 months. 


Phase III 


The objective of this phase, if appropriate, is for the small business concern to pursue with non-Federal funds the
commercialization of the results of the research or RD in Phases I and II. 
The purpose of this notice is to invite Phase I and II grant applications from for-profit domestic small business concerns
that have the expertise to develop or further develop innovative technology. This technology should be compatible
with the general mission of HCFA and contribute to the health care field. HCFA is responsible for the Medicare program,
Federal participation in the Medicaid program, and related health care quality assurance programs. HCFA's mission
is to promote the timely delivery of appropriate quality health care to its Medicare beneficiaries and Medicaid recipients;
over 50 million of the nation's aged, disabled, and poor. HCFA must also ensure that Medicare beneficiaries and Medicaid
recipients are aware of the services for which they are eligible. In addition, HCFA must ensure that those services
are accessible and of high quality. 
In carrying out its mission, HCFA conducts studies and projects that examine and demonstrate payment, coverage,
eligibility, and management alternatives to the present programs. HCFA also studies the impact of HCFA programs
on health care costs, program expenditures, beneficiary and recipient access to services, health care providers,
and the health care segment of the American economy. 
In addition, HCFA monitors national health care expenditures and prices and provides analyses of the costs of current
programs, as well as the impact of possible legislative or administrative changes in the programs. HCFA's Office
of Research and Demonstrations (ORD) is responsible for the technical aspects of the SBIR Program described in this
section. 
This notice outlines the eligibility requirements for organizations wishing to participate in the HCFA SBIR Program
and the research grant application and review processes. It also provides both general program information as well
as specific research topics and subtopics that may be of interest to small business concerns. 
Although areas of special programmatic interest or priority are described in section VII. of this notice, we will
consider grant applications in any area within the field of health care RD unless otherwise specifically excluded.
However, we are not generally interested in funding the biomedical or clinical projects that more appropriately
fit the mission of the National Institutes of Health. 

