 

Cash collateral accounts and subordinated interests are free of third-party performance risk because they stand
ready to absorb a given percentage of total losses from the underlying assets regardless of the financial condition
of the party that funds the cash collateral account or holds the subordinated interest. Spread accounts and other
forms of overcollateralization can provide a similar type of insulation from exposure to any one party if the asset
securitization is based on a large, well diversified pool of assets. These forms of internal credit enhancement depend
on expected excess cash flows from the underlying assets and thus are subject to the risk that the excess cash may not
materialize if default rates among the underlying borrowers exceed expectations. Restricting application of the
ratings-based multi-level approach to large, well diversified asset pools is intended to minimize this risk. 
Transactions with first dollar loss credit enhancements that are subject to third-party performance risk, such
as financial standby letters of credit or repurchase obligations (which are subject to the risk that the provider
fails to perform), and transactions that do not involve the securitization of large, well diversified asset pools
would not be eligible for the ratings-based multi-level approach. Banking organizations and thrifts that participate
as credit enhancers or investors in these types of securitization transactions would not be eligible for the reduced
risk-based capital assessments available under this approach. 


2. Risk-Based Capital Treatment of First Dollar Loss Positions 


The risk-based capital treatment of credit enhancements provided by banking organizations or thrifts in transactions
that qualify for the ratings-based multi-level approach would depend on the loss position of the credit enhancement.
First dollar loss enhancements, whether provided as recourse or direct credit substitutes, would be required to
hold capital dollar-for-dollar against their face amount, up to the full, effective risk-based capital requirement
for the outstanding amount of the assets enhanced.
<FOOTCITE>33</FOOTCITE>
 This would essentially incorporate the proposed low-level recourse rule into the treatment of first dollar loss
enhancements under the ratings-based multi-level approach. The dollar-for-dollar capital requirement would
apply to the holders of subordinated interests as well as against the providers of loans used to fund either cash collateral
accounts or spread accounts.
<FOOTCITE>34</FOOTCITE>
 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
33

</FOOTNAME>
See note 13. In no event would a single institution be required to hold capital in excess of the amount that would be required
for the full amount of the assets underlying the securitization. 


</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
34

</FOOTNAME>
First dollar loss enhancement provided through overcollateralization or a spread account (after any banking organization
or thrift's initial loan to that account is repaid) does not impose risk of loss on any banking organization or thrift
(assuming it is not capitalized in any fashion) and would therefore not be subject to an explicit risk-based capital
charge. 
</FOOTNOTE>


As previously noted, the Agencies are continuing to evaluate the risk-based capital requirements for low-level
recourse arrangements and low-level direct credit substitutes. Because the proposed treatment of first dollar
loss positions under the ratings-based multi-level approach incorporates the low-level recourse rule, any modification
of the low-level recourse rule would also affect the proposed treatment of first dollar loss positions. The capital
requirement for these positions should reflect the fact that they generally carry a higher probability of loss relative
to other loss positions in the securitization. However, the Agencies also recognize that the capital requirement
for these positions may appear to be excessive because the probability of total loss for low-level recourse positions
is unlikely to be 100 percent. 




