 

(m) If the researcher is conducting a study of special interest to the Office of Research and Evaluation (ORE), but
the study is not a joint project involving ORE, the researcher may be asked to provide ORE with the computerized research
data, not identifiable to individual subjects, accompanied by detailed documentation. These arrangements must
be negotiated prior to the beginning of the data collection phase of the project. 

(n) The researcher must submit planned methodological changes in a research project to the IRB for approval, and may
be required to revise study procedures in accordance with the new methodology. 



512.12 

Content of research proposal. 



When submitting a research proposal, the applicant shall provide the following information: 

(a) A summary statement which includes: 
(1) Name(s) and current affiliation(s) of the researcher(s); 
(2) Title of the study; 
(3) Purpose of the project; 
(4) Location of the project; 
(5) Methods to be employed; 
(6) Anticipated results; 
(7) Duration of the study; 
(8) Number of subjects (staff/inmates) required and amount of time required from each; and 
(9) Indication of risk or discomfort involved as a result of participation. 
(b) A comprehensive statement which includes: 
(1) Review of related literature; 
(2) Detailed description of the research method; 
(3) Significance of anticipated results and their contribution to the advancement of knowledge; 
(4) Specific resources required from the Bureau; 
(5) Description of all possible risks, discomforts, and benefits to individual subjects or a class of subjects, and
a discussion of the likelihood that the risks and discomforts will actually occur; 
(6) Description of steps taken to minimize any risks described in (b)(5) of this section. 
(7) Description of physical and/or administrative procedures to be followed to: 
(i) Ensure the security of any individually identifiable data that are being collected for the project, and 
(ii) Destroy research records or remove individual identifiers from those records when the research has been completed.

(8) Description of any anticipated effects of the research project on institutional programs and operations; and

(9) Relevant research materials such as vitae, endorsements, sample informed consent statements, questionnaires,
and interview schedules. 
(c) A statement regarding assurances and certification required by 28 CFR part 46, if applicable. 



512.13 

Institutional Review Board. 



(a) The Bureau of Prisons' central institutional review board shall be called the Bureau Research Review Board (BRRB).
It shall consist of the Chief, ORE, at least four other members, and one alternate, appointed by the Director, and shall
meet a sufficient number of times to insure that each project covered by 28 CFR part 46 receives an annual review. A majority
of members shall not be Bureau employees. The BRRB shall include an individual with legal expertise and a representative
for inmates whom the Director determines is able to identify with inmate concerns and evaluate objectively a research
proposal's impact on, and relevance to, inmates and to the correctional process. 

(b) The Chief, ORE, shall serve as chairperson of the BRRB. If a potential conflict of interest exists for the BRRB chairperson
on a particular research proposal, the Assistant Director, Information, Policy, and Public Affairs Division, shall
appoint another individual to serve as chairperson on matters pertaining to that project. 



512.14 

Submission and processing of proposal. 



(a) An applicant may submit a preliminary research proposal for review by the Office of Research and Evaluation, Federal
Bureau of Prisons, 320 First Street, NW., 202 NALC Building, Washington, DC 20534. Staff response to the preliminary
proposal does not constitute a final decision. 

(b) If the study is to be conducted at only one institution, the applicant shall submit a formal proposal to the warden
of that institution. Proposal processing will be as follows: 

(1) The warden shall appoint a local research review board to consult with operational staff, to evaluate the proposal
for compliance with research policy, and to make recommendations to the warden. The local research review board is
encouraged, but not required, to meet the membership requirements of an IRB, as specified in 28 CFR part 46. 

(2) The warden shall review the comments of the board, make a recommendation regarding the proposal, and forward the
proposal package to the Regional Director, with a copy to the Chief, ORE. 

(3) The Regional Director shall review the proposal and forward recommendations to the Chief, ORE. 

(c) If the study is to be conducted at more than one institution or at any other Bureau location, the applicant shall
submit the research proposal to the Chief, Office of Research and Evaluation, Federal Bureau of Prisons, 320 First
Street, NW., 202 NALC Building, Washington, DC 20534. The Chief, ORE, shall determine an appropriate review process.


(d) All formal proposals will be reviewed by the BRRB. 




