 

ADMINISTRATIVE CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES 



Adoption of Recommendations and Statement Regarding Administrative Practice and Procedure
 


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Administrative Conference of the United States.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice.


 

</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Administrative Conference of the United States (ACUS) adopted two recommendations and one formal statement
at its Fiftieth Plenary Session. The recommendations concern the use of audited self-regulation as a regulatory
technique and procedures for civil forfeiture of property or other assets. The statement presents the views of the
Conference on the Social Security Administration's proposal to reengineer the disability benefits process. 



</SUMMARY>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION: 

Ren&eacute;e Barnow, 2022547020. 



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 The Administrative Conference of the United States was established by the Administrative Conference Act, 5 U.S.C.
591596. The Conference studies the efficiency, adequacy, and fairness of the administrative procedures
used by federal agencies in carrying out administrative programs, and makes recommendations for improvements to
the agencies, collectively or individually, and to the President, Congress, and the Judicial Conference of the United
States (5 U.S.C. 594(1)). At its Fiftieth Plenary Session, held June 16, 1994, the Assembly of the Administrative
Conference of the United States adopted two recommendations and a formal statement. 



Recommendation 941, The Use of Audited Self-Regulation as a Regulatory Technique, suggests that when certain
prerequisites and safeguards are present, Congress and federal agencies should consider the possibility of delegating
regulatory power to a private self-regulatory organization. The recommendation emphasizes the necessity of ensuring
the effectiveness and the fairness of the process, and identifies standards for determining whether such a delegation
may be appropriate. 

Recommendation 942, Reforming the Government's Procedure for Civil Forfeiture, suggests improvements
in this process. The United States Government has in recent years made increasing use of its power to confiscate the
property or assets of persons involved in illegal activities through civil forfeitures. Notice of an impending administrative
forfeiture is sent to the last known address of the owner and is published in newspapers. This system has been criticized
as unduly expensive and ineffective. The recommendation suggests that the establishment of a centrally maintained
Civil Forfeiture Registry, which would be published and made widely available, would not only provide better and
more reliable notice, it would provide a better overview of the entire forfeiture process, thus improving public
and congressional oversight. The recommendation also proposes that Congress impose a statutory 60-day time limit
on the agency to provide notice in the Civil Forfeiture Registry and to send written notice of a seizure to the last known
address of the owner or interest holder in the property. 

Statement No. 17, Comments on the Social Security Administration's Proposal on Reengineering the SSA Disability
Process, constitutes the formal comments from the Administrative Conference to the Social Security Administration
on SSA's proposal. The Conference generally supported the proposed changes to SSA's procedures, which would reduce
the number of administrative stages from four to two, while offering claimants increased opportunity for face-to-face
interaction with agency staff. 

The full texts of the recommendation and statement are set out in the Appendix below. The recommendations will be transmitted
to the affected agencies and to appropriate committees of the United States Congress. The Administrative Conference
has advisory powers only, and the decision on whether to implement the recommendations must be made by the affected
agencies or by Congress. 

Recommendations and statements of the Administrative Conference are published in full text in the 

Federal Register.

 In past years Conference recommendations and statements of continuing interest were also published in full text
in the Code of Federal Regulations (1 CFR Parts 305 and 310). Budget constraints have required a suspension of this
practice in 1994. However, a complete listing of past recommendations and statements is published in the Code of Federal
Regulations. Copies of all past Conference 
recommendations and statements, and the research reports on which they are based, may be obtained from the Office
of the Chairman of the Administrative Conference. Requests for single copies of such documents will be filled without
charge to the extent that supplies on hand permit (see 1 CFR 304.2). 

The transcript of the Plenary Session is available for public inspection at the Conference's offices at Suite 500,
2120 L Street, NW, Washington, DC. 




Dated: August 22, 1994. 


</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Jeffrey S. Lubbers,
 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Research Director.
 


Appendix Recommendations of the Administrative Conference of the United States



The following recommendations were adopted by the Assembly of the Administrative Conference on June 16, 1994: 



Recommendation 941, The Use of Audited Self-Regulation as a Regulatory Technique



Audited self-regulation is defined as congressional or agency delegation of power to a private self-regulatory
organization to implement and enforce laws or agency regulations with respect to the regulated entities, with powers
of independent action and review retained by the agency. This self-regulatory 
organization is often an association of regulated entities formed for the explicit purpose of self-regulation.
Audited self-regulation is an alternative for Congress to consider in legislating any regulatory program. Properly
implemented and monitored, a program of audited self-regulation may effectively advance the statutory objectives
consistent with the public interest and the interests of the regulated entities. 

In certain circumstances, this approach may result in better regulation because the agency's statute and rules are
supplemented and enforced by those entities directly involved in the regulated activity, which may have more detailed
knowledge of the operational or technical aspects of that activity. The regulatory program also may be more effective
because it can be tailored to the individual industry or group. In addition, the agency's regulatory enforcement
costs may be reduced by this approach, although such cost 
reductions should be considered only if they can be achieved without eroding the effectiveness of enforcement. 

</SIGNJOB>
