 

Due to staffing and resource limitations, we cannot accept comments by facsimile (FAX) transmission. In commenting,
please refer to file code BPD732P. Comments received timely will be available for public inspection
as they are received, generally beginning approximately 3 weeks after publication of a document, in room 309G
of the Department's offices at 200 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC, on Monday through Friday of each week
from 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. (phone: (202) 6907890).



<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

Joanne Sinsheimer, (410) 9664620.

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
I. Background


A. National Coverage Decisions


 The intention of the Congress, at the time the Medicare law was enacted in 1965, was that Medicare would provide health
insurance to protect the elderly (and later, the disabled) from the substantial costs of acute health care services,
principally hospital care. The law was designed generally to cover services ordinarily furnished by hospitals,
skilled nursing facilities (SNFs), and physicians licensed to practice medicine. The Congress understood that
questions as to coverage of specific services would invariably arise and would require a specific decision by those
administering the program. Thus, it vested in the Secretary the authority to make those decisions (section 1862(a)(1)(A)
of the Act). Section 1862(a)(1)(A) of the Act authorizes Medicare payment for items or services that are determined
to be reasonable and necessary for the diagnosis or treatment of illness or injury or to improve the functioning of
a malformed body member. While the Congress provided for the coverage of services such as inpatient hospital care
and physicians' services, coverage for these services is prohibited unless they are ``reasonable'' and ``necessary.''
We have interpreted section 1862(a)(1)(A) of the Act to exclude from Medicare coverage those medical and health care
services that are not demonstrated to be safe and effective. Medicare contractors (that is, fiscal intermediaries,
carriers, and Utilization and Quality Control Peer Review Organizations (PROs)) are charged with the responsibility
of ensuring that payments are made only for services that are covered under Medicare Part A or Part B. Therefore, in
adjudicating a Medicare claim or conducting utilization and quality review, they must determine whether a service
that has been furnished to a Medicare beneficiary is included in the scope of Medicare benefits and, if it is, whether
it is ``reasonable'' and ``necessary'' for the particular medical condition of this particular patient.
The term ``national coverage decision'' (NCD) refers to a coverage decision that we make and issue as national policy
under section 1862(a)(1)(A) of the Act. We have issued over 200 NCDs on specific services. We publish NCDs in the Medicare
Coverage Issues Manual (HCFA-Pub. 6), and in other HCFA program manuals or as notices or HCFA Rulings in the 

Federal Register. 

Under section 1871(a)(2) of the Act, NCDs are exempt from the general requirement that no rule, requirement, or other
statement of policy that establishes or changes a substantive legal standard governing the scope of benefits, the
payment for services, or the eligibility of individuals, entities, or organizations to furnish or receive benefits
under title XVIII will take effect unless it is promulgated by the Secretary through regulations.


B. HMOs and CMPs


HMOs and CMPs enter into contracts with HCFA to furnish Medicare covered services to Medicare beneficiaries who enroll
in them in accordance with section 1876 of the Act. The contracts provide for payment to the HMOs and CMPs on either a
risk or a reasonable cost basis. The provisions in this proposed rule apply only to HMOs and CMPs that contract on a risk
basis.
Risk HMOs and CMPs are paid a predetermined, per capita rate for each enrolled Medicare beneficiary. Under section
1876(a)(1)(A) of the Act, we annually determine and announce by September 7 for the following calendar year, a per
capita rate of payment for each class of Medicare beneficiaries enrolled in a risk HMO or CMP. The per capita rate is
set at 95 percent of the adjusted average per capita cost (AAPCC). (The AAPCC is an actuarial estimate that we make in
advance of an HMO's or CMP's contract period and that represents an estimate of what the average per capita cost would
be to the Medicare program for each class of Medicare enrollees if the enrollees had received covered services in the
same geographic area or a similar area, from sources other than the HMO or CMP.) 
We define the classes on the basis of county of residence (State of residence, for end-stage renal disease beneficiaries),
age, sex, disability, institutional status, and welfare status. Within each class, we establish two rates, one for
beneficiaries entitled to Medicare Part A and Part B, and one for those entitled only to Medicare Part B. 

</SUPPLEM>
