 

ASTA and the Wisconsin Attorney General also expressed support for the ``booking rejection'' and ``contingent booking''
procedures. They favored the ``money back guarantee'' as well, as did the RG Travel Companies, the National Air Carrier
Association (NACA, an organization of charter airlines), the NHL, NCAA, FBA, and Pasadena Tournament of Roses. The
Tournament of Roses stated that this guarantee should apply ``at any time prior to departure'' if it is clear tickets
will not be forthcoming. FBA commented ``the greater the remedy available, the less likely that tour packagers will
create the problem by promoting packages that may not be legitimate.'' 

NACA said that there should be an exception to the ``money back guarantee'' for situations of force majeure and acts
of God, such as the earthquake in San Francisco that forced postponement of the World Series. Similarly, the NHL stated
that if the event is canceled or substantially altered after the tour begins, consumers should be entitled only to
a refund of the face value of the event ticket, but that if such cancellation or alteration takes place before departure,
the operator should be required to inform the consumers, who would have the right to cancel (presumably with a full
refund).


Congressman Andrews was also in favor of the ``money back guarantee,'' as well as a requirement for tour operators
to disclose whether event tickets are guaranteed or tentative. However, he stated that any rule that would totally
prohibit marketing of a special-event tour until the tour operator has event tickets in hand would not be practical.
Tickets for many such events are not available until less than two weeks before the event, he pointed out, but other
arrangements (e.g., air and hotel) must be made before that. NTA, the NCAA and the Wisconsin Attorney General stated
that the current restrictions against marketing Super Bowl tours until the operator has game tickets in hand or under
contract should be included in the new rule.



