 

<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
Background 


The Savannah River Site occupies approximately 300 square miles adjacent to the Savannah River, principally in Aiken
and Barnwell Counties of South Carolina, approximately 25 miles southeast of Augusta, Georgia, and 20 miles south
of Aiken, South Carolina. Since its establishment, the mission of the Savannah River Site has been to produce nuclear
materials that support the defense, research, and medical programs of the United States. The Savannah River Site
production process facilities include fuel and target fabrication facilities, nuclear production reactors, separation
facilities, product preparation facilities, and waste management facilities. These facilities have generated
a variety of low-level radioactive, high-level radioactive, hazardous, mixed (hazardous and radioactive), and
transuranic wastes. 
 
At present, the Savannah River Site is in transition to other missions; the new missions include an increased emphasis
on waste management, environmental restoration, and decontamination and decommissioning. DOE is examining its
current integrated waste management program and the suitability of existing and planned facilities in light of these
recent mission changes. 
 
Two DOE-wide programmatic environmental impact statements, one for Environmental Restoration and Waste Management
(Notice of Intent published in the 

Federal Register

 on October 22, 1990; 55 FR 42693) and one for Reconfiguration of the Weapons Complex (Notice of Intent published in
the Federal Register on February 11, 1991; 56 FR 5590), may result in decisions to transfer certain waste management
activities to or from the Savannah River Site. The alternatives for the Savannah River Site Waste Management EIS will
be coordinated with the alternatives for the Programmatic EISs. The alternatives for the Savannah River Site Waste
Management EIS will also bound the range of waste management activities resulting from the Federal Facility Compliance
Act Site Treatment Plan now under development. The Site Treatment Plan will describe the development of treatment
capacities and technologies for mixed (a combination of radioactive and hazardous) wastes. 
 
DOE prepared an Environmental Assessment and issued a subsequent Finding of No Significant Impact on the Consolidated
Incineration Facility in 1992. In response to a public request, DOE took a ``fresh look'' into the suitability of constructing
and operating the Consolidated Incineration Facility. DOE decided that while completing construction, DOE would
propose to include the operation of the Consolidated Incineration Facility within the scope of the Savannah River
Site Waste Management EIS. Under the proposed action, the Consolidated Incineration Facility would be the preferred
facility for the treatment of only those wastes for which under Environmental Protection Agency regulations incineration
is the specified technology or Best Demonstrated Available Technology. The proposed action also will evaluate incineration
and other treatment alternatives for wastes where incineration is not the specified technology or Best Demonstrated
Available Technology. In addition, the proposed action will include the incineration of low-level radioactive
waste for volume reduction and the EIS will consider other volume reduction and treatment alternatives. DOE will
not conduct any trial burns at the Consolidated Incineration Facility until DOE completes this EIS and issues a Record
of Decision. 
 
In 1982, DOE published an EIS and a Record of Decision for the design, construction, and operation of the Defense Waste
Processing Facility, which would immobilize liquid high-level radioactive waste in glass (vitrification). The
vitrified waste would then be encapsulated in stainless steel canisters and stored onsite until a geologic repository
is available for final disposal. DOE then modified the Defense Waste Processing Facility to improve facility efficiency
and safety. A Supplement Analysis was prepared to determine whether modifications as of 1990, primarily the introduction
of the In-Tank Precipitation process and manufacture and disposal of saltstone, required the preparation of a supplement
to the Defense Waste Processing Facility EIS. On the basis of the Supplement Analysis, DOE concluded in 1991 that a
Supplemental EIS was not needed.

Further modifications to the Defense Waste Processing Facility system have now been proposed and are in various stages
of implementation, including process safety enhancement and a Late-Wash Facility. In view of the accumulated changes
and the near-term (estimated 1996) initial operation of the facility, DOE believes that a focused EIS-level review
of the environmental impacts of the facility as now envisioned would be timely and appropriate.
</SUPPLEM>
