 

The ancestors of the Jena Choctaws have been identified both as Choctaws and as an Indian entity by scholars, local
officials, and state and Federal sources on a substantially continuous basis since 1900. No one has denied the Indian
identity of the Jena Choctaws. The 1903 Dawes Commission identified the ancestors of the petitioner as full-blood
Mississippi Choctaws who were eligible to receive land allotments in the Choctaw Nation, or what is now Oklahoma.
Local residents, local store records, and occasional state newspaper articles all referred to them as Indians. Federal
and state school officials from 1929 to 1940 all considered the Jena Choctaws to be Indians, and some referred to them
as a small tribe. Indian children were not allowed to attend the white public schools of the parish, while the Indians
refused to attend the black schools. Local authorities and private individuals made efforts to create a school specifically
for the Indian children. During the 1930's, the Penick Indian School operated with some funding from the Federal Office
of Indian Affairs. 
The Office of Indian Affairs proposed moving those Choctaws who were willing to move to Federal trust lands in Mississippi
so that their children could be educated with other Indian children at Pearl River, Mississippi. Although the proposal
was not carried out, it is clear that the Federal officials considered the Jena Choctaws to be eligible members of the
recognized Mississippi Choctaw tribe. 
When the Office of Indian Affairs provided Federal aid for tuition for the Choctaw students at the Penick Indian School,
it did not deal directly with the Indians but provided funds to state and local governments. In short, although briefly
providing some Federal services to individuals, the Federal Government had not recognized the Jena Choctaws as a
separate tribal entity. Because the Choctaws from rural Jena, Louisiana, were not removed to Oklahoma in 1903 or to
Mississippi in 1938, they retained their identity as a separate and distinct Indian group. 
The Jena Band of Choctaw Indians maintained their community through a high degree of in-group marriages. Before 1950,
85 percent of the marriages of members were to other members, and 50 percent of the existing marriages in 1959 were to
other members of the tribe. Perhaps supported by the in-group marriages and close family ties, the community continued
to speak the Choctaw language almost exclusively until the late 1930's and in many households until the late 1950's.

Although the Choctaw did not live in an exclusively Indian neighborhood, they did live in close proximity of one another
in the Trout Creek or Eden neighborhood from before 1880 until after World War II. They shopped in the local Whatley
stores where they paid for goods by skinning and tanning hides as well as by day labor and household help. They were identified
by the shopkeepers by their first name and the title ``Indian,'' rather than by a first and last name. They traveled
into town as a group on a Saturday night, where they were often met with harassment from the general population and in
particular from the town marshall. 
Maintenance of the White Rock Indian cemetery has been a central activity of Jena Choctaw throughout the history of
the group. Not only have they continually buried their dead in the cemetery, but the frequent clean-up days also became
a time for social contact between the various families. They brought food for a cook out, visited, discussed community
concerns, and even camped over night at the cemetery. Until the late 1930's, the tribe exercised traditional burial
practices, which involved a mourning period, cutting hair, and participating in a ``cry'' or funeral some six months
after the burial. The cemetery, which was located on land owned by the Whatley family, was deeded to the Jena Band of
Choctaw Indians in 1982. 
Aside from informal social interaction and continued maintenance of the White Rock Indian Cemetery, members of the
tribe shared economic resources and provided each other with services in the 1950's and 1960's. After incorporation,
the tribal council assumed a major role in providing for the members' needs. It has provided tutoring, school supplies,
clothing, and free haircuts for school children. To teach and maintain a sense of Indian identity, the tribe conducts
Choctaw language and history classes at the tribal center after school hours and during the summer. 
A traditional leader or chief led the group in burial practices, conducted marriages, and conducted the affairs of
the Indian community until the late 1930's. After World War II, when most of the membership started attending Christian
churches, the role of the traditional leader became less active than in previous generations; however, he continued
to organize community support of members in need and to arrange for maintenance of the Indian cemetery. During the
1950's and 1960's informal leaders also helped to meet the needs of the membership by furnishing goods and services
such as mid-wifing. After the death of the last traditional leader in 1968, there was a transition period between the
old-style of leadership and the formally organized entity. Since 1974, the Jena Choctaws have elected their leaders
and members have participated in the governance of the tribe. 





