 

To be eligible for an exemption from the provisions of 101.9 or 101.36, as discussed in more detail below,
the total number of units of a product sold in all of its forms (i.e., various sizes) must be less than the applicable
number of units for the exemption. For example, a firm may manufacture a beverage in 10-oz bottles, 12-oz cans, 16-oz
bottles, 1-liter (L) bottles, and 2L bottles. In determining whether the beverage would be eligible for an
exemption, the firm would total the number of units of each of the various sizes of containers sold in the United States,
and if the total number of units for all five types of packages is less than the applicable amount, e.g., less than 600,000
in the case of proposed 101.9(j)(18)(i)(A), then the beverage would be eligible for exemption. 

b. 

Food product.

 The agency is proposing to define in 101.9(j)(18)(vi)(B) and 101.36(f)(2)(vi)(B) the terms ``food
product'' and ``food product that is a dietary supplement of vitamins or minerals'' to mean ``food in any sized package
which is manufactured by a single manufacturer or which bears the same brand name, which bears the same statement of
identity, and which has similar preparation methods.'' This definition reflects section 403(q)(5)(E)(vi)(II)
of the act. Whether two units of a food are units of the same food product or are units of different food products for the
purposes of proposed 101.9(j)(18) and 101.36(f)(2) depends on how they compare under the factors listed
in this definition. If two units of a food are the same under each of these three factors, then they would represent two
units of the same food product. However, if the two units of a food differ in one or more respects under these three factors,
then they would represent one unit of two different food products. 

Although the terms ``single manufacturer'' and ``same brand name'' are self-explanatory, the agency believes that
it is useful to provide more detail on the terms ``statement of identity'' and ``similar method of preparation'' and
to provide some examples of the relationship between units and food products. In discussing the definition for statement
of identity, the Statement of Explanation for H.R. 2900 explains that by statement of identity, it intended that FDA
use the definition of ``statement of identity'' in its regulations under 101.3(b) (21 CFR 101.3(b)) (139 Congressional
Record H6358 (August 6, 1993)). Section 101.3(b) provides that: 

(b) Such statement of identity shall be in terms of: 

(1) The name now or hereafter specified in or required by any applicable Federal law or regulation; or, in the absence
thereof, 

(2) The common or usual name of the food; or, in the absence thereof, 

(3) An appropriately descriptive term, or when the nature of the food is obvious, a fanciful name commonly used by the
public for such food. 




Thus, under proposed 101.9(j)(18) and 101.36(f)(2), in determining whether a food is the same food
product as another food for determining the number of units sold, a firm should refer to 101.3(b) to determine
whether the two foods have the same statement of identity. 



The agency interprets the term ``similar preparation methods'' to extend to all aspects in the manufacture of the
food product, from the initial steps of determining the ingredients to be used, i.e., formulation, to interim treatment
steps of the ingredients, such as blanching, to all of the various steps used in the processing of the finished food
to be sold to the consumer. Because each of these steps may have an effect on the nutrient content of the finished food
product, units of foods that differ with respect to particular steps in their manufacture should be considered by
a firm to constitute units of different food products for the purpose of its determining the approximate number of
units of food products sold in the United States. 

The agency provides the following examples to describe the circumstances in which two units of a food would be two units
of the same food product, or, alternatively, one unit each of two different food products: A firm would count two units
of a food with the same statement of identity and similar methods of preparation as two units of the same product if they
both bear the same brand name even though they were manufactured by two different firms. A private label manufacturer
would have to count as units of the same food all production with the same statement of identity (presuming similar
method of preparation) even if it is packing the food products under the brand names of five different firms. On the
other hand, even if two units of food are made by the same firm (or have the same brand name) and have the same statement
of identity, they would not count as units of the same food product if there were differences in their method of preparation,
such that the nutrition profiles of the two products are different, (one ice cream product was made with nuts and the
other was not) or different manufacturing processes were used (e.g., one was canned while the other was frozen). 


