 

(iii) Any available alternative studies, if requested, which employ alternative models and variables.

(3) 

Experimental analysis. 

(i) A complete description of the design, the controlled conditions, and the implementation of controls; and

(ii) A complete description of the methods of observation and adjustment of observation.

(4) 

Studies involving statistical methodology. 

(i) The formula used for statistical estimates;

(ii) The standard error for each component;

(iii) The test statistics, the description of how the tests were conducted, related computations, computer programs
and all final results; and

(iv) Summarized descriptions of input data and, if requested, the input data itself.



251.49 

Transcript and record.



(a) An official reporter for the recording and transcribing of hearings shall be designated by the Librarian of Congress
from time to time. Anyone wishing to inspect the transcript of a hearing may do so at a location specified by the chairperson
of the Copyright Arbitration Royalty Panel conducting the hearing. Anyone wishing a copy of the transcript must purchase
it from the official reporter.

(b) The transcript of testimony and all exhibits, papers, and requests filed in the proceeding shall constitute the
official written record. Such record shall accompany the report of the determination of the CARP to the Librarian
of Congress required by 17 U.S.C. 802(e).

(c) The record, including the report of the determination of a CARP, shall be available at the Copyright Office for
public inspection and copying in accordance with 251.22.



251.50 

Rulings and orders.



In accordance with 5 U.S.C., subchapter II, a Copyright Arbitration Royalty Panel may issue rulings or orders, either
on its own motion or that of an interested party, necessary to the resolution of issues contained in the proceeding
before it; Provided, That no such rules or orders shall amend, supplement or supersede the rules and regulations contained
in this subchapter. See 251.7.



251.51 

Closing the hearing.



To close the record of hearing, the chairperson of a Copyright Arbitration Royalty Panel shall make an announcement
that the taking of testimony has concluded. In its discretion the Panel may close the record as of a future specified
date, and allow time for exhibits yet to be prepared to be admitted, provided that the parties to the proceeding stipulate
on the record that they waive the opportunity to cross-examine or present evidence with respect to such exhibits.
The record in any hearing that has been recessed may not be closed by the chairperson before the day on which the hearing
is to resume, except upon 10 days' notice to all parties.



251.52 

Proposed findings and conclusions.



(a) Any party to the proceeding may file proposed findings of fact and conclusions, briefs, or memoranda of law, or
may be directed by the chairperson to do so. Such filings, and any replies to them, shall take place at such time after
the record has been closed as the chairperson directs.

(b) Failure to file when directed to do so shall be considered a waiver of the right to participate further in the proceeding,
unless good cause for the failure is shown.

(c) Proposed findings of fact shall be numbered by paragraph and include all basic evidentiary facts developed on
the record used to support proposed conclusions, and shall contain appropriate citations to the record for each evidentiary
fact. Proposed conclusions shall be stated separately. Proposed findings submitted by someone other than an applicant
in a proceeding shall be restricted to those issues specifically affecting that person.



251.53 

Report to the Librarian of Congress.



(a) At any time after the filing of proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law specified in 251.52, and
not later than 180 days from publication in the 

Federal Register

 of notification of commencement of the proceeding, a Copyright Arbitration Royalty Panel shall deliver to the Librarian
of Congress a report incorporating its written determination. Such determination shall be accompanied by the written
record, and shall set forth the facts that the Panel found relevant to its determination.

(b) The determination of the Panel shall be certified by the chairperson and signed by all of the arbitrators. Any dissenting
opinions shall be certified and signed by the arbitrator so dissenting.

(c) At the same time as the submission to the Librarian of Congress, the chairperson of the Panel shall cause a copy of
the determination to be delivered to all parties participating in the proceeding.

(d) The Librarian of Congress shall make the report of the CARP and the accompanying record available for public inspection
and copying.



