 

Musculoskeletal 



The Musculoskeletal System Committee of the AMA recommends standards that would disqualify an applicant for medical
certification because of conditions such as quadriplegia, hemiplegia, hemiparesis, collagen disease, and vascular
disease. The FAA does not propose specifying these conditions as disqualifying since they are already covered by
current general medical standards (proposed 67.115, 67.215, and 67.315). 



Special Issuance of Medical Certificates 



The FAA has used special issuance (waiver) provisions of 67.19 (proposed 67.401) for many years to grant
airman medical certification to acceptable applicants who do not meet the published standards. Prior to 1982, except
for applicants for air traffic control tower operator certificates, this authority was not available for airmen
with histories of certain psychiatric, neurological, cardiac, or endocrine conditions, and exemptions from the
regulations were required. Beginning in May 1982, however, airmen with a history or clinical diagnosis of any medical
condition could be granted discretionary medical certification through the special issuance provisions if it could
be determined that, notwithstanding the person's failure to meet the applicable medical standard, airman duties
could be performed, with appropriate limitations or conditions, without endangering public safety. Through special
issuance provisions, many airmen have returned to productive aviation careers and others to private flying after
recovery and rehabilitation from serious medical conditions without adverse impact on public safety. 

Consideration for the granting of a special issuance can be initiated in different ways. Currently, the FAA will often
consider an individual for a special issuance who does not meet the medical standards under part 67 without a formal
request to the agency from the individual. In some cases an individual who does not meet the medical standards under
part 67 will make a written request to the Federal Air Surgeon or to his or her authorized representative to be considered
for a grant of a special issuance. 

Under current practice, a special issuance letter is issued advising an airman of the FAA's decision to grant the special
issuance of a medical certificate. The letter describes the provisions and conditions of a special issuance of medical
certification. Based on the letter and on the individual being otherwise eligible, the agency or examiner issues
a medical certificate to the individual. These procedures apply for a new application and for an application for recertification.


Current 67.19 provides that the Federal Air Surgeon may limit the duration of a medical certificate issued
under that section, condition the continued effect of a medical certificate on the results of subsequent medical
tests, examinations, or evaluations, impose any operational limitation needed for safety, or condition the continued
effect of a second- or third-class medical certificate on compliance with a statement of functional limitations
issued to the person in coordination with the Director of Flight Standards or the Director's designee. It is implicit
in this section that in the interests of public safety a finding of adverse change in the medical condition of the holder
would result in termination of the validity of the medical certificate. 

The validity of the special issuance letter, however, does not lapse until the FAA takes some affirmative action to
modify or terminate it. Similarly, once a medical certificate is issued pursuant to the special issuance provisions,
even if the FAA terminates the special issuance letter, it may be considered that the medical certificate itself does
not lapse until the original date of expiration, unless it is sooner suspended or revoked under the provisions of section
609 of the Federal Aviation Act. Long-standing agency practice in the case of adverse medical change has been to send
the holder a letter terminating the validity of the special issuance of medical certification and requesting the
return of any medical certificates held. 



