 

After consideration of these comments, ASCS decided to proceed with the implementation of fees on USWA licensed cotton
warehousemen. To cancel or delay such fees would not be in accordance with the statutory requirements to collect fees
for services. Since the USWA licensing authority has no control over, or influence on, State regulatory agencies
or CCC, it is not feasible to announce all such fees at the same time. The CCC contractual year is not the same as the USDA
fiscal year. The State authority has no connection with the USWA programs. 



Delaying Effective Date of USWA Fee Charges 


A total of 10 comments were received regarding the effective date. Nine commenters feel that all cotton warehouses,
including state licensed and CCC warehousemen, should be treated equitably in the timing of fee announcements. One
comment, from a grain association, fully supports the proposal for cotton warehouses to pay their fair share of the
costs of the federal warehouse system. 
After consideration, ASCS decided it could not change the manner in which the initial annual fees would be assessed
for cotton warehouses. 


Maximum Limit on Fees 


A total of 11 comments were received regarding caps on fees. Nine commenters state that they oppose the 160,000 cap
on charges because some warehouses are larger, and that the cap would be discriminatory to the smaller capacity warehouses.
One comment opposes the cap on capacity because there are additional expenses inspecting large warehouses and they
should be charged accordingly. One comment also opposes the cap and feels that fees should be escalated without regard
to an arbitrary cap. 

After consideration of these comments, ASCS decided to remove the cap of 160,000 bales of capacity for cotton warehouses
by adding an incremental increase with no cap. 


Grain 


Fee Increases 


A total of five comments were received regarding the fee increase. All five commenters oppose the increase at this
time and recommend deferring it until ASCS takes steps to streamline the program and cut costs. 
After consideration of these comments, ASCS decided to go ahead with increases as proposed. To cancel or delay this
increase would result in a major decrease in the services provided, and therefore the integrity of the USWA. Future
Fee Announcements 
A total of four comments were received regarding future fee announcements. All four commenters oppose changing the
fee setting process and eliminating advance public notice and comment. 
These comments were considered, however, it was determined that the proposed system is necessary and will be implemented.
The regulatory process of writing, clearing, and publishing proposed and final rules in the 

Federal Register

 takes, on the average, nine to twelve months. By removing the fees from the regulatory process, ASCS is able to respond
in a timely manner and make necessary fee adjustments. 










