 

Functions


The National Bioethics Advisory Commission shall advise, consult with, and make recommendations to the National
Science and Technology Council and other appropriate entities, and also make their advice and recommendations available
to the public. The Commission's purview includes the appropriateness of departmental, agency, or other governmental
programs, policies, assignments, missions, guidelines, and regulations as they relate to bioethical issues arising
from research on human biology and behavior, and applications of that research. The Commission shall identify broad,
overarching principles to govern the ethical conduct of research, citing individual projects only as illustrations
for such principles. The Commission shall not be responsible for the review and approval of individual projects.
As a first priority, the Commission will direct its attention to consideration of:



A. Issues in the management and use of genetic information; and
B. Protection of the rights and welfare of research subjects.



In receiving and responding to requests for advice and recommendations from the National Science and Technology
Council, the Commission shall consider four criteria in establishing priority for its activities:



A. The public health or public policy urgency of the bioethical issue.
B. The relation of the bioethical issue to the goals for Federal investment in science and technology.
C. The absence of another body able to fruitfully deliberate on the bioethical issue.
D. The extent of interest in the issue across the government. (The Commission ordinarily will not deliberate on a bioethical
issue of interest to just one department or agency.)



The Commission also shall have the authority to identify bioethical issues, on its own behalf, for deliberation.
The Commission will accept suggestions of issues for consideration from Federal agencies, Congress and the public.
The Commission's decision to deliberate on a specific topic shall be made in consultation with the National Science
and Technology Council. In all such instances, the four stated criteria for establishing priority shall pertain.


Structure


The National Bioethics Advisory Commission shall consist of not more than 15 members, including the Chairperson.
Appointments shall be made by the President, who shall select from knowledgeable non-Government experts and community
representatives with special qualifications and competence to deal effectively with bioethical issues of concern
to the participating departments and agencies. At least one member shall be selected from each of the following categories
of primary expertise: (i) bioethics/theology; (ii) social/behavioral science; (iii) law; (iv) medicine/allied
health professions; and (v) biological research. At least three members shall be selected from the general public,
bringing to the Commission expertise other than that listed. The membership shall be approximately evenly balanced
between scientists and non-scientists.
Members shall be appointed for overlapping four-year terms. Initially, members will be appointed for two-, three-
or four-year terms. Terms of more than two years are contingent upon renewal of the National Bioethics Advisory Commission
by appropriate action prior to its termination. The Chairperson shall be appointed by the President. The term of office
for the Chairperson shall be two years, renewable by appropriate action of the President.
If a vacancy occurs on the Commission, the President shall make an appointment to fulfill the term. Any member appointed
to fill a vacancy occurring prior to expiration of the term for which his or her predecessor was appointed shall serve
for the remainder of such term. Members may serve after the expiration of their terms until their successors have taken
office.
The Commission may conduct inquiries, hold hearings and establish subcommittees, as necessary.


