 

Project Themes and Objectives


1. Introduce African judges to the American legal system and the principles upon which it is based, particularly the
rule of law and the independence of the judiciary;
2. Provide a formal training component for the dual purpose of benefiting the individual visiting judges and enabling
them to develop improved in-service training programs for colleagues in their home countries;
3. Discuss constitutional issues including due process, rules of evidence, equal protection and criminal procedure;
4. Demonstrate various U.S. models for enhancing judicial efficiency, including caseload management and trial
conduct techniques and alternative dispute resolution;
5. Promote long-term linkages between African and U.S. court systems to foster dialogue on issues of common concern
and to enhance the institutional capabilities of the African judiciaries;
6. Develop and/or purchase specialized support materials for participating institutions in each of the target countries.
Such materials might include but are not limited to legal reference and research books, training videos, textbooks
or other instructional materials. Grant monies of $30,000 must be used for this purpose.


Participants


The African participants will be judges selected through coordination among U.S. Information Service personnel
in the target countries, USIA, and the African partner institutions. All participants must have strong English-language
skills.
The U.S. consultants who will travel to Africa will be selected by the grantee institution in consultation with USIA.
The grantee should provide the names of American participants and brief, relevant biographical data. American participants
should be selected on the basis of their experience and expertise in the thematic field. Experience in communicating
to foreign audiences and general knowledge of Africa and of the countries involved in the project are highly desirable.


Recommended Program Structure


The following suggestions should not serve as a blueprint, but as a stimulus for the development of an original program
design.


Phase One: 

The program could begin with a 34 week U.S. study tour for a group of approximately 1012 judges representing
the target countries. The study tour should allow the African jurists to visit several locations in the U.S. and should
include cultural activities as well as the following professional components:



_A series of field visits to familiarize the visiting jurists with the operations of courts and other legal institutions
such as bar associations, law schools, and legal training organizations;
_An intensive visit of several days duration to a state court system which is of a scale similar to the national courts
of the target countries;
_Formal judicial training to address the program themes in both the constitutional and court administration areas;
_A concluding session to evaluate the study tour, make plans for the follow-up visit of American specialists to Africa,
and discuss needs for the specialized support materials to be provided with grant funds.





Phase Two: 

One or more American judges, judicial training specialists and/or experienced court administrators would visit
each of the target countries for consultations, workshops or other activities with local counterparts. Ideally,
the Americans would work closely with Africans who participated in Phase One to build on that earlier phase. For example,
they might collaborate to train and to plan professional development programs for many others. One approach might
be for the Americans and their Phase One African partners to conduct week-long workshops for 1020 African judges
on selected constitutional or court management issues; another approach might be to convene 1020 African
judges to begin designing a country-specific professional development program of coursework and practical experience
and technical progress. In planning these follow-up activities, the grantee should work closely with the African
participants in the U.S. study tour and with U.S. Information Service personnel in Africa to ensure that the activities
are tailored to meet the needs of the African countries.


