 

This SNPRM focuses on two issues raised in the NPRM and addressed by the commenters: (1) The implementation schedule
and (2) the wheels to be controlled by an antilock brake system. 



Implementation Schedule 



In the NPRM, NHTSA stated that its goal is to achieve significant improvements in braking performance at a reasonable
cost to manufacturers and consumers. Based on the available information, NHTSA decided to propose the following
implementation schedule:




Truck Tractors
2 years after final rule (1996) 
Trailers, including converter dollies
3 years after final rule (1997) 
Single unit trucks
4 years after final rule (1998) 
Buses
5 years after final rule (1999)




NHTSA believed that this implementation schedule is appropriate given the current state of ABS technology. The agency
believed that it would provide the industry, ABS manufacturers, and maintenance personnel sufficient leadtime
to prepare for the changes that will be required to accommodate the new technology. 

With respect to truck tractors, NHTSA stated that it was confident that ABS for this type of vehicle would be fully developed,
performance tested, and field tested within two years after the final rule since ABS manufacturers have focused their
initial efforts on developing ABS for truck tractors. The agency noted that ABS for truck tractors is currently available
on a commercial basis in this country and throughout Europe. Nevertheless, a two year leadtime appeared to be necessary
to ensure a smooth transition before the agency mandated this technology given the technical complexities and costs
associated with ABS. 

With respect to trailers, NHTSA noted that ABS manufacturers are currently marketing ABS for these vehicles. NHTSA
stated that it expected its fleet evaluation on 50 ABS-equipped trailers to be completed in 1993. (This evaluation,
titled ``An In-Service Evaluation of the Performance, Reliability, Maintainability, and Durability of Antilock
Braking Systems (ABSs) for Semitrailers'' has been completed and is available for review in the agency's public docket
room. The agency welcomes comments about the report.) 

With respect to single-unit trucks and buses, NHTSA proposed leadtime of four years and five years, respectively,
after the final rule's publication, resulting in an effective date in 1998 and 1999. NHTSA proposed effective dates
that it believed would give the industry sufficient leadtime to develop, field test, and performance test ABS on straight
trucks and buses. The agency also explained that ABS for such vehicles is still being developed, so these leadtimes
appeared to be necessary to ensure that the technology would be reliable when it is required. 

The American Automobile Manufacturers Association (AAMA), which represents the eight major domestic truck manufacturers,

2

 recommended that the effective dates for the proposed heavy vehicle stability and control requirements and the previously
proposed stopping distance requirements be ``synchronized for the various vehicle types.'' (58 FR 11009, February
23, 1993).

3

 




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


2

</FOOTNAME>
 Chrysler, Ford, Freightliner, General Motors, Mack, Navistar, PACCAR, and Volvo-GM. 


</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


3

</FOOTNAME>
 The February NPRM proposed that the stopping distance requirements take effect two years after the final rule for
all applicable vehicles. 


</FOOTNOTE>


AAMA recommended that the agency adopt the following effective dates for both the stability and control requirements
and the stopping distance requirements, assuming that the two rules are issued before September 1994:





Truck tractors
2 years after final rule (1996) 

Trailers, including converter dollies
3 years after final rule (1997) 

Air-braked single unit trucks and buses
3 years after final rule (1997) 

Hydraulic-braked single unit trucks and buses
4 years after final rule (1998)





Similarly, manufacturers of brake components and antilock brake systems recommended that the implementation schedule
for the lateral stability and control requirements be accelerated. Rockwell requested that the leadtime for air-braked
single unit trucks and buses be shortened to three years after the final rule. The Heavy Duty Brake Manufacturers Council
requested that the effective dates of the stopping distance rulemaking and the stability rulemaking be ``made coincident
to allow the industry to maximize its efforts by effectively utilizing its limited resources.'' 



