 

Review Process



USIA will acknowledge receipt of all proposals and will review them for technical eligibility. Proposals will be
deemed ineligible if they do not fully adhere to the guidelines established herein and in the application packet.
Eligible proposals will be forwarded to panels of USIA officers for advisory review. All eligible proposals will
also be reviewed by the appropriate geographic area office, and the USIA budget and contracts offices. Proposals
may also be reviewed by the Agency's Office of General Counsel. Funding decisions are at the discretion of the Associate
Director for Educational and Cultural Affairs. Final technical authority for grant awards resides with USIA's contracting
officer.



Review Criteria



Technically eligible applications will be competitively reviewed according to the following criteria:

a. 

Quality of program plan:

 Proposals should exhibit a thorough knowledge and understanding of the needs of students from Mexico and Central
America and exhibit originality, substance, and rigor.

b. 

Program planning:

 Proposals must include a detailed agenda and relevant workplan of program activities. The agenda should adhere to
the program overview and guidelines described above.

c. 

Ability to achieve program objectives/institutional capacity:

 Proposed personnel and institutional resources should be adequate and appropriate to achieve the program goals
and adhere to the guidelines described above. The applicant should demonstrate an ability to recruit and maintain
a professional staff to successfully accomplish the goals of the program.

d. 

Multiplier effect/impact:

 Program activities should be designed to foster long-term mutual understanding between citizens of the United States
and Central America and Mexico.

e. 

Institution's track record/ability:

 Proposals should demonstrate a track record of successful programs, including responsible fiscal management and
full compliance with all reporting requirements for Agency grants. The Agency will consider the past performance
of prior grantees and the demonstrated potential of new applicants.

f. 

Evaluation plan:

 Proposals should provide a plan for evaluation by the grantee institution, including periodic progress reports.

g. 

Cost-effectiveness:

 The overhead and administrative components of grants, as well as salaries and honoraria, should be kept as low as possible.
All other items should be necessary and appropriate.

h. 

Cost-sharing:

 Proposals should maximize cost-sharing through other private sector support as well as institutional direct-funding
contributions. Evidence of such cost sharing should be detailed in the proposal.



Notice



The terms and conditions published in the RFP are binding and may not be modified by any USIA representative. Explanatory
information provided by the Agency that contradicts published language will not be binding. Issuance of the RFP does
not constitute an award commitment on the part of the Government. Final awards cannot be made until funds have been
fully appropriated by Congress, and allocated and committed through internal USIA procedures.



Notification



All applicants will be notified of the results of the review process on or about September 15, 1994. Funded proposals
will be subject to periodic reporting and evaluation requirements.




Dated: June 6, 1994.



<SIGNER>
John P. Loiello,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Associate Director, Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9414165 Filed 6994; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 823003M
</BILLING>

