 

Southern California Edison Company, et al., Docket No. 50206, San Onofre 
Nuclear Generating Station, Unit No. 1, San Diego County, California 




Date of amendment request:

 April 18, 1994. 


Description of amendment request:

 The proposed amendment will revise 
Sections 2.C and 2.D of the San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station, Unit 1 
(SONGS 1) Operating License. Section 2.C will be revised to modify or 
delete several licensing conditions which either no longer apply or require 
revision to apply to SONGS 1 in its permanently shutdown and defueled 
condition. Section 2.D will be revised to exempt Fire Protection reporting 
from the reporting requirements of Section 2.D. 


Basis for proposed no significant hazards consideration determination:

 As 
required by 10 CFR 50.91(a), the licensee has provided its analysis of the 
issue of no significant hazards consideration, which is presented below:

 

1. Will operation of the facility according to this proposed change 
involve a significant increase in the probability or consequences 
of an accident previously evaluated? 
No. SONGS 1 has been permanently shut down and all fuel has been 
taken out of the reactor and stored in the SONGS 1 spent fuel 
pool. The proposed change will not modify any of the existing 
plant configurations, controls, procedures, or technical 
specification requirements necessary to assure the integrity and 
safe operation of the spent fuel pool. 
The technical basis for deleting the four license conditions, 
which relate to Integrated Implementation Schedule, Cycle 11 
Thermal Shield Monitoring Program, Plant Modification to 
Eliminate Single Failure Susceptibility of Vital Bus Automatic 
Transfer Function, and the NRC's Confirmatory Order of January 2, 
1990, is that these license conditions were intended to assure 
the continued safe operation of SONGS 1 as a power producing 
plant. With the permanent shutdown of SONGS 1 and the issuance 
of its Permanently Defueled Technical Specifications (PDTS) on 
December 28, 1993, the plant modifications and safety programs 
associated with the four license conditions are no longer 
necessary. 
The technical basis for modifying the license condition on fuel 
transshipment is that this license condition was intended to 
ensure the safety of the operating plant by putting restrictions 
on operation of the turbine building gantry crane. These 
restrictions are no longer necessary, in light of the permanent 
shutdown of SONGS 1. 
The technical basis for modifying the license condition on 
physical protection is that this is necessary to update the 
information contained in the license condition. 
The technical basis for exempting the Fire Protection Program 
from the reporting requirements of Section 2.D is that the 
applicable requirements are adequately covered in 10 CFR 50.72 
and 50.73, as stated in Generic Letters 8610 and 8812. 
2. Will operation of the facility according to this proposed change 
create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident 
from any accident previously evaluated? 
No. No safety-related equipment will be impacted by this 
proposed change. Thus, there is no credible likelihood that a 
new or different kind of accident from any accident previously 
evaluated would occur as a result of this proposed change. 
3. Will operation of the facility according to this proposed change 
involve a significant reduction in a margin of safety? 
No. As explained earlier, the plant modifications and safety 
programs associated with the license conditions being deleted are 
no longer necessary. The safety-related equipment concerns that 
led to restrictions on operation of the turbine building gantry 
crane no longer exist. The modification to the license condition 
on physical protection will update the information contained in 
this license condition. 
The revision to Section 2.D will make the reporting requirements 
regarding deficiencies in the Fire Protection Program consistent 
with the NRC's generic guidance on this subject. 
Thus operation of the facility in accordance with this proposed 
change will not significantly reduce a margin of safety.

 

The NRC staff has reviewed the analysis of the licensee and, based on 
this review, it appears that the three standards of 50.92(c) are satisfied. 
Therefore, the NRC staff proposes to determine that the amendment request 
involves no significant hazards consideration. 


Local Public Document Room location:

 Main Library, University of 
California, P.O. Box 19557, Irvine, California 92713. 





