 

Prior to 1950, California red-legged frogs were used sporadically 
for research in high schools and universities. At present, the 
California red-legged frog is sold commercially from suppliers located 
outside California in the pet trade. Because the State of California 
prohibits possession of wild California red-legged frogs, frogs sold in 
the pet trade presumably are reared in captivity (M. Jennings, pers. 
comm., 1993). However, California red-legged frogs occur in isolated 
and fragmented wetland habitat on private property and are at risk from 
vandalism. 

C. 

Disease or predation

. There have been no documented instances 
of disease adversely affecting the California red-legged frog. 

Few data are available on the effect of native predators on the 
California red-legged frog. Bitterns (

Botaurus lentiginosus

) and black-
crowned night herons (

Nycticorax nycticorax

) are likely predators of 
adult frogs (Jennings and Hayes 1990). Juvenile California red-legged 
frogs, which are more active diurnally and less wary than adults, may be 
more susceptible to predation by diurnal predators, such as the great 
blue heron (

Ardea herodias

) and several species of garter snakes 
(

Thamnophis

 sp.) (Fitch 1940, Fox 1952), including the endangered San 
Francisco garter snake (

Thamnophis sirtalis tetrataenia

) (Barry 1978, 
Wharton et al. 1986). Recent post-metamorphs also may be particularly vulnerable to predation by garter snakes,
as was found in other species 
of ranid frogs by Arnold and Wassersug (1978). 

Introduced predators of particular concern are the bullfrog, red 
swamp crayfish (

Procambarus clarkii

), signal crayfish (

Pacifastacus

 

leniusculus

), and several species of fish, including bass (

Micropterus

 spp.), catfish (

Ictalurus

 spp.), sunfish (

Lepomis

 spp.), and mosquitofish (

Gambusia affinis

) (Moyle 1973; Hayes and Jennings 1986, 
1988). All species were introduced into California in the late 1800s 
and early 1900s, and through range expansions, reintroductions, and 
transplants have become established throughout most of the state (Riegel 
1959, Bury and Luckenbach 1976, Moyle 1976). 

Several researchers in central California have noted the decline 
and eventual disappearance of California red-legged frogs once bullfrogs 
become established at the same site (L. Hunt, 

in litt

, 1993; S. Barry, 


in litt

., 1992; S. Sweet, 

in litt

., 1993). Moyle (1973) attributed the disappearance of California red-legged frogs from the San Joaquin Valley 
and Sierran foothill region primarily to a combination of bullfrog 
predation and competition. All sites in the Sierra Nevada mountains 
that supported California red-legged frogs in the 1970s now are 
inhabited by bullfrogs (M. Jennings, 

in litt

., 1993). Over 65 percent 
of the streams or drainages currently known to support California red-
legged frogs also are inhabited by bullfrogs, either in association with 
California red-legged frogs or in other portions of the drainage. Over 
the last decade, Jennings (

in litt

., 1993) has observed bullfrogs moving 
upstream and/or downstream into formerly isolated California red-legged 
frog habitat in a number of drainages, including streams in Ventura, 
Santa Barbara, San Luis Obispo, Merced, Stanislaus, and San Mateo 
Counties. Game fish are introduced into drainages by stocking of 
reservoirs and ponds, dispersal and colonization, conveyance of project 
water from other streams inhabited by these exotics, and releases by 
individuals. At The Nature Conservancy Santa Rosa Plateau Reserve in 
Riverside County (the only site south of the Santa Clara River 
supporting California red-legged frogs), a docent found a school teacher 
attempting to introduce bullfrog tadpoles into the preserve in the 1980s 
(M. Jennings, 

in litt

., 1993). Once established, it is virtually 
impossible to eliminate bullfrogs (M. Jennings, 

in litt

., 1993; Cecil 
Schwalbe, National Park Service, Tuscon, Arizona, pers. comm., 1993; 
Frank Slavens, Woodland Park Zoological Gardens, Seattle, Washington, 
pers. comm., 1993). 

Bullfrogs prey on California red-legged frogs (Twedt 1993; S. 
Sweet, 

in litt

., 1993) and other amphibians and aquatic reptiles 
(Schwalbe and Rosen 1988). Twedt (1993) documented 4 juvenile red-
legged frogs in the contents of a total of 22 adult bullfrog stomachs. 
He also found a subadult bullfrog in one of the adult bullfrog stomachs; 
this prey item was between the size of an adult male (approximately 55 
millimeters (2 inches)) and adult female (approximately 70 millimeters 
(3 inches)) red-legged frog, indicating that bullfrogs also undoubtedly 
prey on adult red-legged frogs. Bullfrogs may have a competitive 
advantage over red-legged frogs because of their (1) larger size, (2) 
generalized food habits (Bury and Whelan 1984), (3) extended breeding 
season (Storer 1933), which allows for production of two clutches of 
eggs during a breeding season (Emlen 1977), (4) apparent olfactory 
rejection of larvae by predatory fish (Kruse and Francis 1977), and (5) 
diminished activity periods (Woodward 1983), which also reduces their 
exposure to predators. Bullfrogs also interfere with red-legged frog 
reproduction. Several researchers have noted red-legged frogs in 
amplexus (mounted on) with bullfrogs (Jennings and Hayes 1990; Twedt 
1993; M. Jennings, 

in litt

., 1993; Stebbins 

in litt

., 1993). However, the extent to which bullfrog predation, competition, and reproductive 
interference adversely affects red-legged frogs has not been studied in 
the field (Hayes and Jennings 1986). Habitat alterations, including 
removal of riparian or aquatic vegetation, reduced stream flows, and 
sedimentation of pools, often provide conditions detrimental to red-
legged frogs but favorable to bullfrogs (Hayes and Jennings 1986; 
Jennings, pers. comm., 1993). 






