 

E. Possible Effects of Consumption of Animal Feeds Containing APH(3
&rsquo;)II on Animals and Their Gut Microflora 


One comment argued that empirical evidence should be gathered to assess the potential effects of modified foods on
animals and their gut microflora. 
The agency is aware of no information that APH(3
&rsquo;)II would affect animals or their gut microflora any differently than any other protein in the diet, nor did
the comment provide such information. The comment may have been referring to the theoretical potential for APH(3
&rsquo;)II in animal feed to affect efficacy of neomycin administered to animals, and the theoretical potential
for the gut microflora to take up the 

kan



r

 gene and become resistant to neomycin. As discussed above, the likelihood of transfer of the 

kan



r

 gene to gut microflora of food animals is extremely remote. Also, as discussed above, FDA has evaluated the study presented
by Calgene addressing the possibility of inactivation of neomycin by APH(3
&rsquo;)II in animal feed and has concluded that the therapeutic efficacy of neomycin in animals would not be affected
by consumption of feed containing transgenic cottonseed and rapeseed modified through the use of the 

kan



r

 gene. 



F. Labeling of Foods Containing the Kan

r

 Gene and APH(3
&rsquo;)II 




One comment asserted that APH(3
&rsquo;)II should be labeled as an ingredient. The comment further stated that, if FDA exempted APH(3
&rsquo;)II from ingredient labeling requirements (based on its classification as a processing aid that is present
at insignificant levels in a finished food and has no technical or functional effect in that food), FDA should require
special labeling if the ingestion of food containing APH(3
&rsquo;)II could compromise the clinical efficacy of orally administered kanamycin or neomycin. 
FDA's authority over food labeling is based on section 403 of the act (21 U.S.C. 343). Section 403(i) of the act requires
that, in the case of foods fabricated from two or more ingredients, a food product bear on the label the common or usual
name of each ingredient, unless compliance with the requirement for labeling is impracticable or results in deception
or unfair competition. FDA considers an ``ingredient'' to be a substance used to fabricate (i.e., manufacture or
produce) a food. FDA does not consider those substances that are inherent components of food to be ingredients that
must be disclosed in the food's label. 
A genetic substance introduced into a plant by breeding becomes an inherent part of the plant as well as of all foods
derived from the plant. Consistent with FDA's general 
approach on ingredient labeling, the agency has not treated 
as an ingredient a new constituent of a plant introduced by 
breeding, regardless of the method used to develop the new plant variety. The comment provides no basis for FDA to deviate
from its current practice in the case of APH(3
&rsquo;)II.

8

 Accordingly, FDA has determined that neither the 

kan



r

 gene nor APH(3
&rsquo;)II is an ingredient that, under section 403(i) of the act, must be individually identified in labels of foods
containing them. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


8

</FOOTNAME>
Furthermore, APH(3
&rsquo;)II satisfies the definition of ``processing aid'' in 101.100(a)(3)(ii)(

c

) (21 CFR 101.100(a)(3)(ii)(

c

)) and will be regulated as such by this final rule. As the comment acknowledges, FDA's labeling regulations exempt
processing aids like APH(3
&rsquo;)II from the labeling requirements of section 403(i)(2) of the act. Thus, even if APH(3
&rsquo;)II were properly considered an ingredient, its presence in a food would not be required to be disclosed in
the food's labeling. 
</FOOTNOTE>


FDA has also determined that the presence of APH(3
&rsquo;)II is not a material fact that must be disclosed in the labeling of foods that contain the enzyme. Under section
403(a)(1) of the act (21 U.S.C. 343(a)(1)), a food is misbranded if its labeling is false or misleading. Under section
201(n) of the act (21 U.S.C. 321(n)), labeling is misleading if it fails to reveal all facts that are ``***
material with respect to consequences which may result from the use of the article ***.'' As discussed
at length above, FDA has determined that the ingestion of food containing APH(3
&rsquo;)II will not compromise the clinical efficacy of orally administered kanamycin or neomycin. Because the
consequences alleged in the comment_compromise of clinical efficacy_will not occur, the presence of APH(3
&rsquo;)II is not a material fact requiring disclosure. 


V. Conclusions 


FDA has evaluated data in the petition and other relevant material and concludes that the proposed use of APH(3
&rsquo;)II as a processing aid in the development of new varieties of tomato, oilseed rape, and cotton is safe, and
that 21 CFR parts 173 and 573 should be amended as set forth below. 


VI. Inspection of Documents 


In accordance with 171.1(h) and 571.1(h) (21 CFR 171.1(h) and 571.1(h)), the petition and the documents
that FDA considered and relied upon in reaching its decision to approve the petition are available for inspection
at the Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition by appointment with the information contact person listed above.
As provided in 21 CFR 171.1(h) and 571.1(h), the agency will delete from the documents any materials that are not available
for public disclosure before making the documents available for inspection. 




