 

(e) 

Per visit rates.



(1) As authorized by 10 U.S.C. 1095(f)(2), the computation of reasonable costs for purposes of collections for most
outpatient services shall be based on a per visit rate for a clinical specialty or subspecialty. The per visit charge
shall be equal to the outpatient full reimbursement rate for that clinical specialty or subspecialty and includes
all routine ancillary services. A separate charge will be calculated for cases that are considered same day/ambulatory
surgeries. These rates shall be updated and published annually. As with inpatient billing categories, clinical
groups representing selected board certified specialties/subspecialties widely accepted by graduate medical
accrediting organizations such as the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) or the American
Board of Medical Specialties will be used for ambulatory billing categories. Related clinical groups may be combined
for purposes of billing categories.

(2) The following clinical reimbursement categories are representative, but not all-inclusive of the billing category
clinical groups referred to in paragraph (e)(1) of this section: Internal Medicine, Allergy, Cardiology, Diabetic,
Endocrinology, Gastroenterology, Hematology, Hypertension, Nephrology, Neurology, Nutrition, Oncology, Pulmonary
Disease, Rheumatology, Dermatology, Infectious Disease, Physical Medicine, General Surgery, Cardiovascular
and Thoracic Surgery, Neurosurgery, Ophthalmology, Organ Transplant, Otolaryngology, Plastic Surgery, Proctology,
Urology, Pediatric Surgery, Family Planning, Obstetrics, Gynecology, Pediatrics, Adolescent Pediatrics, Well
Baby, Orthopaedics, Cast, Orthotic Laboratory, Hand Surgery, Podiatry, Psychiatry, Psychology, Child Guidance,
Mental Health, Social Work, Substance Abuse Rehabilitation, Family Practice, and Occupational and Physical Therapy.



* * * * *



(g) 

Special rule for services ordered and paid for by a facility of the Uniformed Services but provided by another provider.

 In cases where a facility of the Uniformed Services purchases ancillary services or procedures, from a source other
than a Uniformed Services facility, the cost of the purchased services will be added to the standard rate. Examples
of ancillary services and other procedures covered by this special rule include (but are not limited to): laboratory,
radiology, pharmacy, pulmonary function, cardiac catheterization, hemodialysis, hyperbaric medicine, electrocardiography,
electroencephalography, electroneuromyography, pulmonary function, inhalation and respiratory therapy and
physical therapy services.

(h) 

Special rule for certain ancillary services ordered by outside providers and provided by a facility of the Uniformed
Services.

 If a Uniformed Services facility provides certain ancillary services, prescription drugs or other procedures based
on a request from a source other than a Uniformed Services facility and are not incident to any outpatient visit or inpatient
services, the reasonable cost will not be based on the usual per diem or per visit rate. Rather, a separate standard
rate shall be established based on the cost of the particular high-cost service, drug, or procedure provided. This
special rule applies only to services, drugs or procedures having a cost of at least $60. The reasonable cost for the
services, drugs or procedures to which this special rule applies shall be calculated and published annually.

(i) 

Miscellaneous health care services.

 Some outpatient services are provided which may not traditionally be provided in hospitals or which are not traditional
clinical specialties or subspecialties. This includes, but is not limited to, land ambulance service, air ambulance
service, hyperbaric treatments, dental care services and immunizations.

(1) The charge for ambulance services shall be based on the full costs of operating the ambulance service.

(2) For hyperbaric treatments (such as high pressure oxygenation treatments, burn treatments and decompression
treatments in response to diving incidents), charges will be based on the full operating costs of the hyperbaric treatment
services.

(3) Charges for dental services (including oral diagnosis and prevention, periodontics, prosthodontics (fixed
and removable), implantology, oral surgery, orthodontics, pediatric dentistry and endodontics) will be based
on a full cost of the dental services.

(4) The charge for immunizations, allergin extracts, allergic condition tests, and the administration of certain
medications when these services are provided in a separate immunizations or shot clinic, will be based on the average
full cost of these services, exclusive of any costs considered for purposes of any outpatient visit. A separate charge
shall be made for each immunization, injection or medication administered.



* * * * *



(k) 

Special rule for partnership program providers.

 In cases in which the professional provider services are provided under the Partnership Program (or similar program
operated under the authority of 10 U.S.C. 1096), the professional charges component of the total standard rate will
be deleted, as applicable, from the claim for the facility of the Uniformed Services. The third party payer will receive
a claim for professional services directly from the individual healthcare provider, who is not an employee or agent
of the Department of Defense. Such claims are not covered by 10 U.S.C. 1095 or this part, but are governed by statutory
and regulatory requirements of the CHAMPUS program (see 32 CFR part 199). The same is true for the professional services
provided on an outpatient basis under the Partnership Program.

(l) 

Alternative determination of reasonable costs.

 Any third party payer that can satisfactorily demonstrate a prevailing rate of payment in the same geographic area
for the same or similar aggregate groups of services that is less than the standard rate (or other amount as determined
under paragraphs (f) through (k) of this section) of the facility of the Uniformed Services may, with the agreement
of the facility of the Uniformed Services (or other authorized representatives of the United States), limit payments
under 10 U.S.C. 1095 to that prevailing rate for that aggregate category of services. The determination of the third
party payer's prevailing rate shall be based on a review of valid contractual arrangements with other facilities
or providers constituting a majority of the services for which payment is made under the third party payer's plan.
This paragraph does not apply to cases covered by 220.11.



* * * * *



3. Section 220.10 is amended by revising paragraph (c)(1)(ii), as follows:



220.10


Special rules for Medicare supplement plans.



* * * * * 





(c) ***

(1) ***

(ii) Include adjustments, as appropriate, to identify major components of the all inclusive per diem or per visit
rates for which Medicare has special rules.



* * * * *



<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9423465 Filed 92394; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 500004M
</BILLING>





