 

(1) Determine if the official listed on the petition is the appropriate contact. If not, show the name, telephone number
and FAX number (if available) of the appropriate contact person on the face of the petition.

(2) Confirm the product description reported on the petition. Accuracy is critical to DOL in determining whether
imports of like or directly competitive products have increased.

(3) Ask the company official about total and partial worker separations at the firm during the past 12 months. If there
were separations, ascertain if it was because of increased company imports from Mexico or Canada, an actual or threatened
shift of production to either country, or lost sales to customers to purchase from firms importing from Mexico or Canada.

(4) Alert company official that data request forms will be sent by FAX (if available) or by mail, and obtain the official's
cooperation to supply the requested information within 5 days of petition receipt. If the company official fails
to cooperate, inform the company of subpoena authority to obtain the requested data.

If the company continues to refuse to supply the data, the State must notify the company in writing of its subpoena authority
and determine if the data is to be furnished. Subpoena procedures should be instituted when there is non-compliance
with the request. TAA program regulations at 20 CFR 617.53 provide that States may issue subpoenas for attendance
of witnesses and production of records on the same terms and conditions as under State law. If a State court declines
to enforce a subpoena, the State agency may petition for an order requiring compliance with such subpoena to the United
States District Court within the jurisdiction of which the relevant proceeding under 20 CFR part 617 is conducted.

Obviously, encouraging company cooperation is the best solution to obtaining requested information. Use of subpoena
procedures often result in lengthy legal negotiations and even court proceedings. Notify OTAA when subpoena procedures
are being considered.

(5) Use the dedicated line (telephone number 2025016489) to FAX to OTAA the face page of the petition
form as well as any corrections or additions obtained during telephone contacts with the company official. This action
will serve as notification to the Secretary that the Governor has received a petition and that the investigation has
been initiated.

(6) FAX (if available) or mail the data request forms, which include a request for a listing of company customers, to
the company official, specifying a due date for the information to be returned via FAX or mail. If appropriate, inform
the State employment security agency that an investigation is underway.

(7) OTAA will check its records for duplicate petitions and assign a NAFTATAA number to the case. OTAA will enter
the case number in the OTAA Management Information System and institute the investigation of the petition. A notice
of the investigation will be forwarded for publication in the 

Federal Register

 and the regional offices and State agencies notified according to established procedures in the regular TAA Program.

(8) OTAA will begin the analysis of aggregate U.S. imports for the article(s) listed in the petition that are like or
directly competitive with the article(s) produced at the subject firm.



Day 3

OTAA will complete the aggregate import analysis and FAX a determination to the State as to whether relevant imports
from Mexico or Canada have increased. This determination will be made part of the case file as it will be used by the State
in making its preliminary finding.

Day 5

If the data package has not been received from the company official, the State will contact the company official to
urge completion and transmittal by mail or FAX (if available) of the data.

Day 10

a. State will make a preliminary finding regarding whether the petition meets the criteria in section 250(a)(1),
except clause (A)(iii), and will prepare a brief statement on the basis for the finding.

b. State will FAX the petition face sheet, the data packet (including the customer list), and the preliminary finding
and reasons for the finding, to OTAA.

c. State will notify the petitioners of the Governor's preliminary finding on the NAFTATAA petition and that
the petition package is being submitted to the Secretary of Labor for review and final determination.

d. When an affirmative determination is made, the State will take the necessary action to ensure that the JTPA Title
III (Economic Dislocated Worker Adjustment Assistance) rapid response and basic readjustment services are made
available to the impacted workers.

A.6. Review of Petition by Secretary: Certifications.



