 



Comment:

 A few commenters felt that termination should not be applied if deficiencies were corrected within the delineated
timeframes. One commenter said that the timeframe for termination should be no shorter than 6 months in cases that
do not constitute immediate jeopardy. One commenter suggested that the regulation require an ``acceptable plan
of correction'' from the facility. 



Response: 

Current practice and the final regulations assure that termination will not be applied if noncompliance has been
corrected within the designated timeframes. Redesignated 488.456(b)(1) states that the facility's provider
agreement may be terminated if the facility_ 

&bull;Is not in substantial compliance with the requirements of participation; or 

&bull;Fails to submit a plan of correction with the time specified by HCFA or the State. 

Section 488.456(b)(2) states that HCFA and the State will terminate a facility's provider agreement if a facility_

&bull;Fails to relinquish control to the temporary manager, if that remedy is imposed by HCFA or the State; or 

&bull;Does not meet the eligibility criteria for continuation of payment as set forth in 488.412(a)(1). 

However, the Act does not mandate an automatic 6 month period for the correction of all deficiencies; 6 months is the
outside limit permitted for correction of deficiencies that constitute noncompliance and then only when specific
statutory criteria are met. The States and HCFA must have the flexibility to choose appropriate remedies, including
termination, and timeframes appropriate to the noncompliance identified. We agree with the suggestion to revise
redesignated 488.456(b)(1)(ii) to read ``an acceptable plan of correction.'' This change is in line with
our current practice. 



Comment:

 A few commenters were concerned that the proposed regulations were unreasonable and that HCFA and the States should
have an objective, measurable mechanism to govern the enforcement procedures. Another commenter felt the new regulations
would inflate termination actions tenfold and increase the State agency workload. 



Response: 

We do not agree with these comments. These regulations are designed to encourage the selection of a particular remedy
based on the nature of the noncompliance and the likelihood of immediate and sustained compliance. It was the intent
of the Act that the availability of additional remedies will mean that HCFA and the States will use termination as a
remedy less frequently. The use of these regulations for the selection of remedies will help ensure that the selection
of remedies is consistent and appropriate. We expect that these new regulations will not cause greater expenditures
for the State agencies. However, as we said in the proposed rule, a reallocation of resources, particularly geared
to more intensive monitoring of marginal facilities may well occur. 



Comment:

 One commenter recommended amending the regulations to permit the survey agency to initiate termination actions
based upon poor compliance history. 



Response: 

The Act provides the States and HCFA with the authority to terminate facilities with poor compliance histories. Specifically,
sections 1819(h)(2)(C) and 1919(h)(3)(D) of the Act provide for State and Federal discretion as to whether or not
termination is preferable to the imposition of alternative remedies in the case of noncompliance that constitutes
non-immediate jeopardy. We expect that a facility's previous history will be a significant factor in the determination
of whether termination or an alternative remedy is preferred. However, poor history in and of itself can not warrant
termination if the noncompliance has not persisted. That is, if the provider has indicated poor performance in the
past but is in compliance in the present, there would be no basis for termination. 



Section 488.426Transfer of Residents



After considering comments we received on proposed 488.226 and 488.240, we have decided to combine
both sections in a new 488.426. We believe this change will be less confusing as transfers for all nursing homes
can be referenced in one place. 



Comment:

 One commenter asked the following questions: If a facility is terminated, who will be responsible for placing the
residents elsewhere? If no bed is available, who will pay for the residents' care in the facility until a bed is found?
The commenter stated that the State should have the responsibilities regarding transfer and discharge (in other
words, tour of the new facility, counseling, orientation to the new facility, etc.), to avoid transfer trauma. 






