 

We disagree that the clause should be limited to NPL sites and stress that the rule makes no distinction between private
party sites and Federal Facilities. Restricting the clause's applicability to work on NPL sites would provide insufficient
protection to the Superfund program. The NPL is a priority listing of hazardous waste sites which have been identified
for possible long-term remedial cleanup action under Superfund. Most sites are not placed on the NPL until they have
been formally evaluated and meet a Hazard Ranking System threshold. Contractors perform emergency Superfund work
and pre-remedial work for EPA on many hazardous waste sites that may or may not later be placed on the NPL and also provide
support for enforcement activities at non-NPL sites. It is important to protect such work from conflicts of interest
particularly since we may initiate cost recovery action against PRPs for cleanup work at sites that are not yet on the
NPL and may never be placed on the NPL. Moreover, work an EPA contractor may wish to perform for a private party on a non-NPL
site may directly conflict with work performed for EPA and jeopardize CERCLA enforcement activities. Therefore,
the LOFC clause intentionally makes no distinction between NPL and non-NPL site work in its reporting requirements.

4. ``Any party''. Some commenters expressed concern that the term ``any party'' used in the LOFC clause was too broad,
and stated that the term could be interpreted to include another Federal agency. We disagree that the term is too broad
and it is our intent that it include Federal agencies. The rule makes no distinction between private and public sector
work in its reporting requirements. Contractors must report work which is identified as having a high risk of conflict
whether it is for a private party or a Federal agency. 
5. ``Jeopardize CERCLA enforcement actions''. One commenter recommended that the language in paragraph (c) and
(d) of the basic LOFC clause (ARCS) and the parallel language in the Alternates be removed since it is difficult for
contractors to determine whether proposed actions will jeopardize CERCLA enforcement actions. We disagree with
this recommendation. The language is included to require contractors to request approval from the EPA Contracting
Officer before entering into a contract for work which may damage our Superfund enforcement actions so that EPA has
the opportunity to protect its enforcement actions from prejudice. When a contractor believes that there is a risk
that work may jeopardize CERCLA enforcement actions, the contractor shall submit a request to the EPA Contracting
Officer who will make the determination. 
6. Define ``CERCLA activities''. Several commenters requested that we define ``CERCLA activities'' and one commenter
specifically requested that we exempt from the definition activities under Sections 312 and 313 of the Superfund
Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA). 
The scope of CERCLA activities is set out in Section 101 of CERCLA. ``CERCLA activities'' includes the terms ``remove
or removal'' the terms ``remedy or remedial action'' and the terms ``respond or response'' as defined in Sections
101 (23), (24) and (25). Activities under Sections 312 and 313 of SARA are by definition excluded from the term ``CERCLA
activities''. Sections 312 and 313 are reporting requirements in SARA Title III, 
``Emergency Planning and Community Right-To-Know Act of 1986'', which is not part of CERCLA. 
7. LOFC and unrelated sites. Commenters stated that the LOFC clauses should not be broadened but should only cover
a site where a contractor previously worked for EPA. One commenter stated that EPA had no authority to deny private
contracting on an unrelated site. Another commenter stated that it would be almost impossible to administer or enforce
the abstract concept of doing CERCLA work for a private client at a given site where work had not been performed before.




