 

An MWC is defined as any setting or equipment that combusts MSW. Municipal waste combustion includes the burning (or
pyrolysis) of MSW in any type of setting or equipment, including combustion equipment with and without heat recovery.
This definition has been slightly modified from the February 11, 1991 guidelines and is discussed below. 

Municipal solid waste is defined as either a mixture or a single-item stream of household, commercial, and/or institutional
discards. This would include discards such as paper, wood, yard wastes, tree trimmings, plastics, leather, rubber,
glass, metals, and other combustible and noncombustible materials. The MSW definition includes household discards
as well as discards from institutional and commercial sources, but does not include industrial process or manufacturing
discards. The MSW definition also includes refuse-derived fuel (RDF), which is made from MSW that is shredded (or
pelletized) and classified by size before combustion. Municipal solid waste does not, however, include wastes that
are solely segregated medical wastes. However, if segregated medical wastes are mixed with MSW, the resulting mixture
is considered to be MSW, and the proposed guidelines would apply if the aggregate plant capacity exceeded 35 Mg/day.
Minor editing is proposed in the definition of MSW to clarify this point. 

Air curtain incinerators that combust MSW are MWC's. However, air curtain incinerators that burn only yard wastes,
tree trimmings, and clean untreated lumber would be covered under a separate set of proposed opacity emission levels,
and no other part of the proposal would apply. Air curtain incinerator opacity requirements are discussed in section
VI of this preamble. 



B. Pollutants To Be Regulated 



Section 129 of the Act requires the EPA to establish numerical emission limits specifically for SO

2

, HCl, PM, opacity, Cd, Pb, Hg, dioxins/furans, CO, and NO

X

. Section 129 specifies that the EPA may also:

 


*** promulgate numerical emission limitations or provide for the monitoring of post-combustion
concentrations of surrogate substances, parameters, or periods of residence times in excess of stated temperatures
with respect to pollutants other than those listed [above] ***. 




Therefore, the EPA is proposing guidelines for load and flue gas temperature at the PM control device inlet as additional
indicators of MWC operating practices. The EPA is also proposing a guideline emission level for fly ash/bottom ash
fugitive emissions because these emissions include Cd, Pb, Hg, and dioxins/furans (see section V of this preamble
for further discussion of the EPA's decision to regulate fugitive emissions from MWC's). 



The February 11, 1991 guidelines include emission limitations for all of the pollutants listed above except Cd, Pb,
Hg, NO

X

, and fly ash/bottom ash fugitive emissions. The proposed guidelines would establish guidelines for all of the pollutants
listed above. The proposed guidelines for the same pollutants regulated by the February 11, 1991 guidelines (i.e.,
SO

2

, HCl, PM, opacity, dioxins/furans, CO, load, and flue gas temperature at the PM control device inlet) have been revised
to reflect the requirements of section 129. 



C. Format for the Proposed Guidelines 



The format of the proposed emission guidelines is similar to the format of the February 11, 1991 guidelines. In most
cases, the format is in the form of an emission level (concentration). 


The format of the dioxin/furan guideline would be revised in today's proposal. In the 1991 guidelines, dioxin/furan
emissions were reported as a concentration (nanograms per dry standard cubic meter (ng/dscm), corrected to 7 percent
oxygen (O

2

), dry basis) on a total mass basis (i.e., the mass of all tetra- through octa-congeners were added together). In today's
proposal, dioxin/furan emissions could be reported in units of either ng/dscm total mass or ng/dscm toxic equivalency
(TEQ). Reporting in TEQ units is done by first measuring the total mass of dioxin/furan congeners and then adjusting
the results to account for the varying toxicity of each congener. The same test method (Method 23) is used in either
case. See section II.F of this preamble for further discussion of the proposed method of reporting dioxin/furan emissions
in terms of TEQ. 



