 

1208.18 

Retailer. 





Retailer 

means a person that sells cut flowers and greens to consumers. The term includes: 


(a) All retail outlets that sell cut flowers and greens to consumers including retail florists, supermarkets, and
other mass market retail outlets that sell such flowers or greens, except distribution centers defined in 1208.16(e)
(

i.e.

, centers that are owned or controlled by a retailer if the predominant retail business activity of the retailer is
floral sales and whose sales and non-sale transfers of cut flowers and greens to retail outlets exceeds $750,000,
determined as provided in this subpart) even though such centers may also make direct sales to consumers. 


(b) Distribution centers owned or controlled by a retailer (or distribution centers owned or controlled cooperatively
by a group of such retailers) when the predominant business activity of the retailer or retailers is not the sale of
cut flowers and greens to consumers; and 

(c) Distribution centers independently owned but operated primarily to provide food products to retail stores.




1208.19 

Secretary. 






Secretary 

means the Secretary of Agriculture of the United States or any officer or employee of the Department to whom authority
has heretofore been delegated, or to whom authority may hereafter be delegated, to act in the Secretary's stead. 



1208.20 

Substantial portion. 






Substantial portion 

means that portion of the total value of manufactured floral articles that represents the value of the cut flowers
and greens in such articles (expressed as a percentage factor) which the Council, with the approval of the Secretary,
finds to be great enough to cause such articles to be classed as cut flowers and greens under this subpart. 




1208.21 

State. 






State 

means each of the several States of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Republic
of the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, and the Republic of Palau (until such time as the Compact
of Free Association is ratified). 



1208.22 

United States. 



United States means the States collectively. 




Establishment of the Council 



1208.30 

Establishment and membership of the Council. 



(a) A Fresh Cut Flowers and Fresh Cut Greens Promotion Council which shall be named the National PromoFlor Council
is hereby established to administer the terms and provisions of this subpart. The Council shall consist of 25 members
nominated by the floral industry and appointed by the Secretary, as provided in this subpart, each of whom shall have
an alternate nominated and appointed in the same manner as members of the Council are nominated and appointed. 

(b) The membership of the Council shall be divided as follows: 

(1) 14 members and their alternates shall represent qualified wholesale handlers of domestic or imported cut flowers
and greens; 

(2) Three members and their alternates shall represent producers that are qualified handlers of cut flowers and greens;

(3) Three members and their alternates shall represent importers that are qualified handlers of cut flowers and greens;

(4) Three members and their alternates shall represent traditional retailers of cut flowers and greens; 
(5) One member and alternate shall represent persons who produce cut flowers and greens in locations east of the Mississippi
River; and 
(6) One member and alternate shall represent persons who produce cut flowers and greens in locations west of the Mississippi
River. 




1208.31 

Election and appointment of members and alternates other than retailers. 



(a) PromoFlor Organizing Group, Inc., an industry organizing committee, is designated as an election committee
for the purpose of receiving the names of individuals who are engaged in the industry and who are prepared to serve as
members (other than retailer members) of the Council or as alternates if elected as nominees and if selected by the
Secretary for such positions. 

(b) The election committee shall, within five (5) days of the issuance of this subpart and with the assistance of the
Secretary, request the submission of names of candidates for nominees from those segments of the industry for which
nominees must be selected by an election process. These segments are: qualified wholesale handlers; importers who
are qualified handlers; producers of cut flowers and greens who are qualified handlers; and producers of cut flowers
and greens without regard to whether they are qualified handlers. Notification of the industry of the selection process
by the election committee shall be by a news release to industry publications and where appropriate, newspapers of
general circulation. In order to be assured of a place on the slate of candidates, the names of candidates must be received
by the election committee not later than fifteen (15) days after the date of the first such news release. 

(c) Names of candidates shall be sought for the following seats on the Council: 

(1) 14 members and their respective alternates representing qualified wholesale handlers of domestic or imported
cut flowers and greens. Two such members and their respective alternates for the United States at large and two such
members and their respective alternates for each of the following regions: 
(i) 

Region 1 (Pacific): 

Alaska, California, Hawaii, Oregon, Washington, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, the Federated
States of Micronesia, American Samoa, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and the Republic of 
Palau. 
(ii) 

Region 2 (Inter-Mountain): 

Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Idaho, Kansas, Louisiana, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma,
South Dakota, Texas, Utah, and Wyoming. 




