 

Section 28.890Examination and Certification of Compliance 



This section would require that each ATA vessel be 
examined for compliance once every two years. The 
examination would be performed by the American Bureau of 
Shipping (ABS), a similarly qualified organization, or 
another accepted organization. The organization performing 
the examination would be required to provide the owner and 
the cognizant Coast Guard District Commander, (Attention: 
Fishing Vessel Safety Coordinator) with a copy of the signed 
certification letter if the vessel was found to be in 
compliance. A copy of a certification letter would also be 
required to be maintained on board the vessel. 
With respect to the inspection provisions, 46 U.S.C. 3302(c) 
was amended by exempting fishing, fish processing, and fish 
tender vessels of not more than 500 gross tons from 
consideration as a freight vessel, a seagoing barge, or a 
seagoing motor vessel under 46 U.S.C. 3301 (1), (6), and (7) 
if, when the vessel transports cargo to or from Alaska, that 
place does not receive weekly common carrier service by 
water from a place in the United States; or the cargo is of 
a type not accepted by that common carrier service; or in 
the case of a fish tender vessel, the vessel is not engaged 
in the Aleutian trade. 

A fish tender vessel engaged in the Aleutian trade is 
not subject to inspection under the provisions of 46 U.S.C. 
3301 (1), (6), and (7), if the vessel is not more than 500 
gross tons, has an incline test performed by a marine 
surveyor, and has written stability instructions posted on 
board. These provisions were effective May 16, 1991. 



Section 28.895Survey and Classification 



This proposed section would require each ATA vessel 
which undergoes a major conversion completed after July 27, 
1990, to be classed by the ABS or another organization 
determined by the Commandant to be similarly qualified. 



Section 28.900Loadlines 



This section would require that a fish tender vessel of 
not more than 500 gross tons, engaged in the Aleutian trade, 
obtain a loadline certificate. 



Section 28.905Post Accident Inspection 



This proposed section was suggested by a common carrier 
during the first SNPRM to require that an ATA vessel undergo 
a general or partial survey by a Coast Guard Representative 
following an accident or if a defect is discovered which 
affects the safety of the vessel. This requirement would be 
similar to that found in subchapter I for cargo vessels, 
however a third party would be conducting this post accident 
inspection. 



Section 28.910Repairs and Alterations 



This proposed section, again suggested during the first 
SNPRM, would require the managing operators of an ATA vessel 
to notify a Coast Guard Representative prior to making 
repairs or alterations to an ATA vessel that may affect the 
safety of the vessel. 



Section 28.915Manning and Crew 



This proposed section would establish manning 
requirements for a fish tender vessel of not more than 500 
gross tons, engaged in the Aleutian trade. 

This section also proposes that machinery spaces be 
under the control, when at sea, of an engineer designated as 
in charge. This designation may be: (a) In writing by the 
owner, operator, or master; (b) by an entry in the ship's 
log if one is maintained; or (c) by a designation on the 
emergency instructions required under 28.265. If 
designated engineers are not part of the vessel's 
complement, then all the requirements of subpart D would 
have to be met in addition to this subpart. Any component 
or system on a vessel found to be in conflict between the 
regulations found in subparts D and G, then the higher 
standard will apply. ATA amended 46 U.S.C. 8702 to require 
that a fish tender vessel engaged in the Aleutian trade 
comply with the crew requirements set out in 8702, but 
allowed the percentage of the deck crew, who are required to 
have merchant mariners documents endorsed for a rating of at 
least able seaman, to be reduced from 65 to 50 percent of 
crew size. These provisions were effective November 16, 
1991. 

Lastly, the ATA amended 46 U.S.C. Chapter 73 to allow 
acceptance of service on an ATA vessel to be used by an 
individual to qualify for an endorsement as an ``able 
seaman_fishing industry'', ``able seaman_unlimited'' or 
``able seaman_special.'' If the service is on board a 
vessel of at least 100 gross tons, the service may be 
accepted to qualify as an ``able seaman_limited''. 



Incorporation by Reference 






