 

8 CFR Part 223a



Immigration, Refugees, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 



8 CFR Part 248



Aliens, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.



8 CFR Part 264



Aliens, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.



8 CFR Part 292



Administrative practice and procedure, Immigration, Lawyers, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.




Accordingly, under authority 8 U.S.C. 1101, chapter I of title 8 of the Code of Federal Regulations is amended as follows:




PART 103_POWERS AND DUTIES OF SERVICE OFFICERS; AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE RECORDS



1. The authority citation for part 103 continues to read as follows:






Authority: 

5 U.S.C. 522, 522a; 8 U.S.C. 1101, 1103, 1201, 1252 note, 1252b, 1304, 1356; 31 U.S.C. 9701; E.O. 12356, 47 FR 14874,
15557, 3 CFR, 1982 Comp., p. 166; 8 CFR part 2.




2. In section 103.2 paragraph (a) is revised to read as follows: 



103.2 



Applications, petitions, and other documents. 



(a) 

Filing. 

(1) 

General. 

Every application, petition, appeal, motion, request, or other document submitted on the form prescribed by this
chapter shall be executed and filed in accordance with the instructions on the form, such instructions being hereby
incorporated into the particular section of the regulations requiring its submission. The form must be filed with
the appropriate filing fee required by 103.7. Such fees are non-refundable and, except as otherwise provided
in this chapter, must be paid when the application or petition is filed. 

(2) 

Signature.

 An applicant or petitioner must sign his or her application or petition. However, a parent or legal guardian may sign
for a person who is less than 14 years old. A legal guardian may sign for a mentally incompetent person. By signing the
application or petition, the applicant or petitioner, or parent or guardian certifies under penalty of perjury that
the application or petition, and all evidence submitted with it, either at the time of filing or thereafter, is true
and correct. 

(3) 

Representation.

 An applicant or petitioner may be represented by an attorney in the United States, as defined in 1.1(f) of this
chapter, by an attorney outside the United States as defined in 292.1(a)(6) of this chapter, or by an accredited
representative as defined in 292.1(a)(4) of this chapter. A beneficiary of a petition is not a recognized party
in such a proceeding. An application or petition presented in person by someone who is not the applicant or petitioner,
or his or her representative as defined in this paragraph, shall be treated as if received through the mail, and the
person advised that the applicant or petitioner, and his or her representative, will be notified of the decision.
Where a notice of representation is submitted that is not properly signed, the application or petition will be processed
as if the notice had not been submitted. 

(4) 

Oath.

 Any required oath may be administered by an immigration officer or person generally authorized to administer oaths,
including persons so authorized by Article 136 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice. 

(5) 

Translation of name.

 If a document has been executed in an anglicized version of a name, the native form of the name may also be required.

(6) 

Where to file.

 Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, an application or petition should be filed with the INS office or Service
Center with jurisdiction over the application or petition and the place of residence of the applicant or petitioner
as indicated in the instructions with the respective form. 

(7) 

Receipt date.

 (i) 

General. 

An application or petition received in a Service office shall be stamped to show the time and date of actual receipt
and, unless otherwise specified in part 204 or part 245 of this chapter, shall be regarded as filed when so stamped,
if it is properly signed and executed and the required fee is attached or a fee waiver is granted. An application which
is not properly signed or is submitted with the wrong fee shall be rejected as improperly filed. Rejected applications,
and ones in which the check or other financial instrument is returned as not payable, will not retain a filing date.
An application or petition taken to a local Service office for the completion of biometric information prior to filing
at a Service Center shall be considered received when physically received at the appropriate Service Center. 

(ii) 

Non-payment.

 If a check or other financial instrument used to pay a filing fee is subsequently returned as not payable, the remitter
shall be notified and requested to immediately pay the filing fee and associated service charge within 14 days, without
extension. If the application or petition is pending and these charges are not paid, it shall be rejected as improperly
filed. If it was already approved, and these charges are not paid, it shall be automatically revoked because it was
improperly filed. If it was already denied, revoked, or abandoned, that decision will not be affected by the non-payment
of the filing fee. A new fee will be required with any new application or petition. Any fee and service charges collected
as the result of collection activities or legal action on the prior application or petition shall be used to cover the
cost of the previous rejection, revocation, or other action. 



* * * * *



3. Section 103.2 is amended by: 

a. Revising the heading for paragraph (b) and paragraph (b)(1); 

b. Redesignating existing paragraph (b)(2) as paragraph (b)(18), and revising the paragraph heading to read ``

Withholding adjudication

.'';

c. Redesignating paragraph (b)(3) as paragraph (b)(16), and revising in paragraph (b)(16)(i), the reference ``(b)(3)
(ii), (iii) and (iv)'' to read: ``(b)(16) (ii), (iii) and (iv)''; and revising in paragraph (b)(16)(ii), the reference
``(b)(3)(iv)'' to read: ``(b)(16)(iv)''; and by 

d. Adding new paragraphs (b)(2) through (b)(15), (b)(17), and (b)(19), to read as follows: 



103.2



Applications, petitions, and other documents. 



* * * * *



(b) 

Evidence and processing. 

(1) 

General.

 An applicant or petitioner must establish eligibility for a requested immigration benefit. An application or petition
form must be completed as applicable and filed with any initial evidence required by regulation or by the instructions
on the form. Any evidence submitted is considered part of the relating application or petition. 

(2) 

Submitting secondary evidence and affidavits. 

(i) 

General.

 The non-existence or other unavailability of required evidence creates a presumption of ineligibility. If a required
document, such as a birth or marriage certificate, does not exist or cannot be obtained, an applicant or petitioner
must demonstrate this and submit secondary evidence, such as church or school records, pertinent to the facts at issue.
If secondary evidence also does not exist or cannot be obtained, the applicant or petitioner must demonstrate the
unavailability of both the required document and relevant secondary evidence, and submit two or more affidavits,
sworn to or affirmed by persons who are not parties to the petition who have direct personal knowledge of the event and
circumstances. Secondary evidence must overcome the unavailability of primary evidence, and affidavits must overcome
the unavailability of both primary and secondary evidence. 

(ii) 

Demonstrating that a record is not available.

 Where a record does not exist, the applicant or petitioner must submit an original written statement on government
letterhead establishing this from the relevant government or other authority. The statement must indicate the reason
the record does not exist, and indicate whether similar records for the time and place are available. However, a certification
from an appropriate foreign government that a document does not exist is not required where the Department of State's
Foreign Affairs Manual indicates this type of document generally does not exist. An applicant or petitioner who has
not been able to acquire the necessary document or statement from the relevant foreign authority may submit evidence
that repeated good faith attempts were made to obtain the required document or statement. However, where the Service
finds that such documents or statements are generally available, it may require that the applicant or petitioner
submit the required document or statement. 

(3) 

Translations.

 Any document containing foreign language submitted to the Service shall be accompanied by a full English language
translation which the translator has certified as complete and accurate, and by the translator's certification
that he or she is competent to translate from the foreign language into English. 

(4) 

Submitting copies of documents.

 Application and petition forms must be submitted in the original. Forms and documents issued to support an application
or petition, such as labor certifications, Form IAP66, medical examinations, affidavits, formal consultations,
and other statements, must be submitted in the original unless previously filed with the Service. When submission
is required, expired Service documents must be submitted in the original, as must Service documents required to be
annotated to indicate the decision. In all other instances, unless the relevant regulations or instructions specifically
require that an original document be filed with an application or petition, an ordinary legible photocopy may be submitted.
Original documents submitted when not required will remain a part of the record, even if the submission was not required.


(5) 

Request for an original document.

 Where a copy of a document is submitted with an application or petition, the Service may at any time require that the
original document be submitted for review. If the requested original, other than one issued by the Service, is not
submitted within 12 weeks, the petition or application shall be denied or revoked. There shall be no appeal from a denial
or revocation based on the failure to submit an original document upon the request of the Service to substantiate a
previously submitted copy. Further, an applicant or petitioner may not move to reopen or reconsider the proceeding
based on the subsequent availability of the document. An original document submitted pursuant to a Service request
shall be returned to the petitioner or applicant when no longer required. 


