 

Finally, Baseball, PBS/NPR, and RIAA objected to the exemption granted performing rights societies from the Interim
Regulations' requirement of identifying at least one secondary transmission for each joint claimant. Baseball
stated that it ``is firmly of the view that it should not be treated less favorably than the performing rights societies,''
noting that the Interim Regulations gave no reason why performing rights societies should enjoy privileged status.
Baseball, comments at 5. 

See also 

PBS/NPR, comments at 5. RIAA urged that, if the Copyright Office insists on continuing to require each joint claimant
to identify a secondary transmission, it should broaden the definition of a performing rights society ``to include
not only traditional performing rights societies, but also those joint claimants such as RIAA who, with respect to
the royalties distributed to its members under sections 111 and 119, essentially perform the same functions of `performing
rights societies.''' RIAA, comments at 6. 
In addition to seeking relief from 252.3(a)(4) and 257.3(a)(4), several commentators urged the Copyright
Office to reconsider other requirements for the filing of cable and satellite carrier royalty claims. Baseball and
the RIAA urged the Copyright Office to eliminate entirely the requirement of identifying a secondary transmission
to establish a basis for a cable or satellite carrier royalty claim. Baseball, comments at 57; RIAA, comments
at 3, 6. Baseball noted several instances where the CRT refused to dismiss a claim for failure to identify a secondary
transmission, and suggested this demonstrates that ``the secondary transmission identification requirement
did nothing more than unnecessarily increase the costs of claimants.'' Baseball, comments at 6. NAB, however, strongly
opposed Baseball's recommendation, asserting that there is no compelling reason to change the requirement and that
elimination of identification of a secondary transmission would be violative of section 111(d)(3) of the Copyright
Act, which authorizes distribution of royalties only to copyright owners whose works were retransmitted on a distant
signal. NAB, comments at 23. 
Baseball took the ``hands off'' approach one step further by urging the Copyright Office to refrain from making any
substantive review of royalty claims. Baseball, comments at 67. 

See also 

NAB, comments at 2; Copyright Owners, reply comments at 9. Baseball argued that ``[r]outine Copyright Office review
of all claims needlessly increases the costs of all copyright owners and does not serve any useful function,'' concluding
that ``[d]isputes over a particular claimant's eligibility to royalties (when they arise) may be resolved internally
within a Phase II class without involvement of the Copyright Office or a CARP.'' Baseball, comments at 78. Copyright
Owners concurred, stating that ``[t]he parties themselves are in the best position to identify those claimants who
are not entitled to royalties,'' and that they ``do not believe...that the Copyright Office's resources (and Copyright
Owners' royalties) should be expended to screen each and every one of the thousands of claims that will be timely filed
over the years.'' Copyright Owners, reply comments at 910. Copyright Owners do not object, however, to the
Copyright Office returning claims that are not timely filed. 

Id. 

at 9. 
Given the pendency of receipt of cable and satellite carrier royalty claims and the request of Program Suppliers to
sever the joint claims issue from this proceeding, the Copyright Office issued an Order addressing the filing requirements
for joint claims for the 1993 cable and satellite carrier royalties. 

Order 

in Docket Nos. RM 941A; 94 CARP (93CD); 94 CARP (93SD)(July 13, 1994). The Office stated that while
it would ``make a decision on the requirement for joint claims when we publish the final rules,'' it would waive the
requirement of identification of a secondary transmission for each joint claimant in 252.3(a)(4) and 257.3(a)(4)
for the July 1994 filing period. As a result of this action, anyone filing a joint claim for 1993 cable or satellite carrier
royalties was only required to identify at least one secondary transmission to establish a basis for the entire joint
claim. 
The Copyright Office has reviewed the comments of the parties regarding the identification of a secondary transmission
requirement for joint claims and is amending 252.3(a)(4) and 257.3(a)(4) to require identification
of at least one secondary transmission for each joint claim, as opposed to at least one for each joint claimant.

4

 We have stated on several occasions that our intention in implementing the CRT Reform Act is to create a streamlined
process that limits the cost of distribution and rate adjustment proceedings to the participating parties as much
as possible. 

See e.g.

 59 FR 23967 (1994). It is apparent from the unanimous opinion of the commentators that requiring identification of
a secondary transmission for each joint claimant would add in some cases a substantial burden and cost to joint claimants
without yielding an appreciable return in administrative efficiency. We are also aware that, in the past, the CRT
did not require identification of a secondary transmission for each joint claimant.

5

 The practice of the CRT was apparently an unwritten policy, and therefore of questionable precedential value, but
it does demonstrate that the Tribunal did not experience any practical or administrative difficulties in allowing
joint claimants to identify at least one secondary transmission for the entire joint claim. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


4

</FOOTNAME>
In amending these sections, we are also eliminating the exemption for performing rights societies filing joint claims,
since the amended rules will treat all joint claimants equally. 


</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


5

</FOOTNAME>
It would appear from the comments that while Baseball, after consultation with the Tribunal, would only include some
examples of secondary transmissions in their joint claim, PBS would include an example for each one of the claimants
represented in its joint claim. PBS/NPR, comments at 2. 


</FOOTNOTE>

