 

Currently, risk levels (including carcinogen risk, non-carcinogen risk as determined by hazard quotient (HQ),
and ecological risk) provide one of the principal bases for a listing determination. However, risk levels themselves
do not represent the sole basis for a listing. Other factors generally are weighed in making a listing decision. The
Agency's listing decision policy uses a ``weight-of-evidence'' approach in which calculated risk information
is a key factor. Available risk values are assessed with all other data available to determine whether a waste is or
is not a hazardous waste. 

The criteria for listing wastes as hazardous are described in 40 CFR 261.11. They are presented in two basic parts:
Numeric criteria for acutely hazardous wastes (defined by 40 CFR 261.11(a)(2)); and criteria for toxic wastes (defined
by 40 CFR 261.11(a)(3)) containing toxic constituents listed in Appendix VIII to Part 261 (where 11 factors are considered
in determining ``substantial present or potential hazard to human health and the environment'').
Of these 11 factors, seven deal with risk (constituent toxicity, concentration, waste quantity, migration potential,
persistence, degradation product potential, and bioaccumulation potential) and are integrated into the risk values
generated. The other four factors (plausible management, damage cases, coverage of other regulatory programs,
and other factors as may be appropriate) are individual factors that also are considered in a listing determination.
Waste quantity (specifically, ``de minimis'' amounts of waste) also can be a special consideration in making a listing
determination for a lower volume wastestream. 



1. Selection of Waste Management Scenarios (261.11(a)(3)(vii)) 



As noted above, one of the many factors that the Agency takes into account is the ``plausible types of improper management
to which the waste could be subjected.'' 40 CFR 261.11(a)(3)(vii). Exposures to wastes (and therefore the risks involved)
will vary by waste management practice. 

It is important to note that a management scenario need not be in use currently to be considered plausible by EPA since
disposal practices can and do change over time. Potential future waste management practices are projected and considered
in the risk analysis, if appropriate. The Agency often projects risks from management that reasonably 

could

 be employed. 

a. Factors for Projecting a Plausible Waste Management Scenario. There are a number of disposal scenarios for wastes
not hazardous under RCRA that are common across industries. These include municipal and industrial unlined landfills
for solid materials, tanks and unlined surface impoundments for liquids, and boilers for organic solids and liquids.
The Agency will presume that these scenarios are plausible unless circumstances unique to a particular industry
show that one or more is not plausible for that industry. 

The Agency notes that there may exist certain disposal scenarios not common across industries that could present
a greater risk than the risk from the common plausible management scenarios mentioned above. An example might be land-spreading
sludge from wastewater treatment facilities. These less common scenarios generally will be considered plausible
only when information on an industry indicates that these disposal methods currently are being practiced, or there
is good reason to believe they might be practiced in the future. 

In determining whether one of the common disposal scenarios is not plausible, the Agency will consider factors such
as the following: 

&bull;Availability of waste management practices. 

There may be practical constraints to the type of waste management practices available to a category of waste generators.
For example, if facilities in an industry have only a limited amount of land available to them, then building large
surface impoundments to handle wastewaters may be highly unlikely and would not be considered plausible. 

&bull;Coverage of the Characterization Program. 

Where all, or at least a large percentage, of facilities in an industrial category can be characterized with respect
to waste management practices, the Agency may be able to do a more refined analysis of the plausibility of facilities
switching from their current waste management practice to a higher risk waste management practice. The Agency may
determine it more appropriate to estimate risk based on current management practices where our analysis shows that
it is unlikely that facilities would switch to another management practice. 

&bull;Effect of Other Regulatory Programs. 

Other regulatory programs, for example, the water pollution control program or air pollution regulatory requirements,
can impose legal, technical, or practical restraints on waste management practices. If these requirements restrict
certain practices (

e.g.

, water treatment requirements technically and practically might preclude treatment in surface impoundments)
the Agency can use this information to consider eliminating that disposal practice from consideration. 


