 

5. Upon proposing a special case, the EPA Regional Administrator or Corps District Engineer, as appropriate, will
notify the appropriate SCS State Conservationist in writing. Following notification of the proposed designation,
SCS will not make wetland delineations for the purposes of CWA jurisdiction within the proposed special case for a
period of 20 working days from the date of the notification. SCS may proceed to make wetland delineations for CWA purposes
in the proposed special case after the 20-day period if the SCS State Conservationist has not been notified by the EPA
Regional Administrator or Corps District Engineer of approval of the proposed special case designation by EPA Headquarters
or the Corps Director of Civil Works, as appropriate. 
6. Following approval of the proposed special case, the Corps, or EPA as appropriate, will make final CWA wetland delineations
in the special case area, rather than SCS. In addition, the referring field office (i.e., either the EPA Regional Administrator
or Corps District Engineer) will develop draft guidance relevant to the specific issues raised by the special case
and forward the draft guidance to its Headquarters office. The Headquarters office of the agency which designated
the special case will develop final guidance after consulting with the signatory agencies' Headquarters offices.
EPA concurrence will be required for final guidance for any special case designated by the Corps. Special cases remain
in effect until final guidance is issued by the Headquarters office of the agency which designated the special case
or the designation is withdrawn by the EPA Regional Administrator or Corps District Engineer, as appropriate. 


C. Reliance on Previous SCS Wetland Delineations for CWA Purposes 


1. Section 1222 of the FSA, as amended by the Food Agriculture Conservation and Trade Act, provides that SCS will certify
SCS wetland delineations made prior to November 28, 1990. The intent of this process is to ensure the accuracy of wetland
delineations conducted prior to November 28, 1990, for the purposes of the FSA. This certification process also will
provide a useful basis for establishing reliance on wetland delineations for CWA purposes. All certifications done
after the effective date of this MOA that are done using mapping conventions will use the agreed-upon mapping conventions
pursuant to Section V.A of this MOA.
2. Written SCS wetland delineations for lands identified in section IV.A of his MOA conducted prior to the effective
date of this MOA will be used for purposes of establishing CWA jurisdiction, subject to the provisions of section V.C.3
below. If such SCS wetland delineations are subsequently modified or revised through updated certification, these
modifications or revisions will supersede the previous delineations for purposes of establishing CWA jurisdiction.
Written SCS wetland delineations for lands identified in sections IV.B and IV.C of this MOA conducted prior to the
effective date of this MOA will require coordination with the Corps, or EPA as appropriate, before being used for purposes
of determining CWA jurisdiction. 
3. As part of the certification effort, SCS will establish priorities to certify SCS wetland delineations. In addition
to responding to requests from individual landowners who feel their original wetland determinations were made in
error, SCS will give priority to certifying those wetland delineations where at least two of the four signatory agencies
represented on the interagency oversight team convened pursuant to section V.B.2 of this MOA agree that SCS wetland
delineations in a particular area, or a generic class of SCS wetland delineations in a particular area, raise issues
regarding their accuracy based on current guidance. These priority areas will be identified only after mapping conventions
are agreed upon pursuant to section V.A of this MOA. Identification of these high priority certification needs shall
be made at the level of the SCS State Conservationist, FWS Regional Director, EPA Regional Administrator, and the
Corps District Engineer. Following identification of these high priority certification needs, the SCS State Conservationist
will immediately notify the affected landowner(s), by letter, that the relevant SCS wetland delineations have been
identified as a high priority for being certified under Section 1222 of the FSA. In addition, the notification will
inform the landowner that while previous wetland delineations remain valid for purposes of the FSA until certification
or certification update is completed, the landowner will need to contact the Corps before proceeding with discharges
of dredged or fill material. This communication by the landowner will enable the Corps to review the wetland delineation
to establish whether it can be used for purposes of CWA jurisdiction. The SCS State Conservationist will initiate,
within 30 calendar days of landowner notification, corrective measures to resolve the wetland delineation accuracy
problem. 


