 




<USBUREAU>Food and Drug Administration</USBUREAU>


<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 94F0152]</RINDOCK>


Roquette America, Inc.; Filing of Food Additive Petition


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is announcing that Roquette America, Inc., has filed a petition proposing
that the food additive regulations be amended to permit the manufacture of mannitol by fermentation of sugars or sugar
alcohols such as glucose, sucrose, fructose, or sorbitol by the action of the yeast 

Zygosaccharomyces rouxii

.


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Written comments on the petitioner's environmental assessment by January 12, 1995.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Submit written comments to the Dockets Management Branch (HFA305), Food and Drug Administration, rm. 123,
12420 Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD 20857.


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Rosalie M. Angeles, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFS207), Food and Drug Administration,
200 C St. SW., Washington, DC 20204, 2024183107.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 Under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (sec. 409(b)(5) (21 U.S.C. 348(b)(5))), notice is given that a food
additive petition (FAP 4A4412) has been filed by Roquette America, Inc., c/o Keller and Heckman, 1001 G St. NW., Washington,
DC 20001. The petition proposes that the food additive regulations in 180.25 

Mannitol

 (21 CFR 180.25) be amended to permit the manufacture of mannitol by fermentation of sugars or sugar alcohols such as
glucose, sucrose, fructose, or sorbitol by the action of the yeast 

Zygosaccharomyces rouxii

. 


As part of FDA's comprehensive safety review of substances on the list of substances generally recognized as safe
(GRAS), the safety of mannitol as a food ingredient was evaluated in 1972 by the Select Committee on GRAS Substances
(SCOGS) from the Life Sciences Research Office of the Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology
(FASEB). SCOGS concluded that mannitol was safe when used in food at current or reasonably expected future levels.
In the 

Federal Register

 of July 26, 1973 (38 FR 20046), FDA proposed to affirm the GRAS status of mannitol that was manufactured by the process
then known to the agency. 
In response to the proposal, the agency received a comment stating that mannitol was also commonly manufactured by
a process different from that set out in the proposed GRAS affirmation. The agency also received information raising
questions about the safety of mannitol. Data from studies on mannitol demonstrated a significant (but not dose related)
incidence of benign thymomas, and an abnormal growth of thymus gland tissue, in female rats fed mannitol. 
As a result of these findings, the agency concluded that additional data were necessary to evaluate the safety of mannitol.
Thus, in the 

Federal Register

 of September 23, 1974 (39 FR 34178), the agency declined to affirm the use of mannitol as GRAS and, instead, established
an interim food additive regulation for use of mannitol at existing levels. The interim regulation, 121.4005
(21 CFR 121.4005) (redesignated as 180.25 (21 CFR 180.25)) required that mannitol be manufactured by either
the process FDA had proposed to affirm as GRAS or the process described in the comment.
Following the publication of the interim food additive regulation, the agency received data that showed an increased
combined incidence of medullary hyperplasia and pheochromocytoma of the adrenal glands in Fischer rats fed a diet
of 10 percent mannitol. No such mannitol-treatment effect, however, was observed in Sprague-Dawley and Wistar rats.
In 1985, FASEB, under contract with FDA, established an ad hoc Expert Panel on Sugar Alcohols and Lactose to study certain
effects that had been observed in animal experiments in which the test animals were fed sugar alcohols and lactose.
In a report submitted to FDA in 1986, ``Health Aspects of Sugar Alcohols and Lactose,'' FASEB concluded that there
was a statistically significant increased incidence of adrenal medullary hyperplasia and pheochromocytoma in
rats fed high levels of sugar alcohols, including mannitol. The report further concluded that the existing data provided
no satisfactory mechanistic explanations of these adrenal medullary lesions, which are commonly found in aged rats
maintained on standard laboratory diets. 
FDA is continuing to evaluate the FASEB report on sugar alcohols, including mannitol, as well as other data from animal
studies of these substances to determine whether any regulatory action is appropriate for any or all of the sugar alcohols.
During this period of continuing evaluation, mannitol continues to be listed, on an interim basis, for food use.
Roquette America's petition to amend the interim food additive regulation on mannitol, if granted, would not change
the allowed uses of mannitol; it would simply permit a new method of manufacture of the additive. The subject regulation
on mannitol specifies manufacturing procedures that do not include the fermentation process used in Roquette's
production of mannitol. To permit a new manufacturing method, Roquette's petition proposes to amend the interim
food additive regulation (180.25) to provide for the use of 

Zygosaccharomyces rouxii

 in the fermentation process of producing mannitol from sugars and sugar alcohols.
The potential environmental impact of this action is being reviewed. To encourage public participation consistent
with regulations promulgated under the National Environmental Policy Act (40 CFR 1501.4(b)), the agency is placing
the environmental assessment submitted with the petition that is the subject of this notice on public display at the
Dockets Management Branch (address above) for public review and comment. Interested persons may, on or before January
12, 1995, submit to the Dockets Management Branch (address above) written comments. Two copies of any comments are
to be submitted, except that individuals may submit one copy. Comments are to be identified with the docket number
found in brackets in the heading of this document. Received comments may be seen in the office above between 9 a.m. and
4 p.m., Monday through Friday. FDA will also place on public display any amendments to, or comments on, the petitioner's
environmental assessment without further announcement in the 

Federal Register

. If, based on its review, the agency finds that an environmental impact statement is not required and this petition
results in a regulation, the notice of availability of the agency's finding of no significant impact and the evidence
supporting that finding will be published with the regulation in the 

Federal Register

 in accordance with 21 CFR 25.40(c).





Dated: November 28, 1994.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Alan M. Rulis,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Director, Office of Premarket Approval, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9430585 Filed 121294; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>

