 

<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Completed applications (one original and two copies) should be submitted to: Processing and Control Branch, Office
of Community Planning and Development, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street SW.,
Room 7255, Washington, DC 20410, by mail or hand-delivery. When submitting your application, please refer to FR3735,
and include your name, mailing address (including zip code), and telephone number (including area code). HUD, however,
will not accept faxed applications. Applications must be received no later than 4:30 p.m. EST.

 
</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 HUD will not accept direct telephone inquiries about this NOFA. Written inquiries should be mailed or faxed to the
attention of Syl Angel, Director, Office of Technical Assistance, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development,
451 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20410; FAX (202) 7083363. (This is not a toll-free number). 

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 
Paperwork Reduction Act Statement 


The information collection requirements contained in this NOFA have been approved by the Office of Management and
Budget, under section 3504(h) of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 35013520), and assigned OMB
Control Number 25350084. 


I. Background; Purpose; Authority; Amount Allocated 


(A) Background 


HUD's Office of Community Planning and Development (CPD) is consolidating and simplifying the submission requirements
of its formula grant programs to offer local jurisdictions a better ability to shape these and other available resources,
into effective, coordinated, neighborhood and community development strategies to revitalize and physically,
socially and economically strengthen their communities. To complement this overall consolidation and simplification
effort, CPD has designed this NOFA to increase access for technical assistance to CPD grantees, potential grantees
and program participants in the CDBG, HOME, Supportive Housing and CHDO assistance programs. This NOFA places heavy
emphasis upon coordination of technical assistance activities to provide greater flexibility and responsiveness
in meeting the community development and housing needs, including the housing needs of homeless populations in local
jurisdictions, while providing greater flexibility to TA providers in the delivery of assistance services. 
The new application procedures presented in this NOFA will simplify the TA process, promote cost savings, eliminate
duplication, improve the system for potential grantees in need of assistance, and allow interested applicants to
seek to deliver a wider, more integrated array of TA services.




</SUPPLEM>
