 



1.

 Interstate movement from a quarantined area would be prohibited for each of the following: 1) live birds and poultry
infected with or exposed to END; 2) eggs from birds or poultry infected with END; 3) hatching eggs from birds or poultry
exposed to END; 4) litter used by or manure generated by birds and poultry infected with END; and 5) dead birds and poultry,
including any parts of the birds and poultry, infected with END. 



2.

 An area would be removed from quarantine when all: 1) birds and poultry infected with END in the quarantined area have
been euthanized and all dead birds and poultry within the quarantined area have been buried, reduced to ashes by incineration,
reduced to dust by composting, or rendered; 
2) birds and poultry exposed to END have been found to be free of END: 3) eggs produced by birds or poultry infected with
or exposed to END in the quarantined area have been buried, reduced to ashes by incineration, or rendered; 4) manure
produced by or litter used by birds or poultry infected with or exposed to END in the quarantined area has been reduced
to ashes by incineration, or has been buried, composted, or spread on a field and turned under; 5) vehicles with which
birds and poultry infected with or exposed to END or their excrement or litter have had physical contact have been cleaned
and disinfected; 6) cages, coops, containers, troughs, and other equipment used for birds or poultry infected with
or exposed to END, or their excrement or litter, have been reduced to ashes by incineration or have been cleaned and
disinfected in accordance with 9 CFR part 71; and 7) the premises where birds or poultry infected with or exposed to
END were located have been cleaned and disinfected in accordance with 9 CFR part 71. 



3.

 Replacement birds and poultry would not be allowed to be placed in quarantined areas until the Administrator decides
that END has been eradicated and that replacement birds and poultry would not become infected with END. 



4.

 Eggs, other than hatching eggs, from birds and poultry not known to be infected with END could be moved interstate from
a quarantined area under the following conditions: 1) a permit has been obtained and the eggs are accompanied by the
permit; 2) the eggs have been cleaned and sanitized in accordance with 7 CFR part 59; 3) the eggs are packed either in
flats or cases that have not been used before, or in used plastic flats or cases that were first cleaned and sanitized
in accordance with 9 CFR part 71, and any of the flats and cases intended for reuse are cleaned and sanitized in accordance
with 9 CFR part 71 before being moved to a premises where birds or poultry are kept; 4) the eggs are moved interstate to
a processing facility where they are inspected to ensure they are cleaned and sanitized; and 5) a copy of the permit
is submitted to the State animal health official and the Veterinarian in charge for the State of destination. 



5.

 Hatching eggs from birds and poultry not known to be infected with or exposed to END could be moved interstate from a
quarantined area under the following conditions: 1) a permit is obtained and the hatching eggs are accompanied by
the permit; 2) birds or poultry from the eggs are held in the State of destination for not less than 30 days after hatching,
at a premises designated jointly by the Veterinarian in Charge and the State animal health official; and 3) a copy of
the permit accompanying the hatching eggs is submitted so that it is received by both the State animal health official
and the Veterinarian in charge for the State of destination within 72 hours of the arrival of the hatching eggs at the
premises where they are to be held. 



6.

 Pet birds could be moved interstate from a quarantined area provided that, among other provisions: 1) an APHIS permit
has been issued; and 2) the pet birds are not known to be infected with or exposed to END. 



7.

 Interstate movement from a quarantined area would be permitted for each of the following only if specified requirements
are met: 1) live birds and poultry, other than pet birds, that are not known to be infected with or exposed to END; 2) manure
and litter from birds and poultry exposed to END; 3) manure and litter from birds and poultry not known to be infected
with or exposed to END; 4) new or properly disinfected cages, coops, containers, troughs, vehicles, or other equipment
used to handle infected or exposed birds and poultry, and their eggs; 5) dead birds and poultry, including any parts
of the birds and poultry, that are not known to be infected with END. 



Potential Economic Impacts 



The proposed regulations would enhance APHIS's ability to monitor interstate movement of birds and poultry from
areas quarantined because of END. Domestic poultry, egg, and exotic bird operations would be impacted only in the
event of an END outbreak. There has not been a major domestic outbreak of END since an epidemic in southern California
in 197174. However, END is periodically detected in isolated pet bird populations. Smuggled shipments of
exotic species are the source of most outbreaks of END. Historically, APHIS has euthanized all pet birds that are found
within a store in which birds are infected with END. The proposed rule changes would enable APHIS to be more selective
and destroy only those birds and poultry that have been diagnosed as being infected with END. We expect that the savings
to the industry from this more selective euthanization would outweigh any additional restrictions that would be
imposed by the proposed rule changes. Domestic entities would not be severely impacted by either the current regulations
or the proposed rule unless an END outbreak occurs. 




