 

Section 182 of the Act sets out a graduated control program for ozone nonattainment areas. Section 182(a) sets out
requirements applicable in marginal nonattainment areas, which are also made applicable in subsections (b), (c),
(d), and (e) to all other classified ozone nonattainment areas. Among the requirements in section 182(a) is a program
in paragraph (3) of that subsection for stationary sources to prepare and submit to the State each year emission statements
showing actual emissions of volatile organic compounds and nitrogen oxides. This paragraph provides that the States
are to submit a revision to their State Implementation Plans (SIPs) by November 15, 1992 establishing this emission
statement program. 
Section 184(b)(2) of the Act extends the requirements for major stationary sources in moderate ozone nonattainment
areas to sources in the ozone transport region which emit, or have the potential to emit, 50 tpy or more of VOC. Section
182(f) extends the requirements for major stationary sources of VOC in ozone transport regions to major sources of
NO

X

. For areas designated as attainment or nonattainment areas which are not classified, section 182(f) refers to section
302 where the major source definition for NO

X

 is the potential to emit 100 tons per year. Therefore, the emission statement requirement includes sources in attainment
areas and nonattainment areas which are not classified within ozone transport regions which emit, or have the potential
to emit 100 tpy or more of NO

X

 or 50 tpy or more of VOC. 
Connecticut, Rhode Island, Vermont, and Maine are each located in the ozone transport region. The applicability
of these States' emission statement regulations must be State-wide, and cover all stationary sources which emit
or have the potential to emit 50 tpy of VOC or 100 tpy of NO

X

. In addition, Connecticut, Rhode Island, and the following counties of Maine: Androscoggin, Cumberland, Hancock,
Kennebec, Knox, Lincoln, Sagadahoc, Waldo, and York are classified ozone nonattainment areas and are therefore
subject to the more stringent source threshold requirement of section 182(a)(3)(B). For these classified ozone
nonattainment areas, the source threshold of these States' emission statement regulations must cover all sources
which emit VOC or NO

X

. 
For classified ozone nonattainment areas, the States may waive, with EPA approval, the requirement for an emission
statement for classes or categories of sources with less than 25 tons per year of actual plant-wide NO

X

 or VOC emissions in nonattainment areas if the class or category is included in the base year and periodic inventories
and emissions are calculated using emission factors established by EPA (such as those found in EPA publication AP42)
or other methods acceptable to EPA. Connecticut, Maine, and Rhode Island have provided 1990 baseyear inventories
which include emissions from sources that emit below 25 tpy of VOC or NO

X

 emissions and will be updating these inventories every three years until the area is redesignated to attainment.
In addition, the methods and emission factors used by Connecticut, Maine, and Rhode Island to calculate emissions
for the 1990 baseyear inventory have been reviewed by EPA. As a result, EPA finds the 25 tpy threshold acceptable. 
Additionally, if either VOC or NO

X

 is emitted at or above the statutory reporting level, the other pollutant must be included in the emission statement,
even if it is emitted at levels below the specified cutoffs. 
The CAA requires that States' rules specify that facilities must submit the first emission statement to the State
within three years after November 15, 1990, and annually thereafter. EPA requests that the States submit the emission
data to EPA through the Aerometric Information Retrieval System (AIRS). The minimum emission statement data should
include: certification of data accuracy; source identification information; operating schedule; emissions information
(including annual and typical ozone season day emissions); control equipment information; and process data. EPA
developed emission statements data elements to be consistent with other source and State reporting requirements.
This consistency is essential to assist States with quality assurance for emission estimates and to facilitate consolidation
of all EPA reporting requirements. 


II. Analysis of State Submission 


A. Procedural Background 


The Act requires States to observe certain procedural requirements in developing its SIP, of which the emission statement
program will become a part. Section 110(l)(2) of the Act provides that each revision to an implementation plan submitted
by a State under the CAA must be adopted by such State after reasonable notice and public hearing. EPA must at the outset
determine whether a submittal is complete and therefore warrants further EPA review and action (see section 110(k)(1)
and 57 FR 13565). EPA's completeness criteria for SIP submittals are set out at 40 CFR part 51, appendix V (1991), as
amended by 57 FR 42216 (August 26, 1991). 
Connecticut held public hearings on the proposed changes to the SIP narrative on January 5, 6, and 7, 1993. Following
the public hearing, Connecticut submitted the SIP revision to EPA on January 12, 1993. The SIP revision was reviewed
by EPA and deemed complete on March 16, 1993. The State of Maine held a public hearing on Chapter 137 and amendments to
Chapter 100 on July 14, 1993. Following the public hearing, the regulations were adopted by the State on November 10,
1993 and submitted to EPA on January 3, 1994. EPA deemed the submittal complete on February 16, 1994. Rhode Island held
a public hearing on Regulation 14, ``Record Keeping and Reporting'' on December 16, 1992. The regulation was adopted
by the State on January 11, 1993. EPA received the submittal on January 12, 1993 and deemed the SIP revision complete
in a March 9, 1993 letter. The State of Vermont held a public hearing on the proposed changes to the SIP narrative on March
10, 1993. Vermont submitted the SIP narrative and regulations 5801 through 5806 to EPA on August 10,
1993. On October 25, 1993, EPA deemed the submittal complete. 




