 

C. Welfare Evaluation Requirements 



CAA section 211(b)(2)(B) states that the Administrator may 
require manufacturers to furnish ``reasonable and necessary'' 
information for determining ``the extent to which F/FA emissions 
affect the public health or welfare''. The term ``welfare effects'' 
encompasses a variety of complex and interrelated factors. In 
terms of motor vehicle F/FA emissions, welfare effects could 
include the impact of air pollution on the public health and the 
environment, including a broad range of effects on aquatic and 
terrestrial ecosystems, cultivated crops and other vegetation, 
natural and man-made materials, wildlife, and stratospheric 
ozone. Air pollution effects on the public welfare also include 
important environmental concerns such as noxious odors or 
visibility impairment, which may detract from human well-being. 

Except for stipulating that welfare effects should be 
addressed, the statute gives EPA broad discretion about how to 
address welfare effects. EPA recognizes that, at the present 
time, scientific experience and laboratory screening methods for 
the evaluation of welfare effects are more limited than in the 
area of health effects. Thus, today's rule limits the routinely required welfare evaluation to requirements that
are coincident 
or concurrent with the evaluation of health effects. These 
include the literature search, emission characterization, and 
exposure analysis requirements of Tier 1. While at this time EPA 
is not requiring biological testing for welfare effects, the 
Administrator retains the authority to require additional 
evaluation and/or testing of welfare effects at the Tier 3 level, 
when the outcome of lower tiers demonstrates both significant 
environmental toxicity and exposure potential. EPA will 
determine the need for Tier 3 welfare effects testing on a case-by-case basis. 

In the NPRM, EPA proposed to require modeling analyses for 
atmospheric reactivity, environmental fate/partitioning, and 
exposure as part of the welfare evaluation. EPA requested 
comments on the feasibility of requiring such modeling analyses 
as a routine requirement for registration. Commenters urged EPA 
to limit the modeling requirements due to the lack of 
standardized methods in this area of study. Recognizing the 
limitations of modeling methods and the availability of existing 
data for some of the areas of study of interest in this rule, 
this final rule does not require modeling analyses as part of 
Tier 1. 

EPA recognizes that other EPA programs are actively 
researching and controlling mobile and stationary source 
contributions to major air pollution problems such as 
tropospheric/stratospheric ozone, global warming, and acid rain. 
Furthermore, modeled ozone reactivity data are already available 
for most conventional and alternative fuels. EPA believes that 
if additional modeling is deemed necessary, this could be 
performed by manufacturers under Tier 3. Also, EPA may conduct 
simple modeling, using the emission data submitted by registrants 
under Tier 1, if needed for regulatory decisions. 

Regarding environmental fate and exposure modeling, EPA 
recognizes that these types of analyses will be extremely 
difficult due to the complex nature of F/FA emissions. Because 
both environmental partitioning models and exposure models 
address single compounds rather than mixtures, it would be unduly 
burdensome and unreasonable to require all registrants to perform 
these analyses on each individual emission constituent. 
Requiring the modeling of each individual emission product would 
also result in duplication of information and, therefore, would 
be inconsistent with the original intent of the statute. 

In addition, the environmental models are applicable only to 
a limited number of emission products for which appropriate 
physical/chemical data are available in order to perform the 
analysis. In terms of available exposure models, these usually 
rely on carbon monoxide monitoring data and related emission 
rates to estimate potential exposures. This means that the 
applicability of available exposure models is somewhat limited to 
the analysis of compounds whose chemical/physical behavior is 
similar to carbon monoxide. 

Based on the above factors, EPA believes that quantitative 
evaluations of potential exposures and environmental 
fate/partitioning of F/FA emissions will be better addressed at 
the Tier 3 level on a case-by-case basis, where they can be 
focused on specific compounds of potential environmental concern. 






