 



Comment:

 Six commenters suggested that the regulation 
include a remedy which would allow a ban on all admissions 
to a facility, regardless of the resident's source of 
payment. Three commenters further indicated that this 
remedy should be mandatory in cases involving immediate 
jeopardy. 


Response:

 We cannot accept these suggestions. The Act 
does not provide the authority to ban admissions for 
residents whose source of payment is other than Medicare or 
Medicaid. The Act does provide for the remedies of denial 
of all payment for SNFs and NFs by the Secretary and for 
denial of payment for all new admissions for SNFs by the 
Secretary, and for NFs, by the Secretary or the States. The 
proposed rule included denial of payment for all new 
admissions in certain diagnostic categories or requiring 
specialized care, but we have not included that remedy in 
this final rule for the reasons discussed under ``Denial of 
Payment'' later in this preamble. We believe that these 
remedies, along with the other available remedies for 
noncompliance, should be sufficient to promote a shift from 
noncompliance to substantial compliance. 


Comment:

 Two commenters stated that the option of 
closing the facility should be available for SNFs and not 
just for those facilities that participate as NFs or 
SNF/NFs. 


Response:

 For SNFs, HCFA has termination as an option 
for remedying noncompliance. While HCFA can terminate a 
SNF's Medicare participation, it cannot revoke a facility's 
license to operate within a State. Therefore, actual 
closures of facilities and transfers of residents are 
remedies which are options only for those facilities for 
which the State is the enforcing agency because the State 
also has licensing authority; closures of facilities are 
license related actions. 


Comment:

 One commenter proposed that off-site 
monitoring be added to the list of available remedies. 


Response:

 We are not accepting this suggestion. 
Enforcement remedies are designed to motivate providers to 
achieve and maintain compliance with participation 
requirements. The motivation is provided by the nature of 
the various available enforcement remedies that either 
require some action to be taken by the provider or that 
involve financial consequences directly or indirectly to the 
provider. Since off-site monitoring would be performed by 
the State rather than imposed on the facility, and since 
there would be no responsibility and, therefore, no 
incentive for a facility response, we conclude that this 
type of monitor is not an enforcement remedy to be imposed 
against facilities with deficiencies. 


Comment:

 One commenter proposed the addition of State 
and Secretarial authority to order the hospitalization of 
residents in cases involving immediate jeopardy, if the 
facility is unable or unwilling to respond to the residents' 
needs. 


Response:

 We do not believe an additional remedy is 
needed in order to respond to this commenter's concern. As 
temporary management will be imposed in those cases where 
immediate jeopardy is identified in a facility that will not 
be terminated immediately, control of the situation, 
including determinations as to the care of individual 
residents, will be shifted away from the facility's own 
management until the jeopardy is removed. Should the 
facility fail to relinquish control to the temporary 
manager, termination will result and residents will be 
transferred to facilities that are able to provide care in a 
manner consistent with certification requirements. 


Comment:

 One commenter proposed that public notice be 
included as an available remedy. 


Response:

 Public notices are already required by 
regulation for any SNF termination. Public notices are also 
allowed, but not required (unless the State has its own 
public notice requirement), for NFs that will be subject to 
termination. 
We do not believe that the regulation should expand the 
use of public notices as a remedy for noncompliance by 
including them in this section's listing. Public notices 
are frequently costly, and they do not always serve the 
intent of notifying the widest possible audience of a 
facility's noncompliance. Further, facilities are already 
required to post the availability of the results of their 
surveys on their premises. Accordingly, we are not adopting 
this suggestion in the final regulation. 





