 

(B) Other conditions of the temporary relocation are not reasonable; or 

(iii) A tenant-occupant of a dwelling who moves from the building/complex permanently after he or she has been required
to move to another dwelling unit in the same building/complex in order to carry out the project, if either: 

(A) The tenant is not offered reimbursement for all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with
the move; or 

(B) Other conditions of the move are not reasonable; or 

(2) Notwithstanding the provision of paragraph (g)(1) of this section, a person does not qualify as a ``displaced
person'' (and is not eligible for relocation assistance under the URA or this section), if: 

(i) The person has been evicted for serious or repeated violation of the terms and conditions of the lease or occupancy
agreement, violation of applicable Federal, State or local law, or other good cause, and HUD determines that the eviction
was not undertaken for the purpose of evading the obligation to provide relocation assistance; 

(ii) The person moved into the property after the submission of the proposal to HUD and, before signing a lease and commencing
occupancy, was provided written notice of the project, its possible impact on the person (e.g., the person may be displaced,
temporarily relocated or suffer a rent increase) and the fact that he or she would not qualify as a ``displaced person''
(or for any assistance provided under this section) as a result of the project; 

(iii) The person is ineligible under 49 CFR 24.2(g)(2); or 

(iv) HUD determines that the person was not displaced as a direct result of acquisition, rehabilitation, or demolition
for the project; 

(3) The Agency may request, at any time, a HUD determination of whether a displacement is or would be covered by this
section. 

(h) 

Definition of initiation of negotiations. 

For purposes of determining the formula for computing the replacement housing assistance to be provided to a residential
tenant displaced as a direct result of private-owner rehabilitation, demolition, or acquisition of the real property,
the term 

initiation of negotiations

 means the Owner's execution of the agreement covering the rehabilitation, demolition, or acquisition.




(Approved by Office of Management and Budget under OMB Control Number 25060121) 



PART 884_SECTION 8 HOUSING ASSISTANCE PAYMENTS PROGRAM, NEW 
CONSTRUCTION SET-ASIDE FOR SECTION 515 RURAL RENTAL HOUSING PROJECTS 



27. The authority citation for part 884 continues to read as follows: 







Authority: 

42 U.S.C. 1437a, 1437c, 1437f, 3535(d), and 1361113619.




28. Section 884.112 is revised to read as follows: 



884.112

Displacement, relocation, and acquisition. 



(a) 

Minimizing displacement. 

Consistent with the other goals and objectives of this part, Owners shall assure that they have taken all reasonable
steps to minimize the displacement of persons (households, businesses, nonprofit organizations, and farms) as
a result of a project assisted under this part. 

(b) 

Temporary relocation. 

The following policies cover residential tenants who will not be required to move permanently but who must relocate
temporarily for the project. Such tenants must be provided: 

(1) Reimbursement for all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with the temporary relocation,
including the cost of moving to and from the temporary housing, any increase in monthly rent/utility costs, and any
incidental expenses; 

(2) Appropriate advisory services, including reasonable advance written notice of: 

(i) The date and approximate duration of the temporary relocation; 


