 

Complying with the proposed rule will increase the costs of providing services at off-site waste and recovery operations
facilities. The magnitude of the cost increases would vary from facility to facility depending on factors such as
the types of wastes or recoverable materials received, the types of waste or recovery operations performed, the number
and types of emission points for each of these operations, and the level of emission control already in place at the
facility. Cost increases would lead to some price increases, and possibly reduced profits for some firms in the business.


The proposed rule is likely to affect prices charged in almost all of the 60 markets studied, although many markets
are likely to experience very small changes or none at all. The most severely affected market (in percentage terms)
may experience a price increase in excess of 70 percent. The greatest absolute increase in price would be an increase
of $500 per Mg of waste, which would be a 30 percent increase. The greatest decrease in quantity would be 375 Mg of waste.
Overall, the quantity of off-site waste managed at the 700-plus facilities in the data base used for the economic impact
analysis would decrease by slightly over 1,600 Mg, or about 0.009 percent of the estimated 19 million Mg of waste managed.


The EPA's analysis assumed that owners of affected facilities would respond to this rule by either installing and
operating the required air emission control equipment, discontinuing specific individual waste or recovery operations
affected by the rule, or closing the entire facility. The EPA projects that although 100 individual waste and recovery
operations located at a number of facilities could shut down as a result of this proposed rule, only about 10 entire
facilities would close. 

A number of decisions made by the EPA regarding the off-site waste and recovery operations NESHAP rulemaking since
the completion of the economic impact analysis change the costs to comply with the rule for some individual waste or
recovery operations at a particular facility from the costs used for the economic impact analysis. The compliance
costs for some of these individual operations would increase while for other individual operations the costs would
decrease depending on site-specific factors. However on a facility-wide basis, the EPA expects that the total cost
to comply with the requirements of the proposed rule for most of individual off-site waste and recovery operations
facilities listed in the data base to be about the same as the total individual facility compliance costs used for the
economic impact analysis described above. Thus, the EPA believes that the results of this analysis are representative
of the overall economic impacts of the proposed rule. 



