 

(4) Locations, with or without lightning protection, where operations involving unprotected electro-explosive
devices or circuitry are being performed.
(b) A qualified person in authority should make the final decision about evacuation. When special warning is required
for shutdown, volunteer observers or a detector (lightning detection system) may be used.
(c) All personnel shall evacuate to locations identified in the SOP. These locations shall be at unbarricaded intraline
distance or greater, or in a shelter providing equivalent protection.


184.26 

Explosives in process during shutdown.


When electrical storms cause evacuation of explosives buildings, operations requiring constant attention shall
be manned by the minimum number of personnel consistent with safety requirements. Once the process has reached a condition
in which it is considered safe to leave, the building shall be completely evacuated. Explosives processes requiring
constant attention should not be started when an electrical storm threatens.


184.27 

Maintenance and repairs to equipment and buildings.


(a) All new or newly repaired explosives processing equipment shall be examined and tested to ensure that it is in safe
working condition before being placed in service.
(b) Before repairs can proceed on equipment exposed to explosives, a decontamination tag, signed by supervisory
personnel, shall be placed on the equipment. The tag shall certify all explosives have been removed from the equipment
or identify parts that could not be cleaned, and shall provide maintenance personnel with instructions on safe handling.
(c) Major repairs or changes shall not be undertaken in a building during regular operations until the hazardous material
has been removed and the employee in charge of the building informed.
(d) Repairs cannot start in an explosives location until all explosives have been removed from equipment, crevices,
areas beneath floors, within walls and pipes, and under fittings where explosives could be ignited. The entire area
should be wetted or washed down thoroughly. An inspection of the immediate vicinity shall assure no explosives remain.
(e) After repairing, maintaining or adjusting machines and equipment, an inspection shall be made to assure all tools
used for the work are removed. Before work resumes, operators should check their own equipment to ensure its safe operating
condition.
(f) Electricians shall not wear conductive shoes while working on electrical equipment. Exposed explosives and
other static-sensitive hazardous material shall be removed before work begins.
(g) Safe practices specified elsewhere in this part shall also apply to maintenance employees.
(h) Maintenance and tool rooms in an operating line should be separated from explosives by intraline distance. Protection
equivalent to that afforded by a suitable barrier shall be provided when this proves impractical.


184.28 

Safety hand-tools.


(a) Hand tools constructed of wood or materials such as bronze, lead, and ``K'' Monel metal shall be used for work in
locations that contain exposed explosives or hazardous concentrations of flammable dusts, gases, or vapors. While
safer, the nonferrous metals used in so-called non-sparking tools may produce sparks.
(b) If their strength makes the use of ferrous metal hand tools necessary, exposed explosives and other highly combustible
materials shall be removed from the area as required in 184.27 (b) through (d).


184.29 

Operational shields.


(a) The purpose of operational shields is to prevent propagation of explosions from one explosives operation or location
to another, to protect facilities and equipment and to provide personnel protection. Therefore, all AE operations
and processes shall be assessed prior to work performance to determine the type of hazard involved, the level of risk
associated with the AE material or item, and the corresponding level of protection normally provided.
(b) The primary hazards that accompany explosions and deflagrations are potential blast overpressure, fragmentation
(primary and secondary), and thermal effects. These hazards and the following factors shall be considered, as a minimum,
during the above assessment:
(1) Initiation sensitivity,
(2) Potential ignition sources,
(3) Quantity of AE,
(4) Rate of burning,
(5) AE and personnel resource exposures, and
(6) Protection capabilities of shields.
(c) When analysis of these factors indicates an unacceptable probability of explosion or deflagration, resources
shall be dedicated to additional protection for personnel and equipment. If operational shields are selected for
this purpose, they shall be tested prior to installation to assure compliance with the following criteria:
(1) Prevent propagation due to blast overpressure.
(2) Contain all fragmentation or direct fragments (primary and secondary) away from areas requiring protection.
(3) Contain thermal effects to prevent propagation.


