 



(ii) 

Monitoring requirements.


 
(A) Continuous Emissions Monitoring System (CEMS) Requirements. Owners or operators subject to the requirements
of this paragraph because of paragraph (u)(3)(i)(F) of this section shall comply with the following: 

(

1

) By the applicable compliance date specified in paragraph (u)(5) of this section, install, calibrate, operate,
and maintain a CEMS in accordance with the applicable requirements of appendices B and F of 40 CFR part 60 to demonstrate
continuous compliance with the requirements of paragraphs (u)(3)(i) (A) and (B) of this section. The CEMS shall be
installed and operational before conducting the initial compliance test required under paragraphs (u)(6)(i)(C)
and (u)(7) of this section. The owner or operator shall submit to the Administrator documentation that the CEMS is
in compliance with the requirements of paragraph (u) of this section. 

(

2

) Each owner or operator shall submit an excess emissions and monitoring systems performance report, in accordance
with the requirements of 60.7 (c) and (d) and 60.13, to the Administrator within 30 days after the end
of each calendar quarter. 

(B) Any owner or operator of a unit with an annual heat input rate of less than 9 &times; 10

9

 Btu/yr and not complying with the requirements of paragraph (u)(3)(i) of this section shall install a totalizing
fuel meter for each applicable unit and for each fuel. Meters shall be accurate to 

#

  1 percent, as certified by the manufacturer in writing. Fuel consumption for each unit shall be compiled monthly into
a rolling 12 calendar month report. 

(iii) 

Recordkeeping requirements. 

Any owner or operator of a unit subject to this section shall maintain all records necessary to demonstrate compliance
with the section for a period of five calendar years at the plant where the subject unit is located. The records shall
be made available to the Administrator upon request. The owner or operator shall maintain records of the following
information for each day the unit is operated: 

(A) Identification and location of each unit subject to the requirements of this section. 

(B) Calendar date of record. 
(C) The number of hours the unit is operated during each  day. 
(D) Boiler load, fuel type, actual time of startups and 
shutdowns, breakdown periods, and the type and duration of 
maintenance and repairs. 
(E) The results of all compliance tests and monitored stack 
gas oxygen concentrations. 
(F) If a unit is equipped with a flue gas recirculation 
system, records of the percentage of the flue gas that is 
recirculated to the combustion chamber of the unit. 
(G) If a unit is equipped with a CEMS: 

(

1

) The NO

X

 and CO emission concentrations measured, 
corrected to 3 percent volume stack gas O

2

 on a dry basis 
averaged over a period of 15 consecutive minutes. 

(

2

) Identification of time periods during which NO

X

 and CO 
standards are exceeded, the reason for the exceedance, and action 
taken to correct the exceedance and to prevent similar future 
exceedances. 

(

3

) Identification of the time periods for which operating 
conditions and pollutant data were not obtained including reasons 
for not obtaining sufficient data and a description of corrective 
actions taken. 

(H) For units with an annual heat input rate less than 9 &times; 10

9

 Btu/yr, the monthly fuel consumption and the rolling 12 calendar month fuel consumption. 

(I) Any owner or operator that uses a non-gaseous fuel in 
any unit, pursuant to the requirements of paragraph (u)(4)(ii) of 
this section, shall maintain daily records of each occurrence. 
Each record shall specify the reason why non-gaseous fuel is used 
in a unit and shall include the type of fuel, the quantity of 
fuel, and the hours of operation during the use of non-gaseous 
fuel. If non-gaseous fuel is used during a natural gas 
curtailment, the owner or operator shall obtain information from 
the natural gas supplier to verify the period of curtailment. If 
non-gaseous fuel is used to maintain the non-gaseous fuel system, 
the owner or operator shall maintain records of the total hours 
during which the unit was operated on non-gaseous fuel during 
each calendar year. 

(7) 

Test methods.

 

(i) Any owner or operator of a unit that is required to 
perform a compliance test to demonstrate compliance with the 
standards specified in paragraph (u)(3(i) of this section, or 
chooses to perform a compliance test to demonstrate compliance 
with the requirements of paragraph (u)(3)(ii) of this section, 
shall comply with the requirements of 60.8 (c), (d), and (e). 
The test shall be performed and data reduced and reported as 
follows: 

(A) Each emission test shall be conducted while the unit is 
operated at maximum capacity and operating under representative 
operating conditions. 

(B) Each emission test shall be conducted in accordance with the appropriate test methods in 40 CFR part 60, appendix
A. Except for the modifications in this paragraph and unless otherwise approved by the Administrator: NO

X

 shall be measured in accordance with 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, Method 7E; CO shall be measured in accordance with 40
CFR part 60, appendix A, Method 10; and the diluent shall be measured using 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, Method 3A. Testing
shall be conducted for twelve 15 minute testing periods. Compliance shall be evaluated for each 15 minute period.
Data recorded during testing to determine the 15 minute average shall either be continuously integrated by the testing
instrument and data recorder, or recorded manually at 30 second intervals during each 15 minute test period. Zero
and calibration checks shall be conducted after each 15 minute test period. 

(C) The ppm CO emission limit required by paragraph (u)(3)(i)(B) of this section shall be established during the initial
compliance test for NO

X

 emissions to establish a ppm CO emission limit that represents good operating and combustion practices for fuel(s)
burned in the unit. The CO emission limit established for determining subsequent compliance shall be documented
in the applicable certification report required under paragraph (u)(6)(i)(C) of this section. 



