 

c. All rights to seek judicial review or otherwise to challenge or contest the validity of the order entered pursuant
to this agreement; and

d. All claims under the Equal Access to Justice Act.

4. This agreement shall not become part of the public record of the proceeding unless and until it is accepted by the
Commission. If this agreement is accepted by the Commission, it, together with the draft of complaint contemplated
thereby, will be placed on the public record for a period of sixty (60) days and information in respect thereto publicly
released. The Commission thereafter may either withdraw its acceptance of this agreement and so notify the proposed
respondents, in which event it will take such action as it may consider appropriate, or issue and serve its complaint
(in such form as the circumstances may require) and decision, in disposition of this proceeding.

5. This agreement is for settlement purposes only and does not constitute an admission by proposed respondents that
the law has been violated as alleged in the draft of complaint, or that the facts alleged in the draft complaint, other
than the jurisdictional facts, are true.

6. This agreement contemplates that, if it is accepted by the Commission, and if such acceptance is not subsequently
withdrawn by the Commission pursuant to the provisions of 2.34 of the Commission's Rules, the Commission may,
without further notice to proposed respondents, (1) issue its complaint corresponding in form and substance with
the draft of complaint here attached and its decision containing the following order to cease and desist in disposition
of the proceeding, and (2) make information public in respect thereto. When so entered, the order to cease and desist
shall have the same force and effect and may be altered, modified or set aside in the same manner and within the same time
provided by statute for other orders. The order shall become final upon service. Delivery by the U.S. Postal Service
of the complaint and decision containing the agreed-to order to proposed respondents' address as stated in this agreement
shall constitute service. Proposed respondents waive any right they may have to any other manner of service. The complaint
may be used in construing the terms of the order, and no agreement, understanding, representation, or interpretation
not contained in the order or the agreement may be used to vary or contradict the terms of the order.

7. Proposed respondents have read the proposed complaint and order contemplated hereby. They understand that once
the order has been issued, they will be required to file one or more compliance reports showing that they have fully
complied with the order. Proposed respondents further understand that they may be liable for civil penalties in the
amount provided by law for each violation of the order after it becomes final.



Order



For purposes of this order, the following definitions shall apply:

``Work Opportunity'' means any offer to a person to earn income by producing goods or providing services, where (1)
the offeree must pay to the offeror, or a person identified by the offeror, any amount of money, whether in the form of
a registration, application or other fee, a payment for initial inventory or supplies, or in any other form, as a condition
of participating; and (2) the offeror represents that the offeree will or could be compensated in any manner by the
offeror or by a person identified by the offeror.

``Participant'' means any person who pays the offeror of a work opportunity, or a person identified by such offeror,
any amount of money, whether in the form of a registration, application or other fee, a payment for initial inventory
or supplies, or in any other form, as a condition of participating in a work opportunity.

``Net Earnings or Profits'' means the compensation paid to a participant in a work opportunity, less the costs to a
participant of materials, supplies and shipping.



I





It is ordered 

That respondents Homespun Products, Inc., a corporation, G  S Marketing, Inc., a corporation, their successors
and assigns, and their officers, and Gregory A. Straw, individually and as an officer of Homespun Products, Inc. and
G  S Marketing, Inc., and respondents' agents, representatives and employees, directly or through any corporation,
subsidiary, division or other device, in connection with the marketing, advertising, promotion, offering, or sale
of any work opportunity, in or affecting commerce, as ``commerce'' is defined in the Federal Trade Commission Act,
do forthwith cease and desist from:

A. Making any material misrepresentation, including but not limited to:

1. Misrepresenting the past, present or potential future earnings or profits of participants in any work opportunity;
or

2. Misrepresenting the marketplace demand for any product or service for which respondents are offering a work opportunity.

B. Making any earnings-related or profit-related claim which uses the phrase ``up to'' or words of similar import
or which states any dollar amount, unless the stated level of earnings or profits constitutes the net earnings or profits
which can be achieved by an appreciable number of participants; and further, in any instances where consumers could
not reasonably foresee the major factors or conditions affecting the ability to achieve the stated level of earnings
or profits, cease and desist from failing to disclose clearly and prominently the class of consumers who can achieve
the stated level.



II





It is further ordered 

That for three (3) years after the last date of dissemination of any representation covered by this Order, respondents,
or their successors and assigns, shall maintain and upon request make available to the Federal Trade Commission for
inspection and copying:

A. Specimen copies of all materials disseminated which contain such representation;

