 

Alternate Emergency Egress Standard for Airport Traffic Control Towers_Final Version



August 30, 1993.



Alternate Emergency Egress Standard for Air Traffic Control Towers (ATCT)



a. Scope and Application



1. General. Airport Traffic Control Towers (ATCTs) are unique structures used for the control of aircraft, usually
over or near an airport facility. The distinctive mission of ATCTs requires ATCT designs that permit 360
&cir; visibility at the cab level and, in many cases, sufficient space for radar equipment and administrative activities
related to ATCT operations.

2. This standard applies to all ATCTs.

3. Specific. This standard sets forth minimum fundamental requirements essential to providing a safe means of egress
from fire and similar emergencies. Nothing in this standard shall be construed to prohibit a better type of building
construction, more exits, or otherwise safer conditions than the minimum requirements specified herein.

4. Equivalent Protection. The use of alternative arrangements or construction, developed or approved by a licensed
fire protection engineer, may be permitted by the authority having jurisdiction when it is shown that these features
provide a level of safety to life equivalent to that required in this standard or, where this standard is silent on an
issue, by other standards or codes.



b. Definitions



1. ``Aisle'' is a passageway between rows of desks, cabinets, equipment, etc, generally within a room or work area
which leads to or connects with a corridor.

2. ``Approved'' refers to equipment listed or approved by a nationally recognized testing laboratory.

3. ``ASTM'' represents the American Society for Testing and Materials, who establishes flame spread characteristics
for materials used in building construction and furnishing.

4. ``ATCT'' represents an airport traffic control tower and is an occupied structure containing equipment and supplies
necessary for aircraft control and related activities.

5. ``Authority Having Jurisdiction'' is the Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) is responsible for implementing the requirements of this standard for
FAA-owned or occupied ATCTs.

6. ``Base Building'' is a single or multiple level structure attached to an ATCT and which may house administrative,
air traffic control, or facility management functions.

7. ``Corridor'' is an enclosed passageway which limits the means of egress to a single path of travel.

8. ``Decorations'' are curtains, hangings, draperies, mirrors, or other embellishments suspended from walls or
ceilings.

9. ``Draftstopping'' is any building material installed to prevent the movement of air, smoke, gases, and flame to
other areas of the building through large concealed passages such as attic spaces and floor assemblies with suspended
ceilings or open-web trusses.

10. ``Emergency action plan'' is a plan for a workplace, or parts thereof, describing what procedures the employer
and employees must take to ensure employee safety from fire or other emergencies.

11. ``Emergency escape route'' is the route that employees are directed to follow in the event they are required to
evacuate the workplace or seek a designated refuge area.

12. ``Exit'' is that portion of a means of egress which is separated from all other spaces of the building or structure
by construction or equipment as required in this standard to provide a protected way of travel to the exit discharge.

13. ``Exit access'' is that portions of a means of egress which leads to an exit.

14. ``Exit discharge'; is that portion of a means of egress between the termination of an exit and a public way.

15. ``Fire Partition'' is a vertical assembly of material having protected openings and designed to restrict the
spread of fire.

16. ``Fire Resistive or Resistant'' refers to the ability of materials or assemblies of construction to withstand
exposure under standard fire test conditions for a prescribed temperature and period of time without structural
failure.

17. ``Fire Separation Assembly'' is a continuous barrier, either horizontally or vertically oriented, with a fire
resistance rating and protected openings, designed to restrict the spread of fire.

18. ``Fire Separation Distance'' is the distance in feed measured from the building face to the closest interior lot
line, to the center line of a street or public way or to an imaginary line between two buildings on the same property.

19. ``Firestopping'' is approved noncombustible building material installed to prevent the movement of flame and
gases to other areas of a building through small concealed passages in building components such as floors, walls,
and stairs.

20. ``Furnishings'' are chairs, tables, plants, or other movable objects.

21. ``Hazardous Areas'' are areas of an ATCT possessing a degree of hazard greater than that normal to the facility,
such as areas used for the storage of combustibles or flammable materials, or areas containing furnaces or boilers.

22. ``High hazard contents'' are contents classified as those which are liable to burn with extreme rapidity or from
which poisonous fumes or explosions are to be feared in the event of fire (such as flammable or combustible liquids).

23. ``Interior Finish'' is the exposed interior surfaces of a building including, but not limited, to, walls and ceilings.



