 


6. Applicants maintain, however, that there is no public policy reason why a ``tax burden charge'' designed to cover
the expense of federal taxes should be treated as sales load or otherwise be subject to the sales load limits of Rule
6e3(T). Applicants also assert that nothing in the administrative history of Rule 6e3(T) (or, for that
matter, in the administrative history of Rule 6e2, its predecessor rule) suggests that the Commission intended
to treat tax charges as sales load.



7. Applicants assert that the public policy that underlies Rule 6e3T(b)(13)(i), like that which underlies
Sections 27(a)(1) and 27(h)(1), is to prevent excessive sales loads from being charged in connection with the sale
of periodic payment plan certificates. Applicants submit that the treatment of a ``tax burden charge'' attributable
to the receipt of purchase payments as sales load would in no way further this legislative purpose because such a deduction
has no relation to the payment of sales commissions or other distribution expenses.



8. Applicants assert that the genesis of Rule 6e3T(c)(4) supports this analysis. in this regard, Applicants
note that Section 2(a)(35) of the 1940 Act provides a scale against which the percent limits of Sections 27(a)(1) and
27(h)(1) thereof may be measured. Applicants submit that the Commission's intent in adopting Rule 6e3T(c)(4)
was to tailor the general terms of Section 2(a)(35) to flexible premium variable life insurance contracts in order,
among other things, to facilitate verification by the Commission of compliance with the sales load limits set forth
in Rule 6e3T(b)(13)(i). Applicants submit that Rule 6e3T(c)(4) does not depart, in principal, from
Section 2(a)(35), and that both Section 2(a)(35) and Rule 6e3T(c)(4) define ``sales load'' derivatively.
 


9. Applicants further assert that Section 2(a)(35) clearly excludes from the definition of ``sales load'' under
the 1940 Act deductions from purchase payments for ``issue taxes.'' Applicants submit that the exclusion of charges
for expenses attributable to federal taxes from sales load (as defined in Section 2(a)(35)) is consistent with the
protection of investors and the purposes intended by the policies and provisions of the 1940 Act. By extension, Applicants
submit, it is equally consistent to exclude such charges, including the ``tax burden charge'' described above, from
the definition of ``sales load'' in Rule 6e3T(c)(4).



10. Applicants submit that the reference in Section 2(a)(35) to administrative expenses or fees that are ``not properly
chargeable to sales or promotional activities'' suggests that the only charges or deductions intended to fall within
the definition of ``sales load'' are those that 

are

 properly chargeable to such activities. Because the proposed ``tax burden charge'' will be used to pay costs attributable
to Providentmutual's federal tax liabilities, and such costs are not properly chargeable to sales or promotional
activities, Applicants assert that the language of Section 2(a)(35) is another indication that not treating the
proposed ``tax burden charge'' as sales load is consistent with the purposes intended by the policies and provisions
of the 1940 Act.



11. Applicants state that the specification of only state premium taxes in Rule 6e3T(c)(4)(v) probably is
an historical accident, related to the fact that the Section 848 tax burden attributable to the receipt of premiums
did not exist when Rule 6e3T was initially adopted in 1984 and amended in 1987. Applicants note that nothing
in the administrative history of Rule 6e3(T) suggests that the exclusion from the definition of ``sales load''
of deductions for tax liabilities attributable to the amount of premium payments received was tried to the type of
government entity imposing such taxes.




