 

As for cordage specifications, the FHWA is incorporating by reference (1) CRS1, Polyester/Polypropylene
Composite Rope Specifications, Three- and Eight-Strand Standard Construction, May 1979, (2) PPRS2, Polypropylene
Fiber Rope, 3-Strand and 8-Strand Constructions, revised August 1992, (3) PETRS2, Polyester Fiber Rope,
3-Strand and 8-Strand Constructions, revised January 1993, (4) NRS1, Nylon Rope Specifications, Three-
and Eight-Strand Standard Construction, May 1979, and (5) C1, Double Braided Nylon Rope Specifications, DBN-January
1984. The incorporation of CRS1, NRS1 and C1 is consistent with the NPRM and the inclusion of PPRS2
and PETRS2 is in response to the docket comments. The FHWA has reviewed the Cordage Institute's recommendation
concerning the working load limits for manila rope (three-strand laid construction), and notes that the recommendation
results in (1) an increase in the working load limit for rope with diameters of 3/16 through 1/2 inch and 21/2 through
4 inches, and (2) a decrease in the working load limits for diameters of 9/16 through 21/4 inches. The increases in working
load limits are generally between 1 and 5 percent for the 21/2 through 4 inch diameter ropes. The percentage increases
in the working load limits of 3/16 through 1/2-inch rope are much larger. However, the safety factors provided in MRS1
for 3/16 through 1/2-inch rope were greater than those of the larger diameter ropes. The FHWA believes the working
load limit recommendations of the Cordage Institute provide reasonable safety factors for manila rope. Accordingly,
the FHWA is adopting these recommendations as part of the table of working load limits in the final rule. In light of
the Cordage Institute's recommendations concerning manila rope working load limits, the FHWA does not believe that
it is appropriate to incorporate by reference MRS1. To do so would result in a contradiction between the working
load limits contained in MRS1 and the working load limits (for cargo securement applications) recommended
by the Cordage Institute.

The FHWA accepts the Cordage Institute's suggestion to delete the reference to sisal rope (SRS1), but does
not believe that excluding nylon rope specifications from the final rule is appropriate. The final rule is not intended
to incorporate standards for all tiedown materials, but only the most commonly used. In that context, and in consideration
of the relatively low working load limits for sisal rope the FHWA does not believe that including a specification for
sisal rope is essential. The FHWA notes that the rule does not prohibit the use of sisal rope.

As for the nylon rope specifications, the references remain as originally proposed. Although the agency cannot quantify
the extent to which nylon rope is used, the working load limits for nylon rope are such that its usage in cargo securement
applications is likely.

The FHWA is not adopting the Cordage Institute's recommendation to include rope requirements similar to those used
in the California Code of Regulations. With the exception of California's requirement for ultraviolet resistance,
the FHWA considers this particular regulatory language unnecessarily design restrictive in that it would prohibit,
without sufficient technical justification, certain synthetic rope and webbing based primarily on material and/or
color, irrespective of its strength or safety for use in cargo securement. As for ultraviolet resistance requirements,
the Cordage Institute did not provide, and the California regulations do not include, sufficient information to
enable the FHWA to establish specific and objective regulatory language.

The NPRM requested comments on the method used in determining the working load limit for wire rope which is not marked.
Four commenters responded to this request. All supported the method described in the NPRM (i.e., 1/4 of the nominal
strength_the nominal strength multiplied by a design factor of 1/3 and the ``termination efficiency,'' 0.75). Therefore,
393.102(b) includes this method for determining the working load limit of unmarked wire rope.



Marking and Labeling of Tiedown Devices



Several commenters responded to the FHWA's questions concerning the need for requiring the use of only those tiedown
devices which are marked or labeled with the working load limit. For example, the CVSA stated:

Manufacturers of tiedowns have indicated that they are willing to mark load securement devices with working load
limit ratings. We believe having working load values marked on load securement devices is a significant aid to their
proper use and we would like to see such markings universally required.

We recognize that presently, much of the tiedown equipment in the field is either unmarked or not directly marked with
working load limit. As it would be an extreme waste of resources and a huge financial burden on carriers to scrap today's
inventory of products not marked with working load limit, we would recommend the requirement for marking working
load limits be made effective at some future date, i.e., three to five years. Another way to handle this would be to grandfather
the tiedown equipment already manufactured and being used by the motor carrier industry.

New York believed the final rule should ``clearly state that unmarked cargo securement devices, steel strapping,
chain, webbing, wire rope, etc. will not be allowed and will cause vehicles transporting materials with unmarked
devices to be placed out-of-service. There is no way to effectively ensure the adequacy of unmarked devices.''



