 



a. General applicability.

 In general, the subpart CC standards apply to RCRA-permitted tanks, surface impoundments, and containers subject
to 40 CFR part 264, subparts J, K, or I, respectively, as well as to interim-status TSDF tanks, surface impoundments,
and containers subject to 40 CFR part 265, subparts J, K, or I, respectively. However, certain specific types of TSDF
tanks, surface impoundments, and containers are not subject to the subpart CC standards under applicability provisions
in other RCRA regulations as well as provisions included specifically in the subpart CC standards.

The subpart CC standards do not apply to those TSDF tanks, surface impoundments, or containers excluded from regulation
under 40 CFR 264.1. For example, TSDF owners and operators are not required to obtain a RCRA permit for tanks or tank
systems that manage hazardous wastewaters or wastewater treatment sludges and are subject to regulation under either
section 402 or 307(b) of the Clean Water Act [refer to 40 CFR 264.1(g)(6) and 40 CFR 265.1(c)(10)]. Because these tanks
are exempted from RCRA permitting requirements, they are not subject to the requirements of 40 CFR parts 264 and 265.
Thus, the subpart CC standards do not apply to a TSDF tank that is considered to be a part of a ``wastewater treatment
unit'' as defined in 40 CFR 260.10. Similarly, the subpart CC standards do not apply to TSDF tanks, surface impoundments,
or containers when these units are used for emergency or spill management activities in accordance with 40 CFR 264.1(g)(8)(i)
or 40 CFR 265.1(c)(11)(i).



b. Exemptions.

 The subpart CC standards are only applicable to containers with a design capacity greater than or equal to 0.1 m3 (approximately
26 gallons). This means that any container that has a design capacity less than 0.1 m3 is not subject to the subpart CC
standards regardless of the volatile organic concentration of the hazardous waste placed in the container.

The subpart CC standards apply only to TSDF tanks, surface impoundments, and containers in which an owner or operator
places hazardous waste on or after June 5, 1995. With respect to surface impoundments, the EPA has already explained
that RCRA regulations do not apply to impoundments at which there is no active management of hazardous waste after
the rule's effective date (see 55 FR 39410, September 27, 1990). This would include impoundments that cease operation
before the rule's effective date, and impoundments that convert to non-hazardous waste impoundments before the
effective date. This latter class of impoundments includes those impoundments that contain hazardous wastes deposited
before the rule's effective date for which the impoundment is the final disposal site for hazardous waste already
in the unit (i.e., the impoundment is a disposal unit) and hazardous wastes are not actively managed in the impoundment.


Id.

 The principle in today's rule is consistent with this existing interpretation.

The rationale for not applying the subpart CC standards to tanks and containers that do not receive hazardous waste
after the effective date is somewhat different. Under the subpart CC standards, the need to apply air emission controls
to a particular tank or container is determined by the organic content of the hazardous waste at a point prior to being
placed in the tank or container (this is discussed in the following section under ``General Standards''). In many
situations where existing tanks and containers at a TSDF already hold hazardous waste but no longer receive new wastes,
a TSDF owner or operator will be unable to perform a waste determination as specified in the rule because waste samples
cannot be collected at the required locations and the owner or operator has insufficient knowledge about the waste.
Furthermore, even if a waste determination can be performed for these tanks or containers but the units presently
are uncovered or have other openings, most if not all of the volatile organics in the waste have most likely already
been emitted to the atmosphere. Thus, the EPA decided that air emission control requirements should only apply to
those tanks and containers in which hazardous waste is placed on or after the effective date of the rule.

The EPA decided not to apply the subpart CC standards to a tank once an owner or operator stops adding hazardous waste
to the unit and begins closure pursuant to an approved closure plan because in many cases, use of the required air emission
controls would hinder or prevent closure activities from being performed.



c. Remediation wastes.

 The EPA has further decided to temporarily defer application of the subpart CC standards to tanks, containers, and
surface impoundments which are being used on-site to treat or store hazardous wastes containing organics generated
from remedial activities required under RCRA corrective action or CERCLA response authorities, or similar State
remediation authorities, provided that the wastes are managed in units that do not also manage other hazardous wastes.
This deferral applies only to on-site management of such wastes. For remediation waste transported off-site, the
point of waste origination will be the point at which the wastes are physically moved outside the facility boundary
(or for CERCLA response actions, outside the site boundary).

As the D.C. Circuit recently explained, a temporary deferral such as today's is permissible if the Agency legitimately
needs further time to ascertain the best means of integrating concurrent statutory and regulatory schemes to avoid
potential interference with the objectives of both schemes, and where Congress has not expressly forbidden a temporary
deferral. 

Edison Electric Inst. 

v. 

EPA,

 2 F. 3d 438, 45153 (D.C. Cir. 1993). See also RCRA section 1006, requiring the EPA to integrate all provisions
of RCRA for purposes of administration and enforcement, and to avoid duplication to the maximum extent practicable
in doing so.

This situation is presented here. Control of air emissions from units at remediation sites implicates the overlapping
and potentially competing concerns of RCRA section 3004(n) and the complex statutory provisions under RCRA, CERCLA,
and State laws relating to remediation. The EPA's primary goal in this rulemaking has been to develop air emission
standards for tanks, containers, and surface impoundments holding as-generated hazardous wastes containing organics.
At proposal, the EPA thus did not fully consider the issue of whether different standards should appropriately apply
to wastes that are generated and managed as the result of remedial activities, or how the proposed rule for air emissions
could best be integrated with the remediation authorities of RCRA and other Federal or State laws. 56 FR at 3349798
(July 22, 1991).

Commenters on the proposed subpart CC regulations pointed out that these were important issues deserving careful
attention. The EPA agrees. It is possible that certain provisions of the air emission requirements promulgated today
may be inappropriate or unnecessarily restrictive if applied to remediation activities (see 58 FR 8660, February
16, 1993).




