 

Anaysis of Proposed Consent Order to Aid Public Comment



The Federal Trade Commission (``Commission'') has provisionally accepted an agreement containing a proposed Consent
Order from Sulzer Limited (``Sulzer''), which requires Sulzer to divest a copy of all product information regarding
Amdry 2010, an aluminum polyester powder, to a Commission-approved acquirer and to assist such acquirer in its efforts
to produce and sell an Amdry 2010 equivalent powder (``Amdry 2010 Equivalent''). 

The proposed Consent Order has been placed on the public record for sixty (60) days for reception of comments by interested
persons. Comments received during this period will become part of the public record. After sixty (60) days, the Commission
will again review the agreement and the comments received and will decide whether it should withdraw from the agreement
or make final the agreement's proposed Order. 

On April 18, 1994, Sulzer and The Perkin-Elmer Corporation (``Perkin-Elmer'') entered into an agreement whereby
Sulzer agreed to purchase all of the assets of Perkin-Elmer's Metco Division (``Metco''). The proposed complaint
alleges that the proposed acquisition, if consummated, would constitute a violation of Section 7 of the Clayton Act,
as amended, 15 U.S.C. 18, and Section 5 of the FTC Act, as amended, 15 U.S.C. 45, in the market for the manufacture and
sale of aluminum polyester powder in the United States. Sulzer's powder is marketed as Amdry 2010 and Metco's powder
is marketed as Metco 601. The proposed Consent Order would remedy the alleged violation by requiring Sulzer to establish
a new competitor in the business of manufacturing and selling aluminum polyester powder and to assist such competitor
to receive the necessary product approvals from three original equipment manufacturers (``OEMs''). Thus, Sulzer
will be required to replace the competition lost due to its acquisition of Metco.

The proposed Consent Order provides that within six (6) months of the Order becoming final, Sulzer shall divest to
a Commission-approved acquirer a copy of all information necessary to purchase ingredients for, manufacture, and
sell aluminum polyester powder (Amdry 2010 Information'') and to assist such acquirer in its efforts to manufacture
an equivalent aluminum polyester powder. The divestiture of the Amdry 2010 Information shall be made only to an acquirer
that receives the prior approval of the Commission and only in a manner that receives the prior approval of the Commission.
Sulzer shall provide all additional assistance, information, and know-how reasonably necessary to the acquirer
to help such acquirer receive all product approvals from three OEMs necessary for the purchase of an Amdry 2010 Equivalent
by such OEMs. The three OEMs included in the Order are General Electric Aircraft Engines Division, Textron Lycoming,
and the Garrett Division of Allied Signal. Sulzer shall submit an affidavit from each OEM to the Commission, certifying
that each OEM has either approved the Amdry 2010 Equivalent or approved another person's aluminum polyester powder.

In the event that Sulzer has not divested the Amdry 2010 Information within six (6) months of the date the Order becomes
final, or submitted the required affidavits to the Commission within nine (9) months of the date the Commission approves
the divestiture, then the proposed Consent Order provides that Sulzer shall consent to the appointment by the Commission
of a trustee to divest the Amdry 2010 Information and a copy of all product information relating to Metco 601 (``Metco
601 Information'') to a Commission-approved acquirer. The trustee shall also have the authority to take such steps
as may be feasible and necessary to assist the acquirer to receive approvals from the three OEMs for an Amdry 2010 or
a Metco 601 equivalent powder.

Under the provisions of the Consent Order, Sulzer is also required to provide to the Commission a report of its compliance
with the divestiture provisions of the Order within sixty (60) days following the date this Order becomes final, and
every sixty (60) days thereafter until Sulzer has completely divested the Amdry 2010 Information and submitted the
required affidavits to the Commission, or consented to the appointment of a trustee to do the same. The proposed Order
will also prohibit Sulzer, for a period of ten (10) years, from acquiring, without Federal Trade Commission approval,
any stock in any concern engaged in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of aluminum polyester powder in the United
States, or any assets used for the manufacture, sale, or distribution of aluminum polyester powder in the United States.

One year from the date the Order becomes final and annually thereafter for nine (9) years, Sulzer will be required to
provide to the Commission a report of its compliance with the Consent Order. The Consent Order also requires Sulzer
to notify the Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to any change in the structure of Sulzer resulting in the emergence
of a successor.

The purpose of this analysis is to facilitate public comment on the proposed Order, and it is not intended to constitute
an official interpretation of the agreement and proposed Order or to modify in any way their terms.



<SIGNER>
Donald S. Clark,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Secretary.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9425338 Filed 101294; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 675001M
</BILLING>



