 




<CFRNO>14 CFR Part 71</CFRNO>




<RINDOCK>[Airspace Docket No. 94AGL7]</RINDOCK>



Proposed Establishment of Class D and E Airspace; Kenosha, WI



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), DOT.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Notice of proposed rulemaking.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

This notice proposes to establish Class D and E4 airspace at Kenosha, WI, Class D airspace due to commissioning of an
air traffic control tower and removal and revocation of Class E5 airspace. Class D designation requires communication
capability with aircraft down to the runway surface, and weather reporting is available by Automated Weather Observation
Station (AWOS). The intended affect of this proposal is to provide segregation of aircraft using instrument approach
procedures in instrument conditions from other aircraft operating in visual weather conditions, and to establish
Class E airspace to contain instrument approach procedures in areas outside the Class D surface area.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

Comments must be received on or before May 4, 1994.



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Send comments on the proposal in triplicate to: Federal Aviation Administration, Office of the Assistant Chief Counsel,
AGL7, Rules Docket No. 94AGL7, 2300 East Devon Avenue, Des Plaines, Illinois 60018.



The official docket may be examined in the Office of the Assistant Chief Counsel, Federal Aviation Administration,
2300 East Devon Avenue, Des Plaines, Illinois. An informal docket may also be examined during normal business hours
at the Air Traffic Division, System Management Branch, Federal Aviation Administration, 2300 East Devon Avenue,
Des Plaines, Illinois.



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:



Robert J. Woodford, Air Traffic Division, System Management Branch, AGL530, Federal Aviation Administration,
2300 East Devon Avenue, Des Plaines, Illinois 60018, telephone (708) 2947568.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

Comments Invited



Interested parties are invited to participate in this proposed rulemaking by submitting such written data, views,
or arguments as they may desire. Comments that provide the factual basis supporting the views and suggestions presented
are particularly helpful in developing reasoned regulatory decisions on the proposal. Comments are specifically
invited on the overall regulatory, aeronautical, economic, environmental, and energy-related aspects of the proposal.
Communications should identify the airspace docket number and be submitted in triplicate to the address listed above.
Commenters wishing the FAA to acknowledge receipt of their comments on this notice must submit with those comments
a self-addressed, stamped postcard on which the following statement is made: ``Comments to Airspace Docket No. 94AGL7.''
The postcard will be date/time stamped and returned to the commenter. All communications received on or before the
specified closing date for comments will be considered before taking action on the proposed rule. The proposal contained
in this notice may be changed in light of comments received. All comments submitted will be available for examination
in the Rules Docket, FAA, Great Lakes Region, Office of the Assistant Chief Counsel, 2300 East Devon Avenue, Des Plaines,
Illinois, both before and after the closing date for comments. A report summarizing each substantive public contact
with FAA personnel concerned with this rulemaking will be filed in the docket.



Availability of NPRM's



Any person may obtain a copy of the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) by submitting a request to the Federal Aviation
Administration, Office of Public Affairs, Attention: Public Inquiry Center, APA220, 800 Independence Avenue,
SW., Washington, DC 20591, or by calling (202) 2673485. Communications must identify the notice number of
this NPRM. Persons interested in being placed on a mailing list for future NPRM's should also request a copy of Advisory
Circular No. 112A, which describes the application procedure.



The Proposal



The FAA is considering an amendment to part 71 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR part 71) to establish Class
D and E4 airspace at Kenosha, WI, Class D airspace due to commissioning of an air traffic control tower and removal and
revocation of Class E5 airspace. Class D designation requires communication capability with aircraft down to the
runway surface, and weather reporting is available by Automated Weather Observation Station (AWOS). The intended
affect of this action is to provide segregation of aircraft using instrument approach procedures in instrument conditions
from other aircraft operating in visual weather conditions, and to establish Class E airspace to contain instrument
procedures in areas outside the Class D surface area. Aeronautical maps and charts would reflect the defined area
which would enable pilots to circumnavigate the area in order to comply with applicable visual flight rule requirements.

The coordinates for this airspace docket are based on North American Datum 83. Class D and E airspace designations
are published in Paragraph 5000 and 6004 of FAA Order 7400.9A dated June 17, 1993, and effective September 16, 1993,
which is incorporated by reference in 14 CFR 71.1 (58 FR 36298; July 6, 1993). The Class D and E airspace designation
listed in this document would be published subsequently in the Order. The Class E5 airspace designation listed in
this document would be subsequently removed.

The FAA has determined that this proposed regulation only involves an established body of technical regulations
for which frequent and routine amendments are necessary to keep them operationally current. It, therefore_(1) Is
not a ``significant regulatory action'' under Executive Order 12866; (2) is not a ``significant rule'' under DOT
Regulatory Policies and Procedures (44 FR 11034; February 26, 1979); and (3) does not warrant preparation of a regulatory
evaluation as the anticipated impact is so minimal. Since this is a routine matter that will only affect air traffic
procedures and air navigation, it is certified that this rule, when promulgated, will not have a significant economic
impact on a substantial number of small entities under the criteria of the Regulatory Flexibility Act.



List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 71



Airspace, Incorporation by reference, Navigation (air).



The Proposed Amendment



In consideration of the foregoing, the Federal Aviation Administration proposes to amend 14 CFR part 71 as follows:



</SUPPLEM>
