 

The Commission directs, pursuant to section 4.34(b) of 
the regulations (see Order No. 533 issued May 8, 1991, 
56 FR 23108 (May 20, 1991)), that all preliminary 
comments, recommendations, terms and conditions be 
filed with the Commission within 90 days from the 
issuance date of this notice and the date of issuance 
of the draft application, whichever is later. All 
reply comments must be filed with the Commission within 
135 days from the date of this notice and the date of 
issuance of the draft application, whichever is later. 

Anyone may obtain an extension of time for these 
deadlines from the Commission only upon a showing of 
good cause or extraordinary circumstances in accordance 
with 18 CFR 385.2008. 

All filings must: (1) Bear in all capital letters the 
title ``COMMENTS'', ``REPLY COMMENTS'', ``RECOMMENDATIONS'', 
``TERMS AND CONDITIONS'', or ``PRESCRIPTIONS''; (2) set 
forth in the heading the name of the potential 
applicant and the project number of the application to 
which the filing responds; (3) furnish the name, 
address, and telephone number of the person submitting 
the filing; and (4) otherwise comply with the 
requirements of 18 CFR 385.2001 through 385.2005. All 
comments, recommendations, terms and conditions or 
prescriptions must set forth their evidentiary basis 
and otherwise comply with the requirements of 18 CFR 
4.34(b), except as amended by this notice with respect 
to deadline, mailing list, and the requirement to file 
all comments upon issuance of this notice rather than 
upon notice of an application being ready for 
environmental analysis. Any of these documents must be 
filed by providing the original and eight copies to: 
Secretary, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 825 
North Capitol Street, NE., Washington, DC 20426. An 
additional copy must be sent to: Director, Division of 
Project Review, Office of Hydropower Licensing, Federal 
Energy Regulatory Commission, Room 1027, at the above 
address. Each filing must be accompanied by proof of 
service on all persons listed in the service list 
prepared by the Commission, in accordance with 18 CFR 
4.34(b) and the procedures set forth in this notice. 
The procedures for service of all comments (including 
preliminary recommendations, terms and conditions, and 
prescriptions) filed with the Commission for the 
Lorella Project shall be: (1) All comments (and any 
attachments) must be served on the Commission's service 
list which includes all entities receiving a draft 
application and final application; (2) a letter 
notification that comments have been filed with the 
Commission must be served on the general mailing list 
(exclusive of service list entities) prepared for this 
project by the Commission; (3) for convenience, the 
Commission will make available on request to any entity 
filing comments a computer diskette of these 
mailing lists. Commenters may obtain computerized 
copies of these mailing lists from Sabina Joe at (202) 
2191648. 

(2) Pursuant to 4.32(b)(7) of 18 CFR of the 
Commission's regulations, if any resource agency, 
Indian Tribe, or person believes that an additional 
scientific study should be conducted in order to form 
an adequate factual basis for a complete analysis of 
the application on its merit, the resource agency, 
Indian Tribe, or person must formally file a request 
for a study with the Commission not later than 90 days 
from the issuance date of this notice and issuance date 
of the draft application, whichever is later, and serve 
a copy of the request on the potential applicant. (See 
j(1) above for filing and service). Except for the 
filing deadline set forth in this notice, Section 
4.32(b)(7) shall apply. This shall be the last 
opportunity in the Lorella licensing process to request 
additional scientific studies. This substitutes for 
the request for additional scientific studies made at 
the time of tendering for filing of an application 
under the Commission's traditional licensing process. 

k. Status of Environmental Analysis: Under third party 
contract provisions of the National Energy Policy Act of 
1992, the Commission is supervising the selected third party 
contractor's ongoing preparation of a Draft Environmental 
Impact Statement (DEIS) for the Lorella Project. The 
Commission plans to issue a DEIS at the same time as (or 
shortly after) the potential applicant files a final 
application with the Commission. Preliminary comments, 
terms, conditions, and prescriptions, and additional 
scientific study requests solicited with this notice are 
critical to the development of the DEIS. Final comments, 
recommendations, terms, conditions, and prescriptions will 
be solicited at the time of filing of the final application 
and issuance of the DEIS. 

l. With this notice, we are initiating consultation with the 
Oregon STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER (SHPO), as 
required by Section 106, National Historic Preservation Act, 
and the regulations of the Advisory Council on Historic 
Preservation, 36 CFR 800.4. 

m. 

Description of Project:

 The proposed project would consist 
of the following: 




