 

Comments Received



The agency received twenty comments in response to the notice. Comments were received from manufacturers of screening
devices and related equipment, persons representing sectors of the transportation industry subject to the DOT regulations
(including rail, transit, motor carriers and pipelines) and substance abuse program administrators, an interested
individual and a health professional.



General Comments



The comments, in general, were supportive of the agency's proposed Model Specifications. Some of the comments praised
the notice for proposing to increase flexibility, stimulate development and reduce barriers and cost for those charged
with implementing DOT's new alcohol testing rules.

A number of commenters raised concerns about the schedule NHTSA would following publishing the final Model Specifications.
DOT's final rule becomes effective for large employers (in general, with 50 or more safety-sensitive employees)
on January 1, 1995. The commenters, therefore, urged the agency to issue the Model Specifications and approve conforming
devices prior to that date. Two commenters recommended that if final rules and product evaluations are not completed
within a specified period of time (one commenter suggested August 1 1994, another mid-1994), the effective date of
DOT's final rule should be delayed.

In response to these comments, NHTSA has sought to publish the final Model Specifications as quickly as possible.
As described further below, we intend to begin testing immediately, and hope to publish within 30 days from today's
date a Conforming Products List (CPL) of screening devices that have been tested to date and conform to these Model
Specifications. The CPL will be updated and published periodically, as further testing is completed.

A number of commenters raised issues that pertain to other notices that were published in the 

Federal Register

 on February 15, 1994, such as DOT's final rule (59 FR 7340) on Procedures for Transportation Workplace Drug and Alcohol
Testing Programs (49 CFR Part 40) or the final rules and common preamble (59 FR 7302) on the Limitation on Alcohol Use
by Transportation Workers. Others raised issues that are also outside the scope of NHTSA's notice and request for
comments. For example, one respondent commented that all alcohol testing should be performed by law enforcement
representatives. Another respondent urged the Department to permit testing to be conducted only using evidential
breath testing devices. Other commenters suggested that the use of non-breath alcohol tests (which use blood, saliva
or urine samples) as a condition for employment is an invasion of privacy and a violation of individual rights.

NHTSA's Model Specifications contain the performance criteria and methods for the testing of alcohol screening
devices. It does not address whether such devices are permitted to be used to perform screening tests, who is authorized
to administer such tests or who is subject to them. These issues are addressed instead in DOT's final rules.



