 

A factor complicating identification of the upper Missouri River fluvial Arctic grayling population is the extensive
hatchery propagation and transplantation of Arctic grayling stocks that has occurred in lakes and rivers throughout
Montana and elsewhere (Lee et al. 1980, Everett 1986). The Service does not regard the introduced, lake-dwelling
graying to be part of the indigenous upper Missouri River fluvial Arctic grayling population.

Introduced Arctic grayling that display partially fluvial characteristics reside in Sunnyslope Irrigation Canal
in Teton County, Montana. The Service does not consider the Sunnyslope Canal Arctic grayling to be a remnant of the
native upper Missouri River fluvial Arctic grayling population. 



Summary of Factors Affecting the Species



The following information is a summary and discussion of the five factors or listing criteria as set forth in Section
4(a)(1) of the Endangered Species Act (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq.) and regulations (50 CFR Part 424) promulgated to implement
the listing provisions of the Act and their applicability to the current status of the fluvial population of the Arctic
grayling.



A. The Present or Threatened Destruction, Modification, or Curtailment of Its Habitat or Range



A substantial portion of the historic range of the fluvial Arctic grayling has been altered by the extensive construction
of dams and reservoirs that have created barriers obstructing migrations to spawning, wintering or feeding areas;
inundating grayling habitat; and altering the hydrology of river systems (Vincent 1962, Kaya 1990). In the upper
Missouri River drainage, the dominant land use has become agriculture-related (Vincent 1962). The major impact
from these activities on Arctic grayling habitat is by the diversion of water for irrigation, which reduces available
instream habitat for grayling. This results in stranding of incubating eggs or young fish, thus increasing predation
on young because they are concentrated in the remaining water, reducing food availability, increasing water temperatures
(Kaya 1990), decreasing survival of young grayling (Shepard and Oswald 1989), and increasing mortality of trapped
fish when diversions are shut down (Shepard and Oswald 1989, Streu 1990). Increased sedimentation from agricultural
run-off is also a problem (Vincent 1962, Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife and Parks 1989, Shepard and Oswald 1989).



B. Overutilization for Commercial, Recreational, Scientific, or Educational Purposes



Since Arctic grayling are easily caught by anglers, historical exploitation likely contributed to past declines
or local extirpations of the grayling population in the upper Missouri River drainage (Vincent 1962, Kaya 1990).
A commercial fishery for Arctic grayling existed on the upper Missouri River (Vincent 1962). Catch-and-release
fishing regulations are currently in effect on the Big Hole in order to reduce mortality from recreational fishing
(Montana Department of Fish, Wildlife and Parks 1989).



C. Disease or Predation



