 

Appendix A_Fedwire Study Group



Bruce J. Summers, FRB Richmond, Chair 
Carol W. Barrett, FRB New York 
Gayle Brett, Board staff 
Paul Connolly, FRB Boston 
Lisa Hoskins, Board staff 
Dara Hunt, FRB Chicago 
Oliver Ireland, Board staff 
Barbara Kavanagh, FRB Chicago 
Donald R. Lieb, FRB San Francisco 
David E. Lindsey, Board staff 
Jeffrey C. Marquardt, Board staff 
Christopher J. McCurdy, FRB New York 
Gerard J. Nick, FRB Chicago 
Patrick M. Parkinson, Board staff 
John H. Parrish, Board staff 
Israel Sendrovic, FRB New York 
A. Patricia White, Board staff.



Appendix B_Structure of Large-Value Interbank Payment Arrangements



Most large-value, domestic interbank payments are currently made via the transfer of money balances on the books
of the Federal Reserve Banks through the Fedwire system. Fedwire is the large-value payment system operated by the
Federal Reserve Banks for the transfer of funds and delivery of book-entry (electronic) securities against payment.
Fedwire is a real-time gross settlement system that settles transfers immediately on a transaction-by-transaction
basis. The Fedwire funds transfer service is a credit transfer process. That is, a bank sends a funds transfer to the
Federal Reserve instructing the Federal Reserve to debit its account for a specified amount and to credit the account
of another bank. In 1993, the daily average value of transfers originated over the Fedwire funds transfer system was
about $824 billion. 

In contrast, the Fedwire securities transfer service, which is the principal means for transferring and settling
U.S. government securities,
<FOOTCITE>1</FOOTCITE>
 is a debit transfer process that permits the seller of the securities to send a transfer that will result in the Federal
Reserve withdrawing funds from the account of the receiver of the securities transfer. The Fedwire securities transfer
process is based on the delivery-versus-payment (DVP) principle, whereby the final transfer of securities from
the seller to the buyer (delivery) occurs at the same time as final transfer of funds from the buyer to the seller (payment).
Fedwire achieves such simultaneous settlement by treating the instruction initiated by the seller as both an instruction
to deliver securities to the buyer and an instruction to debit payment from the buyer's reserve or clearing account.
In 1993, the daily average value of transfers originated through the Fedwire securities transfer system was roughly
$580 billion. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
1

</FOOTNAME>
Netting is performed outside Fedwire through the Government Securities Clearing Corporation (GSCC) for transactions
that settle on a next day or forward basis, with the netted securities and funds positions settled on Fedwire. 

</FOOTNOTE>


Banks may also provide settlement services to their customers through the final transfer of balances across their
books. In addition, banks also use multilateral clearing and settlement arrangements to meet some of their large-value
payment needs. In such arrangements, including the Clearing House Interbank Payments System (CHIPS) operated by
the New York Clearing House, payment instructions may be entered into a netting system throughout a pre-determined
clearing cycle and each participant's net position vis-a-vis the other participants is determined on an ongoing
basis throughout the cycle. Settlement for the payment instructions occurs at an agreed upon settlement time. Participants
with net debit obligations may satisfy their obligations by transferring funds on the books of a ``settlement bank.''
Central banks can serve as a ``settlement bank'' for such interbank netting arrangements and, in the case of CHIPS,
this role is performed by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. In this arrangement, CHIPS settling participants in
a net debit position send Fedwire funds transfers to a settlement account at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which,
when fully funded, is the source for payments to participants in net credit positions. In 1993, the daily average value
of transfers originated through the CHIPS system was over $1 trillion.


