 

The regulations implementing Section 127(b) will define the term ``notarizing officer.'' This term will include
consular officers, diplomatic officers encompassed by the term ``secretary of embassy or ligation'' in 22 U.S.C.
4221, and U.S. citizen employees of the Department of State designated by the Deputy Assistant Secretary. The Bureau
of Consular Affairs expects that the bulk of the U.S. citizen designees will be comprised of civil service visa examiners,
part-time intermittent, temporary foreign service (PIT) employees, when actually employed individuals (WAE's,
generally retired Foreign Service Officers temporarily serving), consular associates (all the above being assigned
overseas) and civil service employees ordinarily assigned to the Department of State but temporarily serving overseas.
The Deputy Assistant Secretary will insure that all designees are qualified to perform notarials, mormally by satisfactory
completion of the Basic Consular Course offered by the Foreign Service Institute at the National Foreign Affairs
Training Center.

This proposed regulation will not provide for designated U.S. citizen State Department employees to perform authentications,
but the Department hopes to be able to extend the rule to encompass authentications in the future. The authentication
of documents for use in civil proceedings in the federal courts is currently governed by Rule 44(e)(2) of the Federal
Rules of Civil Procedure. It is unclear whether that rule can be read to include authentications performed by non-consular
officer U.S. citizens designated by the Department to perform notarial services. The Bureau for Consular Affairs
plans to initiate consultations with the appropriate judicial officials to clarify the interpretation of Rule 44
and, if necessary, to ask that Rule 44 be amended to encompass all notarial officials under this proposal rule, thereby
permitting further amendments to the Department's notarial regulations to include authentications.
Similarly, the regulation will not allow the designated employees to perform notarial services in connection with
patents and patent applications. The taking to oaths regarding patent applications is governed by 35 U.S.C. 115,
which provides for patent application oaths to be administered by ``diplomatic and consular officers.'' The Bureau
of Consular Affairs plans to initiate consolations with the appropriate officials to clarify the scope of 35 U.S.C.
115 and, if necessary, to seek amendments to permit notarial officers to accept patent applications, thereby permitting
further amendments to these regulations to include patent applications.

Another service which designated employees will be unable to perform is the taking of testimony in any criminal action
or proceeding pursuant to a commission issued by a court in the United States. Such testimony is governed by 18 U.S.C.
3492, which authorizes consular officers to receive commissions to take testimony. Again, the Bureau of Consular
Affairs plans to initiate consultations with the appropriate officials to clarify the scope of 18 U.S.C. 3492 and,
if necessary, to seek amendments to permit notarial officers to receive commissions to authenticate documents and
take testimony.

The acceptability of notarials performed by designated U.S. citizen State Department employees for State law purposes
is of course governed by the laws of the various states. The Department hopes that any State laws that do not allow acceptance
of such notarials will be amended as necessary to achieve this result, and will be inviting consultations to this end.
The Department also invites comments from state and local governments as well as members of the public bar on the proposed
rule and its relationship to state notarial laws.
The Department believes that, with these qualifications, notarials performed by designated U.S. citizen State
Department employees will be acceptable for all purposes, and particularly for all Federal law purposes. The Bureau
of Consular Affairs will be consulting with other interested federal agencies to ensure this result to the extent
possible consistent with current statutory authorities.

The Bureau of Consular Affairs is also proposing herein to make Sections 92.5 and 92.31 more concise by eliminating
superfluous material from both sections.

This regulation is not expected to have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities under
the criteria of the Regulatory Flexibility Act. It will not impose information collection requirements under the
provisions of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980. This rule has been reviewed as required under E.O. 12778 and certified
to be in compliance therewith. This rule is exempt from review under E.O. 12866 but is consistent therewith and is being
shared with potentially interested federal agencies to ensure that they are aware of the changes it will entail in
consular operations.



List of Subjects in 22 CFR Part 92



Notarial and related services.




