 

(8) That the methods of capture, transport, and maintenance of the species minimize the risk of injury or damage to
health, including inhumane treatment (Section 106, paragraph (c)(4) of the WBCA). The proposed criteria incorporate
this required finding in a number of ways, including requiring: (a) a description of the process of removing birds
from the wild, including locations, time of year of removal, capture methods, means of transport, and pre-export
conditioning; and (b) a description of the shipping methods and enclosures proposed to be used to transport the exotic
birds, including but not limited to feeding and care during transport, and shipping densities. Since there is evidence
that for some species and, in some cases, consignment size may increase the risk of mortality in transport, the Service
has also proposed that estimated consignment sizes be included with the management plan. Although the proposed rule
does not establish a maximum consignment size, the Service will take this factor into consideration in making the
required finding. Consignment size in this context refers to the number of birds in a single shipment exported from
the country of export. 

The WBCA also requires that the Service ``consider the adequacy of regulatory and enforcement mechanisms in all countries
of origin for the species, including such mechanisms for control of illegal trade'' (WBCA 106(a)(3)). Therefore,
in the approval criteria, for species with a multi-national distribution, the Service proposes to make the following
determinations (the information needed may need to come from sources other than the country requesting approval
of its management plan): (a) whether populations of the species in other countries in which it occurs will be detrimentally
affected by exports of the species from the country requesting approval (this information could be obtained from
those governments and/or from other sources, and could include communication from the Scientific Authorities of
other range states); (b) whether factors affecting conservation of the species, including export from other countries,
illegal trade, domestic use, or subsistence use are regulated throughout the range of the species so that recruitment
and/or breeding stocks of the species are not detrimentally affected by the proposed export; (c) whether the proposed
take and export from the requesting country include enough demographic information to ensure they will not detrimentally
affect breeding populations; and (d) whether the proposed take and export will not detrimentally affect any existing
enhancement activities or conservation programs throughout the species' range. 

The approved non-captive-bred (

i.e.,

 wild-caught) species can be imported into the United States without meeting any additional requirements of the WBCA
or this part 15; however, all of the existing requirements in parts 13 and 14, part 17, part 21, and part 23 must be complied
with. Upon receipt of a completed sustainable use management plan for a country of export, the Director will publish
a Notice in the 

Federal Register

 for public comment. Approval of species will be granted in accordance with the criteria proposed in 15.32.


The Service proposes to consider only sustainable use management plans for appendix II species and appendix III species
from the country for which they are listed, since trade for primarily commercial purposes is not permitted under the
Convention for appendix I species. If specimens of an appendix I species are required for zoological, scientific,
or breeding purposes, individuals desiring such import may apply for a permit under Subpart C of this Part 15. 



Section 15.33Species Included in the Approved List



(a) Captive-bred species. In order to establish a proposed list of approved captive-bred species, based on the criteria
in proposed Section 15.31, the Service used the best information available, including import records of captive-bred
species, law enforcement and intelligence data on the commercial trade in captive-bred species, and law enforcement
and intelligence information on the illegal trade in exotic bird species. The proposed list of approved species includes
37 captive-bred exotic bird species that can be imported from any other country, with export permits required by CITES,
other federal laws, and the exporting country. In addition, the Service has proposed to include in the approved list
of captive-bred species several exotic bird species that are not listed in an appendix to the Convention but are regularly
bred in captivity and are not taken from the wild. Although these species are not listed in an Appendix and thus are not
presently prohibited under the WBCA, these species are included in the list for the convenience of the public. To ensure
that there is no confusion, even if the species or higher taxon to which it belongs were subsequently listed in the Appendices
to the Convention, the Service would still consider it to be an approved captive-bred species pursuant to this subpart
D. 

As established in the WBCA, the Service will periodically review the list of species that meet the approval criteria
for the importation of captive-bred species. Any changes to this approved list will be proposed in the 

Federal Register

 for public comment. The Service is interested in receiving the comments, including documentation, of any interested
individuals or organizations with information on the captive-bred status of any of the species in the list proposed
in this subsection, or of any other exotic bird species that meet the criteria in 15.31 for inclusion in this
list. 

(b) Non-captive-bred species. No species can be proposed for approval under this paragraph until the proposed regulations
in Section 15.32 are finalized, and a completed sustainable use management plan for a country of export for that species
has been received by the Director. Upon granting approval in accordance with the issuance criteria of this section,
approved species and countries of export would be listed in this paragraph. 



Subpart E_Qualifying Foreign Facilities Breeding Exotic Birds in Captivity 


