 

9. New 76.630 is added to read as follows:


76.630

Compatibility with consumer electronics equipment.


(a) Cable system operators shall not scramble or otherwise encrypt signals carried on the basic service tier. Requests
for waivers of this prohibition must demonstrate either a substantial problem with theft of basic tier service or
a strong need to scramble basic signals for other reasons. As part of this showing, cable operators are required to
notify subscribers by mail of waiver requests. The notice to subscribers must be mailed no later than thirty calendar
days from the date the request waiver was filed with the Commission, and cable operators must inform the Commission
in writing, as soon as possible, of that notification date. The notification to subscribers must state:



On (date of waiver request was filed with the Commission), (cable operator's name) filed with the Federal Communications
Commission a request for waiver of the rule prohibiting scrambling of channels on the basic tier of service. 47 CFR
76.630(a). The request for waiver states (a brief summary of the waiver request). A copy of the request for waiver
is on file for public inspection at (the address of the cable operator's local place of business).
Individuals who wish to comment on this request for waiver should mail comments to the Federal Communications Commission
by no later than 30 days from (the date the notification was mailed to subscribers). Those comments should be addressed
to the: Federal Communications Commission, Cable Services Bureau, Washington, DC 20554, and should include the
name of the cable operator to whom the comments are applicable. Individuals should also send a copy of their comments
to (the cable operator at its local place of business).



Cable operators may file comments in reply no later than 7 days from the date subscriber comments must be filed.


(b) Cable system operators that provide their subscribers with cable system terminal devices and other customer
premises equipment that incorporates remote control capability shall permit the remote operation of such devices
with commercially available remote control units or otherwise take no action that would prevent the devices from
being operated by a commercially available remote control unit. Cable system operators are advised that this requirement
obliges them to actively enable the remote control functions of customer premises equipment where those functions
do not operate without a special activation procedure. Cable system operators may, however, disable the remote control
functions of a subscriber's customer premises equipment where requested by the subscriber.
(c) Cable operators may not alter the infrared codes used to operate the remote control capabilities of the customer
premises equipment they employ in providing service to subscribers. Cable operators may, however, use new equipment
that includes additional infrared codes for new remote control functions that were not included in existing models
of customer premises equipment.
(d) Cable system operators that use scrambling, encryption or similar technologies in conjunction with cable system
terminal devices, as defined in 15.1(e) of this chapter, that may affect subscribers' reception of signals
shall offer to supply each subscriber with special equipment that will enable the simultaneous reception of multiple
signals. This equipment could include, for example, set-top cable system terminal devices with multiple descramblers/decoders
and/or timers, and signal bypass switches.
(1) The offer of special equipment shall be made to new subscribers at the time they subscribe and to all subscribers
at least once each year.
(2) Such special equipment shall, at a minimum, have the capability:
(i) To allow simultaneous reception of any two or more scrambled or encrypted signals and to provide for tuning to alternative
channels on a pre-programmed schedule; and,


