 

In response to the Court's request that the parties confer, OFCCP placed on the record herein the statement that such
are precisely the terms presented to Commonwealth. In contrast, Commonwealth asserts that even such an arrangement
does not protect it from liability to the individual employees. This exchange, which occurred after the Court announced
its decision, persuades the Court that Commonwealth is irreparably harmed, since OFCCP lacks the requisite ability
to shield Commonwealth from all liability in the event Commonwealth extends offers of employment and later succeeds
here. These facts, therefore, are not parallel to those which existed in 

Uniroyal.

Going on to the third element, public interest, and the fourth, harm to others. The Court has heard testimony concerning
Commonwealth being a new company with a different approach. The Court has also heard testimony concerning administrative
delay. There is a legitimate public interest in wanting employers to offer employment opportunities to everyone
regardless of disability, regardless of age, gender, race, all of those factors. If this heightens the public interest,
then it also heightens the government's responsibility. If there is a high government responsibility, then waiting
seven or eight years to render an opinion frustrates the purposes of the Rehabilitation Act. In the Court's opinion,
the government has acted, if not unconscionably, perhaps unfairly. Therefore, in the Court's opinion, the public
interest_if it does swing over to the side of the government at the outset_swings back because of the administrative
delay that has occurred here. Whether this case is considered on an expedited basis or not, there is no further harm
to the government. There is some value in the employer being able to rely on its understanding that at some point a proceeding
is ended. It is not reasonable to wait seven years and come in and do something and then expect immediate compliance.

As far as harm to any third parties, the employees who are still in the work force are working now. To the extent that Commonwealth
should lose this case on its merits, those employees can gain monetary relief, and that will be satisfactory. The Court
will not hear a claim about the public agency's harm to it because of the delay that has been involved here.



Preliminary Injunction and Order



Based upon the foregoing Findings and Conclusions, it is Ordered and Adjudged 

as follows:

1. Defendants, their officers, agents, employees, attorneys, and representatives, are immediately enjoined and
restrained, directly and indirectly, whether alone or in concert with others, until further orders of this Court,
from doing any of the following:

a. Seeking, attempting to seek, or taking any affirmative steps to enforce that portion of the February 10, 1994 Order
of the Acting Assistant Secretary for Employment Standards which requires Commonwealth to make offers of employment
to Gregory Gray, Wilda Matthis, Kenneth Sherrard, William Zellers, and Thomas Marshall, or from seeking to enforce
that portion of the Order which grants relief in favor of Robert Etnire.

b. Seeking, attempting to seek, or taking any affirmative steps to enforce or place into effect that portion of the
February 10, 1994 Order of the Acting Assistant Secretary for Employment Standards which, under certain conditions,
makes Commonwealth ineligible for the award of any government contracts or subcontracts and makes Commonwealth
ineligible for extensions or other modifications of any existing government contracts or subcontracts.

2. The Final Decision and Order of the Acting Assistant Secretary for Employment Standards, United States Department
of Labor, dated February 10, 1994, in the matter of 

Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, United States Department of Labor, Plaintiff 

v. 

Commonwealth Aluminum formerly Martin-Marietta Aluminum of Kentucky, Inc., Defendant, 

Case No. 82OFC6, shall be, and it is hereby, stayed and such stay shall remain in full force and effect
until such time as this Court specifically orders otherwise.

3. Within three business days of the date hereof, defendants shall furnish the Court and Commonwealth with a full and
complete written listing of all agencies, contractors, or others, to whom notice of Commonwealth's debarment was
sent by defendants.

4. Within five business days of the date hereof, defendants shall send written notification to all agencies, contractors,
any third parties identified pursuant to paragraph 3 hereof, and the 

Federal Register

, that the effect of Commonwealth's debarment has been stayed by the United States District Court for the Western District
of Kentucky, Owensboro Division, pending the appeal by Commonwealth of the Decision which resulted in the debarment
order which notification shall include a complete copy of this Temporary Injunction.

5. No security shall be required in connection with this Order.



So Ordered 

effective as of May 19, 1994, at 6:20 p.m.



<SIGNER>
Jennifer B. Coffman,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Judge, United States District Court, Western District of Kentucky.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9413715 Filed 6694; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 451027M
</BILLING>


