 

The vast majority of the comments directed to this question stated that asylum interviews should be mandatory. However,
a large number of these comments also suggested that, as an alternative, direct referral without interview should
take place only in circumstances where the written application indicates that the claim is frivolous or manifestly
unfounded. Some comments criticized the proposed rule for making it appear that the granting of interviews to asylum
applicants will be the exception, not the rule. The comments also stated that applicants deserve to know the standard
under which the INS will determine whether or not to grant an interview. 


Response and Disposition:

 The Department has carefully considered these comments and determined that the goal of streamlining asylum adjudications
can be met without changing the present rule that mandates the opportunity for an interview of each asylum applicant.
Accordingly, the present rule is retained and there is no provision for immediate referral of cases, without an interview,
to an immigration judge. The rule is clarified to state that an interview will be granted for applications that are
complete within the meaning of 208.3(c)(5). Section 208.10 also is amended to provide that the failure without
good cause of an applicant to appear for a scheduled interview under 208.9(a) may be deemed to constitute a waiver
of the right to an interview with an asylum officer or, in the case of an applicant who is a stowaway, alien crewman, alien
temporarily excludable under section 235(c) of the Act, 8 U.S.C. 1225, or in current lawful immigration status, may
be deemed to constitute an abandonment of the application. 


b. Procedural Issues 




Proposed Rule:

 The proposed rule would have amended 8 CFR 208.9 (b) and (c) to require the applicant to provide full identifying information
at the time of the application. Section 208.9(d) would have been amended to require that, at the conclusion of the interview,
the applicant be notified that he or she must appear in person to receive the written decision of the asylum officer.
A new section 208.9(g) would have been added to specify rules regarding the use of interpreters during interviews.





