 

1.423

Post-hearing procedure.


(a) 

Corrections to transcript. 

(1) Within the period of time fixed by the Judge, any party may file a motion proposing corrections to the transcript.
(2) Unless a party files such motion in the manner prescribed, the transcript shall be presumed, except for obvious
typographical errors, to be complete.
(3) As soon as practicable after the close of the hearing and after consideration of any timely objections filed as
to the transcript, the Judge shall issue an order making any corrections to the transcript which the Judge finds are
warranted, which corrections shall be entered onto the original transcript by the Hearing Clerk (without obscuring
the origianl text).
(b) 

Proposed findings of fact, conclusions, order, and brief. 

Prior to the close of the hearing, each party may submit for consideration proposed findings of fact, conclusions,
order, and brief in support thereof. A copy of each such document filed by a party shall be served upon each of the other
parties.
(c) 

Judge's decision. 

(1) The Judge may, upon motion of any party or in his or her own discretion, issue a decision orally at the close of the
hearing, or within 10 calendar days after the close of the hearing, or within 10 calendar days after submission of the
record, if no hearing is requested.
(2) If the decision is announced orally, a copy thereof, excerpted from the transcript of the record, shall be furnished
to the parties by the Hearing Clerk. Irrespective of the date such copy is mailed, the issuance date of the decision
shall be the date the oral decision was announced.
(3) If the decision is in writing, it shall be filed with the Hearing Clerk and served upon the parties as provided in
1.427.
(4) The Judge's decision shall become effective without further proceedings 21 calendar days after the issuance
of the decision, if announced orally at the hearing, or if the decision is in writing, 21 calendar days after the date
of service thereof upon the respondent, unless there is an appeal to the Judicial Officer by a party to the proceeding
pursuant to 1.426; 

Provided, however, 

that no decision shall be final for purposes of judicial review except a final decision of the Judicial Officer upon
appeal.
(5) The Judicial Officer shall issue a decision within 10 calendar days of the receipt of the response to the appeal.


1.424

Motions and requests.


(a) 

General. 

All motions and requests shall be filed with the Hearing Clerk, and served upon all the parties except motions and requests
made on the record during the oral hearing.
(b) 

Motions entertained. 

No dispositive motions, including motions to dismiss on the pleadings and motions for summary judgment, shall be
entertained unless specifically mentioned herein or allowed in the discretion of the Judge.
(c) 

Contents. 

All written motions and requests shall state the particular order, ruling, or action desired and the grounds therefore.
(d) 

Response to motions and requests. 

Within 5 days after service of any written motion or request, or within such shorter or longer period as may be fixed
by the Judge, an opposing party may file a response to the motion or request. The other party shall have no right to reply
to the response.


1.425

Judges.


(a) 

Assignment. 

No Judge shall be assigned to serve in any proceeding who:
(1) Has any pecuniary interest in any matter or business involved in the proceeding;
(2) Is related within the third degree by blood or marriage to any party to the proceeding; or
(3) Has any conflict of interest which might impair the Judge's objectivity in the proceeding.
(b) 

Disqualification of Judge. 

(1) Any party to the proceeding may, by motion made to the Judge, request that the Judge withdraw from the proceeding
because of an alleged disqualifying reason. Such motion shall set forth with particularity the grounds of alleged
disqualification. The Judge may then either rule upon or certify the motion to the Secretary, but not both.


