 

11. In response to efforts by various HMOs to obtain discounts off inpatient hospitalization rates and to direct patients
away from higher cost hospital providers in Nassau and Suffolk Counties to lower cost hospitals, the defendant hospitals
formed Classic Care in the fall of 1991 and signed a memorandum of understanding pursuant to which each defendant agreed
(a) that no member of Classic Care would enter into any contract with an HMO or managed care payer without the collective
approval of the defendant hospitals; and (b) that Classic Care would be the exclusive bargaining agent for the defendant
hospitals in connection with any negotiations relating to contracts with HMOs and managed care firms.

12. In connection with that memorandum of understanding, each of the defendant hospitals entered into an understanding
and agreement that no discounts would be permitted off any Classic Care member's inpatient hospital rates in contracts
with HMOs and that discounts off any defendant hospital's outpatient rates to HMOs or managed care payers would be
limited to no more than 10% off their existing prices for those services. The defendants also agreed to refrain from
entering into contracts with HMOs that sought to convert DRG rates on inpatient hospital services to per diem rates
for those same services, and agreed on the terms and conditions upon which any most favored nation clause would be accepted
by the defendant hospitals.

13. The agreements had the following effects: (a) price competition between the defendant hospitals for the sale
of inpatient hospital services to licensed HMOs was unreasonably restrained; (b) price competition between the
defendant hospitals for the sale of outpatient services to licensed HMOs and managed health care payers was unreasonably
restrained; and (c) HMOs and managed health care entities were deprived of the benefits of free and open competition
in connection with the purchase of hospital services of those entities.



III

Explanation of the Proposed Final Judgment



The United States and defendants have stipulated that the Court may enter the proposed Final Judgment after compliance
with the Antitrust Procedures and Penalties Act, 15 U.S.C. 16 (b)(h).

Under the provisions of Section 2(e) of the Antitrust Procedures and Penalties Act, 15 U.S.C. 16(e), the proposed
Final Judgment may not be entered unless the Court finds that such entry is in the public interest. Paragraph XV. of
the proposed Final Judgment sets forth such a finding.

The proposed Final Judgment is intended to ensure that the defendant Classic Care refrain from acting as an exclusive
bargaining agent on behalf of the defendant hospitals or otherwise acting as conduit or coordinating agency for collective
decision making by the defendant hospitals relating to participation in contracts with third-party payers and managed
care plans and with respect to any pricing terms as may be contained in such contracts. In addition, the proposed Final
Judgment is intended to ensure that the defendant hospitals reach independent decisions and refrain from engaging
in collective anticompetitive practices in their contractual negotiations with purchasers of inpatient and outpatient
hospital services such as HMO and managed care plans.



A. Prohibitions and Obligations



Paragraph IV.A. of the proposed Final Judgment contains prohibitions that run against both the defendant Classic
Care and the defendant hospitals. Pursuant to Paragraph IV.A., each defendant is enjoined and restrained from directly
or indirectly entering into any agreement with any hospitals in the Long Island area concerning the negotiation,
selection, approval, acceptance or refusal of any contract with any third-party payer for the delivery of hospital
services; the terms or amounts of any fee to any third-party payer; the utilization of per diem-based fees in any agreement
with any third-party payer; or communicating any negotiated fee to any hospital in the Long Island area. The ``Long
Island area'' is defined in Paragraph II.F. as Queens, Nassau and Suffolk Counties in the State of New York.




