 

Agreement Containing Consent Order To Cease and Desist



In the matter of:




Synchronal Corporation, Synchronal Group, Inc., Smoothline Corporation, and Omexin Corporation, corporations,
Ira Smolev, individually and as a former officer and director of Synchronal Corporation and Synchronal Group, Inc.,

Richard E. Kaylor, individually and as a former officer and director of Synchronal Corporation, Synchronal Group,
Inc., Smoothline Corporation, and Omexin Corporation,

Thomas L. Fenton, individually and as a former officer and director of Synchronal Corporation and Synchronal Group,
Inc., and

Ana Blau a/k/a Anushka, and Steven Victor, M.D. individually.




The agreement herein, by and between Thomas L. Fenton, individually and as a former officer and director of Synchronal
Corporation and Synchronal Group, Inc., hereinafter sometimes referred to as respondent, and his attorneys, and
counsel for the Federal Trade Commission, is entered into in accordance with the Commission's Rule governing consent
order procedures. In accordance therewith the parties hereby agree that:

1. Respondent Thomas L. Fenton is or was at relevant times herein an officer and director of Synchronal Corporation
and Synchronal Group, Inc. He formulated, directed, and controlled the policies, acts and practices of said corporations.
His home address is 160 East 38th Street, New York, New York 10036.

2. Respondent has been served with copies of the complaint and the amended complaint issued by the Federal Trade Commission
charging him with violations of Sections 5(a) and 12 of the Federal Trade Commission Act and the provisions of the Postal
Reorganization Act, 39 U.S.C. 3009, and has filed an answer to said complaint denying said charges.

3. Respondent admits all the jurisdictional facts set forth in the Commission's complaint and amended complaint
in this proceeding.

4. Respondent waives:

(a) Any further procedural steps;

(b) The requirement that the Commission's decision contain a statement of findings of fact and conclusions of law;

(c) All rights to seek judicial review or otherwise to challenge or contest the validity of the order entered pursuant
to this agreement; and

(d) Any claim under the Equal Access to Justice Act.

5. This agreement shall not become a part of the public record of the proceeding unless and until it is accepted by the
Commission. If this agreement is accepted by the Commission it will be placed on the public record for a period of sixty
(60) days and information in respect thereto publicly released. The Commission thereafter may either withdraw its
acceptance of this agreement and so notify the respondent, in which event it will take such action as it may consider
appropriate, or issue and serve its decision, in disposition of the proceeding.

6. This agreement is for settlement purposes only and does not constitute an admission by respondent of facts, other
than jurisdictional facts, or of violations of law as alleged in the complaint and the amended complaint issued by
the Commission.

7. This agreement contemplates that, if it is accepted by the Commission, and if such acceptance is not subsequently
withdrawn by the Commission pursuant to the provisions of 3.25(f) of the Commission's Rules, the Commission may without
further notice to respondent, (1) issue its decision containing the following order to cease and desist in disposition
of the proceeding, and (2) make information public in respect thereto. When so entered, the order to cease and desist
shall have the same force and effect and may be altered, modified or set aside in the same manner and within the same time
provided by statute for other orders. The order shall become final upon service. Delivery by the U.S. Postal Service
of the decision containing the agreed-to order to respondent's address as stated in this agreement shall constitute
service. Respondent waives any right he might have to any other manner of service. The complaint and the amended complaint
may be used in construing the terms of the order, and no agreement, understanding, representation, or interpretation
not contained in the order or in the agreement may be used to vary or contradict the terms of the order.

8. Respondent has read the complaint, the amended complaint and the order contemplated hereby. He understands that
once the order has been issued, he will be required to file one or more compliance reports showing that he has fully complied
with the order. Respondent further understands that he may be liable for civil penalties in the amount provided by
law for each violation of the order after it becomes final.




