 

The NRC agrees that the proposed policy statement would result in more meetings being open to the public than would
have been under the 1978 policy statement. The 1978 policy covered only meetings between the NRC and parties to proceedings.
The proposed policy statement reflects NRC's longstanding practice of providing the public with the fullest information
practicable on its activities and of conducting business in an open manner. Evolving agency practice since 1978 has
resulted in additional types of meetings being open to the public that are not covered by the 1978 policy statement.
These include meetings with licensees on technical issues, with licensee senior management on Systematic Assessment
of Licensee Performance reports, and with licensees on exit meetings for special team inspections or by accident
investigation and diagnostic evaluation teams. In addition, NRC has open meetings with trade organizations and
with public interest groups regarding policy and technical issues and the agency's regulatory responsibilities.
The policy statement codifies current practice by establishing uniform guidelines for the staff. 



Definition of a Public Meeting 



Several commenters offered suggestions for refining the definition of ``public meeting.'' Several commenters
suggested that the type of individuals attending a meeting should be a determinant of whether the meeting is open to
the public. One commenter suggested limiting public meetings to those where a decision-maker was attending. Other
commenters suggested limiting public meetings only to those where technical staff were in attendance or where only
a project manager and one or more license representatives were present. The NRC strongly believes that the subject
matter of the meeting, or the administrative burden of opening the meeting, rather than the type of participant in
attendance, should be the determining criterion for deciding if a meeting should be considered open for public observation.


One commenter expressed concern that the policy does not apply to state and local governments, including agreement
states. The policy statement does apply to those entities as provided for in Section C.1. of the policy statement.


A commenter suggested language be included to establish a presumption that meetings between the NRC staff and outside
parties be open. The NRC believes its policy statement clearly announces a policy of openness and establishes only
a limited number of necessary exemptions. The NRC believes the policy statement provides meaningful opportunities
for the public to be informed of NRC activities without unduly affecting open and candid discussions between licensees
and the NRC staff or interfering with the NRC staff's ability to exercise its regulatory and safety responsibilities
without undue administrative burden. 

Other commenters suggested that the definition of a public meeting specifically exclude all meetings other than
``face to face meetings,'' that is, exclude meetings using electronic communications, such as telephone conference
calls or teleconferencing. The NRC agrees that the definition of a public meeting is not intended to include conversations
using electronic communications and has modified the definition to clarify that meetings covered by this policy
statement are those where participants are physically present at a single meeting site. 

One commenter suggested that the definition of a public meeting be limited to one in which public interest has been
expressed or where the NRC has reason to believe there is substantial public interest. The use of this type of criterion
would require that the NRC judge what is of significant interest to a wide range of groups that have varied interests.
The NRC does not presume to judge for these varied groups what meetings they may consider to be of significant interest.
The NRC believes that it is the responsibility of members of the public, not the NRC, to decide if they are interested
in attending a staff meeting. 

Several commenters suggested that the public's role at open staff meetings be clearly limited to that of observers.
The preamble of the proposed policy statement clearly states that staff meetings open to the public would be open only
to observation. However, in response to this concern, the NRC has amended the definition of a public meeting to include
the phrase, ``open to public observation.'' 

Several commenters suggested that the policy statement include specific ways to limit public participation, such
as permitting members of the public to ask questions only at the conclusion of a meeting or requiring them to submit
written comments or questions. The policy statement is not intended to address the role of the public beyond that of
observation. However, the NRC recognizes that some meetings open under the policy statement may warrant a greater
degree of public participation. If participation beyond that of observation is allowed for a particular meeting,
a description of the degree of participation will be specified when the meeting is announced and at the outset of the
meeting by the senior NRC official participating in the meeting. 

One commenter asked that NRC prohibit members of the public from interrupting meetings to pursue a personal agenda
or raise public policy issues. The NRC recognizes the concern outside persons may have regarding this possibility.
As above, the NRC staff will indicate the ground rules for a public meeting at the beginning of a meeting and adhere to
those rules throughout the meeting. 



