 

4. This agreement shall not become a part of the public record of the proceeding unless and until it is accepted by the
Commission. If this agreement is accepted by the Commission, it, together with the draft of the complaint contemplated
hereby, will be placed on the public record for a period of sixty (60) days and information in respect thereto publicly
released. The Commission thereafter may either withdraw its acceptance of this agreement and so notify proposed
respondent, in which event it will take such action as it may consider appropriate, or issue and serve its complaint
(in such form as the circumstances may require) and decision, in disposition of the proceeding.

5. This agreement is for settlement purposes only and does not constitute an admission by proposed respondent that
the law has been violated as alleged in the attached draft complaint or that the facts as alleged in the attached draft
complaint, other than the jurisdictional facts, are true.

6. This agreement contemplates that, if it is accepted by the Commission, and if such acceptance is not subsequently
withdrawn by the Commission pursuant to the provisions of 2.34 of the Commission's Rules the Commission may
without further notice to proposed respondent, (1) issue its complaint corresponding in form and substance with
the draft of complaint here attached and its decision containing the following order to cease and desist in disposition
of the proceeding, and (2) make information public in respect thereto. When so entered, the order to cease and desist
shall have the same force and effect and may be altered, modified or set aside in the same manner and within the same time
provided by statute for other orders. The order shall become final upon service. Delivery by the U.S. Postal Service
of the decision containing the agreed-to order to proposed respondent's address as stated in this agreement shall
constitute service. Proposed respondent waives any right it might have to any other manner of service. The complaint
may be used in construing the terms of the order, and no agreement, understanding, representation, or interpretation
not contained in the order or in the agreement may be used to vary or contradict the terms of the order.

7. Proposed respondent has read the complaint and the order contemplated hereby. It understands that once the order
has been issued, it will be required to file one or more compliance reports showing it has fully complied with the order.
Proposed respondent further understands that it may be liable for civil penalties in the amount provided by law for
each violation of the order after it becomes final.



Order



Definitions



For purposes of this Order, the following definitions shall apply:

1. The term ``product'' means any product that is offered for sale, sold or distributed to the public by respondent,
its successors and assigns, under the ``Superior Sno-N-Ice Melter'' band name or any other brand name of respondent,
its successors and assigns; and also means any product sold or distributed to the public by third parties under private
labeling agreements with respondent, its successors and assigns.

2. The term ``competent and reliable scientific evidence'' means tests, analyses, research, studies or other evidence
based on the expertise of professionals in the relevant areas, that has been conducted and evaluated in an objective
manner by persons qualified to do so, using procedures generally accepted in the profession to yield accurate and
reliable results.



I





It is ordered

 that respondent, Chemopharm Laboratory Inc., a corporation, its successors and assigns, and its officers, agents,
representatives, and employees, directly or through any corporation, subsidiary, division, or other device, in
connection with the manufacturing, labeling, advertising, promotion, offering for sale, sale, or distribution
of any product in or affecting commerce, as ``commerce'' is defined in the Federal Trade Commission Act, do forthwith
cease and desist from representing, in any manner, directly or by implication, that:

A. Such product is ``environmentally safe,'' ``protects the total environment,'' or otherwise offers any environmental
benefit; or

B. Such product provides the environmental benefits of Calcium Magnesium Acetate,




unless such representation is true and, at the time of making such representation, respondent possesses and relies
upon competent and reliable evidence, which when appropriate must be competent and reliable scientific evidence,
that substantiates such representation.



II





It is further ordered

 that respondent, Chemopharm Laboratory Inc., a corporation, its successors and assigns, and its offers, agents,
representatives, and employees, directly or through any corporation, subsidiary, division, or other device, in
connection with the manufacturing, labeling, advertising, promotion, offering for sale, sale, or distribution
of any product in or affecting commerce, as ``commerce'' is defined in the Federal Trade Commission Act, do forthwith
cease and desist from misrepresenting, in any manner, directly or by implication, the existence, contents, validity,
results, conclusions, or interpretations of any test or study.



III





It is further ordered

 that for five (5) years after the last date of dissemination of any representation covered by this Order, respondent,
or its successors and assigns, shall maintain and upon request make available to the Federal Trade Commission for
inspection and copying:

A. All materials that were relied upon in disseminating such representations; and


