 

1. Potential Revisions to the Federal Test Procedure



EPA has not to date proposed any revisions to the FTP, so no impact is expected for MYs 199697.



2. IM240 Short Test Requirements



EPA has issued new inspection and maintenance test procedures to help ensure that vehicle emission controls function
properly in real-world use, and has proposed a new Certification Short Test procedure. It has also issued a rule, effective
for MY 1996, outlining new Certification Short Test procedures to ensure that properly maintained passenger cars
and light trucks have no elements of design that would cause ``pattern failure'' in inspection and maintenance programs.
However, EPA's analyses have not indicated that there would be any impact on manufacturers' fuel economy capabilities
as a result of these rulemakings.



3. Onboard Diagnostics



EPA has issued a final rule on onboard diagnostics that applies to MY 1994 and later passenger cars and light trucks,
but EPA believes that this will not affect fuel economy. There may even be some actual fuel economy benefits due to earlier
identification of malfunctioning emissions control equipment.



4. Cold CO Testing



EPA has issued new low temperature carbon monoxide testing requirements which will apply to all MY 1996 and later model
year passenger cars and light trucks, but EPA believes that the requirements will not result in any fuel economy loss
and may actually result in a slight fuel economy benefit.



5. Enhanced Evaporative Testing Requirements



EPA has recently issued enhanced evaporative emissions standards. Any negative impact on fuel economy (due to increased
weights of upgraded evaporative emissions control system) would be very slight. EPA estimates that larger evaporative
canisters, vapor lines, and purge valves will add an average of 2.9 pounds to the weight of a light duty truck. Using
NHTSA's secondary weight multiplier of 1.7, this would mean a total increase of 4.9 pounds, which would reduce fuel
economy by approximately 0.017 mpg. However, this requirement only applies to 20 percent of MY 1996 vehicles and 40
percent of MY 1997 vehicles, so the total respective fuel economy penalties would not be greater than 0.003 mpg and
0.007 mpg. EPA, however, expects offsetting fuel economy benefits, which it has not yet quantified.



