 







<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Food and Drug Administration</USBUREAU>



<CFRNO>21 CFR Part 164</CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 93N0473]</RINDOCK>


Peanut Butter: Proposed Amendment of Standard of Identity 


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Proposed rule.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is proposing to amend the standard of identity for peanut butter to remove the
statement that added vitamins are not suitable ingredients of this food. If this change is adopted, manufacturers
will be able to add vitamins to make modified peanut butter in accordance with the agency's general definition and
standard of identity for food named by the use of a nutrient content claim (such as ``reduced fat'' or ``reduced calorie'')
and a standardized term (peanut butter). FDA is proposing to take this action because it tentatively finds that providing
for modified forms of peanut butter will assist consumers in maintaining healthy dietary practices. Thus, the agency
tentatively concludes that this action will promote honesty and fair dealing in the interest of consumers. 

 
</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Comments by April 4, 1994. FDA proposes that any final rule that may issue based on this proposal become effective 60
days after date of publication in the 

Federal Register

.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Submit written comments to the Dockets Management Branch (HFA305), Food and Drug Administration, rm. 123,
12420 Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD 20857.


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:


 Nannie H. Rainey, 
 Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFS158), 
 Food and Drug Administration, 
 200 C St. SW., Washington, DC 20204, 
2022055099.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:




I. Background


In the 

Federal Register

 of January 6, 1993 (58 FR 2431), FDA adopted 130.10 (21 CFR 130.10). This regulation provides for the use of nutrient
content claims defined in part 101 (21 CFR part 101), such as ``fat free,'' ``low calorie,'' or ``light,'' in conjunction
with a traditional standardized food name (e.g., ``sour cream'') to define a new food such as ``reduced fat sour cream.''
The purpose of the new general standard of identity is to provide for modified versions of certain standardized foods
and thereby to assist consumers in maintaining healthy dietary practices.
The general standard of identity in 130.10 requires, among other things, that the modified versions of the
standardized foods: (1) Not be nutritionally inferior to the traditional standardized food, (2) possess performance
characteristics, such as physical properties, flavor characteristics, functional properties, and shelf life,
that are similar to those of the traditional standardized food, (3) contain a significant amount of any mandatory
ingredient required to be in the traditional food, and (4) be made from the same types of ingredients as permitted in
the standard for the traditional food, except that ingredients may be used to improve texture, prevent syneresis,
add flavor, extend shelf life, improve appearance, or add sweetness. Section 130.10(d)(5) also provides for the
use of water and fat analogs to replace fat and calories but specifically prohibits the replacement of required ingredients
of standardized foods with ingredients from a different source. For example, vegetable oil may not replace milkfat
in the manufacture of a modified version of sour cream. Furthermore, 130.10(d)(3) of the general standard
of identity prohibits the use in the modified food of any ingredient or component of an ingredient whose use in the traditional
food is specifically prohibited by the standard of identity for that food (21 CFR parts 131 through 169). 
In the 

Federal Register

 of January 6, 1993, in a document entitled ``Food Labeling Regulations Implementing the Nutrition Labeling and Education
Act of 1990; Opportunity for Comments'' (58 FR 2066) (hereinafter referred to as the ``implementation final rule''),
FDA provided an opportunity for comment on technical issues raised by the final regulations on food labeling that
it published on that date, including 130.10. The implementation final rule, among other things, provided
30 days for the submission of comments on technical issues.
In response to the implementation final rule, the agency received several inquiries regarding ingredients whose
use in modified foods is prohibited under 130.10(d)(3) of the general standard. Comments claimed that this
provision is inconsistent with 130.10(b), which requires that nutrients be added to the new food to restore
nutrient levels so that the new food is not nutritionally inferior to the traditional food. One comment suggested
that FDA amend 130.10(d)(3) by adding an exception to allow for compliance with 130.10(b). This comment
contended that without such an exception, no nutritionally improved versions of important products such as peanut
butter would be permitted, except when labeled as imitations.
In the 

Federal Register

 of August 18, 1993, FDA published a final rule entitled ``Food Labeling: Nutrient Content Claims, General Principles,
Petitions, Definition of Terms; Definitions of Nutrient Content Claims for Fat, Fatty Acids, and Cholesterol content
of Foods; Food Standards: Requirements for Foods Named by Use of a Nutrient Content Claim and a Standardized Term;
Technical Amendment'' (58 FR 44020) (hereinafter referred to as ``the technical amendment''). In this document,
the agency acknowledged that it was arguable that there was a conflict between 130.10(b) and (d)(3) (58 FR 44020
at page 44028) but stated that no conflict between these provisions was intended. It recognized, however, that while
the need to ensure that the modified food is consistent in characteristics with the traditional standardized food
in as many ways as possible, and the need to ensure that the modified food is not made with ingredients not permitted
in the traditional food, normally support each other, in the case of peanut butter, and only peanut butter, they work
to prevent the creation of modified peanut butter products.
The standard of identity for peanut butter in 164.150(c) (21 CFR 164.150(c)) states that artificial flavorings,
artificial sweeteners, chemical preservatives, added vitamins, and color additives are not suitable ingredients
for use in the food. Based on testimony at the hearings held when the standard of identity for peanut butter was adopted
and the resulting findings of fact (33 FR 10506 at 10509, July 24, 1968), the agency adopted this prohibition on the
addition of vitamins to peanut butter because such addition is unnecessary when the peanut butter is consumed as part
of a balanced diet. As a result of the prohibition on vitamin addition in the peanut butter standard (164.150(c)),
it may not be possible to formulate a modified peanut butter product that is not nutritionally inferior to peanut butter
under the general standard of identity. For example, if the level of vitamins is reduced in making the modified peanut
butter product, e.g., a ``reduced calorie'' or ``reduced fat'' peanut butter, vitamins would have to be added to ensure
compliance with 130.10(b). 
In the technical amendment, the agency discussed the appropriateness of amending the standard of identity for peanut
butter to remove the specific prohibition regarding the addition of vitamins in 164.150(c) as well as the appropriateness
of the option suggested in comments of modifying 130.10 to allow the addition of nutrients to modified peanut
butter products (58 FR 44020 at 44028 and 44029). FDA stated that it was the agency's preliminary view that it is more
appropriate to amend the standard of identity for peanut butter to remove the specific prohibition regarding the
addition of vitamins than to modify 130.10. FDA said that amendment of the peanut butter standard would accomplish
the same result as the suggested modification of 130.10 but would allow the general standard of identity to
remain a generic standard applicable to any standardized food. FDA is now proposing to amend 164.150(c) to
effect this change. 
The agency points out that FDA's regulations make provision for nonstandardized spreadable peanut products. Under
102.23 (21 CFR 102.23), these products may be labeled with the common or usual name ``peanut spreads,'' provided
that the identity statement contains a statement of the percent of peanut ingredient, and the product complies with
the nutrient content requirements in 102.23. This regulation has not, however, fostered a large number of
products.
FDA believes that amendment of the peanut butter standard to remove the prohibition on added vitamins will lead to
the creation of more peanut products than has been the case under 102.23 because manufacturers will be able
to use the term ``peanut butter'' instead of ``peanut spread'' in the names of their products. Further, FDA believes
that the use of defined nutrient content claims will promote uniformity in labeling and will enhance consumer recognition
of modified peanut butter products that have been designed to achieve a nutritional goal. This enhanced recognition
will assist consumers in maintaining healthy dietary practices. Thus, FDA tentatively finds that a change in the
peanut butter standard that will permit the use of added vitamins in the production of modified peanut butter products
is in the best interest of consumers. Accordingly, FDA is proposing to revise 164.150(c) by removing the specific
prohibition regarding ``added vitamins.'' This change will allow the addition of nutrients normally present in
peanut butter that would otherwise be reduced in manufacturing the modified peanut butter products, thereby ensuring
that the modified version of the food will not be nutritionally inferior to peanut butter. 
FDA notes that the removal of the specific prohibition against added vitamins in the peanut butter standard does not
change the agency's position that added vitamins are not necessary for peanut butter that has not been modified when
it is consumed in a balanced diet. Thus, if vitamins were added to a food that complies with the standard of identity
in 164.150, the resultant food would not be peanut butter. 


II. Economic Impact


FDA has examined the impacts of the proposed rule under Executive Order 12866 and the Regulatory Flexibility Act (Pub.
L. 96354). Executive Order 12866 directs agencies to assess all costs and benefits of available regulatory
alternatives and, when regulation is necessary, to select regulatory approaches that maximize net benefits (including
potential economic, environmental, public health, and safety effects; distributive impacts; and equity). The
Regulatory Flexibility Act requires analyzing options for regulatory relief for small businesses. The proposed
removal of the specific prohibition regarding added vitamins in the peanut butter standard of identity will not affect
the manufacture or labeling of peanut butter as defined in 164.150. However, it will provide an additional
option to manufacturers of spreadable peanut products that do not comply with the standard of identity for peanut
butter. It will permit the manufacture and labeling of some modified peanut butter products in accordance with the
general definition and standard of identity in 130.10. Products complying with the general definition and
standard of identity may be named by use of a nutrient content claim and the standardized term ``peanut butter,'' thereby
minimizing confusion to consumers regarding the nature of the food. 
Because the manufacture of modified peanut butter products complying with the new general definition and standard
of identity is optional, and manufacturers may continue to make nonstandardized spreadable peanut products in accordance
with the common or usual name regulation in 102.23 and peanut butter in accordance with the standard of identity
in 164.150, FDA does not believe that the proposed change to remove the specific prohibition regarding ``added
vitamins'' in the standard of identity will have any adverse economic impact on manufacturers. Therefore, FDA finds
that this proposed rule is not a significant regulatory action as defined by Executive Order 12866. In addition, FDA
certifies in accordance with section 605 of the Regulatory Flexibility Act that no significant economic impact on
a substantial number of small entities will derive from this action.


III. Environmental Impact


The agency has determined under 21 CFR 25.24(b)(1) that this action is of a type that does not individually or cumulatively
have a significant effect on the human environment. Therefore, neither an environmental assessment nor an environmental
impact statement is required.


IV. Comments


Interested persons may, on or before April 4, 1994, submit to the Dockets Management Branch (address above) written
comments regarding this proposal. Two copies of any comments are to be submitted, except that individuals may submit
one copy. Comments are to be identified with the docket number found in brackets in the heading of this document. Received
comments may be seen in the office above between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.


List of Subjects in 21 CFR Part 164


Food grades and standards, Nuts, Peanuts.
Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and under authority delegated to the Commissioner of Food
and Drugs and redelegated to the Director, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, it is proposed that 21 CFR
part 164 be amended as follows:


PART 164_TREE NUT AND PEANUT PRODUCTS


1. The authority citation for 21 CFR part 164 is revised to read as follows:





Authority: 

 Secs. 201, 401, 403, 409, 701, 721 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321, 341, 343, 348, 371, 379e).



2. Section 164.150 is amended by revising paragraph (c) to read as follows:


164.150 

 Peanut butter.


* * * * *


(c) The seasoning and stabilizing ingredients referred to in paragraph (a) of this section are suitable substances
which are not food additives as defined in section 201(s) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the act), or if
they are food additives as so defined, they are used in conformity with regulations established pursuant to section
409 of the act. Seasoning and stabilizing ingredients that perform a useful function are regarded as suitable, except
that artificial flavorings, artificial sweeteners, chemical preservatives, and color additives are not suitable
ingredients in peanut butter. Oil products used as optional stabilizing ingredients shall be hydrogenated vegetable
oils. For the purposes of this section, hydrogenated vegetable oil shall be considered to include partially hydrogenated
vegetable oil.


* * * * *





Dated: January 24, 1994.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Fred R. Shank,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Director, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 942359 Filed 2294; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>

