 

The proposed experimental area does not currently support reproducing pairs of wolves nor is it likely to support
2 pairs of naturally dispersing wolves from northwestern Montana within the next 3 years, at which time the reintroduced
population should be growing and potentially dispersing into Montana and central Idaho. Except for an established
and growing population of gray wolves in northwestern Montana, only gray wolf individuals have been documented in
the remainder or the northern Rocky Mountains in the United States. Thus, the Yellowstone National Park reintroduction
is consistent with provisions of section 10(j) of the Act that requires that an experimental population be wholly
separate geographically from nonexperimental populations of the same species. An occasional, solitary wolf has
been reported, killed, or otherwise documented in Idaho, Wyoming, Montana, and other western States, and single
packs occasionally have been reported throughout the northern Rocky Mountains. However, these reported wolves
and groups of wolves, if all reports are factual, apparently disappeared for unknown reasons and did not establish
recoverable ``populations'' as defined by wolf experts (Service 1994). However, it is possible that prior to 2002,
other wolves may appear in the wild, and be attracted to the experimental area by the presence of the reintroduced wolves,
or by other factors. These ``new'' wolves that appear in the experimental population area might contribute to recovery
of the experimental population, and they also would be classified as part of the experimental, nonessential population.


It is anticipated that some wolves may disperse from the experimental area and contribute to wolf recovery in northwestern
Montana. If so, these wolves would be classified as endangered, as in the case of wolves that recolonized an area near
Glacier National Park in 1982. It is also possible, but not probable, that during the next 3 years, movements between
recovery areas would result in some genetic exchange between wolves resulting from natural recovery and those resulting
from the reintroduction. It is not anticipated that such exchange will significantly affect the rate of recovery
in the Yellowstone National Park experimental population area. 

For the purposes of establishment of this experimental population, the Service has determined that there is no existing
wolf population in the recovery area that would preclude reintroduction and establishment of an experimental population
in Yellowstone National Park. A wolf population is defined as at least two breeding pairs of naturally occurring gray
wolves that successfully raise at least two young to December 31 of their birth year for two consecutive years (Service
1994). If a wolf population were discovered in the proposed recovery area, no reintroduction would occur. Instead,
the success of the naturally occurring wolf population would be monitored to determine if population recovery was
continuing. If this event occurs before the effective date of the experimental population rule, those wolves would
be determined to be, and managed as, endangered wolves under the full authority of the Act. In this case, the experimental
rule would not be implemented, and no wolves would be reintroduced in that experimental area. If wolf population growth
does not continue, and within 5 years the wolf population has not doubled from the original founding pairs and pups,
reintroduction would proceed. Wolves will not be introduced as an experimental population if, prior to introduction
of wolves, breeding groups of wolves are discovered. However, once the experimental population rule is established
and the reintroduction begun by the actual release of wolves into a recovery area, the experimental population rule
would remain in effect until wolf recovery occurs or after a scientific review indicates that modifications in the
experimental rule are necessary to achieve wolf recovery. 

If a wolf population (2 breeding pairs successfully raising two young each for two consecutive years) were discovered
in the proposed Yellowstone experimental population area, reintroduction under an experimental population rule
would not occur into that area and any such wolf population would be managed as a natural recovering population in that
area. The boundaries of the proposed experimental population area would be changed, as needed, to encourage recovery
of any naturally occurring, breeding wolf population if such natural population is discovered prior to the establishment
of the experimental population, and before wolf reintroduction occurs. No experimental population area will contain
a portion of the home range of any active breeding pairs of wolves that have successfully raised young. Any changes
in the boundaries of the nonessential experimental population area, required because of the above conditions, would
be reflected in a final rule. 

Utilization of Federal public lands including National Parks and Forests is consistent with the legal responsibility
of the National Park Service to sustain the native wildlife resources of the United States, and of the Forest Service
and all other Federal agencies under section 7(a)(1) to utilize their authorities in furtherance of the purposes
of the Act by carrying out programs for the conservation of endangered species and threatened species. 



Management 



As previously stated, the nonessential experimental population of gray wolves would be established in the Yellowstone
area by introducing gray wolves into Yellowstone National Park under authority of section 10(j) of the Act, as amended.
The Yellowstone area includes all of Wyoming and parts of Montana and Idaho that surround the Park. Ongoing wolf monitoring
efforts (Service 1994) would continue to document the presence of any wild wolves, and, prior to any reintroduction,
the Service would make a determination of the status of any naturally occurring wolf population in this area. Wolves
would not be reintroduced into the Park if a wolf population is documented in the recovery area. After introduction
has been completed according to the Reintroduction Protocol (section 5 above), management of the experimental population
will begin. 





