 

&bull;If HCWs are from risks groups with increased prevalence of TB, consideration may be given to including them
in the skin-testing program, even if they do not have potential occupational exposure to 

M. tuberculosis

, so that converters can be identified and preventive therapy offered. 
&bull;Administrators of health-care facilities should ensure that physicians and other personnel not paid by,
but working in, the facility receive skin testing at appropriate intervals for their occupational group and work
location. 
&bull;During the pre-employment physical or when applying for hospital privileges, HCWs who have potential for
exposure to 

M. tuberculosis

 (Table 2), including those with a history of BCG vaccination, should have baseline PPD skin testing performed (Suppl.
2). For HCWs who have not had a documented negative PPD test result during the preceding 12 months, the baseline PPD
testing should employ the two-step method; this will detect boosting phenomena that might be misinterpreted as a
skin-test conversion. Decisions concerning the use of the two-step procedure for baseline testing in a particular
facility should be based on the frequency of boosting in that facility. 
&bull;HCWs who have a documented history of a positive PPD test, adequate treatment for disease, or adequate preventive
therapy for infection, should be exempt from further PPD screening unless they develop signs or symptoms suggestive
of TB. 
&bull;PPD-negative HCWs should undergo repeat PPD testing at regular intervals as determined by the risk assessment
(Section II.B). In addition, these HCWs should be tested whenever they have been exposed to a TB patient and appropriate
precautions were not observed at the time of exposure (Section II.K.3). Performing PPD testing of HCWs who work in
the same area or occupational group on different scheduled dates (e.g., test them on their birthdays or on their employment
anniversary dates), rather than testing all HCWs in the area or group on the same day, may lead to earlier detection
of 

M. tuberculosis

 transmission. 
&bull;All PPD tests should be administered, read, and interpreted in accordance with current guidelines by specified
trained personnel (Suppl. 2). At the time their test results are read, HCWs should be informed about the interpretation
of both positive and negative PPD test results. This information should indicate that the interpretation of an induration
that is 59 mm in diameter depends on the HCW's immune status and history of exposure to persons who have infectious
TB. Specifically, HCWs who have indurations of 59 mm in diameter should be advised that such results may be considered
positive for HCWs who are contacts of persons with infectious TB or who have HIV infection or other causes of severe
immunosuppression (e.g., immunosuppressive therapy for organ transplantation). 
&bull;When an HCW who is not assigned regularly to a single work area has a PPD test conversion, appropriate personnel
should identify the areas where the HCW worked during the time when infection was likely to have occurred. This information
can then be considered in analyzing the risk for transmission in those areas. 
&bull;In any area of the facility where transmission of 

M. tuberculosis

 is known to have occurred, a problem evaluation should be conducted (Section II.K), and the frequency of skin testing
should be determined according to the applicable risk category (Section II.B). 
&bull;PPD test results should be recorded confidentially in the individual HCW's employee health record and in an
aggregate database of all HCW PPD test results. The database can be analyzed periodically to estimate the risk for
acquiring new infection in specific areas or occupational groups in the facility. 


4. Evaluation and Management of HCWs Who Have Positive PPD Test Results or Active TB 


a. Evaluation 
&bull;All HCWs with newly recognized positive PPD test results or PPD test conversions should be evaluated promptly
for active TB. This evaluation should include a clinical examination and a chest radiograph. If the history, clinical
examination, or chest radiograph is compatible with active TB, additional tests should be performed (Section II.C.2).
If symptoms compatible with TB are present, the HCW should be excluded from the workplace until either a) a diagnosis
of active TB is ruled out or b) a diagnosis of active TB was established, the HCW is being treated, and a determination
has been made that the HCW is noninfectious (Suppl. 2). HCWs who do not have active TB should be evaluated for preventive
therapy according to published guidelines (Suppl. 2). 
&bull;If an HCW's PPD test result converts to positive, a history of confirmed or suspected TB exposure should be obtained
in an attempt to determine the potential source. When the source of exposure is known, the drug-susceptibility pattern
of the 

M. tuberculosis

 isolated from the source should be identified so that the correct curative or preventive therapy can be initiated
for the HCW with the PPD test conversion. The drug-susceptibility pattern should be recorded in the HCW's medical
record, where it will be available if the HCW subsequently develops active TB and needs therapy specific for the drug-susceptibility
pattern. 
&bull;All HCWs, including those with histories of positive PPD test results, should be reminded periodically about
the symptoms of TB and the need for prompt evaluation of any pulmonary symptoms suggestive of TB. 
b. Routine and follow-up chest radiographs. 
&bull;Routine chest radiographs are not required for asymptomatic, PPD-negative HCWs. HCWs with positive PPD test
results should have a chest radiograph as part of the initial evaluation of their PPD test; if negative, repeat chest
radiographs are not needed unless symptoms develop that could be attributed to TB (

58

). However, more frequent monitoring for symptoms of TB may be considered for recent converters and other PPD-positive
HCWs who are at increased risk for developing active TB (e.g., HIV-infected or otherwise severely immunocompromised
HCWs). 
c. Workplace restrictions.


(1) Active TB.
&bull;HCWs with pulmonary or laryngeal TB pose a risk to patients and other HCWs while they are infectious, and they
should be excluded from the workplace until they are noninfectious. The same work restrictions apply to all HCWs regardless
of their immune status. 
&bull;Before the HCW who has TB can return to the workplace, the health-care facility should have documentation from
the HCW's health-care provider that the HCW is receiving adequate therapy, the cough has resolved, and the HCW has
had three consecutive negative sputum smears collected on different days. After work duties are resumed and while
the HCW remains on anti-TB therapy, facility staff should receive periodic documentation from the HCW's health-care
provider that the HCW is being maintained on effective drug therapy for the recommended time period and that the sputum
AFB smears continue to be negative. 
&bull;HCWs with active laryngeal or pulmonary TB who discontinue treatment before they are cured should be evaluated
promptly for infectiousness. If the evaluation determines that they are still infectious, they should be excluded
from the workplace until treatment has been resumed, an adequate response to therapy has been documented, and three
more consecutive sputum AFB smears collected on different days have been negative. 
&bull;HCWs who have TB at sites other than the lung or larynx usually do not need to be excluded from the workplace if
a diagnosis of concurrent pulmonary TB has been ruled out. 
(2) Latent TB infection.
&bull;HCWs receiving preventive treatment for latent TB infection should not be restricted from their usual work
activities. 
&bull;HCWs with latent TB infection who cannot take or who do not accept or complete a full course of preventive therapy
should not be excluded from the workplace. These HCWs should be counseled about the risk for developing active TB and
instructed regularly to seek prompt evaluation if signs or symptoms develop that could be caused by TB. 


K. Problem Evaluation 


Epidemiologic investigations may be indicated for several situations. These include, but are not limited to, (a)
the occurrence of PPD test conversions or active TB in HCWs; (b) the occurrence of possible person-to-person transmission
of M. tuberculosis

; and (c) situations in which patients or HCWs with active TB are not promptly identified and isolated, thus exposing
other persons in the facility to 

M. tuberculosis

. The general objectives of the epidemiologic investigations in these situations are as follows: 
(1) To determine the likelihood that transmission of and infection with 

M. tuberculosis

 has occurred in the facility; 
(2) To determine the extent to which 

M. tuberculosis

 has been transmitted; 
(3) To identify those persons who have been exposed and infected, enabling them to receive appropriate clinical management;

(4) To identify factors that could have contributed to transmission and infection and to implement appropriate interventions;
and 
(5) To evaluate the effectiveness of any interventions that are implemented and to ensure that exposure to and transmission
of 

M. tuberculosis

 have been terminated. 
The exact circumstances of these situations are likely to vary considerably, and the associated epidemiologic investigations
should be tailored to the individual circumstances. The following sections provide general guidance for conducting
these investigations. 


1. Investigating PPD Test Conversions and Active TB in HCWs 


a. Investigating PPD test conversions in HCWs.
PPD test conversions may be detected in HCWs as a result of a contact investigation, in which case the probable source
of exposure and transmission is already known (Section II.K.3.), or as a result of routine screening, in which case
the probable source of exposure and infection is not already known and may not be immediately apparent. 
If a skin-test conversion in an HCW is identified as part of routine screening, the following steps should be considered
(Figure 2): 
&bull;The HCW should be evaluated promptly for active TB. The initial evaluation should include a thorough history,
physical examination, and chest radiograph. On the basis of the initial evaluation, other diagnostic procedures
(e.g., sputum examination) may be indicated. 
&bull;If appropriate, the HCW should be placed on preventive or curative therapy in accordance with current guidelines
(Suppl. 2) (

5

). 
&bull;A history of possible exposure to 

M. tuberculosis

 should be obtained from the HCW to determine the most likely source of infection. When the source of infection is known,
the drug-susceptibility pattern of the 

M. tuberculosis

 isolate from the source patient should be identified to determine appropriate preventive or curative therapy regimens.






