 

c. All rights to seek judicial review or otherwise to challenge or contest the validity of the order entered pursuant
to this agreement; and
d. All claims under the Equal Access to Justice Act, 5 U.S.C. 504.
4. This agreement shall not become part of the public record of the proceeding unless and until it is accepted by the
Commission. If this agreement is accepted by the Commission, it, together with the attached draft complaint, will
be placed on the public record for a period of sixty (60) days and information in respect thereto publicly released.
The Commission thereafter may either withdraw its acceptance of this agreement and so notify the proposed respondents,
in which event it will take such action as it may consider appropriate, or issue and serve its complaint (in such form
as the circumstances may require) and decision, in disposition of the proceeding.
5. This agreement is for settlement purposes only and does not constitute an admission by proposed respondents of
facts, other than jurisdictional facts, or of violations of law as alleged in the draft complaint here attached.
6. This agreement contemplates that it it is accepted by the Commission, and if such acceptance is not subsequently
withdrawn by the Commission pursuant to the provisions of 2.34 of the Commission's Rules, the Commission may,
without further notice to proposed respondents, (a) issue its complaint corresponding in form and substance with
the attached draft complaint and its decision containing the following order to cease and desist in disposition of
the proceeding and (b) make information public in respect thereto. When so entered, the order to cease and desist shall
have the same force and effect and may be altered, modified or set aside in the same manner and within the same time provided
by statute for other orders. The order shall become final upon service. Delivery by the U.S. Postal Service of the complaint
and decision containing the agreed-to order to proposed respondents' address as stated in this agreement shall constitute
service. Proposed respondents waive any right they may have to any other manner of service. The complaint may be used
in construing the terms of the order, and no agreement, understanding, representation, or interpretation not contained
in the order or the agreement may be used to vary or contradict the terms of the order.
7. Proposed respondents have read the attached draft complaint and the following order. Proposed respondents understand
that once the order has been issued, they will be required to file one or more compliance reports showing that they have
fully complied with the order. Proposed respondents further understand that they may be liable for civil penalties
in the amount provided by law for each violation of the order after it becomes final.


Order


I




It is ordered 

that respondents Mia Rose Products, Inc., a corporation, its successors and assigns, and its officers, and Mia Palencar,
individually and as an officer of said corporation, and respondents' agents, representatives, and employees, directly
or through any corporation, subsidiary, division or other device, in connection with the manufacturing, labelling,
advertising, promotion, offering for sale, sale or distribution of Air Therapy, Pet Air or any substantially similar
product in or affecting commerce, as ``commerce'' is defined in the Federal Trade Commission Act, do forthwith cease
and desist from representing, in any manner, directly or by implication, that:
A. Such product is effective in cleaning or purifying indoor air.
B. Such product is more effective in cleaning or purifying indoor air than conventional air cleaning products.
C. Spraying such product into the air eliminates smoke.


