 







<USDEPT> DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Food and Drug Administration</USBUREAU>



<CFRNO>21 CFR Part 131</CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 91P0090]</RINDOCK>


 Evaporated Milk; Amendment of the Standard of Identity


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Final rule.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is amending the standard of identity for evaporated milk by revising the minimum
milkfat and total milk solids content requirements and establishing a minimum milk solids-not-fat content requirement.
This action is in response to a petition filed by the American Dairy Products Institute (ADPI) and will promote honesty
and fair dealing in the interest of consumers.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Effective June 13, 1994, written objections and requests for a hearing by May 16, 1994.



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Submit written objections to the Dockets Management Branch (HFA305), Food and Drug Administration, rm. 123,
12420 Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD 20857. 



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION:

 Nannie H. Rainey, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFS158), Food and Drug Administration, 200
C St. SW., Washington, DC 20204, 2022055099.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:




I. The Proposal


 In the 

Federal Register

 of July 22, 1992 (57 FR 32470), FDA published a proposal, based on a petition from ADPI, 130 North Franklin St., Chicago,
IL 60606, to amend the standard of identity for evaporated milk (21 CFR 131.130) to: (1) Reduce the minimum milkfat
content requirement from 7.5 percent to 6.5 percent by weight; (2) reduce the minimum total milk solids content requirement
from 25 percent to 23 percent by weight; and (3) add a minimum milk solids-not-fat content requirement of 16.5 percent
by weight. Interested persons were given until September 21, 1992, to submit comments.



 II. Comments


 The agency received seven responses, each containing one or more comments, from a consumer, a trade association,
and several manufacturers. Six letters supported, and one opposed, the proposal. A summary of the opposing comments
and the agency's responses follow.
 1. The comment contended that the solids content of fluid milk (producers' milk) has probably increased over the last
20 years, and that the proposed reduction in the minimum required milkfat and total milk solids content of evaporated
milk is inconsistent with the intent of the standard of identity for evaporated milk, as well as the intent of the subsequent
amendments, that the milkfat and milk solids-not-fat contents be reasonably related to those of the milk used in the
manufacture of evaporated milk. 
 The agency disagrees with the comment. According to data supplied by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) (Ref.
1), the composition of producers' milk has remained fairly constant through the 1970's and the 1980's. These data
show that the yearly average milkfat content for all producers' milk, before standardization for beverage purposes,
during the period 1970 to 1991 (Ref. 1) ranged between 3.64 percent and 3.68 percent, with an overall average of 3.66
percent. 
 The agency does not agree that the change in compositional requirements is inconsistent with the intent of the evaporated
milk standard. Throughout the history of the evaporated milk standard, the labeling of evaporated milk products
and the instructional materials pertaining to the use of the food supplied to consumers by food manufacturers, trade
associations, and USDA (Ref. 2), as well as policy statements by FDA, have described the food as a 2 to 1 concentrate
of milk. Instructions on the label or in labeling of evaporated milk frequently show that the food is to be diluted with
an equivalent portion of water for use in preparation of beverages made using the food. In addition, recipes for other
foods often state that a can of evaporated milk may be diluted with a can of water for use in recipes calling for the addition
of milk (Ref. 2). 
 The standard of identity for milk in 131.110 (21 CFR 131.110) defines minimum compositional requirements
for the food of not less than 3.25 percent of milkfat and not less than 8.25 percent of milk solids not fat. The minimum
compositional requirements for evaporated milk that FDA is adopting in this final rule (i.e., not less than 6.5 percent
of milkfat, 16.5 percent of milk solids not fat, and 23 percent total milk solids) correspond to a twofold concentration
of standardized milk and, thus, are directly related to those of milk. Because the change in compositional requirements
accurately reflects the general understanding that evaporated milk is a twofold concentrate of milk, the agency
finds that the change in the evaporated milk standard is consistent with the intent of the standard and, therefore,
is revising the standard as proposed.
 2. The comment disagreed that the test results that ADPI submitted from a monadic (i.e., single-product evaluation)
in-home use test were a reliable indication of real consumer preferences. The comment stated that monadic ratings
are not accepted by organizations such as the National Advertising Division of the Better Business Bureau to support
product comparative claims.
 FDA acknowledges the comment's concern that ADPI's in-home use test was not a conclusive demonstration that consumers
preferred the lower fat, lower solids evaporated milk over the traditional standardized evaporated milk. However,
ADPI submitted information in its petition on a total of three industry research tests on consumer perceptions of
traditional standardized evaporated milk compared to evaporated milk manufactured to conform to the parameters
for which ADPI had petitioned. The monadic in-home use test was only one of these tests. In the other two tests, each
participant was able to evaluate both products.
 FDA has reviewed the studies that ADPI submitted (Ref. 3). The agency concludes that there was sufficient evidence
to support ADPI's claim that consumers were unable to distinguish between the standardized evaporated milk and evaporated
milk manufactured to conform to the petitioned parameters. Taken individually, the studies did not provide overwhelming
data, but the combined weight of the three studies has convinced the agency that consumers' perceptions of the two
products were not significantly different. Each test was performed under different circumstances (i.e., employing
different evaluation techniques) and used a different representative sample of consumers. The studies examined
a wide variety of possible consumer uses of evaporated milk in realistic, everyday situations. Additionally, these
were separate studies employing within-subjects and between-subjects designs that came to identical conclusions.
Based on all of the evidence in the petition, the agency finds that it can conclude that consumers are unable to discriminate
between standardized evaporated milk and the evaporated milk manufactured to conform to the suggested parameters.
 3. The comment stated that the overwhelming use of evaporated milk is in recipes, and that it was not aware of anyone
reconstituting evaporated milk for beverage use in the United States. The comment questioned whether consumers
consider evaporated milk to be a 2:1 concentrate of fluid milk, and whether the amendment would make reconstitution
for beverage use more convenient. 
 The agency agrees that evaporated milk is used primarily as an ingredient of other foods. FDA notes that evaporated
milk may be used in recipes, as manufactured, or in reconstituted form as a direct replacement for milk. Another significant
use of evaporated milk is in coffee and tea (Ref. 4). Although the common consumption of reconstituted evaporated
milk as a beverage is decreasing (Refs. 5 and 6), evaporated milk does replace fluid milk for beverage purposes in individual
households as a result of commercial purchases, as well as through the USDA commodity distribution program; in institutions;
and by participants in the USDA Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children (Ref. 4). In fact, one comment
from a consumer stated that he and his family have used evaporated milk regularly in food recipes, in coffee, and in
the preparation of beverage milk.
Evaporated milk has been touted as a 2:1 concentration of milk for many years (Ref. 7). A 2:1 concentrate is easier for
consumers to reconstitute than a 2.3:1 concentrate because it is in whole units. In addition, as noted above, a 2:1
concentrate, when diluted, results in a product whose composition is the same as that for beverage milk. Therefore,
FDA concludes that providing for a 2:1 concentrate of milk under the standard of identity for evaporated milk is in
the best interest of consumers, and that the concerns raised by the comment are without merit.
 4. The comment argued that a change in the standard of identity for evaporated milk is unnecessary because consumers
that want a lower fat, lower cholesterol evaporated milk can purchase evaporated lowfat milk or evaporated skimmed
milk.
 FDA notes that consumers may continue to purchase evaporated lowfat milk or evaporated skimmed milk. However, comments
from a manufacturer of evaporated milk that were submitted in support of the proposal stated that many of its customers
have expressed an interest in lower fat and lower calorie foods, and that the amendment would afford it (the commenting
manufacturer) the opportunity to meet the demands of this segment of the public. Furthermore, the fat reduction,
although modest, is consistent with ``The Surgeon General's Report on Nutrition and Health'' (Ref. 8) and the National
Academy of Sciences' report on ``Diet and Health, Implications for Reducing Chronic Disease Risk'' (Ref. 9), which
recommend that consumers reduce their consumption of fats and cholesterol. Therefore, FDA finds that the amended
standard will benefit consumers.
 FDA also notes that the nutritional benefit is only one of several bases that support the amended standard. Therefore,
FDA concludes that the argument raised by the comment is without merit.

 5. The comment noted that the proposed reduction in the minimum required milkfat content and milk solids content in
evaporated milk would make the U.S. standard of identity for evaporated milk inconsistent with the International
Codex standard for evaporated milk.
 FDA acknowledges that the amended standard is not identical to the International Codex standard for evaporated milk.
The Codex standard requires that evaporated milk contain not less than 7.5 percent of milkfat and not less than 25 percent
of total milk solids. Because the new requirements in the standard that FDA is adopting will establish lower values
for minimum milkfat and minimum total milk solids content than those of the Codex standard for evaporated milk, products
complying with the Codex standard will meet FDA's standard of identity. U.S. exporters of evaporated milk may need
to reformulate their products if they are to be shipped to countries that require that the food comply with the minimum
requirements of the Codex standard, but this fact provides no basis for not making the proposed change in the standard.
 Accordingly, after consideration of all comments, the agency is amending the standard of identity for evaporated
milk in 131.130(a) by reducing the minimum milkfat content requirement from 7.5 percent to 6.5 percent by weight,
reducing the minimum total milk solids content requirement from 25 percent to 23 percent by weight, and establishing
a minimum milk solids-not-fat content requirement of 16.5 percent by weight. FDA concludes that the amendments will
promote honesty and fair dealing in the interest of consumers.



 III. Economic Impact


 FDA has examined the economic implications of this final rule to amend the standard of identity for evaporated milk
in 21 CFR part 131 as required by Executive Order (E.O.) 12866 and the Regulatory Flexibility Act (Pub. L. 96354).
E.O. 12866 directs agencies to assess all costs and benefits of available regulatory alternatives and, when regulation
is necessary, to select regulatory approaches that maximize net benefits (including potential economic, environmental,
public health, and safety effects; distributive impacts; and equity). The Regulatory Flexibility Act requires
that the agency analyze options for regulatory relief for small businesses.
 On July 22, 1992, FDA analyzed the economic impact of the requirements that the agency is adopting under the previous
E.O. 12291 and found that they would not have a significant impact on small business. The agency noted in the proposed
rule that manufacturers may continue to process evaporated milks using current formulations. Thus, no changes are
required in formulations unless manufacturers wish to reformulate their products. In the proposal, the agency tentatively
concluded that the regulation would have zero costs associated with it. FDA has received no information or comments
that would alter the tentative finding that it set out in the proposed rule that there is no substantive economic issue
in this rulemaking. 
 Thus, the agency finds that this final rule is not a significant regulatory action as defined in E.O. 12866. In compliance
with the Regulatory Flexibility Act, the agency certifies that the final rule will not have a significant impact on
a substantial number of small businesses.
 


 IV. Environmental Impact


 The agency has determined under 21 CFR 25.24(b)(1) that this action is of a type that does not individually or cumulatively
have a significant effect on the human environment. Therefore, neither an environmental assessment nor an environmental
impact statement is required.



 V. Objections


 Any person who will be adversely affected by this regulation may at any time on or before May 16, 1994, file with the Dockets
Management Branch (address above) written objections thereto. Each objection shall be separately numbered, and
each numbered objection shall specify with particularity the provisions of the regulation to which objection is
made and the grounds for the objection. Each numbered objection on which a hearing is requested shall specifically
so state. Failure to request a hearing for any particular objection shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing
on that objection. Each numbered objection for which a hearing is requested shall include a detailed description
and analysis of the specific factual information intended to be presented in support of the objection in the event
that a hearing is held. Failure to include such a description and analysis for any particular objection shall constitute
a waiver of the right to a hearing on the objection. Three copies of all documents shall be submitted and shall be identified
with the docket number found in brackets in the heading of this document. Any objections received in response to the
regulation may be seen in the Dockets Management Branch between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.



 VI. References


 The following references have been placed on display in the Dockets Management Branch (address above), and may be
seen by interested persons between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.


 1. Rourke, J., Dairy Division , U.S. Department of Agriculture, facsimile of Summary Data on Milkfat Content of Producers'
Milk, 1970 through 1991, to Shellee A. Davis, February 17, 1993.
 2. Leighton, R. J., and R. F. Mann, letter to Fred R. Shank, FDA, May 4, 1993.
 3. Heaton, A. W., FDA Division of Consumer Studies, memorandum to Shellee A. Davis, November 6, 1992.
 4. Clark, W. S., letter to Dockets Management Branch, February, 25, 1992. 
 5. USDA Summary Data from the Nationwide Food Consumption Survey/Individual, 19771978.
 6. USDA Summary Data from the Nationwide Food Consumption Survey/Individual, 19871988.
 7. Jenness, R., and S. Patton, ``Principles of Dairy Chemistry,'' p. 325, John Wiley  Sons, Inc., New York, NY,
1959.
 8. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, ``The Surgeon General's Report on Nutrition
and Health,'' DHHS (PHS) Publication No. 8850210 (GPO Stock No. 017001004651), pp. 911,
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC, 1988.
 9. Committee on Diet and Health, Food and Nutrition Board, Commission on Life Sciences, National Research Council,
National Academy of Sciences, Executive Summary from ``Diet and Health, Implications for Reducing Chronic Disease
Risk,'' National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1989.



 List of Subjects in 21 CFR Part 131


 Cream, Food grades and standards, Milk, Yogurt.
 Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and under authority delegated to the Commissioner of Food
and Drugs, 21 CFR part 131 is amended as follows: 


 PART 131_MILK AND CREAM


 1. The authority citation for 21 CFR part 131 is revised to read as follows:





Authority:

 Secs. 201, 401, 403, 409, 701, 721 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321, 341, 343, 348, 371, 379e).



2. Section 131.130 is amended by revising paragraph (a) to read as follows:


131.130 

Evaporated milk.


 (a) 

Description

. Evaporated milk is the liquid food obtained by partial removal of water only from milk. It contains not less than 6.5
percent by weight of milkfat, not less than 16.5 percent by weight of milk solids not fat, and not less than 23 percent
by weight of total milk solids. Evaporated milk contains added vitamin D as prescribed by paragraph (b) of this section.
It is homogenized. It is sealed in a container and so processed by heat, either before or after sealing, as to prevent
spoilage.


 * * * * *





Dated: April 8, 1994.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Michael R. Taylor,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Commissioner for Policy.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 948979 Filed 41194; 12:13 pm]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>

