 

II. Description of the Proposed Amendment



The Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Reclamation (Ohio), submitted proposed Program Amendment
Number 69 by letter dated September 22,1 994 (Administrative Record No. OH2059). In this amendment, Ohio proposes
to revise two rules at Ohio Administrative Code (OAC) sections 1501:13103 and 13705 to
make the Ohio program as effective as the corresponding Federal regulations concerning financial interest statements
and yield data for pasture or grazing land. The substantive rule revisions proposed by Ohio in this amendment are briefly
described below.



A. Financial Interest Statements (OAC section 1501:13103)




1. Definition of ``Employee''



Ohio is revising paragraph (D)(2) to provide that members of the Ohio Board on Unreclaimed Strip Mined Lands are included
under this definition. Members of the Ohio Reclamation Board of Review and the board's hearing officers are not included
under this definition.



2. Hearing Officers of the Ohio Reclamation Board of Review



Ohio is revising paragraphs (F)(1), (G)(1), and (H) to require that hearing officers of the Ohio Reclamation Board
of Review must also file annual financial interest statements.



3. Standard Form for Annual Financial Interest Statements



Ohio is revising paragraph (I)(1) to specify that employees shall use Form OSM23 to file their annual financial
interest statements.



4. Appeal of Remedial Actions



Ohio is revising paragraph (L)(1) to specify that nothing in OAC section 1501:13103 modifies any right
of appeal that any employee may have under State law of a decision by the Chief of the Division of Reclamation, Ohio Department
of Natural Resources, on an employee's appeal of remedial action for prohibited financial interests. Ohio is also
revising paragraphs (L) (2) and (3) to provide that members of the Ohio Reclamation Board of Review and the board's
hearing officers may request advisory opinions from the Director of the Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement on issues pertaining to an apparent prohibited financial interest.



