 

Columbia now proposes to increase the amount of short-term financing for Ohio $40 million. These short-term borrowings
will have the same terms and conditions as those authorized by the September Order. Thus, Ohio proposes to borrow the
funds directly from Columbia and/or from certain other subsidiaries of Columbia through Columbia's intrasystem
money pool (``Money Pool''), and Columbia requests authority to loan to its subsidiaries an additional $40 million
for short-term borrowings.

The Money Pool provides a vehicle by which Columbia and its subsidiary companies loan their excess cash to their associate
companies. Funds would be advanced, repaid, and reborrowed as required through December 31, 1994, with all such advances
to be fully repaid by April 30, 1995. All short-term borrowings from Columbia and/or the Money Pool will be evidenced
by a promissory note (``Short-Term Note'' and ``Money Pool Note'', respectively). A default rate of 2% per annum above
the pre-default rate on unpaid principal or interest amounts will be assessed if any interest or principal payment
becomes past due.

The interest rate charged on all Short-Term Notes and Money Pool Notes, and the investment rate earned on moneys invested
in the Money Pool, will be the interest rate per annum equal to the composite weighted average effective rate on short-term
transactions of Columbia and/or the Money Pool short-term investment rate. During any month, this composite rate
may be based on one or any combination of: (1) The cost of Columbia's borrowings under its bank facility; (2) the interest
rate earned by Columbia on invested excess cash; and/or (3) the interest rate earned by subsidiaries on investments
of excess Money Pool funds.



The Southern Company (708421)



The Southern Company (``Southern''), 64 Perimeter Center East, Atlanta, Georgia 30346, a registered holding company,
has filed an application-declaration under Sections 6(a), 7, 9(a), 10 and 12(b) of the Act and Rules 45 and 50(a)(5)
thereunder.

Southern proposes to acquire the securities of one or more companies (``Project Parents'') engaged directly or indirectly,
and exclusively, in the business of owning and holding the securities of ``foreign utility companies'' (``FUCOs''),
as defined in Section 33(a) of the Act, and ``exempt wholesale generators'' (``EWGs''), as defined in Section 32(a)
of the Act. Southern requests that the authorization for its proposals remain effective until the earlier of: (i)
December 31, 1996; and (ii) the effective date of any rule of general applicability adopted by the Commission that
would exempt the acquisition of any securities of any Project Parent from the requirements of Sections 9(a) and 10
of the Act.

Southern states that a Project Parent may be organized at the time of, and in order to facilitate: the making of bids
or proposals to acquire an interest in any EWG or FUCO (``Exempt Subsidiaries''); after the award of a bid proposal,
in order to facilitate closing on the purchase or financing of any such Exempt Subsidiary; or at any time subsequent
to the consummation of an acquisition of an interest in an Exempt Subsidiary. A Project Parent would be formed after
the acquisition of an Exempt Subsidiary in order to: effect an adjustment in the respective ownership interests in
any Exempt Subsidiary held by Southern and unaffiliated co-investors; facilitate a partial sale of an interest in
any such Exempt Subsidiary; comply with applicable laws of foreign jurisdictions limiting or otherwise relating
to the ownership of domestic companies by foreign nationals; or, to limit Southern's exposure to U.S. and foreign
taxes as part of tax planning.



