 

Although the Service determined that there is no existing wolf population in the recovery area that would preclude
reintroduction and establishment of an experimental population in Idaho, the Service will continue to monitor for
the presence of any wild wolves. Prior to any reintroduction, the Service would evaluate the status of any wolves found
in the experimental population area. If a wolf population is discovered in the proposed experimental area, no reintroduction
of wolves would occur. Instead, the success of the naturally occurring wolf population would be monitored to determine
if recovery was continuing. If a natural wolf population is located in the experimental area prior to the effective
date of the final rule, then the final rule would not be implemented and there would be no reintroduction program. Wolves
naturally occurring would be classified as endangered and managed with full protection under the Act. If the natural
wolf population failed to maintain positive growth for 2 consecutive years, then the reintroduction effort could
proceed or other recovery measures could be taken. After reintroduction is completed, according to the Reintroduction
Protocol (section 5 above), management of the experimental population will begin. 
Once the rule is in effect and wolves have been released into the recovery area, the rule would remain in effect until
wolf recovery occurs or a scientific review indicates that modifications in the experimental rule are necessary
to achieve wolf recovery. 
If a wolf population is discovered in the central Idaho experimental population area after the effective date of the
experimental population rule but before release, reintroduction under the rule would not occur in that area and any
such wolves would be managed as a natural recovering population. Boundaries of the proposed experimental population
area would be changed, as needed, to encourage recovery of the naturally occurring, breeding wolf population. No
experimental population area would contain a portion of the home range of any active breeding pairs of wolves that
have successfully raised young, prior to the establishment of the experimental population areas. 
Management of the nonessential experimental population would allow reintroduced wolves to be killed or moved by
Service-authorized Federal, State, and tribal agencies for domestic animal depredations and excessive predation
on big game populations. Under special conditions, the public could harass or kill wolves attacking livestock (cattle,
sheep, horses, and mules). There would be no Federal compensation program, but compensation from existing private
funding sources would be encouraged. When six or more wolf packs are documented in the experimental population area
outside of the national parks and national wildlife refuges, there would be no land-use restrictions, including
areas around den sites or other critical areas. 
Wolves have a relatively high reproductive rate. Projected recruitment would off-set the anticipated 10 percent
mortality resulting from management control actions. An additional 10 percent loss could occur from other mortality
sources. Once reintroduced wolves reach the goal of six wolf packs, the reproductive output of the packs would provide
a population increase at or near 22 percent per year. Closely regulated public control (taking of depredating wolves)
would effectively focus on only individual problem wolves. Agency control actions would more likely target groups
of wolves containing problem individuals. 
The Service, and States or tribes as authorized, could move wolves that are negatively impacting ungulate populations.
Such wolves would be moved to other places within the experimental population area. Two examples when this would occur
are: (1) when wolf predation is dramatically affecting prey availability because of unusual habitat or weather conditions
(e.g., bighorn sheep in areas with marginal escape habitat); and (2) when wolves cause prey to move onto private property
and mix with livestock, increasing potential conflicts. The States and tribes will define such unacceptable impacts,
how they would be measured, and identify other possible mitigation in their State or tribal management plans which
are to be approved by the Service through cooperative agreement before such control actions are conducted. Wolves
will not be deliberately killed solely to address ungulate-wolf conflicts. Control actions by the States or tribes
likely to be significant or beyond the provisions of the experimental rule as determined by the Service would have
to be specifically incorporated into an amendment of this experimental rule and subject to national public comment
and review. 




