 

B. Drilling Muds and Drill Cuttings 



The term ``drilling fluid'' generally includes all compositions of fluids used to aid the production and removal
of cuttings (particles from geological formations) from a borehole in the earth. The essential functions of drilling
fluids are: 




_To carry cuttings to the surface, 

_To cool and clean drill bit, 

_To reduce friction in the borehole, 

_To maintain pressure balance between formation and borehole in uncased sections of hole, and 

_To assist in collection and interpretation of information available from cuttings, cores, electrical logs, etc.





All drilling fluids fall into one of three classes: gas-based (e.g., mist or foam), water-based, or oil-based. When
the main component of the drilling fluid is liquid (i.e., water or oil), it is referred to as ``mud''. All of Region 10's
previous permits address only the discharge of muds, as gas fluids are not used in Alaskan offshore or coastal drilling
operations. As discussed below in subsections 1 and 2, the discharge of oil-based muds (with oil as the continuous
phase and water as the dispersed phase) is prohibited because they do not comply with the no free oil limitation. 

The Agency understands that non-petroleum hydrocarbon organic liquids are being developed as an alternate to gas,
water or hydrocarbon (e.g., diesel or mineral) oil-based drilling muds. The Agency invites comments on the applicability
and feasibility of such muds to exploratory drilling operations in the offshore Arctic. 



1. BCT Limitations on Drilling Muds and Cuttings 





Free oil and oil-based muds: 

No discharge of free oil is permitted from the discharge of drilling mud and drill cuttings, based upon the guidelines.
The technology basis for this limitation is substitution of water-based drilling fluids in place of oil-based muds,
non-petroleum oil-containing additives, and minimization of the use of mineral oil. When this substitution is not
possible, the guidelines contemplated that the technology basis was also transportation and discharge onshore.
Free oil is being regulated under BAT as an ``indicator'' pollutant for the control of toxic pollutants. Although
it is not a listed conventional pollutant, as is oil and grease, free oil is also limited as a surrogate for oil and grease
under BCT. 

The discharge of oil-based drilling fluids is prohibited since discharge of oil-based fluids would violate the effluent
limitations of no discharge of free oil. 

Compliance with the free oil limitation will be monitored by use of the Static Sheen Test (see 40 CFR part 435, appendix
1 to subpart A) daily and before bulk discharges. Region 10 has required the use of the Static Sheen Test in previous
permits because visual observation of the discharge for sheen upon the receiving water will not prevent violations
of the standard. This test is also appropriate for the harsh weather and extended periods of darkness common in Alaska.


Previous Region 10 permits have contained an oil content limitation on drill cuttings. However, this approach has
been rejected in favor of the no free oil limitation contained in the guidelines. As discussed at 56 FR 10682 and 56 FR
10685 (March 13, 1991), the Agency rejected an oil content limitation based on cuttings washing treatment technologies
because limitations on other parameters (diesel oil, free oil, and toxicity) are sufficient to reduce toxics from
drilling wastes. Because the no free oil limitation is more stringent than the 10% by weight limitation on the oil content
of cuttings, this change does not invoke antibacksliding provisions (see 40 CFR 122.44(l)(2)). 



2. BAT Limitations on Drilling Muds and Cuttings 





Toxicity: 

Region 10 is proposing to incorporate an effluent toxicity limit of minimum 96-hour LC

50

 of 30,000 ppm suspended particulate phase (SPP) on discharged drilling muds and cuttings. This limit is designed
to be a technology-based control on toxicity, as well as toxic and nonconventional pollutants. The 30,000 ppm SPP
limitation is based on the Agency's evaluation that it constitutes an economically and technically achievable level
of performance and is both technologically feasible and economically achievable and reflects BAT level of control
(U.S. EPA, 1993a) on a national basis. This limitation is present in the general permit for the Western Gulf of Mexico
(57 FR 54652, November 19, 1992). The toxicity limit is also present in a recently issued individual NPDES permit for
ARCO Alaska operations in Cook Inlet. 







