 




<DOCTITLE>Record of Decision for the Final Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement (FSEIS) for Dredging at Pier D of the
Puget Sound Naval Shipyard, Bremerton, Washington</DOCTITLE>




Pursuant to section 102(2) of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) of 1969 and the Council on Environmental
Quality Regulations on Implementing NEPA Procedures (40 CFR parts 15001508), the Department of the Navy announces
its decision to implement the final supplemental environmental impact statement (FSEIS) for dredging at Pier D of
the Puget Sound Naval Shipyard (PSNS), Bremerton, Washington. This decision updates and supplements the Record
of Decision for the Final Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement for the Fast Combat Support Ship (AOE6
Class) U.S. West Coast Homeporting Program which was issued on March 10, 1992.


The proposed action is to dredge and make structural upgrades at Pier D of the PSNS, and dispose of the dredged material
in federally and state approved disposal sites. The action will provide the necessary bathymetry for permanent berthing
for up to two AOE6 Class ships and temporary berthing of one of the largest deep draft ships already homeported
at PSNS, typically an aircraft carrier. The proposed action has been developed from a combination of three berthing
configurations and five disposal options. The required dredging quantity is approximately 105,000 cubic yards,
of which approximately 53,400 cubic yards are contaminated and are unsuitable for in-water disposal. The disposal
method is a mixed mode of operation which utilizes an upland facility (landfill) for contaminated sediment disposal
and an in-water site for disposing of clean material. The primary upland disposal site is the Olympic View Sanitary
Landfill (OVSL) about 10 miles south of Bremerton. The Roosevelt Regional Landfill (RRL) and Columbia Ridge Landfill
and Recycling Center (CRLRC) would be used as backup in the event of unforeseen problems at OVSL. Each of these landfills
is currently authorized to accept the type of dredged materials produced by this project which have been designated
unsuitable for in-water disposal by regulatory agencies. The primary in-water disposal site is the Puget Sound Dredge
Disposal Analysis (PSDDA) approved Elliot Bay disposal site near Seattle which is about 15 miles east of PSNS; backup
sites include PSDDA approved Commencement Bay near Tacoma or Port Gardner near Everett.


Other berthing configurations and the ``No Action'' alternative were considered and eliminated. Other berthing
configurations would not address the Navy's need for operational flexibility at PSNS with respect to large deep-draft
vessels. The ``No Action'' alternative would not accommodate Navy's AOE6 homeporting mission in the west
coast.



