 

Provides telecommunications planning, budgeting and management for AoA Headquarters' facilities, including
procurement, installation, alterations, and maintenance. Provides liaison with HHS and GSA on telecommunications
matters, and provides assistance to AoA components to identify telecommunications needs and to use communications
equipment and systems.

Division of Grants Management (BE3) serves as AoA's focal point for management, leadership and administration of
discretionary and formula grants, and cooperative agreements. Provides national policy oversight and development
for grant management and administration matters. Ensures that all grant awards conform with applicable statutes,
regulations, and policies. Maintains liaison and coordination with appropriate AoA and HHS organizations to ensure
consistency between AoA discretionary and formula grant award activities, and the Department's various payment
systems for grants.

For discretionary grants, ensures that the administrative and financial management aspects of grants administration
are carried out and monitors grantee performance in these areas. Provides support for and processes all discretionary
grant award documents and negotiates grant budgets, and makes all awards for AoA Headquarters and Regional Offices.
Reviews discretionary grants after input for AoA program offices, and coordinates AoA grantee financial management
matters as necessary with appropriate HHS and AoA units.

Issues and maintains control over formula grant awards under the OAA, and makes adjustments to previously issued
formula grant awards.

In coordination with all AoA Headquarters and Regional Offices having grant administrative responsibilities:
reviews and assesses AoA formula grant award procedures; directs and/or coordinates management initiatives to
improve formula grant programs in financial areas; develops proposals for improving the efficiency in awarding
grants and coordinating financial operations among AoA programs; establishes priorities and develops procedures
for grantee financial monitoring; and, reviews activities at the regional level for all AoA discretionary and formula
grant programs.

Following consultation with all Headquarters and Regional Offices having grant administrative responsibilities,
and with the approval of the Assistant Secretary: develop AoA instructions and procedures for the administration
of all discretionary and formula grants, including those approved in AoA Regional Offices. Provides training and
technical assistance to AoA staff regarding grants and provides overall guidance, monitoring, and assistance to
Regional Offices in all areas of administrative and financial management of grants.

Has primary responsibility for developing policy issuances for grants management in AoA, and reviews all proposed
AoA instructions and policy issuances pertaining to grant matters which are derived from Departmental, OMB or other
government-wide issuances to ensure consistent policy and interpretation with AoA concerning grants management.

Functions as AoA liaison with the General Accounting Office (``GAO''), the HHS Office of the Inspector General and
the Department's Office of Grants and Acquisition Management on grant matters. Assists at discretionary and formula
grant hearings before the Departmental Appeals Board in response to disallowances and other financial claims by
AoA or State Agencies on Aging and other grantees.

For formula grant activities, develops financial management standards for State and Area Agencies and provides
guidance on and interpretation of 45 CFR parts 74 and 92 to AoA staff. Based on formula grants management policies and
procedures approved by the Department, reprograms formula grant funds as required under the OAA.

Responds to audit issues raised by Department and General Accounting Office audit reviews and ensures the proper
analysis and resolution of audit findings by Regional Offices for final action by the Assistant Secretary.

Division of Information Resources Management (BE4) manages AoA's information resources management (``IRM'')
program and develops policies, plans, budgets, standards and procedures related to it. Plans, manages, maintains
and operates AoA's automated information system, including the LAN, personal computers, software, and support
systems and services. Provides guidance and technical assistance on all components of the system and coordinates
the preparation of manuals and policy issuances required to meet the instructional and informational needs of users
of the system. Provides or contracts for training of users in all AoA systems, hardware and software. In coordination
with the Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Program Operations and Intergovernmental Affairs (``D/ASPOIA''),
carries out the activities required under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, as amended, as the Federal Information
Resources Management Regulations, other Federal regulations and Executive Orders and DHHS/OS policies and procedures
apply the Paperwork Reduction Act to automated information resources management. Represents AoA on the OS IRM Policy
and Planning Board.

Responsible for IRM reviews; Federal Information Processing resources retirement and disposal; and conducting
and reporting of information resource inventories.

Acts within the overall strategy, annual workplan and budget approved by the AoA Information Resources Management
Board, composed of management representatives from each component of AoA.

Assesses the need for, and defines the specifications for procurement of all Headquarters and Regional Office IRM
hardware and software. Reviews and recommends to the Director, OAM, the decision for Headquarters and Regional requests
for Automatic Data Processing (``ADP'') equipment and services. Assesses, recommends and defines the need to share
ADP services through inter-government, inter-department and interagency agreements. Surveys specifications
and other literature, initiates requests for services, and defines AoA's need for support services from private
ADP vendors.




