 




<CFRNO>50 CFR Part 677 </CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 9408394239; I.D. 081294A] </RINDOCK>


North Pacific Fisheries Research Plan 


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Commerce.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Proposed specifications for 1995; request for comments.



</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 NMFS proposes North Pacific Fisheries Research Plan (Research Plan) specifications for calendar year 1995. The
specifications would be used to calculate fees to be paid by participants in the Gulf of Alaska (GOA) groundfish fishery,
Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands (BSAI) management area groundfish fishery, BSAI area king and Tanner crab fisheries,
and Pacific halibut fishery in convention waters off Alaska (Research Plan fisheries) to fund an observer program
to promote management, conservation, and scientific understanding of groundfish, halibut, and crab resources
off Alaska.


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Comments must be received by October 12, 1994.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Comments should be sent to, and additional information can be obtained from, Ronald J. Berg, Chief, Fisheries Management
Division, Alaska Region, National Marine Fisheries Service, P.O. Box 21668, Juneau, AK 998021668 (Attn:
Lori Gravel).


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 
Kim S. Rivera, 9075867228. 

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 
Background 


Section 313 of the Magnuson Act, as amended by section 404 of the High Seas Driftnet Fisheries Enforcement Act, Public
Law 102582, authorizes the North Pacific Fishery Management Council (Council) to prepare, in consultation
with the Secretary of Commerce (Secretary), a Research Plan for all fisheries under the Council's jurisdiction,
except salmon fisheries. On September 6, 1994, NMFS published a final rule at 59 FR 46126 to implement the Research
Plan. This rule requires that observers be stationed on certain fishing vessels and at U.S. fish processors participating
in Research Plan fisheries, including extending these requirements to the halibut fishery off Alaska. Observers
will be deployed for the purpose of collecting data necessary for the conservation, management, and scientific understanding
of fisheries under the Council's authority. The Research Plan also establishes a system of fees to pay for the costs
of implementing the Research Plan, beginning January 1, 1995. The fees are based on the exvessel value of retained
catch from Research Plan fisheries. Additional background and rationale for measures implemented under the Research
Plan are contained in the preamble of the proposed rule published May 6, 1994, and the final rule, and are not repeated
here. 
NMFS is publishing these proposed specifications prior to the effective date of the final rule implementing the Research
Plan. This is necessary because of the requirement for public comment on proposed specifications for the fee collection
program, and because the specifications must be in place before the calendar year for which they apply. It also allows
affected members of the industry to be notified and for the fee collection systems to be put in place. 


Annual Research Plan Specifications 


Section 677.11 of the Research Plan regulations requires NMFS, after consulting with the Council, and, in the case
of observer coverage levels in the crab fisheries, the State of Alaska, to publish certain proposed specifications
for the upcoming calendar year in the 

Federal Register

 and to invite public comments. These proposed specifications include standard exvessel prices, total exvessel
value, fee percentage, levels of observer coverage for Research Plan fisheries, and embarkment/disembarkment
ports for observers. 
NMFS prepared a report, ``Establishing the Fee Percentage and Standard Ex-vessel Prices for 1995,'' for the Council's
consideration at its June 1994 meeting. The report contains details of the derivation of these proposed specifications,
including sources of information and assumptions that are not repeated here. In response to comments received from
the Council and its advisory committees, the report was subsequently revised to provide a greater breakdown of exvessel
prices and to reflect a revised first-year program. Copies of the revised report are available (see 

ADDRESSES

). 
Proposed specifications for calendar year 1995 are as follows: 
1. 

Standard exvessel prices. 

Standard exvessel prices are used to determine the annual fee percentage for the calendar year and are the basis for
calculating bimonthly fee assessments. Standard exvessel prices for species harvested in Research Plan fisheries
are based on: 
a. Exvessel price information by applicable season, area, gear, and processing sector for the most recent 12-month
period for which data are available; 
b. Factors that are expected to change exvessel prices in the upcoming calendar year; and 
c. Any other relevant information that may affect expected exvessel prices during the calendar year. 
For 1995, proposed standard exvessel prices of species from Research Plan fisheries, based on best available information,
are as follows: 






</SUPPLEM>
