 

After careful review of the comments, FSIS is in agreement with commenters that oppose the tentative position that
poultry products produced by mechanical separation must meet a minimum protein quality requirement, i.e., a protein
digestibility corrected amino acid score of not less than 40 expressed as a percent or the alternative measurement
of essential amino acids being at least 33 percent of the total 17 amino acids present. The lack of the need for a protein
quality requirement is founded on scientific literature provided and cited by comments from academia and statements
made by other commenters regarding the status of the quality of protein in diets of individuals in the U.S. The literature
stated that the protein quality of mechanically deboned poultry is comparable to hand-deboned poultry.

5

 Therefore, mechanically deboned poultry can be used in poultry and meat food products without sacrificing protein
quality. According to the literature, during the 20 to 30-year history of the use of MDP in many food products, there
has not been an indication of problems identified with protein quality. Furthermore, consumption of enough high-quality
protein by humans in the U.S. is not a problem. In the preamble of the final nutrition labeling regulations, both FSIS
and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) stated that current evidence suggests that the diet typically consumed
in the U.S. provides for an adequate protein intake of sufficiently high quality to meet the nutritional needs of adults
and children 4 or more years of age (58 FR 632 and 2079). Furthermore, since there are no outstanding health implications
requiring the establishment of protein quality criteria for food products, in general, it would 
be unnecessary to require such criteria for a specific poultry product, viz., mechanically deboned poultry. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


5

</FOOTNAME>
 Public comment, including attached research article, submitted by R.A. Field, University of Wyoming, is available
for review in the FSIS Docket Clerk's office. 




</FOOTNOTE>


D. 

Quality Control. 


Twenty-one commenters addressed the issue of quality control for all poultry products produced by mechanical separation.
Nineteen of the 21 commenters did not believe that a mandatory quality control program was needed for the production
of such products. The commenters stated that (1) quality control programs, including partial quality control programs
(PQC), should remain voluntary programs, and (2) that FSIS should focus compliance program efforts on issues of health
and safety of products and allow manufacturers to determine quality parameters. The commenters also noted that they
operate under PQC programs for manufacturing mechanically deboned poultry that are approved by FSIS, and any additional
concerns for assuring their processes are in conformance with current regulations should be incorporated into their
present PQC programs rather than by issuance of a formal requirement through rulemaking. 
FSIS believes that establishments manufacturing poultry products that are mechanically separated must have controls
in place to assure that such products comply with the Agency's proposed definition, standard, and other criteria.
However, after reviewing the comments and re-examining the Agency's current regulatory agenda, FSIS believes that
because there are efforts underway within the Agency to study and address ways of reducing the potential for situations
that would render any poultry or meat food product adulterated, unwholesome, and/or misbranded it is premature to
address the need for a mandatory quality control program for this one distinct category of poultry product. FSIS does,
however, believe that records of achieving compliance with parameters established for mechanically separated
poultry product, e.g., bone solids content and bone particle size criteria, should be maintained to substantiate
that boneless poultry criteria meets the proposed regulatory manufacturing practices. 
E. 

Protein/Fat. 

Nineteen commenters responded to the tentative position on establishing a minimum protein content and a maximum
fat content requirement for poultry product produced by mechanical separation with greater than 0.6 percent bone
solids content. All nineteen commenters disagreed with FSIS' position on establishing such a protein and fat content
requirement for this mechanically separated poultry. The commenters stated that poultry product produced by mechanical
separation is used as an ingredient in ready-to-consume products of which most have established protein and/or fat
standards. Furthermore, the commenters stated that most poultry and meat food products are now required to have nutrition
labeling. 
FSIS does not agree that ``most ready-to-consume'' poultry and meat food products have established protein and fat
standards, as asserted by the commenters. Standards of identity and composition for poultry and meat food products
generally do not include minimum protein content requirements. Of the products for which standards stipulate a maximum
fat content, most are sausages composed of meat from livestock. There are no fat limitations associated with sausages
made from poultry, according to FSIS policies. 





