 

(2) By acquiring any interest in real or personal property owned, occupied, or used by the retailer in the conduct of
the business; or
(3) By furnishing, giving, renting, lending, or selling to the retailer, any equipment, fixtures, signs, supplies,
money, or other things of value, subject to the exceptions prescribed by regulations, having due regard to public
health, the quantity and value of articles involved, established trade customs not contrary to the public interest
and the purposes of the subsection; or
(4) By paying or crediting the retailer for any advertising display or distribution service; or
(5) By guaranteeing any loan or repayment of any financial obligation of the retailer; or
(6) By extending to the retailer credit for a period in excess of the credit period usual and customary to the industry
for the particular class of transactions as ascertained by the Secretary and prescribed by regulation; or
(7) By requiring the retailer to take and dispose of a certain quota of any of such products.
Retailer independence can be threatened in a tied-house arrangement between an industry member and a retailer when
the arrangement involves a continuing business relationship which restricts the retailer's ability to make free
economic choices on which brands of products to purchase. In effect, 
competition is restricted because the retailer who is dependent on or tied to an industry member cannot make free and
rational business choices on whether to make a current purchase from another industry member based on current business
considerations such as consumer demand or lower prices offered by the competition.
The proposed regulations identify threats to a retailer's independence which include: A wholesaler's use of partial
ownership of a retailer to control the retailer's purchases of alcoholic beverages, sales where the wholesaler conditions
the purchase of one distilled spirits product on the retailer purchasing another distilled spirits product at the
same time, and wholesaler control over the retailer through controlling the resetting of the products on a retailer's
premises.
Slotting fees are also included in this proposed category. These fees are paid to a retailer in order to obtain premium
shelf space. Data and information on the effect of such fees is requested, rather than solely statements of preference
by a particular industry member.
As discussed in the material relating to consignment sales, the prohibition on other than a bona fide sale is defined
to include sales in connection with which the industry member bears the cost of display by purchasing or renting a trade
buyer's shelf space to be occupied by such products. Accordingly, slotting fees in these situations are within the

consignment sale proscriptions. Comments are sought on whether the slotting fee should be addressed in both tied-house
and consignment sale regulations or are more appropriately covered by only one of the provisions.
With respect to the practices listed in proposed 6.152, ATF will be required to determine whether the practice
results in the retailer purchasing less than it otherwise would have of a competitor's product.
The proposed regulations also identify certain practices that will not result in exclusion. These are the practices
allowed under the regulatory exceptions to the tied-house provisions (safe harbors). For instance, the proposed
regulations recognize that certain retail activities of a temporary nature, such as weekend events and community
festivals, are also so minor in the retail marketplace so as not to justify Federal intervention. (Revisions to these
regulatory exceptions are also proposed in this notice and discussed in detail below.)


Commercial Bribery


Section 105(c) of the FAA Act makes it unlawful for an industry member to induce through any of the following means,
any trade buyer engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages, to purchase any such products from such person to the exclusion

in whole or in part of alcoholic beverages sold or offered for sale by other persons in interstate or foreign commerce,
provided one of the three jurisdictional clauses is met:
(1) By commercial bribery; or
(2) By offering or giving any bonus, premium, or compensation to any officer, or employee, or representative of the
trade buyer.


Commercial bribery situations involve the receipt of money or a premium by an officer, employee, or representative
of the trade buyer. Payment made directly to business entities (

i.e., 

the corporation, partnership, or individual owning the business) for the use of the business does not constitute
a commercial bribe. The independence of the trade buyer is threatened in a commercial bribery situation because the
officer, employee, or representative of the trade buyer is making a purchasing decision as a result of the money or
premium received personally and not based on business or marketing factors which further the interests of the trade
buyer itself.


