 

One commenter states that the FAA's economic analysis should account for the costs to implement AD 930605
and other safety concerns since they are directed at reducing the safety concern addressed by the proposed rule. AD
930605 requires LPT blade torque check inspections. The FAA does not concur. The proposed rule maintains
the inspection requirements of AD 930605, but only until the installation of the containment hardware,
which is ultimately required for all engines in accordance with the compliance schedule. Therefore, the inspections
continue only as options, and only the mandated hardware installation is used to compute the direct costs of this AD.
Further, since inspections are not mandated for engines that have containment hardware installed, only the cost
of either the inspection or containment hardware applies for any given engine. The containment hardware cost, the
higher of the two, was used on the assumption that an operator would install the hardware rather than continue with
the optional inspection program. 

One commenter states that the modifications required by PW SB No. 5748, LPT vane cluster cut-back, are not applicable
to the engine models specified in this AD. This requirement should be eliminated from the AD. The FAA concurs. The modification
of the LPT vane clusters in accordance with PW SB No. 5748, is not required for the ``non-A'' JT8D engine models and therefore
has been eliminated from this AD. 

One commenter states that PMA 3rd stage outer air seal, Part Number (P/N) M2533, manufactured by McClain International,
should be an acceptable alternative installation to the corresponding PW part, P/N 811962. The FAA concurs. Third
stage turbine outer air seal, P/N M2533, has been granted FAA PMA approval, and therefore meets all applicable Federal
Aviation Regulations and is directly interchangeable with PW P/N 811962. The AD has been revised to specify 
P/N M2533 as an acceptable installation. 

One commenter states that a one-year extension of the compliance end date to December 31, 1999, should be granted.
The FAA concurs. A one-year extension of the compliance end date has been granted to adjust for the time required to
review the comments to the NPRM and process the Final Rule. 

One commenter states that only engines removed for shop visits on or after the AD effective date will be required to
comply with the AD, and therefore AD compliance would not be required for engines already undergoing a shop visit as
of the AD effective date. The FAA concurs, but no revision of the AD is required because the wording in the proposed rule
accounts for this situation. 



