 

Emissions from equipment, such as computers, will decrease over 
time compared to emissions from equipment that continually use chemicals. Emissions from such equipment (e.g.,
laser printers) that use chemicals continually, will obtain a steady state concentration dependent upon the chemicals
used and frequency of equipment use. 


B. Microbial Contamination 


Three conditions must exist in buildings before microbial contamination can occur: high humidity (over 60%), appropriate
temperatures (varies according to microbe), and appropriate growth media [Exs. 361, 433]. These conditions
are found in heating, ventilating, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems. HVAC systems provide multiple sites for
microbes to grow (reservoir) and also the means to disperse the microbes throughout the ventilated space. These reservoirs
of microbial growth, if allowed to proliferate unchecked, can lead to indoor air quality problems once the microbes
or microbe-related products, such as endotoxins, are dispersed. 
Building materials that have been soaked with water, such as fiberglass insulation in air handlers, furnishings
and fabrics, ceiling tiles, and carpeting are excellent media for microbial growth. Biological organisms, including
fungal spores, bacteria, viruses, pollens, and protozoa derived from mold growth have been identified in humidifiers
with stagnant water, water damaged surfaces and materials, condensing coils and drip-pans in HVAC systems, drainage
pans in refrigerators, dirty heating coils, and are also associated with mammals, arthopods and insects. Table III3
gives examples of biologicals found in indoor environments. 
Various allergens have been associated with the development of allergic rhinitis, asthma, or airway hyperresponsiveness
(Table III3) [Ex. 433]. Many of these allergens are common to the nonindustrial work environment. These
include chemical volatiles and dusts, arthropods, and dusts, particulates  fibers.



<TABLE>


Table 

III3._

Examples of Biologicals Found in Indoor Environments1 
1Class 
1Agent or component 
1Origin



Arthopods and Insects 
Whole organism, body parts, feces 
Furnishings, building materials, food.


Microbes:


Algae 
Whole organism, cellular components 
Outdoor air, HVAC (rare).
Bacteria 
Whole organism, spores and cell walls, endotoxin 
Stagnant water, floods, cooling towers, industrial processes.
Fungi 
Whole organism spores and hyphae toxins and volatiles 
Moist surfaces, HVAC system, bird droppings, outdoor air.
Protozoa 
Whole organism cellular components 
Water reservoirs, pets (rare).
Viruses 
Whole organism 
Humans and pets (rare).


Pets 
Skin, scales danders, urine, saliva, feces 
Pets, pet litter, pet cages, pet toys, pet bedding.
Plants 
Stems, leaves and pollens 
Outdoor and indoor air.

1Adapted from Ex. 433.

</TABLE>


