 

Processors and importers should identify in their written 
plans only those safety hazards that are reasonably likely to 
occur, rather than every conceivable hazard no matter how 
theoretical or remote. This view is in keeping with NACMCF's 
recommendation that firms conduct a hazard analysis and then give 
no further consideration to hazards that are unlikely to occur 
(Ref. 34, p. 189). FDA has tentatively concluded that processors 
and importers should not be required to establish controls and 
regularly monitor for hazards that are highly unlikely to occur 
in the absence of those controls. If, for example, chemical 
contaminants have never been found, or have only been found in 
amounts significantly below levels of public health concern in a 
species from a particular location, processors and importers need 
not identify chemical contaminants as a hazard that must be 
controlled for that fish. 


As indicated earlier in this preamble, FDA intends to issue 
a guidance document that will cover possible environmental and 
processing hazards for fish and fishery products as well as types 
of controls that can be applied to those hazards. The agency 
anticipates that it will update that guidance periodically as new 
controls (or new hazards) are identified or established. 


FDA cannot reasonably expect processors and importers to 
exercise controls for hazards that are beyond the scope of 
current scientific knowledge. The agency does expect processors 
and importers to demonstrate that they are taking precautions 
that are reasonable in light of available information, and that 
they are adopting new controls as those controls are developed 
and accepted. 


For example, the controls for 

Vibrio 

bacteria in raw 
molluscan shellfish, which can cause serious illness and death in 
certain at-risk populations, are the subject of continuing 
research at FDA and elsewhere. Short of a complete ban on 
harvesting, there is no known control that would prevent the 
presence of 

Vibrios 

in molluscan shellfish. Moreover, the 
infectious dose, that is, the number of 

Vibrios 

necessary to 
cause illness, is unknown. Because these bacteria occur 
naturally in the environment and are ubiquitous, controls that 
are employed to prevent sewage-related viruses from entering 
molluscan shellfish are not relevant to 

Vibrios. 

It is known, 
however, that proper temperature controls from the time of 
harvest onward can at least limit the growth of these bacteria 
(Ref. 49). FDA believes that such controls are reasonable and 
should be applied now. (In fact, temperature controls have long 
been a feature of the National Shellfish Sanitation Program 
(NSSP).) 


Of the hazards listed in proposed 123.6(b), pesticides and 
drug residues (proposed 123.6(b)(1)(iv) and (b)(1)(v)) are 
forms of chemical contaminants (proposed 123.6(b)(1)(iii)) but 
are listed separately because they can be of special concern in 
aquaculture-raised species. These fish generally have a greater 
likelihood of being exposed to agricultural run-off than wild 
ocean stocks (Ref. 50, pp. 11 and 12). Aquaculture-raised fish 
are known to be fed drugs for various purposes. Drug residues in 
edible tissues can be a public health concern. 


Decomposition, listed in proposed 123.6(b)(1)(vi), is a 
known hazard in those species that can generate scombrotoxin when 
they decompose; otherwise, it is regarded as a quality problem. 
Parasites (proposed 123.6(b)(1)(vii)) are not a hazard if 
killed during cooking but can be a hazard in finfish consumed 
raw, unless that fish is commercially frozen. Unapproved direct 
and indirect food and color additives (proposed 
123.6(b)(1)(viii)) are a potential hazard with most any food.

