 

7. The Bank has requested retroactive relief, for the in-kind transfer to HighMark that occurred over the weekend
of November 12, 1993. It is represented that on the weekend of November 12, 1993, all of the assets of five CIFs
<FOOTCITE>9</FOOTCITE>
, which were maintained by the Bank and in which the Plans held interests, were transferred to HighMark in exchange
for an appropriate number of shares of certain portfolios of HighMark which have investment objectives and policies
substantially identical to those of the CIFs. At the same time, the five CIFs were terminated and the assets of each,
then consisting of shares in portfolios of HighMark, were distributed in-kind to the Plans participating in such
CIFs based on each Plan's 

pro rata

 share of the assets of the CIFs on the date of the transaction. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


9

</FOOTNAME>
It is represented that the CIFs maintained by the Bank which engaged in the transfer in-kind on November 12, 1993, were
the Balanced Fund, the Flexible Bond Fund A, the Government Fund, the Income and Growth Equity Fund, and the Income
Equity Fund A. 

</FOOTNOTE>


The Bank provided to the Second Fiduciary for each affected Plan disclosures that announced the termination of the
CIFs, summarized the transaction, and otherwise complied with provisions of Section I. It is represented that based
on these disclosures, the Second Fiduciary from each affected Plan approved in writing the transfer of the CIFs assets
to the corresponding portfolios of HighMark, the investment of the assets of the Plans in shares of HighMark, and the
receipt by the Bank of fees for services to HighMark and to the Plans. It is represented that the assets of Plans that
did not approve investment in HighMark were withdrawn from the CIFs and held or invested in appropriate alternative
investments in accordance with the terms of such Plans. 

Prior to the transaction, the assets of the five CIFs were reviewed to confirm that such were appropriate investments
for the corresponding portfolios of HighMark into which such assets were transferred. If any of the assets of the five
CIFs were not appropriate for HighMark, it is represented that the Bank sold such assets in the open market through
an unaffiliated brokerage firm prior to the transfer. 

It is represented that the assets transferred by the five CIFs to HighMark consisted entirely of cash and marketable
securities. For purposes of the transfer in-kind, the value of the securities in each of the five CIFs were determined
based on market values as of the close of business on November 12, 1993, the last business date prior to the transfer.
It is represented that the values were determined in a single valuation using the valuation procedures described
in Rule 17a7 under the Investment Company Act of 1940. In this regard, it is represented that the ``current market
price'' for specific types of CIF securities involved in the transaction was determined as follows: 

(1) If the security was a ``reported security'' as the term is defined in Rule 11Aa31 under the 1934 Act, the last
sale price with respect to such security reported in the consolidated transaction reporting system (the Consolidated
System) for November 12, 1993; or if there were no reported transactions in the Consolidated System that day, the average
of the highest independent bid and the lowest independent offer for such security (reported pursuant to Rule 11Ac11
under the 1934 Act), as of the close of business on November 12, 1993; or 

(2) If the security was not a reported security, and the principal market for such security was an exchange, then the
last sale on such exchange on November 12, 1993; or if there were no reported transactions on such exchange that day,
the average of the highest independent bid and lowest independent offer on such exchange as of the close of business
on November 12, 1993; or 

(3) If the security was not a reported security and was quoted in the NASDAQ system, then the average of the highest independent
bid and lowest independent offer reported on Level 1 of NASDAQ as of the close of business on November 12, 1993; or 

(4) For all other securities, the average of the highest independent bid and lowest independent offer as of the close
of business on November 12, 1993, determined on the basis of reasonable inquiry. For securities in this category,
the Bank represents that it obtained quotations from at least three sources that were either broker-dealers or pricing
services independent of and unrelated to the Bank and, where more than one valid quotation was available, used the
average of the quotations to value the securities, in conformance with interpretations by the SEC and practice under
Rule 17a7. 

It is represented that the securities received by the corresponding portfolio of HighMark were valued by such portfolio
for purposes of the transfer in the same manner and on the same day as such securities were valued by the CIFs. The per
share 
value of the shares of each portfolio of HighMark issued to the CIFs were based on the corresponding portfolio's then
current net asset value. It is represented that the aggregate value of the shares of the corresponding portfolio of
HighMark issued to the CIFs were equal to the value of the assets (cash and marketable securities) transferred to such
portfolio as of the close of business on November 12, 1993. It is also represented that the value of a Plan's investment
in shares of a corresponding portfolio of HighMark as of the opening of business on the first business day after the
transaction (November 15, 1993) was equal to the value of such Plan's investment in the CIF as of the close of business
on the last business day prior to the transaction (November 12, 1993). 

It is represented that not later than thirty (30) days after completion of the transaction (December 15, 1993), the
Bank sent by regular mail a written confirmation of the transaction to each affected Plan. Such confirmation contained:
(1) the identity of each security that was valued in accordance with Rule 17a7(b)(4), as described in the paragraph
7(4) above; (2) the price of each such security for purposes of the transaction; and (3) the identity of each pricing
service or market maker consulted in determining the value of such securities. To reiterate the above discussion,
and in accordance with the conditions under section I, similar procedures will occur upon any future in-kind exchanges
between CIFs maintained by the Bank, Plans, and the Funds. 



Receipt of Fees From Funds 



8. It is represented that the Bank currently invests assets of the Plans it manages in shares of the Funds in accordance
with the conditions set forth in PTCE 774. Under certain conditions, PTCE 774 permits the Bank to receive
fees from the Funds under either of two circumstances: (a) where a Plan does not pay any investment management, investment
advisory, or similar fees with respect to the assets of such Plan invested in shares of a Fund for the entire period of
such investment; or (b) where a Plan pays investment management, investment advisory, or similar fees to the Bank
based on the total assets of such Plan from which a credit has been subtracted representing such Plan's 

pro rata

 share of such investment advisory fees paid to the Bank by the Fund. As such, it is represented that there are two levels
of fees_those fees which the Bank charges to the Plans for serving as trustee with investment discretion or as investment
manager (the Plan-level fees); and those fees the Bank charges to the Funds (the Fund-level fees) for serving as investment
advisor, custodian, or service provider. 



