 

3. Option 1: Conditional Exclusion From Subtitle C Standards Costs 


The first option under consideration in today's proposal is to exclude mercury-containing lamps from Subtitle C
management standards with the condition that these lamps are managed in permitted municipal landfills or recycling
facilities. The proposed exclusion also includes a minor generator record keeping requirement. As the exclusion
would be deregulatory, primary economic impacts to small and large quantity generators of mercury-containing lamps
resulting from this action would be in the form of cost savings from avoided Subtitle C regulatory management, particularly
for transport and disposal of spent lamps.
In the cost analysis, it was assumed that, given the proposed conditional exclusion, all small and large quantity
generators of spent mercury-containing lamps would opt for management in municipal landfills in order to reduce
disposal costs. 
Some generators may have slightly higher disposal costs than others as a result of the proposed exclusion of mercury-containing
lamps from municipal combustors. If these generators currently manage their non-hazardous waste in municipal combustors,
the combustor exclusion may require these generators to: (1) Keep their spent lamps separate from the rest of their
municipal solid waste, (2) store spent lamps on site until enough volume has been generated to make disposal cost effective,
and (3) haul spent lamps greater distances to municipal solid waste landfills. 
In short, overall savings to be accrued from the proposed exclusion may vary slightly from generator to generator.



4. Option 2: Special Collection Costs 


The second option, special collection, included in today's proposal would allow small and large quantity generators
of spent mercury-containing lamps to reduce certain administrative activities required under Subtitle C standards,
including biennial reporting, notification, manifesting and personnel training. Additionally the option also
allows generators to store spent mercury-containing lamps on-site for up to one year without a hazardous waste permit,
and to transport their spent lamps direct to final disposal or recycling using non-hazardous waste haulers. 
The option also includes similar reduced requirements for interim spent lamp storage facilities and ``special collection
centers.'' Transportation to these facilities or centers from the generator would not be regulated under Subtitle
C standards, however, transport to final disposal or recycling from these facilities would be regulated under Subtitle
C standards. 
The costs estimated for Special Collection Option assumes for urban generators direct shipment using non-hazardous
waste haulers, as allowed under this option, from generators to final disposal; thus the costs of creating and operating
an interim storage facility or special collection center are not included for urban generators. The rationale for
this omission is twofold: (1) It is assumed that spent lamp generation is large enough to create economies of scale
for direct non-hazardous waste transport; the need for special collection centers is precluded by non-hazardous
waste transport ``milk runs'' for spent lamps, and (2) although there may be economies of scale generated for long-haul
transport of spent lamps from collection centers, the special collection option requires Subtitle C transport from
the centers to final disposal or recycling, thus making the use of a collection center with Subtitle C final transport
more expensive than Subtitle D direct transport to the disposal facility. 


