 

Similarly, FDA is also proposing to require in 123.8(c) 
that the processor retain any records relating to the general 
adequacy of the equipment or processes being used by the 
processor, including the results of scientific studies and 
evaluations to determine adequacy, for 1 year beyond the 
applicability of these records to refrigerated products being 
produced by the processor, and for 2 years beyond the 
applicability of the records to frozen or preserved products 
being produced by the processor. The processor may need to 
obtain a written scientific evaluation of a process, such as a 
cooking, pasteurization, or cooling process, to ensure that the 
process it is using is adequate to destroy pathogens or to 
prevent their growth. Such an evaluation may also be necessary 
to ensure the adequacy of the cooking, pasteurizing, or 
refrigerating equipment that the processor is using. (See the 
preamble discussion on cooked, ready-to-eat fishery products.) 
As with processing records, these records should be retained for 
a period of time that reflects the period that the products to 
which they relate can be expected to be in commercial 
distribution. 

FDA recognizes that some processing plants may be closed on 
a seasonal basis. Given the nature of the HACCP system, however, 
FDA may choose to inspect at least the records of a plant even if 
the plant is not in operation. Therefore, FDA is providing in 
proposed 123.8(c) that if a processing facility is closed 
between seasonal packs, the records may be transferred to some 
reasonably accessible location during the period of closure. 

FDA is proposing to require in 123.8(d) that HACCP plans 
and records be available for review and copying by authorized 
agency employees at reasonable times. As already discussed, the 
agency's access to HACCP records is essential to ensure that the 
HACCP system is working, and that the safety of seafood is being 
ensured by design. FDA's authority to require maintenance of 
these records, and to provide for agency access to them, is fully 
supported by the holding in 

National Confectioners Association

 v. 


Califano,

 569 F.2d 69495 (D.C. Cir. 1978). In this case, the 
court recognized FDA's authority to impose recordkeeping 
requirements on firms that process foods when such requirements 
effectuate the goals of the act. See also 

Toilet Goods 
Association

 v. 

Gardner,

 387 U.S. 158, 163164 (1967). The 
importance of the records in ensuring that fish and fishery 
products will not be rendered injurious to health has been fully 
discussed. FDA access to these records will expedite the 
agency's efforts to ensure that the fish and fishery products in 
interstate commerce are not adulterated and to identify any such 
products that are. 

FDA is aware that there is substantial public interest in 
the extent to which industry-generated HACCP records could or 
should be publicly available. As FDA understands it, the 
argument in favor of availability is that where an inspection 
system to protect the public health relies heavily on records, 
those records should be public to the maximum extent possible. 
The arguments in favor of protection of records, on the other 
hand, are based on concerns about advantages to competitors from 
disclosure and on the risk that the records will be otherwise 
misused if they become public. FDA invites comment on the 
general question of public disclosure of HACCP records and on the 
agency's preliminary analysis of their availability, as follows. 

FDA has longstanding explicit statutory access to certain 
industry records during inspections involving infant formula, 
drugs, and devices and has access by regulation to certain 
processing records during inspections of low acid canned food 
processors. The agency has the right to copy and take possession 
of these records but does not routinely do so. FDA typically 
copies and takes possession of records only when they may be 
needed for regulatory purposes. As a preliminary matter, FDA 
expects to continue that practice with regard to seafood HACCP 
records. 

The public availability of those HACCP records that FDA 
would possess as a result of copying during an inspection would 
be governed by section 301(j) of the act and by the Freedom of 
Information Act (FOIA) and regulations issued pursuant to it by 
the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) and FDA. 
Section 301(j) of the act expressly prohibits FDA from disclosing 
trade secret information obtained during the course of an 
inspection. The FOIA regulations also say that FDA will not 
divulge either trade secret or commercial confidential 
information. As a preliminary matter, HACCP plans and monitoring 
records appear to fall within these two categories of protected 
records. As a consequence, FDA may well have little discretion 
in this area. Moreover, under DHHS' FOIA regulations, processors 
may be entitled to challenge in court a pending disclosure of 
records on the grounds that the records to be disclosed are 
commercial confidential or trade secret. 

As an additional matter, there are significant legal and 
practical questions as to whether FDA has the authority to 
require disclosure of industry records that are not in FDA's 
possession. As discussed elsewhere in this document, FDA does 
not contemplate the submission of HACCP plans or other records to 
FDA under these proposed regulations. The preapproval of HACCP 
plans by FDA (and thus the submission of HACCP plans to FDA) is 
simply not practical. The agency has tentatively concluded that 
HACCP plans and monitoring records will be reviewed on site by 
agency investigators as part of FDA's normal inspection regime. 





