 

Estimated Economic Impact of a Major END Outbreak 



Eliminating END requires the detection of the virus in a flock, appraisal, and rapid, humane destruction of the infected
flocks. It also requires that all premises that contained infected or exposed flocks be cleaned and disinfected.
Depopulation would not occur until an appraised value was determined and the owners had signed the appropriate forms.


At the time of the 1971 END outbreak in southern California, there were approximately 1,115 commercial poultry and
bird flocks in that part of the State. Commercial flock populations ranged in size from approximately 1,000 to more
than 3.4 million birds and poultry. The estimated population of birds and poultry in southern California's commercial
operations totaled more than 38.9 million. The average poultry operation contained approximately 55,000 birds.
In southern California, the poultry industry was dominated by layer operations that produced table eggs for markets
in California and neighboring States. In addition to commercial flocks, there were approximately 39,960 backyard
poultry flocks with a total population of approximately 1 million. 

A national animal disease emergency was declared by the Secretary of Agriculture in March 1972, which placed the eight
southernmost counties in California under quarantine. The last case of END was diagnosed in June 1973, and surveillance
programs continued until July 1974. Eradicating END from the area required the destruction of nearly 12 million infected
and exposed birds and poultry. Most of the birds and poultry depopulated were laying hens. The effort cost approximately
$55 million. Approximately half ($27.5 million) was for indemnities paid to flock owners for poultry, birds, eggs,
and supplies destroyed. Approximately 91 percent of the depopulated birds and poultry were commercial layers, followed
by 6 percent for pullets and broilers, 1 percent each for turkeys and breeding poultry, and less than 1 percent each
for pigeons, backyard aviaries, game birds, and exotic birds. 

Between March 1972 and December 1987, the poultry and bird population in the original quarantined area decreased
from approximately 38.9 million to 27.6 million. Conversely, the number of commercial flocks in the 1972 END quarantined
area increased from approximately 1,115 to 1,856. The increased number of bird and poultry flocks since 1972 can be
attributed to expansion of the exotic bird industry. Importers and producers of exotic birds are not as vertically
integrated as poultry producers. More exotic bird operations also helped to account for decreases in average flock
size since 1972. Additionally, increased urbanization in traditional poultry producing sections of southern California
have forced many poultry operations to close or relocate. 

APHIS estimates that if a similar END outbreak were to occur in southern California today, up to 7.8 million birds and
poultry could be required to be depopulated, and indemnities totaling $22.3 million dollars would be paid to producers.
Newly developed diagnostic techniques should enable APHIS to be more selective when euthanizing birds and poultry
in areas quarantined because of END. Although this should result in the destruction of fewer birds and poultry, the
actual potential impact of the proposed regulations is unknown. 



Estimated Economic Impact of an Isolated END Outbreak 



Under APHIS regulations, all imported birds are quarantined for a minimum of 30 days to prevent the introduction of
foreign animal diseases, particularly END. 

Exotic bird species have been imported into the United States primarily for use as pets for several decades. During
fiscal year 1991, approximately 136 lots, totaling approximately 250,000 exotic birds, were legally imported into
the United States. Only three lots were refused entry due to END. Two of these lots, totaling 827 birds, were euthanized,
the third was returned to the country of origin. APHIS estimates that the values of the euthanized lots were approximately
$8,000 and $19,500 respectively. 

In addition to legal importation, exotic bird species are also smuggled into the United States. Birds are smuggled
for a variety of reasons, such as the avoidance of quarantine costs and illegal importation of prohibited species.
The inherent nature of smuggling makes reliable data impossible to obtain. However, APHIS estimates that the number
of smuggled birds entering the United States ranges from 100,000 to 150,000 annually. Smuggling increases the likelihood
that domestic birds and poultry could be exposed to END. 

During fiscal year 1991, an END outbreak resulted in the destruction of approximately 120 birds. APHIS estimated
the value of these euthanized birds to be approximately $40,000. Under the proposed regulations, APHIS would use
updated diagnostic techniques to determine which birds have actually been infected with END. This should permit
APHIS to be more selective when euthanasia is necessary. However, the actual potential effect of the proposed regulations
on domestic exotic bird producers is unknown. 



