 

(e) Adult care is to be provided in the setting determined to be the least restrictive (in-home care, adult day care,
foster care, group home, or institutional) for the specific individual adult. If appropriate, and when a qualified
care provider is available, in-home care is preferred. When an institutional or group care setting is in the adult's
best interest, the preferred placement shall be in a facility located as close as possible to his/her home community.


(f) The cost of adult care provided by BIA shall not exceed the applicable state payment rate for similar care. 

(g) When establishing the actual level of payment for an adult's care, the BIA shall: 

(1) Consider all available resources when determining eligibility; and 

(2) Determine the amount of the assistance payment for which the client is eligible based upon the deficit remaining
after all available resources are deducted from the cost of care. 
(h) Redetermination of adult care eligibility and the payment level. 

(1) The BIA shall redetermine financial eligibility and the amount of the BIA payment based upon the deficit between
the cost of care and resources available to the adult in need of care, including other Federal, state, or public assistance
resources. Recipients or their authorized representatives are required to inform the BIA immediately of any changes
in status that may affect eligibility or the amount of assistance. The BIA shall redetermine eligibility whenever
there is an indication of a change in circumstances affecting eligibility, but not less frequently than once every
six months for each recipient. 

(2) The redetermination process shall include personal contact with the recipient in the actual placement setting.
The purposes of the contact are to evaluate changes in the adult's personal circumstances or condition and to assess
the need for continued assistance. 



20.27 

Work Experience Program (WEP). 



WEP is a program for eligible general assistance recipients. It provides work experience and job skills that will
enhance the recipients' potential for job placement. WEP participation is mandatory for general assistance recipients,
unless they are excepted under 25 CFR 20.21(i). 

(a) 

Work experience and training sites. 

(1) Work experience and training sites offering potential for job placement within a specified period of time shall
be given priority. 

(2) If eventual employment at a work site is not likely, other options for WEP placements that provide opportunity
for the development of relevant skills and good work habits shall be preferred. 

(3) Placement should not exceed a period of 24 months. 

(4) Placements of WEP participants in subsidized employment may be authorized for periods up to six months if the employer
shares in the cost of the participant's wages. Agreements with such employers shall include the amount of wages to
be paid and a provision that the WEP participant will be considered for permanent employment if a vacancy exists. 

(b) 

Payment for work-related expenses. 

(1) A monthly work-related payment not to exceed the amount established and periodically reviewed by the Assistant
Secretary shall be allowed for WEP participation. No advance general assistance grant payments or WEP payments are
authorized. 

(2) Payments to participants shall not be considered as wages, but as grant assistance payments pursuant to provisions
at 25 CFR 20.21. 

(c) 

Participants. 

(1) In situations where the recognized head of the family unit is certified as unemployable, an alternate member of
the assistance group, such as the spouse or another adult, shall be designated as available for WEP participation.


(2) Where there are multiple family units in one household, one member of each family unit shall be eligible to participate
in WEP. 

(d) 

Program. 

(1) The local WEP shall have specific written program procedures that cover hours of work, participation requirements,
acceptable reasons for granting leave from work, evaluation criteria and monitoring plans. 





