 

Listing of Actions Identified in EPA's Contaminated Sediment Management Strategy 



EPA's Contaminated Sediment Management Strategy proposes that Agency program offices take the following actions.




Assessment 



All EPA program offices will use standard sediment testing methods to determine whether sediments are contaminated.
The Office of Water will use standard sediment toxicity and bioaccumulation test methods for monitoring, interpretation
of narrative water quality standards, and dredged material disposal testing. The Office of Pesticide Programs and
the Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics will use standard sediment toxicity tests to assess the toxicity of
pesticides and chemicals when registering or reregistering these chemicals for manufacture and use. The Office
of Emergency and Remedial Response will use standard sediment toxicity and bioaccumulation test methods for Superfund
Remedial Investigation/Feasibility studies. The Office of Solid Waste will use biological sediment toxicity test
methods for assessing and monitoring hazardous waste facilities. 

To date, EPA program offices have not yet detailed how they will use sediment quality criteria. This information will
be documented in a Sediment Quality Criteria User's Guide which is currently under development. The general decisions
on how criteria will be used are described in the Strategy. All EPA programs conducting sediment monitoring can use
the criteria to interpret sediment chemistry data. Upon promulgation, the criteria can be adopted as State water
quality standards and used to set National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit limits. The criteria
can also be used with other information to make site-specific decisions concerning corrective action at hazardous
waste facilities, and to assess Superfund sites. The criteria can also be used to evaluate dredged material suitability
for disposal in open water. As soon as EPA's Sediment Quality Criteria User's Manual is drafted, it will be noticed
in the 

Federal Register

 for public review and comment. In the interim, the Contaminated Sediment Management Strategy will be implemented
using the standardized biological assessment methods already available for the program offices. 

The National Sediment Inventory will be used by EPA program offices as an assessment tool. The inventory will be used
to: identify contaminated sediment sites for consideration for remedial action; target facilities for possible
injunctive relief or supplemental enforcement projects; identify problem pesticides and toxic substances that
may require further regulation or be targeted for enforcement action; identify impaired waters for National Water
Quality Inventory reports or development of Total Maximum Daily Loads; target watersheds for nonpoint source management
practices; and to help select industries for effluent guidelines development. 



Prevention 



In order to regulate the use of pesticides that may accumulate to toxic levels in sediment, EPA intends to propose that
acute sediment toxicity tests be included in procedures required to support registration, reregistration, and
special review of pesticides likely to sorb to sediment. In fiscal year 1995, EPA will propose incorporating acute
toxicity bioassays and spiking protocols into the Agency's pesticide assessment guidelines (40 CFR Part 158). To
prevent other toxic substances from accumulating in sediment, EPA will also propose incorporating acute sediment
toxicity tests and sediment bioaccumulation tests into routine chemical review processes required under the Toxic
Substances Control Act. In addition, EPA intends to call for the development of EPA guidelines for design of new chemicals
to reduce bioavailability and partitioning of toxic chemicals to sediment. 

EPA's Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance will take action to prevent sediment contamination by negotiating,
in cases of noncompliance with permits, enforceable settlement agreements to require source recycling and source
reduction activities. The Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance will also monitor the progress of Federal
facilities toward the goal of halving toxic emissions by the year 1999, and will monitor the reporting of toxic releases
to the public. 


EPA's Office of Water, and other EPA program offices, will work with nongovernmental organizations and the States
to prevent point and nonpoint source contaminants from accumulating in sediments. EPA will: (1) promulgate new and
revised best available technology effluent guidelines for industries that discharge sediment contaminants in
significant amounts; (2) encourage the States to use biological sediment test methods to interpret water quality
standards, and to adopt sediment quality criteria as water quality standards; (3) encourage the States to develop
Total Maximum Daily Loads for impaired watersheds specifying point and nonpoint source load reductions necessary
to protect sediment quality; (4) use the National Sediment Inventory to target active point sources of sediment contaminants
for permit compliance tracking, (5) ensure that discharges from CERCLA sites and RCRA facilities subject to NPDES
permits comply with permit requirements that protect sediment quality; (6) use the National Sediment Inventory
to target watersheds where technical assistance and grants would effectively be used to reduce nonpoint source loads
of sediment contaminants. 




