 

To determine the appropriate percentage for market risk, ISCC will review the Financial Times Index and assume that
it will take one day to sell all positions. Based on a ten day settlement cycle this will result in 11 days elapsing from
trade date to close out date. Accordingly, the formula will take into consideration the largest price movement over
an 11 day period. Initially ISCC will use the largest price movement in 1993 of 7% for the market risk factor component
of the formula.

To calculate the foreign exchange risk, ISCC will review the daily rate fluctuation for the exchange rate between
the British Pound and U.S. Dollars. Initially, ISCC will use data from the 19891992 period and the maximum fluctuation
during that time was 4.445%. This number will be used on the foreign exchange factor component of the formula.

Currently, Clearing Fund Requirements for ISCC members on surveillance are increased, in the discretion of the Corporation,
by requiring up to an additional 3%, 5%, and 7% of average daily debits for members on Advisory, Class A, and Class B surveillance,
respectively. The same increases (of three, five, and seven percent for Advisory, Class A, and Class B surveillance)
will be retained under the new formula, only they will be added to the Market Risk Factor and Foreign Exchange Risk Factor.

(b) The proposed rule changes will permit ISCC to safeguard securities and funds in its custody or control and is therefore
consistent with Section 17A of the Act.



B. Self-Regulatory Organization's Statement on Burden on Competition



ISCC does not believe that the proposed rule change imposes any burden on competition.



C. Self-Regulatory Organization's Statement on Comments on the Proposed Rule Change Received From Members. Participants,
or Others



ISCC has received no written comments. ISCC will notify the Commission of any written comments received by ISCC.



III. Date of Effectiveness of the Proposed Rule Change and Timing for Commission Action 



Within thirty-five days of the date of publication of this notice in the 

Federal Register 

or within such longer period: (i) as the Commission may designate up to ninety days of such date if it finds such longer
period to be appropriate and publishes its reasons for so finding or (ii) as to which the self-regulatory organization
consents, the Commission will:

A. By order approve the proposed rule change, or

B. Institute proceedings to determine whether the proposed rule change should be disapproved.



IV. Solicitation of Comments



Interested persons are invited to submit written data, views, and arguments concerning the foregoing. Persons making
written submissions should file six copies thereof with the Secretary, Securities and Exchange Commission, 450
Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20549. Copies of the submission, all subsequent amendments, all written statements
with respect to the proposed rule change that are filed with the Commission, and all written communications relating
to the proposed rule change between the Commission and any person, other than those that may be withheld from the public
in accordance with the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 552, will be available for inspection and copying in the Commission's
Public Reference Section, 450 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, D.C., 20549. Copies of such filing also will be available
for inspection and copying at the principal office of the above-mentioned self-regulatory organization. All submissions
should refer to File No. SRISCC941 and should be submitted by July 13, 1994. 





For the Commission, by the Division of Market Regulation, pursuant to delegated authority.



<SIGNER>
Margaret H. McFarland,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Secretary.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9415140 Filed 62194; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 801001M
</BILLING>





