 

FDA has promulgated regulations to ensure that, among other things, drug products are held, pending use by the intended
consumer, in a manner that ensures their safety (Parts 210 and 211 (21 CFR parts 210 and 211)). The term ``held'' includes
not only manufacturing and shipping time, but also the time from point of purchase to consumer use. Thus, manufacturers
are responsible for the manner in which their products are held pending actual consumer use, and they are responsible
if the packaging that they use is not adequate to prevent unintended ingestion of iron by children.

The regulations are replete with examples of FDA's authority to regulate the manufacturer beyond the point of shipping
the product from the manufacturing site. For example, 211.94(b) requires that container closure systems
``provide adequate protection against 

foreseeable external factors

 in storage and 

use

 that can cause deterioration or contamination of the drug product (emphasis added).'' This regulation requires
that manufacturers protect against deterioration or contamination occurring during storage of drug products throughout
the chain of distribution, up to the point of use by the consumer.

Under section 501(a)(2)(B) of the act, manufacturers also are responsible for preventing intentional misuse of
a drug product. In 1982, in response to a series of capsule tamperings, FDA promulgated a regulation (211.132)
that requires tamper-resistant packaging for all over-the-counter (OTC) human drug products except dermatologics,
dentifrices, and insulin (47 FR 50442). The agency's action assured greater package integrity and product security
beyond the point of manufacture. FDA's authority to require tamper-resistant packaging is found primarily in section
501(a)(2)(B) of the act.

Significantly, the health risk that prompted the tamper-resistant packaging regulation was not attributable directly
to manufacturing or packing practices that contravened the current good manufacturing practice regulations in
effect at that time. Rather, despite compliance with existing regulations, drug product quality was compromised
because of previously unforeseeable and unintended intervention by persons other than the consumer.

Because tamper resistant packaging was a means to obviate a newly apparent danger, and because tamper-resistant
packaging technology was available, current good manufacturing practice mandated that it be used.

Similarly, in 1989, recognizing the persistent vulnerability of the hard-capsule dosage form, FDA amended the tamper-resistant
regulation to require that OTC products marketed in two-piece, hard-gelatin capsules be packaged using at least
two tamper-resistant features (54 FR 5227, February 2, 1989). Likewise, in 1994, the agency proposed to amend the
tamper-resistant regulation to require that the packages for all OTC human drug products marketed in two-piece,
hard-gelatin capsules be sealed (59 FR 2542, January 18, 1994). The proposed amendment is part of ``the agency's continuing
review of the potential public health threat posed by product tampering,'' and was proposed to ``address specific
vulnerabilities in the OTC market and to improve consumer protection.'' (59 FR 2543). In the preamble to the proposed
rule, FDA recognized that, although the packaging used at the time of the latest poisoning incidents met FDA requirements
in effect at that time, the packaging was not designed to reveal visible evidence of tampering. The proposed rule would
change ``tamper-resistant'' to ``tamper-evident'' to underscore the fact that current packaging technology is
not invulnerable to tampering and would require packaging that not only erects barriers to tampering, but also alerts
the consumer to signs of tampering.

In addition, in September 1993, FDA published a regulation that requires the imprinting of solid oral dosage form
drug products for human use (See 58 FR 47948, September 13, 1993). The regulation requires that every such product
be imprinted with a code that allows identification of the drug product and its manufacturer or distributor. The regulation
will ensure, among other things, that consumers and health care professionals will have this information available
in the event of an emergency. The imprinting rule, like the proposed rule for iron-containing products, responds
to concerns that are related to consumer use of drug products rather than concerns focused on the integrity and composition
of such products.

The proposed rule, therefore, like those pertaining to tamper-evident packaging and drug imprinting, is intended
to enhance the safety of drug products, specifically iron-containing drug products. The recent statistical data
available to FDA demonstrate that the current manner of holding iron-containing drug products until their use by
the intended consumer fails to ensure that the drug products will be safe because large numbers of children are ingesting
such products and suffering serious injuries or death. Existing technology permits additional safeguards, such
as child-resistant blister packs, to be used for holding iron-containing drug products. Given the known dangers
and the ability to minimize or eliminate such dangers through the use of existing technology, FDA tentatively concludes
that current good manufacturing practice dictates that unit-dose packaging be used.



