 

(b) The Significant New Alternatives Policy (SNAP) Information Notice is designed to provide the Agency with the
information necessary to reach a decision on the acceptability of a substitute. (1) Submitters requesting review
under the SNAP program should send the completed SNAP notice to: SNAP Document Control Officer, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (6205J), 401 M Street, SW., Washington, DC 20460. 

(2) Submitters filing jointly under SNAP and the Premanufacture Notice Program (PMN) should send the SNAP addendum
along with the PMN form to: PMN Document Control Officer, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (7407), 401 M Street,
SW., Washington, DC 20460. Submitters must also send both documents to the SNAP program, with a reference to indicate
the notice has been furnished to the Agency under the PMN program. Submitters providing information on new chemicals
for joint review under the TSCA and SNAP programs may be required to supply additional toxicity data under TSCA section
5. 

(3) Submitters filing jointly under SNAP and under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act should
send the SNAP form to the Office of Pesticide Programs, Registration Division, (7505C) 401 M Street, SW., Washington,
DC, 20460, as well as to the SNAP Document Control Officer. 



82.180 



Agency review of SNAP submissions. 



(a) 

Processing of SNAP notices. 

(1) 

90day review process. 

The 90-day review process will begin once EPA receives a submission and determines that such submission includes
data on the substitute that are complete and adequate, as described in 82.178. The Agency may suspend or extend
the review period to allow for submission of additional data needed to complete the review of the notice. 

(2) 

Initial review of notice. 

The SNAP Document Control Officer will review the notice to ensure that basic information necessary to process the
submission is present (i.e., name of company, identification of substitute, etc.). The SNAP Document Control Officer
will also review substantiation of any claim of confidentiality. 

(3) 

Determination of data adequacy. 

Upon receipt of the SNAP submission, the Agency will review the completeness of the information supporting the application.
If additional data are needed, the submitter will be contacted following completion of this review. The 90-day review
period will not commence until EPA has received data it judges adequate to support analysis of the submission. 

(4) 

Letter of receipt. 

The SNAP Document Control Officer will send a letter of receipt to the submitter to confirm the date of notification
and the beginning of EPA's 90-day review period. The SNAP Document Control Officer will also assign the SNAP notice
a tracking number, which will be identified in the letter of receipt. 

(5) 

Availability of new information during review period. 

If critical new information becomes available during the review period that may influence the Agency's evaluation
of a substitute, the submitter must notify the Agency about the existence of such information within 10 days of learning
of such data. The submitter must also inform the Agency of new studies underway, even if the results will not be available
within the 90-day review period. The Agency may contact the submitter to explore extending or suspending the review
period depending on the type of information received and the stage of review. 

(6) 

Completion of detailed review. 

Once the initial data review, described in paragraphs (a)(2) and (3) of this section, has been completed, the Agency
will complete a detailed evaluation of the notice. If during any time the Agency perceives a lack of information necessary
to reach a SNAP determination, it will contact the submitter and request the missing data. 

(7) 

Criteria for review. 

To determine whether a substitute is acceptable or unacceptable as a replacement for class I or II compounds, the Agency
will evaluate: 

(i) Atmospheric effects and related health and environmental impacts; 

(ii) General population risks from ambient exposure to compounds with direct toxicity and to increased ground-level
ozone; 

(iii) Ecosystem risks; 

(iv) Occupational risks; 

(v) Consumer risks; 

(vi) Flammability; and 

(vii) Cost and availability of the substitute. 

(8) 

Communication of decision. 

(i) 

Communication of decision to the submitter. 

Once the SNAP program review has been completed, the Agency will notify the submitter in writing of the decision. Sale
or manufacture of new substitutes may commence after the initial 90-day notification period expires even if the Agency
fails to reach a decision within the 90-day review period or fails to communicate that decision or the need for additional
data to the submitter. Sale or manufacture of existing substitutes may continue throughout the Agency's 90-day review.


(ii) 

Communication of Decision to the Public. 

The Agency will publish in the 

Federal Register

 on a quarterly basis a complete list of the acceptable and unacceptable alternatives that have been reviewed to date.
In the case of substitutes proposed as acceptable with use restrictions, proposed as unacceptable or proposed for
removal from either list, a rulemaking process will ensue. Upon completion of such rulemaking, EPA will publish revised
lists of substitutes acceptable subject to use conditions or narrowed use limits and unacceptable substitutes to
be incorporated into the Code of Federal Regulations. (See appendix A of this subpart.) 

(b) 

Types of listing decisions. 

When reviewing substitutes, the Agency will list substitutes in one of five categories: 


