 

e. 

Should child-resistant blister packaging be required?

 Requiring child-resistant blister packaging of iron-containing drugs and supplements, as recommended by the AG
petition, is one packaging approach to reduce the incidence of pediatric iron-poisoning fatalities. This approach
can be viewed as embodying three distinct packaging components: (1) Require unit-dose packaging; (2) require a specific
type of unit-dose packaging (i.e., blister packs); and (3) require CRP's.

FDA recognizes that unit-dose packaging provides certain packaging features that reclosable containers do not
provide. Products packaged in unit-dose packaging require that the packaging be opened for each individual dosage
unit. The additional time and effort needed to open each unit restricts the number of doses available for ingestion
during the time that a child has access to the package. In contrast, a multi-dose reclosable package (i.e., a bottle
and closure) allows a child access to all of its contents once the closure is opened. In addition, the effectiveness
of child-resistant unit-dose packaging does not depend upon adults' properly resecuring a cap as is the case with
reclosable CRP's. Therefore, FDA tentatively concludes that unit-dose packaging of products will contribute in
a significant, over and above the protections provided by warning statements and CRP's, to reduce children's access
to potentially fatal doses of product.

This tentative conclusion is supported by studies of the pediatric accessibility of products in different types
of conventional (i.e., nonchild resistant) packaging. The results from these studies show that unit-dose packaging,
in comparison to snap type and screw cap closure packaging, will limit access to multiple doses of product by young
children. Studies of pediatric accessibility of product packaged in conventional unit-dose ``pouches,'' conventional
unit-dose ``blister cards,'' and containers with conventional ``snap type'' and ``screw cap'' closures have been
reported. Children, 42 to 51 months old, participated in each of these studies. Results from the study of conventional
pouch packaging show that 55.5 percent of the children (n = 200) were unable to access more than eight tablets in 10 min
(Ref. 26). In a similar study of conventional blister card packaging 64 percent of the children (n = 200) were unable
to access more than eight tablets in 10 min (Ref. 27). In contrast, studies of pediatric accessibility of conventional
``snap type'' and ``continuous threaded type'' packaging show that most young children are able to gain access to
products packaged in these types of conventional packaging in a relatively short period of time. Results from studies
of ``snap type'' packaging show that with upward opening forces of less than 3 lb (average 1.9 lb), 96 percent of the
children (n = 650) were able to open such packaging within 12 to 75 seconds (Ref. 28). Results from studies of pediatric
accessibility of conventional, 33 mm diameter, ``screw type'' packaging and having caps with 2, 4, 6, and 8, torque-inch-pounds
(TIP) rotational closing forces, show that approximately 100 percent of the children (n = 400) were able to open the
packaging within an average of 11 seconds. Fifty-four percent of the children were able to open ``screw type'' packaging
with rotational closing forces of 10 to 25 TIP within 71 seconds (Ref. 29).

As noted above, blister packaging is one type of unit-dose packaging. However, FDA does not agree with the AG petition's
contention that blister packaging is necessary to ensure the safe use of iron-containing drugs and supplements.
FDA tentatively finds that requiring a specific type of unit-dose packaging may be more restrictive than necessary
if other types of unit-dose packaging accomplish the same objective. As discussed above, other types of conventional
unit-dose packaging provide a comparable length of time for children to open as that required by conventional blister
packaging.

With regard to the child-resistant component of the AG petition's recommendation, FDA notes that CPSC has established
regulations that require CRP's for iron-containing drugs and dietary supplements in packages that contain 250 mg
or more total iron (16 CFR 1700.14(a)(12) and (13)). In addition, CPSC has promulgated regulations for performance
standards to establish the effectiveness of CRP's (16 CFR 1700.20). FDA finds that establishing CRP's standards
for iron-containing drugs and dietary supplements therefore would be redundant and could place an unnecessary regulatory
burden on manufacturers of such iron-containing products. Furthermore, requiring CRP's for all iron-containing
products with 30 mg or more iron per dosage unit would circumvent the intention of the PPPA to allow access by elderly
and handicapped persons who are unable to use such household substances when packaged in compliance with CRP's requirements.
Therefore, FDA is not proposing to separately require CRP's of iron-containing drugs and dietary supplements.



