 

(1) 

The rule should only apply prospectively. 

NRC response:

 The NRC disagrees that this rule should not apply to licensees of plants that have already permanently ceased operating.
This rule should be consistent with the provisions of 10 CFR 50.82(a), which requires all power plant licensees to
submit decommissioning plans no later than 2 years after permanently ceasing operations regardless of how long the
plant operated. The NRC recently amended 10 CFR 50.82(a) to allow the collection period of any shortfall of decommissioning
funds to be determined on a case-by-case basis for plants that had been shut down prematurely (57 FR 30383, July 9, 1992).
However, even licensees of these plants must submit their decommissioning plans within the 2-year time frame, notwithstanding
the collection period ultimately adopted. 

To maintain consistency, the NRC believes that the 2-year limit should be applied to plants already shut down. However,
to assure that the NRC does not impose unnecessary burdens on these licensees, the final rule has been modified to allow
these licensees 2 years from the effective date of the rule to submit their spent fuel management and funding plans.

1

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


1

</FOOTNAME>
In practice, licensees of most of the nuclear power plants that have already permanently shut down have developed
plans for the management and funding of the disposition of spent fuel at their sites. For example, Fort St. Vrain has
either shipped spent fuel offsite to DOE or moved it to an ISFSI onsite. Shoreham is shipping its fuel to Limerick. Yankee-Rowe
and Rancho Seco have developed plans for onsite storage facilities. Humboldt Bay and LaCrosse are maintaining fuel
in their spent fuel pools. Dresden 1, San Onofre 1, and Indian Point 1 are maintaining fuel in their spent fuel pools
or in pools of other units still operating at the site. Peach Bottom 1 has no fuel onsite. 



</FOOTNOTE>


(2) 

Submittal of spent fuel management and funding plans should be required within 60 days of permanent shutdown of the
facility, rather than within 2 years. 

NRC Response:

 The NRC disagrees with this comment. Sixty days is too short a period in which to develop a meaningful spent fuel management
and funding plan. Because licensees will normally develop these plans in conjunction with their decommissioning
plans, the NRC should maintain consistency by requiring the same 2-year limit for both spent fuel management and funding
plans and the overall decommissioning plan, which includes decommissioning funding. 

(3) 

Costs associated with the construction, operation, and decommissioning of ISFSIs are already assured by provisions
in 10 CFR Part 72. 

NRC Response: 

The NRC agrees that part 72 contains provisions to ensure that licensees have adequate funds to construct, operate,
and decommission ISFSIs. Spent fuel management and funding plans submitted in compliance with the amended 50.54(bb)
need not cover spent fuel while it is being stored in an ISFSI in compliance with part 72. The NRC will consider whether
these provisions are adequate when it evaluates whether it is necessary to include spent fuel management and funding
as part of decommissioning costs. 



Finding of No Significant Environmental Impact: Availability 



This final rule clarifies the timing of the submittal of plans for managing and providing funding for managing all
irradiated fuel for those licensees whose power reactors are shut down prematurely. This action is required to coordinate
the submittal of spent fuel management and funding plans with the submittal of decommissioning plans for prematurely
shut down reactors. Because management and funding of spent fuel can have a significant impact on the method and timing
of decommissioning, licensees should submit their plans for spent fuel management and funding to be consistent with
the timing provisions for decommissioning plans in 50.82(a) (i.e., no later than 2 years after permanent shutdown).




