 

5.2.4Vehicle Maintenance 


With OPM's concurrence, Runzheimer selected the five most common maintenance service/repair jobs performed on
vehicles as the basis for vehicle maintenance analysis: 
&bull;tune-up, 
&bull;oil change, 
&bull;automatic transmission fluid change, 
&bull;flush/fill coolant, and 
&bull;muffler installation. 
Automobile manufacturers' recommended maintenance schedules were used to determine the frequency of performing
each of these maintenance jobs. Maintenance schedules vary, depending on the driving conditions typically encountered.
Consistent with the assumptions used for fuel economy and tire mileage, Runzheimer assumed that driving conditions
in the allowance areas were generally severe and used the maintenance schedules that reflected that kind of driving.
For the D.C. area, Runzheimer assumed that driving conditions were normal and used the maintenance schedules that
reflected that kind of driving. 
The recommended frequency of performing each of these jobs was combined with the prices charged by local dealers and
service stations to compute an estimated annual maintenance expense. 
For Alaska, Runzheimer included constant velocity (CV) joint boots as well. Runzheimer's research of CV joint boot
replacement revealed varying replacement cycles between Alaskan allowance areas: Anchorage_every 45,000 miles
(3 years), Fairbanks_every 15,000 miles (1 year), Juneau_every 45,000 miles (3 years) and Nome_every 30,000 miles
(2 years). The cost of replacement for all three vehicle types has been factored into the indexes based upon the life
cycle of the replacement. For example, 100% of the cost was included for Fairbanks because research indicated annual
replacement was the norm. Only 50% of the cost was included for Nome where research indicated bi-annual replacement.




5.2.5Tires 


Research previously conducted by Runzheimer for OPM (see the June 1992 report) revealed that various factors (e.g.,
road quality/state of repair, road composition) caused tread life (the average number of miles a tire is expected
to last) to be less in allowance areas than in the Washington, D.C., area. Based on these findings (some of which were
quantitative), Runzheimer based tire expenses on a 40,000-mile tread-life in allowance areas, and a 55,000-mile
tread-life in the Washington, D.C., area. 
Runzheimer's research also indicated that four extra snow tires, with studs, would be required for all three vehicles
in Anchorage, Fairbanks, and Juneau. For Nome, Runzheimer's research revealed that mud and snow tires would be appropriate
for the S10 Blazer but not the other two vehicles because all-season radials were reported to be the norm. (Most of the
driving in Nome occurs within a very confined area). Therefore, as with the previous survey, Runzheimer surveyed
the cost of extra wheels, extra tires, and installing studs for all vehicles in Anchorage, Fairbanks, and Juneau and
the additional cost of mud and snow tires for the S10 Blazer in Nome. 



5.2.6License and Registration Fees, and Miscellaneous Tax 


Runzheimer obtained information regarding appropriate license and registration fees, and miscellaneous taxes
(i.e., personal property tax and motor vehicle registration tax) from each area. One-time fees and miscellaneous
taxes were divided equally over each vehicle's four-year trade cycle. Sales and excise taxes were included in the
purchase price of each vehicle (see section 5.2.7.). Ongoing fees and taxes were included as part of the annual costs.




5.2.7Depreciation 


From Runzheimer's experience, the single largest annual expense related to owning and operating newer vehicles
is vehicle depreciation, the lost value of the vehicle as it ages and is driven. To calculate average annual depreciation,
Runzheimer divides the difference between the purchase price and the residual value by the number of years the vehicle
is owned. 
In the depreciation equation, Runzheimer used suggested retail prices, plus any additional charges, such as shipping,
excise tax, dealer prep, and additional dealer markup. (Runzheimer did not believe that negotiated prices could
be collected on an equitable basis.) As discussed earlier, the trade cycle was determined to be four years, 60,000
miles. Runzheimer research indicated that residual values were the same in all areas except Fairbanks and Nome. This
research effort is explained below. 
Runzheimer is aware that several firms and associations track and publish weekly or monthly used-car and used-truck
wholesale auction prices. Some firms even publish projections of the future value of today's new vehicles. Most publications
provide several residual values for each vehicle, depending on its condition at the time of trade-in (e.g., clean,
average, rough). Several common publications of this type are 

Black Book, Kelley Blue Book, Automotive Market Report, 

and 

NADA 

(National Automobile Dealers Association). Unfortunately, these sources only track prices for vehicles sold in
the contiguous 48 states and then publish broad-based average residual values for each vehicle. 
To get specific information from sources knowledgeable about the used vehicle markets in allowance areas, Runzheimer
contacted auto dealers and financial institutions in these areas. Most of the sources with whom Runzheimer spoke
said that they used the above-mentioned publications as guides, just as dealers and financial institutions across
the United States used them. 
Except for Fairbanks and Nome, Runzheimer found no conclusive evidence that used vehicles in allowance areas were
(on average) worth more or less than used vehicles in the Washington, D.C., area. Therefore, we reported the same used
vehicle prices in all areas (except Fairbanks and Nome). An appropriate and logical source for these values was the
October 1993 issue of 

Black Book Official Finance/Lease Guide 

for 1994 vehicles. For Fairbanks and Nome, Runzheimer used 90% of the 

Black Book 

projected residual values to reflect rougher conditions. 
It should be noted for clarification that identical residual values did not translate into identical depreciation
amounts in all locations. Depreciation amounts were higher in allowance areas than in the Washington, D.C., area
because new vehicle prices in all allowance areas were higher. 



5.2.8Finance Expense 


Runzheimer included the average annual cost of financing a vehicle in the total cost of private transportation. Runzheimer
surveyed banks in all areas for their auto-loan interest rates, using a 48-month loan length with 80% financing as
the basis in all locations. 



