 

a. Adding in alphabetical order a new definition ``Elevated blood lead level or EBL''; 


b. Amending the definition of ``HUD-associated housing'' by removing the word ``or'' at the end of paragraph (2),
replacing the period with a comma at the end of paragraph (3), and adding new paragraphs (4) and (5) in that definition;
and 


c. Revising the definition of ``residential structure'', to read as follows: 




35.3 

Definitions. 




* * * * * 






Elevated blood lead level or EBL. 

Excessive absorption of lead is a confirmed concentration of lead in whole blood of 20 &mu;g/dl (micrograms of lead
per deciliter of whole blood) for a single test or of 1519 &mu;g/dl in two consecutive tests several months apart.





HUD-associated housing. 

* * * 


(4) That is currently covered by a mortgage held by the Secretary; or 


(5) That was purchased by a third party at a foreclosure by the Secretary of a Secretary-held mortgage and is subject
to any requirements regarding its use or operation under an agreement, or condition imposed by the Secretary. 




Residential structure. 

Any house, apartment, or structure intended for human habitation, including any nondwelling facility operated
by the owner and commonly used by children less than six years of age, such as a child care center. 




* * * * * 




3. Section 35.10 would be revised to read as follows: 




35.10 

Purpose and scope. 




This subpart implements the provisions of 42 CFR part 90, issued by the Secretary of Health and Human Services pursuant
to section 401 of the Act, which are applicable to Federal agencies and prohibit the use of lead-based paint in residential
structures constructed or rehabilitated by the Federal government or with Federal assistance. This subpart also
establishes procedures to prohibit the use of lead-based paint in all HUD-associated housing. 


4. Section 35.14 would be revised to read as follows: 




35.14 

Requirements. 



(a) No office of the Department shall use or permit the use of lead-based paint in HUD-associated housing. 


(b) Each Assistant Secretary shall implement the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section with respect to the
HUD programs within his/her administrative jurisdiction. Implementation shall include: 


(1) The establishment of procedures to require the inclusion of appropriate provisions in contracts and subcontracts
involving HUD-associated housing prohibiting the use of lead-based paint in the HUD-associated housing; and 


(2) Provisions necessary for enforcement of the prohibition. 


5. Section 35.22 would be amended by removing the definition of ``applicable surface''; by revising the definition
of ``defective paint surface''; and by adding in alphabetical order definitions of ``HEPA'', ``misted scraping'',
``paint removal'', and ``replacement'', to read as follows: 




35.22 

Definitions. 




* * * * * 






Defective paint surface 

means a surface on which the paint is nonintact, i.e. the paint is cracking, scaling, chipping, peeling, or loose.





HEPA 

means a high efficiency particle air filter, as used in lead-abatement vacuum cleaners. 




* * * * * 





Misted scraping 

means both the surface to be scraped and the scraping tool are kept wet with water during the removal process to minimize
the dispersal of paint chips and air-borne dust. 




Paint removal 

means stripping paint from the surfaces of building components. 




Replacement 

means the removal of building components, such as windows, doors, and trim, that have lead-based painted surfaces
and the installation of new components free of lead-based paint. 




* * * * * 




6. Section 35.24 would be amended by revising paragraphs (b) introductory text, (b)(1) and (b)(2); by redesignating
paragraph (b)(3) and (b)(4) as paragraphs (b)(5) and (b)(6), respectively; and by adding new paragraphs (b)(3) and
(b)(4), to read as follows: 




35.24 

Requirements. 




* * * * * 




(b) Subject to the provisions of separate regulations promulgated with respect to any program by the Assistant Secretary
having jurisdiction over that program, the following minimum requirements shall apply to all programs: 


(1) All painted surfaces of HUD-associated housing constructed before 1978 shall be inspected to determine whether
defective paint surfaces exist. 


(2) Defective paint surfaces must either: 


(i) Be tested for lead content and, if found to contain lead at concentrations equal to or exceeding levels specified
in paragraph (b)(3) of this section, abated as described in paragraph (b)(4) of this section. Defective paint surfaces
that do not contain lead-based paint do not require treatment; or 


(ii) Be abated, if defective paint surfaces are not tested. If not tested, the presence of lead-based paint shall be
assumed. 


(3) If defective paint surfaces are tested, testing shall be accomplished by using a portable X-ray fluorescence
(XRF) analyzer or by laboratory analysis of paint samples, whichever is more cost effective. Abatement as described
in paragraph (b)(4) of this section is required of all defective paint surfaces for which the test results equal or
exceed 1.0 milligram of lead per square centimeter of paint surface. If the laboratory reports the test results in
percent by weight, the standard shall be 0.5 percent or 5000 parts per million (ppm). A qualified inspector or laboratory
shall certify in writing the precise results of the testing. 


(4)(i) Lead-based paint abatement can create lead dust that is dangerous to workers and occupants, especially small
children. Abatement should be performed only by workers who are trained in managing lead hazards and are properly
protected. Abatement should not be undertaken by home craftsmen, even very skilled ones, or untrained construction
professionals. The generation and control of dust must be carefully considered when selecting the abatement method.
Dust caused by abatement shall be contained within the work area and shall not be allowed to spread to adjacent spaces
or the soil. 


(ii) Abatement shall be by covering lead-based paint surfaces, removal of paint, or replacement of painted building
components. Acceptable methods of covering lead-based paint surfaces require the use of durable materials, sealed
and caulked to prevent the escape of lead-contaminated dust. Acceptable methods of paint removal are misted scraping,
scraping with an infrared or coil-type heat gun, and chemical stripping on- or off-site. Unacceptable methods of
abatement include dry unassisted scraping; machine sanding and use of propane or gasoline torches (open flame methods);
and washing and repainting without first thoroughly removing the paint by one of the approved methods. 




