 

V. Summary of the Proposed Rule 



FDA's rule to preempt State and local laws, rules, regulations or other requirements that would permit the disclosure
of the identity of health care professionals who report adverse events associated with FDA regulated products and
the identity of patients and other individuals named in those reports would be codified in newly proposed 20.63(f).


Proposed 20.63(f) would provide that the names and any identifying information, including the address of
the reporter or the name or address of the institution, that would lead to the identification of the reporter or the
persons named in a voluntary adverse event report, shall not be disclosed by either FDA or a manufacturer in possession
of such report in response to any request. 

Proposed 20.63(f)(1) would provide exceptions to the prohibition of disclosing the names if both the reporter
and the person identified in the adverse event report consent to disclosure of their identities, or if there is a court
order in a medical malpractice action involving both the person named in the report and the reporter. Proposed 20.63(f)(1)(iii)
would permit disclosure of an adverse event report to the individual who is the subject of the report upon request.



Proposed 20.63(f)(2) explicitly states that no State or local entity shall establish or continue in effect
any law, rule, regulation or other requirement that permits or requires the disclosure of the identities of the reporter
or person identified in an adverse event report except as provided in this rule. 



VI. Executive Order 12612: Federalism 



FDA has examined the effects of this proposal on the relationship between the Federal Government and the States, as
required by Executive Order 12612 on ``Federalism.'' The agency concludes that preemption of State or local rules
that permit disclosure of the identities of the voluntary reporter or persons identified in an adverse event report
for human drugs, biologics, and devices is consistent with this Executive Order. 

Executive Order 12612 recognizes that Federal action limiting the discretion of State and local governments is appropriate
``where constitutional authority for the action is clear and certain and the national activity is necessitated by
the presence of a problem of national scope (section 3(b)). The constitutional basis for FDA's authority to regulate
the safety and efficacy of human drugs, biologics, and devices is beyond challenge. Congress' decision to vest FDA
with the responsibility to establish a regulatory scheme to monitor the safety of these products demonstrates Congress'
view that the safety of human drugs, biologics, and devices is a problem of national scope (21 U.S.C. 355(k) and 42 U.S.C.
262)). 

Executive Order 12612 expressly contemplates preemption where there is a conflict of State and Federal authority
under Federal statute (section 4(a)). State and local rules of civil procedure, rules of evidence, and other rules
and regulations that permit or require disclosure of the identities of those who report adverse events associated
with human drugs, biologics, and devices are an obstacle to fulfilling FDA's charge to monitor the safety and efficacy
of these products. The guarantee of confidentiality of the reporters' and patients' identities is necessary to assure
meaningful reporting of adverse events. In addition, Congress specified that Federal regulations issued to monitor
the safety of drug products ``shall have due regard for the professional ethics of the medical profession and the interests
of patients'' (21 U.S.C. 355(k) and 360i). State and local rules and regulations that permit disclosure of the identities
conflict with this requirement by jeopardizing confidentiality and the physician-patient relationship. 

Executive Order 12612 requires that any Federal preemption be restricted to the minimum level necessary to achieve
the objectives of the statute pursuant to which the regulations are promulgated (section 4(c)). The proposed regulation
is narrowly drawn and focuses solely on protecting the identity of the reporter and patient and other individuals
named in the report. The proposed rule does not preempt State and local laws that require disclosure of the substance
of the adverse event reports. 

As required by the Executive Order, States will be given, through this notice of proposed rulemaking, an opportunity
to participate in the proceedings to preempt State and local laws (section 4(e)). In addition, pursuant to the Order,
the appropriate officials and organizations representing the States will be consulted before this proposed action
is implemented (section 3(a)). 

The agency concludes that the policy proposed in this document has been assessed in light of the principles, criteria,
and requirements in Executive Order 12612; that this policy is not inconsistent with that Order; that this policy
will not impose additional costs or burdens on the States; and that this policy will not affect the States' ability
to discharge traditional State governmental functions.




