 



Response: 

Because this definition is a title 23, U.S.C., definition, it was not revised, even though the ``and'' condition would
make it more restrictive. Regulations may clarify or explain, but cannot revise, a statutory definition. 


Comment: 

Another commenter suggested revising the definition of ``forest road'' to include a road which provides ``access
to'' the NFS since many FHs in some States do not meet the criteria of a forest road as indicated by the proposed definition.




Response:

 This is also a title 23, U.S.C., definition and was not revised in the final rule. The present wording for the definition
of ``forest road,'' as stated in 23 U.S.C. 101, is: ``The term forest road or trail means a road or trail wholly or partly
within, or adjacent to, and serving the NFS and which is necessary for the protection, administration, and utilization
of the NFS and the use and development of its resources.'' This definition is adequate because a road which provides
access to the NFS is considered to be serving the NFS. Also, the definition for FH allows for roads providing access
to the NFS since it refers to forest roads, the definition of which allows access to the NFS. 


Comment: 

One commenter suggested that the definition of ``statewide transportation plan'' be clarified by adding the phrase
``pursuant to the provisions of part 450 of this title'' at the end of the definition. 


Response: 

Similar wording was used in the definition of Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) in this section. Therefore,
the phrase was added to the end of the definition to clarify it. Also, a definition for ``metropolitan transportation
plan'' was added to this section because the term is used in 660.105 along with the term ``statewide transportation
plan,'' which is also defined in this regulation in 660.103. 


Section 660.105Planning and Route Designation 




Comment: 

Several of the SHAs expressed the need for clarification of who provides transportation planning, FS resource planning,
and management systems information to the States and MPOs for incorporation into the MPOs and transportation improvement
programs (TIPs). 


Response: 

Some minor wording changes were made to paragraph (a) of this section to reflect the fact that the FS will provide resource
planning and related transportation information to the ``appropriate'' MPO in accordance with part 450 of this title.
This clarification was needed because there are numerous MPOs within some States and the FS should direct the information
only to the MPO needing the information. 


Comment: 

Two of the SHAs felt that paragraph (b) should be clarified to delineate the reporting responsibilities for management
information systems. One felt the final rule should specify that the State would be responsible for pavement, bridge,
and safety management systems where the FH is also a State highway and that cities and counties would be responsible
for those management systems where FHs are under city or county jurisdiction. The FS would then be responsible for
those management systems on all other applicable roads. 


Response: 

Title 23, U.S.C., 303 requires the States to develop and implement systems for managing highway pavements of Federal-aid
highways (pavement management systems), bridges on and off Federal-aid highways (bridge management systems),
and highway safety for all public roads (safety management systems). The results of bridge management systems and
safety management systems on all FHs and results of pavement management systems for FHs on Federal-aid highways are
to be provided by the SHAs for consideration in the development of programs under 660.109 of this part. The FHWA
will provide appropriate pavement management results for FHs which are not Federal-aid highways. The last two sentences
in paragraph (b) were reworded to clarify these procedures and be more in concert with 23 U.S.C. 204(a). 


Comment: 

Two SHAs pointed out the inappropriate reference to the ``Federal-aid system'' in paragraph (b) when describing
who reports pavement management systems results for FHs. 


Response: 

The language of the final rule was revised to refer to ``forest highways which are not Federal-aid highways'' rather
than to ``forest highways off the Federal-aid system.'' 


Comment: 

One commenter recommended that paragraph (c)(1) be clarified by adding the word ``forest'' before the word ``roads''
to be more consistent with previous definitions and to clarify candidate roads for nomination. This would clarify
the fact that the SHA and the FS will nominate ``forest'' roads, not just any roads, for FH designation. The FH definition
also references forest roads. 


Response: 

Paragraph (c)(1) was revised to make this clarification. 



