 

i. Practical Issues 


(a) Risk Premium. There are several procedures for estimating the risk premium. One common approach is to use the historical
arithmetic average return differential between rates of return actually earned on investments in common-stock
equities and bonds. This approach is expressed mathematically as follows: 




K

e

=K

d

+Historical bond-equity spread




The historical bond-equity spread, in turn, is often based on the data series published annually in the SBBI Yearbook.
The portfolio of common stocks used as the benchmark for estimating the risk premium should be one that is composed
of a broad array of firms and is well diversified, in order to minimize the potential for it to be contaminated by the
peculiarities of a particular group of common stocks. The SBBI Yearbook database is based upon the Standard 
Poor's 500 Index, which meets these criteria. The range of companies in such a broad group as the Standard  Poor's
500 Index covers the broad dimensions of investor perceptions of the trade-off between risk and return, and serves
as a benchmark for investor-required returns. The Commission's proposed rule stipulates the use of the historical
bond-equity spread based on the data published in the SBBI Yearbook. 
Risk premiums based on the historical differential can be extremely volatile and may fluctuate as macroeconomic
and microeconomic conditions change. The time period over which the risk premium is selected should, therefore,
be sufficiently long that short-term aberrations are smoothed out. Such a time period must encompass at least several
business and interest rate cycles. The Commission's proposed rule requires the use of the entire data series (1926present)
published annually in the SBBI Yearbook in estimating the risk premium. 
(b) Debt Security. The particular debt security used to implement the RP model should be one which is, at least in theory,
risk-free and embodies a premium for inflation similar in magnitude to that reflected in common stocks. Satisfying
these criteria would isolate the spread component of the return and obviate the need to make any type of adjustment
to the debt yield to account for default risk, which can vary over time, and obscure the long-term relationship between
returns on common stocks and debt. These criteria are the same as those identified for selecting a debt security to
measure the risk-free rate in implementing the CAPM. 
Accordingly, the Commission's proposed rule stipulates the use of the six-month average five-year Treasury Note
yield in implementing the RP model, for the reasons identified for selecting this same yield as the risk-free rate
in implementing the CAPM. 
(c) Risk Adjustment. The risk premium estimate derived from a composite market index is sometimes adjusted if there
are differences in the risk of the firms represented in the common-stock equity index and that of the regulated firm
under consideration. The CAPM (which is actually the company-specific form of the general RP model), for example,
adjusts for such risk differences by multiplying the risk premium by ``beta,'' which serves as the measure of relative
risk in the CAPM model. The Commission's proposed rule specifies that the RP model be used in its general form without
making any adjustment for risk, because the generic form provides a useful benchmark for the range of companies contained
in the Standard  Poor's 500 Stock Index on which it is based and, therefore, measures the broad dimensions of investor
perceptions of the trade-off between risk and return. The cost of capital estimate produced using the RP model is not
to be used as the estimate, but instead is to be used as a check on, and in combination with, the cost of capital company-specific
estimates produced using the DCF and CAPM models. 
d. Market-to-Book Ratio Method. The MBR method is based on the notion that the market value of a regulated firm's common-stock
equity should be equal to its book value (plus some allowance for underpricing), and will be so if the firm's allowable
rate of return on common-stock equity capital is equal to the firm's cost of common-stock equity capital. The MBR approach
is considered solid conceptually, but is criticized widely for being impractical or even impossible to implement.
In order to apply the MBR, a regulator must be able to accurately predict the effect that its rate order will have on the
common stock price of a regulated firm in attempting to maintain the equality between the market value and book value
of the firm's common stock. Critics argue that regulators are unable to produce such accurate forecasts even when
sophisticated econometric models are used. In addition, a regulator may influence, but cannot control completely,
the market price of the regulated firm's stock. Even if it could, the exercise of such control would produce violent
swings in rate levels which would be uneconomical to both the ratepayer and the regulated firm alike. Finally, diversification
by the regulated firm into unregulated activities could result in a market price that differs from book value, although
the earnings of the regulated segment are restrained. 






