 

232.205 

Qualifications for train brake system supervisor. 


A qualified train brake system supervisor shall have demonstrated the knowledge and skills necessary to supervise
the work of personnel who test, inspect, and maintain train brake systems by successfully completing a training program
designed in accordance with the minimum training and experience guidelines issued by FRA or a training program approved
by FRA under 232.201(c). 


232.207 

Qualifications for train brake system mechanical inspector. 


A qualified brake system mechanical inspector shall have demonstrated the knowledge and skills necessary to test,
inspect, and maintain the mechanical parts of train brake systems as required in the Train Brake System Safety Standards
by successfully completing a training program designed in accordance with the minimum training and experience guidelines
issued by FRA or a training program approved by FRA under 232.201(c). 


232.209 

Qualifications for train brake system electronic inspector. 


A qualified brake system electronic inspector shall have demonstrated the knowledge and skills necessary to inspect,
test, and maintain the electronic parts of train brake systems as required in the Train Brake System Safety Standards
by successfully completing a training program designed in accordance with the minimum training and experience guidelines
issued by FRA or a training program approved by FRA under 232.201(c). 


232.211 

Specific qualifications for train crew member. 


A qualified train crew member shall have demonstrated the knowledge and skills necessary to inspect or to test the
mechanical parts of train brake systems as required in the Train Brake System Safety Standards by successfully completing
a training program designed in accordance with the minimum training and experience guidelines issued by FRA or a training
program approved by FRA under 232.201(c). 


232.213 

Personnel qualification records and notification. 


(a) Railroads shall keep adequate records to demonstrate the current qualification status of all of its personnel_including
contract personnel_assigned to inspect, test, or maintain train brake systems. These records shall include the
following information concerning each such employee of the railroad or of a contractor for the railroad: 
(1) The name of the railroad employee or contractor employee; 
(2) The dates that each training course was completed; 
(3) The content of each training course completed; 
(4) The scores on each test taken to demonstrate proficiency; 
(5) A description of how experience guidelines are met; 
(6) A record that the railroad employee or contractor employee was notified of his or her current qualification status
and of any subsequent changes to that status; 
(7) The type of equipment the person is qualified to inspect, test, or maintain; 
(8) A statement signed by the railroad's chief mechanical officer that the person meets the minimum qualification
standards as set forth in this subpart; and 
(9) The date that the person's status as qualified expires due to the need for refresher training. 
(b) Railroads shall notify all personnel described in paragraph (a) of this section of their current qualification
status. 


232.215 

Performance of tests, inspections, and maintenance. 


(a) Qualified train crew members are permitted to perform Class 1 or Class 2 tests only on: 
(1) Conventional freight trains restricted to 500 miles between required train brake system tests; or 
(2) Excursion trains restricted to a maximum operating speed of 30 mph and a maximum travel distance of 250 miles between
required train brake system tests. 
(b) Only qualified train brake system mechanical or electronic inspectors shall perform single car tests or single
unit train tests. 
(c) Only qualified train brake system mechanical or electronic inspectors shall perform Class 1 tests on passenger
trains, commuter trains, and intermediate speed freight trains. 
(d) Only qualified train brake system mechanical or electronic inspectors shall perform Class 1 tests on conventional
freight trains that qualify to travel more than 500 miles between required train brake system tests. 
(e) Only qualified train brake system supervisors shall perform spot checks of train brake system inspections, tests,
and maintenance. 
(f) Only qualified train brake system mechanical and electronic inspectors shall maintain train brake systems.



Subpart D_Inspection and Test Standards for Conventional Freight Train Brake Systems 


232.301 

Applicability. 


This subpart applies to all conventional freight locomotives and trains. 


232.303 

Locomotive brake inspection and test standards. 


(a) Railroads shall maintain locomotive brake systems in a safe and suitable condition for service. 
(b) As part of each locomotive Calendar Day Inspection required under 229.21(a) of this chapter, an inspection
of the locomotive brake system shall be made. At a minimum, this inspection shall determine that: 
(1) The automatic, independent brake valve shall function as intended; 
(2) Gauges shall operate as intended; 
(3) Brake rigging shall operate as intended; 
(4) Brakes shall be properly adjusted; 
(5) When released, brake pads or shoes shall not be in contact with braking surfaces; 
(6) All cutout cocks, valves, and related cables or hoses shall be in good condition and in the correct position for
operation; 
(7) All air brake pressures shall be properly regulated; 
(8) The air brake system shall properly respond to an emergency application; and 
(9) Air compressors shall stop, start, unload, and load at no more than five psi greater than the maximum working pressure
set by the railroad. 
(c) 

Main reservoirs.




