 

Current regulations for identifying out-of-service devices are found at:

30 CFR 250.123(c), General platform operations. (1) Surface or subsurface safety devices shall not be bypassd or
blocked out of service unless they are temporarily out of service for startup, maintenance, or testing procedures.
Only the minimum number of safety devices shall be taken out of service. Personnel shall monitor the bypassed or blocked-out
functions until the safety devices are placed back in service. Any surface or subsurface safety device which is temporarily
out of service shall be flagged.

Requirements for out-of-service devices on pipelines are found at 30 CFR 250.154(c). If the required safety equipment
is rendered ineffective or removed from service on pipelines which are continued in operation, an equivalent degree
of safety shall be provided. The safety equipment shall be identified by the placement of a sign on the equipment stating
that the equipment is rendered ineffective or removed from service.

The task group determined that the existing regulations do not provide for adequate communication or warning of out-of-service
equipment and may not have prevented an accident similar to Piper Alpha if the same set of circumstances existed in
the OCS. The current rule does not ensure that accidental flow of hydrocarbons will not be initiated in process components
that are taken out of service, particularly if flow is initiated out of view of a flagged device or control. Flagging
requirements for out-of-service equipment and valves need to be revised to ensure that control panels and certain
equipment upstream of process equipment or valves are also flagged and that the procedure is documented. The task
group recommended that the regulations should include requirements identifying which individuals have the authority
to remove flags and to authorize equipment startup. It also recommended that subpart A be revised to include a briefing
requirement to ensure that all workers on a production platform are notified of all out-of-service equipment and
safety concerns at the beginning of each work shift or upon addition or replacement of personnel.



Location and Protection of Pipeline Risers



From the evidence gathered on Piper Alpha, at least one of the highly pressured risers ruptured when struck by debris
falling from the burning platform. The effect of gas escaping from the high pressure pipeline was catastrophic. The
escaping gas boiled to the surface, exploded, and burned under the platform for several hours.

Subpart J of the regulations currently requires risers to be protected only from contact with floating vessels. Protection
is usually accomplished by locating risers between the jacket legs or by reinforcing the risers with external protection.
The task group recommended that subpart J be revised to add a requirement to provide for riser protection from falling
objects as well and that MMS require submission of piping drawings at an early stage in the platform design approval
process.



Diesel and Helicopter Fuel Storage Areas and Tanks



During the early stages of the Piper Alpha incident, fuel drums and containers of lubricants and cleaners stored throughout
the platform exploded and burned when they were exposed to flames. These materials are stored in a similar manner on
U.S. facilities.

There are no current MMS regulations for fuel storage. The task group recommended that MMS revise the regulations
to require operators to store diesel and other flammable liquids on platforms in accordance with the requirements
contained in American Petroleum Institute (API) Recommended Practice (RP) 500, Recommended Practice for Classification
of Locations for Electrical Installation at Petroleum Facilities. The task group also recommended that the revised
regulations require operators to design fuel storage tanks in accordance with API RP 14C, Recommended Practice for
Analysis, Design, Installation and Testing of Basic Surface Safety Systems for Offshore Production Platforms.



Approval of Pipeline Repairs



Upon examination of the events leading to the fire on the ARCO ``B'' platform, the task group found that there was a lack
of communication and coordination between the platform operator and the pipeline repair company. The task group
recommended that the regulations be strengthened by requiring MMS approval for pipeline repairs. The Regional Supervisor,
upon being notified that the lessee or right-of-way holder is anticipating a pipeline repair, will consider the complexity
of the repair procedure in deciding whether or not to require a written repair plan. Exceptions would be made for pipeline
repairs necessitated by imminent harm to the environment or to human safety.




