 

For 1991 and 1992, we propose that the cost of an NCD service be considered ``significant'' if the average cost of furnishing
that service exceeds $100,000 or represents a change of at least 0.1 percent in the United States per capita cost (USPCC)
determined for the nation as a whole. The USPCC is defined in 417.582 as the average per capita cost, including
intermediary or carrier administrative costs, incurred by Medicare, as determined on an accrual basis, for services
furnished to Medicare beneficiaries nationwide during the most recent period for which HCFA has complete data. AAPCCs
derived from the USPCC are the basis for Medicare payments to HMOs and CMPs. We also propose that beginning with calendar
year 1993 the preceding year's threshold be adjusted to reflect any increase or decrease in the USPCC. The purpose
of the annual adjustment is to keep pace with inflation. The average annual increase or decrease in the USPCC represents
the change in the average per capita cost of furnishing services to Medicare beneficiaries. 
We would actuarially determine the average cost of an individual NCD service and include it at the time the NCD is issued
in manuals, published in the 

Federal Register

, or announced by other formal notice.
The $100,000 threshold is proposed because it approximates the 1991 Medicare Part A cost of a liver transplant, a recent
and important national coverage decision that was included in the adjusted average per capita cost (AAPCC) for 1991.
The AAPCC is defined in 417.401 as an actuarial estimate made by HCFA in advance of an organization's contract
period that represents what the average per capita cost to the Medicare program would be for each class (that is, Medicare
beneficiary designated by age, sex, disability, institutional, and welfare status) of the organization's Medicare
enrollees if they had received covered services other than through the organization in the same geographic area or
in a similar area. We are especially interested in receiving public comments concerning the thresholds we are proposing.
A 0.1 percent annual change in the 1993 USPCC would represent an annual increase of approximately $4.30 or about $156
million in additional annual outlays for the Medicare program as a whole. We believe these figures represent the minimum
threshold of significant financial outlay for the average risk contracting HMO or CMP that has a mean enrollment of
nearly 15,800 Medicare beneficiaries and an average monthly payment from Medicare of approximately $339 per Medicare
beneficiary or $5.37 million. We also believe it would protect small organizations from unanticipated financial
outlays sufficiently to induce their continued participation in the Medicare program under section 1876 of the Act.





