 




<USBUREAU>Agricultural Marketing Service</USBUREAU>


<CFRNO>7 CFR Part 982 </CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. AO205A7; FV949821] </RINDOCK>


Filberts/Hazelnuts Grown in Oregon and Washington; Hearing on Proposed Further Amendment of Marketing Agreement
and Order No. 982, Both as Amended 






<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Agricultural Marketing Service, USDA. 



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice of public hearing on proposed rulemaking. 




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 Notice is hereby given of a public hearing to consider amending Marketing Agreement and Order No. 982 
(order). The order regulates the handling of filberts/hazelnuts grown in Oregon and Washington. The purpose of the
hearing is to receive evidence on proposals to amend provisions of the order. The proposed amendments would make changes
in order provisions regarding: Volume control; nomination and membership of the Filbert/Hazelnut Marketing Board
(Board); collecting assessments; and the administration and operation of the program. The proposed amendments
were submitted by the Board, the agency responsible for local administration of the order, to make the order more consistent
with current industry conditions and needs. The Fruit and Vegetable Division, Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS),
proposes other conforming and necessary changes. 



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 The hearing will begin at 9 a.m. in Newberg, Oregon, on March 8, 1994, and if necessary, it will continue the next day.




</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 The hearing will take place at the Shiloh Inn, 501 Sitka Avenue in Newberg, Oregon. 




</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Teresa Hutchinson, Marketing Specialist, Northwest Marketing Field Office, Fruit and Vegetable Division, Agricultural
Marketing Service, USDA, 1220 SW Third Ave., room 369, Portland, OR 97204; telephone (503) 3262724, FAX (503)
3267440; or 
Tom Tichenor, Marketing Order Administration Branch, Fruit and Vegetable Division, AMS, USDA, room 2524S,
Washington, DC 202500200; telephone: (202) 7206862, 
FAX (202) 7205698. 



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 This administrative action is taken pursuant to the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937, as amended 
(7 U.S.C. 601674), hereinafter referred to as the ``Act.'' This action also is governed by the provisions of
556 and 557 of Title 5 of the United States Code and, therefore, is excluded from the requirements of Executive
Order 12866. 


The Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 

et. seq.

) seeks to ensure that within the statutory authority of a program, the regulatory and informational requirements
are tailored to the size and nature of small business. Interested persons are invited to present evidence at the hearing
on the possible regulatory and informational impact of the proposals on small businesses. 

The amendments proposed herein have been reviewed under Executive Order 12778, Civil Justice Reform. They are not
intended to have retroactive effect. If adopted, the proposed amendments would not preempt any state or local laws,
regulations, or policies, unless they present an irreconcilable conflict with this rule. 

The Act provides that administrative proceedings must be exhausted before parties may file suit in court. Under section
608c(15)(A) of the Act, any handler subject to an order may file with the Secretary a petition stating that the order,
any provision of the order, or any obligation imposed in connection with the order is not in accordance with law and
requesting a modification of the order or to be exempted therefrom. A handler is afforded the opportunity for a hearing
on the petition. After the hearing the Secretary would rule on the petition. The Act provides that the district court
of the United States in any district in which the handler is an inhabitant, or has his principal place of business, has
jurisdiction in equity to review the Secretary's ruling on the petition, provided a bill in equity is filed not later
than 20 days after date of the entry of the ruling. 

The hearing is called pursuant to the provisions of the Act and the applicable rules of practice and procedure governing
the formulation of marketing agreements and orders (7 CFR Part 900). 


The Board proposes several amendments to the order's volume control provisions. The Board recommends an amendment
that would expand the primary (domestic) market by adding Hawaii to the distribution area that currently is the continental
United States (including Alaska) (982.16). In addition, the Board proposes an amendment that would allow
the Board, with the approval of the Secretary of Agriculture, to make future changes in the primary market's distribution
area (982.16). The Board proposes another amendment designed to provide the Board with additional flexibility
to release up to 15 percent of the average volume acquired by the trade for the primary market for the preceding three
years' rather than the mandatory 15 percent release specified in the current order (982.40). The Board recommends
an amendment that would allow the Board to establish identification standards for inspected and certified lots of
hazelnuts rather than the current order requirement which specifies seals, stamps, tags or other identification
(982.46). 


The Board recommends several proposed amendments regarding nomination and Board membership. The Board proposes
an amendment to change the length of the term of office to two years from the current one-year period with a corresponding
change limiting the consecutive terms to three two-year terms rather than the current six consecutive 
one-year terms (982.33). A corresponding amendment would establish the qualifications for nominating handler
Board members based on the handlers' previous two years' volume handled rather than the previous one year volume handled,
as currently required (982.30). Similarly, the Board recommends a conforming change to the qualification
period for weighing handler votes to the previous two marketing years rather than the previous one year marketing
year 
(982.32). The Board proposes that a change be made in the voting procedures when calculating handler voting
qualifications by changing the minimum weighted volume to one ton rather than the current one percent (982.32).
The Board also proposes that a clarification be added to voting procedures to make it clear that eligible handlers
vote for only one member and one alternate member (982.32). 



</SUPPLEM>
