 

(2) Applicant must assure that the clients will substantively participate in the assessment of their needs and in
decisions about the services to be received. 

(3) Applicant must assure that the outreach programs to be established are designed to attract individuals who are
eligible to participate in the project. 

(4) Applicant must provide an assurance that housing and services will be available to a client for a continuous period
not to exceed 540 days (18 months). 

(5) Applicant must describe the methods to be employed in collecting statistical records and evaluative data and
for submitting annual reports on such information to the Department of Health and Human Services. 

(6) Applicant must describe how the applicant will ensure the confidentiality of client records. 

(7) Applicant must describe how the activities implemented under this project will be continued by the agency once
Federal funding for the project has ended. The applicant must describe specific plans for accomplishing program
phase-out for the last two quarters of program project period in the event that the applicant would not receive a new
award. 

(8) Applicant must agree to gather and submit program and client data required by ACYF's Management Information System
(MIS). While the computer software and training for the implementation of the MIS will be provided by FYSB to grantees,
applicant should include a request for funds in its budget for any computer equipment needed for implementation of
the MIS. 

(9) Applicant must agree to cooperate with any research or evaluation efforts sponsored by the Administration for
Children and Families. 



Staff Background and Organizational Experience



1. As priority for funding will be given to agencies and organizations that have documented experience in providing
direct services to homeless youth, applicant must include a brief description of the organization and its experience
in providing services to this specific client population. 

2. Applicant must include a description of current and proposed staff skills and knowledge regarding homeless youth
and indicate how staff will be utilized in achieving the goals and objectives of the program. Information on proposed
staff training and brief resumes or job descriptions may be included. 

3. Applicant must describe how the project has established or will establish formal service linkages with other social
service, law enforcement, educational, housing, vocational, welfare, legal service, drug treatment and health
care agencies in order to ensure appropriate referrals for the project clients where and when needed. 

4. Applicant must describe procedures for maintaining confidentiality of records on the youth and families served.
Procedures must insure that no information on the youth and families is disclosed without the consent of the individual
youth, parent or legal guardian. Disclosures without consent can be made to another agency compiling statistical
records if individual identities are not provided or to a government agency involved in the disposition of criminal
charges against an individual runaway or homeless youth. 



Budget Appropriateness



1. Applicant must discuss and justify the costs of the proposed project in terms of numbers of youth to be served, the
types and quantities of services to be provided, and the anticipated outcomes for the youth. 




