 

NHTSA declines to adopt the change requested by Cosco. NHTSA agrees with Cosco that data do not indicate a safety need
to prohibit seat backs on belt-positioning seats. However, the commenter suggests amending the ``booster'' definition
such that a seat back would be an acceptable feature on a shield booster. That suggestion is beyond the scope of the NPRM
and has not been adopted. 
In further response to Cosco, the absence or presence of a seat back is the only feature that distinguishes shield-type
boosters from toddler or convertible child restraint systems. Distinguishing booster seats from other child restraint
systems is important because Standard 213 provides that a tether on a booster seat may be tested in the 30 mph dynamic
test, while a tether on a toddler or convertible child restraint system will not be attached. NHTSA does not attach
the tether when testing toddler and convertible restraints because many consumers do not properly attach tethers
on their child seats. Limiting the use of a tether in the test better ensures that child seats perform satisfactorily
as they are typically used in the real world. If boosters were permitted to have seat backs, a new way to distinguish
shield booster seats from other types of child restraint systems would have to be developed. 
An alternative approach to distinguishing between shield booster seats and other child restraint systems could
be to remove the reason for having to distinguish between the restraint systems. That is, NHTSA could amend Standard
213 to specify that all child restraint systems, including shield boosters, would be tested without attaching any
tethers. NHTSA believes all booster seats are currently manufactured without a tether. The agency will consider
for future rulemaking whether Standard 213 should continue to specify attaching tethers on shield boosters in the
standard's 30 mph dynamic test. 


b. Test Procedures 


1. Type of Belt System Used To Test Belt-Positioning Seats


The agency is amending Standard 213's test procedures to specify the testing of belt-positioning seats using a lap/shoulder
belt. Cosco commented that there should be a misuse test in which a belt-positioning booster is tested with a lap belt.
The commenter said research has shown that the HIC and head excursions of dummies in belt-positioning seats tested
with lap belts were much greater than the limits in Standard 213. Conversely, the NTSB stated that, ``Because there
is no information on the extent of booster seat misuse *** it appears premature to require misuse tests.''

NHTSA is not requiring testing belt-positioning seats secured by a lap belt only. Standard 213's approach is to require
child restraint systems to be tested in configurations they were designed for, absent information showing that misuse
of the restraints are resulting in safety problems. The reason for this approach is that child seat manufacturers
must design many safety features into their child restraint systems to protect a restrained child. To do this, the
manufacturers must anticipate how the restraint will be used and design safety into their system bearing in mind their
assumptions about such use. The manufacturer's assumptions about the expected use of the restraint are reflected
in the use instructions to the consumer. Today's rule requires belt-positioning seats to be conspicuously labeled
with instructions about the proper use of the seat, including information on the appropriate vehicle belt system
to be used. Absent information showing a safety need for a belt misuse test, it is premature to require testing belt-positioning
boosters with only a lap belt. 


2. Standard Seat Assembly 


This rule adopts test specifications appropriate for testing belt-positioning seats. The agency believes that
the specifications for the testing procedure should be sufficiently detailed so tests conducted uniformly by various
organizations would provide the same results. This presupposes that the test conditions that affect the performance
of the dummy/child restraint should be standardized. Accordingly, NHTSA amends the provisions concerning the standard
seat assembly used to test child restraint systems to depict added anchorages for the shoulder belt system. This rule
specifies a Type II seat belt assembly for use in testing belt-positioning seats. The standard belt system eliminates
the variability of these belt parameters. In response to Ford and UM-CPP, this rule also modifies some of the specifications
proposed in the NPRM. 
Ford and UM-CPP suggested that the rule should specify the type of latch plate, and further suggested ``that a locking
latch plate is appropriate, given the new rule on lap belt lockability.'' NHTSA has specified that retractors and
reels are not used in the standard seat assembly, which is what was proposed in the NPRM. Since retractors and reels
are absent, the latch plate functions as a locking latchplate. The agency agrees with these commenters that this is
appropriate given the FMVSS No. 208 lockability requirements that will be effective on September 1, 1995. 


