 




<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 50160]</RINDOCK>



<DOCTITLE>Georgia Institute of Technology; Consideration of Application for Renewal of Facility License</DOCTITLE>


The United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is considering renewal of Facility License No.
R97, issued to the Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia Tech or the licensee) for operation of the Georgia
Tech Research Reactor located on the Georgia Tech campus in the city of Atlanta, Fulton County, Georgia.
The renewal would extend the expiration date of Facility License No. R97 for twenty years from date of issuance,
in accordance with the licensee's timely application for renewal dated April 19, 1994.
Prior to a decision to renew the license, the Commission will have made findings required by the Atomic Energy Act of
1954, as amended (the Act), and the Commission's regulations.
Within thirty days of publication of this notice, the licensee may file a request for a hearing with respect to renewal
of the subject facility license and any person whose interest may be affected by this proceeding and who wishes to participate
as a party in the proceeding must file a written request for a hearing and a petition for leave to intervene. Requests
for a hearing and a petition for leave to intervene shall be filed in accordance with the Commission's ``Rules of Practice
for Domestic Licensing Proceedings'' in 10 CFR Part 2. Interested persons should consult a current copy of 10 CFR 2.714
which is available at the Commission's Public Document room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street NW., Washington,
DC 20037. If a request for a hearing or petition for leave to intervene is filed within the time prescribed above, the
Commission or an Atomic Safety and Licensing Board, designated by the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safety
and Licensing Board Panel, will rule on the request and/or petition and the Secretary or the designated Atomic Safety
and Licensing Board will issue a notice of hearing or an appropriate order.
As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall set forth with particularity the interest of the
petitioner in the proceeding, and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding. The petition
should specifically explain the reasons why intervention should be permitted with particular reference to the following
factors:
(1) The nature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made a party to the proceeding;
(2) The nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial, or other interest in the proceeding; and
(3) The possible effect of any order which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest. The petition
should also identify the specific aspect(s) of the subject matter of the proceeding as to which petitioner wishes
to intervene. Any person who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has been admitted as a party may amend
the petition without requesting leave of the Board up to fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehering conference
scheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended petition must satisfy the specificity requirements described above.
Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conference scheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner
shall file a supplement to the petition to intervene which must include a list of the contentions which are sought to
be litigated in the matter. Each contention must consist of a specific statement of the issue of law or fact to be raised
or controverted. In addition, the petitioner shall provide a brief explanation of the bases of the contention and
a concise statement of the alleged facts or expert opinion which support the contention and on which the petitioner
intends to rely in proving the contention at the hearing. The petitioner must also provide references to those specific
sources and documents of which the petitioner is aware and on which the petitioner intends to rely to establish those
facts or expert opinion and the petitioner must provide sufficient information to show that a genuine dispute exists
with the applicant on a material issue of law or fact. Contentions shall be limited to matters within the scope of the
amendment under consideration. The contention must be one which, if proven, would entitle the petitioner to relief.
A petitioner who fails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirements with respect to at least one contention
will not be permitted to participate as a party.
Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subject to any limitations in the order granting leave
to intervene, and have the pportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, including the opportunity
to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.


