 

Under the terms of the partnership agreement the General Partner will be paid an annual management fee equal to 21/2%
of the total amount of the capital commitments of the partners through the first six (6) years, thereafter declining
by 1/4 of 1% on each anniversary to 1.5% commencing on the ninth anniversary date. In addition, the General Partner
shall be entitled to reimbursement for all reasonable expenses incurred in the organization of the Envirotech Partnership
up to $195,000, and for other third party expenses incurred on behalf of the Envirotech Partnership.

All Envirotech Partnership income and losses (including income and losses deemed to have been realized when securities
are distributed in kind) will generally be allocated 80% to and among the limited partners and 20% to the General Partner.
One hundred percent (100%) of all cash distributions to the partners shall be made first to the limited partners until
such time as the limited partners shall have received aggregate distributions equal to the aggregate of their respective
capital contributions, and thereafter 20% to the General Partner and 80% to the limited partners. Distributions
in kind of the securities of Portfolio Companies that are listed on or otherwise traded in a recognized over-the-counter
or unlisted securities market may be made at the option of the General Partner.



Entergy Corporation (708509)



Entergy Corporation (``Entergy''), 225 Baronne Street, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, a registered holding company,
and its wholly owned nonutility subsidiary companies, Entergy Enterprises, Inc., (``Enterprises''), Three Financial
Centre, 900 South Shackleford Road, Suite 210, Little Rock, Arkansas 72211, and Entergy Systems and Service, Inc.
(``Entergy SASI''), 4740 Shelby Drive, Suite 105, Memphis, Tennessee 38118, (collectively, ``Applicants''),
have filed an application-declaration under sections 6(a), 7, 9(a), 10 and 12(b) of the Act and rules 45 and 54 thereunder.

Pursuant to Commission order dated December 28, 1992 (HCAR No. 25718), Entergy SASI was organized as a wholly owned
subsidiary of Enterprises that would provide energy management services to commercial, industrial and institutional
customers. Such order authorized Entergy SASI to provide energy management services, without limitation, to customers
within a region consisting of the states of Arkansas, Louisiana and Mississippi; and the service territories of utilities
from which the Entergy system could expect to purchase economy, replacement and emergency energy (``Base Region'').
The order also permitted Entergy SASI to solicit and serve customers outside the Base Region to a limited extent and
subject to the condition that at least 50% of Entergy SASI's annual revenues be derived from its activities within
the Base Region (``50% Revenue Restriction'').


The Applicants now seek additional authorization for Entergy SASI to provide consulting services related to energy
management and demand-side management (``DSM'') activities. Such consulting services would generally be limited
to the rendering of advice, know-how and management/technical services for a consulting fee in order to assist energy
customers, utilities, federal, state and foreign government entities and other customers with energy management
and/or DSM activities in cases where Entergy SASI is not directly involved in the performance of such energy management
and/or DSM services. Entergy SASI proposes to provide such consulting servies on a worldwide basis and that associated
revenues not be subject to the 50% Revenue Restriction.

Specifically, Entergy SASI's consulting services would include the following: (1) development and review of architectural,
structural and engineering drawings for energy and other resource efficiency; (2) design and specification of energy
consuming or conservation equipment, controls and systems; (3) design and marketing of intellectual property,
i.e. any process, program, technique, or computer software used to analyze energy conservation opportunities and
results; (4) general technical advice concerning the use, benefits, planning and/or administration of energy management
and/or DSM programs; and (5) general management advice and services relating to the implementation of functions,
practices and procedures incidental to the conduct of the energy management services business and/or DSM programs.

In addition, Entergy SASI proposes to provide funding to other energy management and DSM contractors to enable them
to carry out energy conservation measures. Although the precise terms of such funding arrangements will not be determined
until the time of the applicable transactions, it is anticipated that Entergy SASI will be repaid through assignments
of a portion of the monthly fees paid by customers under contracts relating to the installation of such energy conservation
measures. The Applicants state that the proposed funding arrangements will not involve the acquisition by Entergy
SASI of any promissory notes.

Finally, the Applicants request authorization for: (1) Entergy to make additional investments in Enterprises of
up to an aggregate amount of $100 million from time to time through December 31, 1997, with such investments to be made
through any combination of purchases of Enterprises' common stock and/or capital contributions to Enterprises;
(2) Enterprises to use the proceeds of such transactions to make additional investments in Entergy SASI (in the form
of equity investments and/or loans) of up to $100 million from time to time through December 31, 1997; and (3) Entergy
SASI to issue and sell to nonaffiliated third parties during the same period up to $100 million of commercial paper,
promissory notes and/or other debt securities, secured or unsecured (collectively, the ``Debt Securities).

It is proposed that the proceeds derived from Enterprises' investments, as well as any third party financing, be used
by Entergy SASI for the following purposes: (1) to repay its existing indebtedness under notes issued to Entergy;
(2) to provide financing for customer contracts and funding for the implementation of energy conservation measures
by other energy management and DSM contractors; and (3) to provide Entergy with necessary working capital in connection
with its ongoing energy management, consulting and other authorized businesses, as well as to pay for general and
administrative expenses and to provide for Entergy SASI's other capital needs.

Any loans made by Enterprises to Entergy SASI would be evidenced by promissory notes bearing an interest rate to be
determined at the time of borrowing (but in no event greater than the then prevailing prime rate, as reported by the
Wall Street Journal) and maturing no later than ten years from the date of borrowing. Where Debt Securities issued
to nonaffiliates are involved, the yield to maturity of such Debt Securities would not exceed the then current yield
to maturity on U.S. Treasury securities of comparable maturities (subject to straight line interpolation when there
is no comparable U.S. Treasury security), plus 400 basis points, and no Debt Securities would be issued for a term of
greater than thirty years. It is further proposed that any notes issued by Entergy SASI to Enterprises may, at the option
of Enterprises, be converted to capital contributions to Entergy SASI by the forgiveness of the debt represented
thereby.




For the Commission, by the Division of Investment Management, pursuant to delegated authority.



<SIGNER>
Jonathan G. Katz,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Secretary.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9429215 Filed 112594; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 801001M
</BILLING>


