 

FSIS views third party endorsements on product labeling as references, made through a name or logo, to an organization
such as a professional society or association that is independent of the product's manufacturer or distributor,
to promote that organization's approval of a product. If the name of an endorsing organization references a particular
disease and the endorsement references a particular food or nutrient, a third party endorsement would constitute
an implied health claim. While third party references often include general information about dietary recommendations
or good nutrition, FSIS is proposing that they be regulated as a health claim if they characterize the relationship
of a substance to a disease or health-related condition. FSIS believes that it would not be misleading to include such
references on food labeling provided such statements are made in a manner that is in compliance with all applicable
provisions of proposed 9 CFR 317.314, 317.371, 381.414, and 381.471. 


Disqualifying Nutrient Levels 


FSIS is proposing to adopt the disqualifying nutrient levels defined by FDA at 21 CFR 101.14(a)(5) with minor modifications.
FDA defines disqualifying levels at 21 CFR 101.14(a)(5) for total fat, saturated fat, cholesterol, or sodium for
individual foods as 13.0 grams (g) of fat, 4.0 g of saturated fat, 60 milligrams (mg) of cholesterol, or 480 mg of sodium
per reference amount customarily consumed, per label serving size, and, only for foods with reference amounts customarily
consumed of 30 g or less or 2 tablespoons or less, per 50 g. The levels for a main dish product, as defined in 21 CFR 101.13(m)
and that weighs at least 6 ounces, are defined as 19.5 g of fat, 6.0 g of saturated fat, 90 mg of cholesterol or 720 mg of
sodium per label serving size. The levels for a meal product, as defined in 21 CFR 101.13(l) and that weighs at least
10 ounces per labeled serving, are defined as 26.0 g of fat, 8.0 g of saturated fat, 120 mg of cholesterol, or 960 mg of
sodium per label serving size. 
FDA's disqualifying levels for total fat, saturated fat, cholesterol, or sodium represent 20, 30, and 40 percent
of the Daily Reference Value established for each nutrient for individual foods, main dish products, and meal products,
respectively. FSIS believes these levels are appropriate to meet the intent of the NLEA requirement that health claims
be prohibited for foods that, taking into account the makeup of the total daily diet, increase the risk of diet-related
diseases or health conditions for persons in the general population. In setting these levels, FSIS agrees with FDA
that risk not be considered in terms of the impact of consuming a particular food, but, rather, in terms of the role a
food plays in the total diet, and the effects its nutrient levels have on a person's ability to construct a healthy diet.
Consistent with FDA's general requirements for health claims on labeling of products under its jurisdiction, FSIS
is proposing that any one of the levels would disqualify a meat or poultry product from bearing a health claim, unless
an exception is provided under a specific provision authorizing a health claim. 
The disqualifying levels set by FDA for total fat and saturated fat are expressed to one-tenth of a gram. FSIS's nutrition
labeling regulations require that fat and saturated fat be declared in labeling in half-gram increments below 3 g
per serving and to the nearest gram above 3 g. FSIS intends to amend its regulations to change the 3 g to 5 g in a proposed
regulation on technical amendments to be published in the near future. FSIS established the reporting increments
taking into account the adequacy of analytical methods for determining fat and fatty acids in food products. FSIS
is concerned that method precision and natural variations in fat content in foods are such that measurements cannot
be made reliably at higher fat contents to support disqualifying levels with the degree of accuracy implied by levels
set at one-tenth of a gram. Accordingly, FSIS is proposing to adopt disqualifying levels for fat and saturated fat
expressed at increments required for labeling declarations. 
For purposes of making a nutrient content claim, FSIS defines a meal-type product at 9 CFR 317.313(l) and 381.413(l),
in part, as a product that weighs at least 6 ounces, but no more than 12 ounces per serving (container). Meal-type products
weighing more than 12 ounces are evaluated for use of nutrient content claims on a case-by-case basis when labels are
submitted for prior approval. In its final rule on nutrition labeling, FSIS stated that it believes the majority of
meal-type products fall under its purview, and that 78.7 percent of frozen dinners (6.0 to 24.0 ounces) fall between
6 ounces and 12 ounces. FSIS concludes that its definition of meal-type product encompasses the types of products
that FDA defines as main dish products and meal products. To provide consistency with FDA's requirements for health
claims on these types of products, FSIS is proposing to apply FDA's disqualifying levels for main dish products to
FSIS-regulated meal products weighing at least 6 ounces, but less than 10 ounces, and FDA's disqualifying levels
for meal products to FSIS-regulated meal products weighing 10 ounces or more, including those weighing more than
12 ounces. 
FSIS does not believe that FDA's cholesterol disqualifying level of 90 mg per label serving for main dish products
differs measurably from the cholesterol criterion of less than 95 mg per 100 g and labeled serving for ``lean'' and
``extra lean'' claims on meal-type products at 9 CFR 317.362(c) and 381.462(c) when taking into account that cholesterol
is declared in labeling to the nearest 5 mg per serving. Because FSIS requires a minimum weight of 6 ounces (170 g) for
a meal-type product, the labeled-serving basis becomes the limiting basis. Regardless of its weight, an entire meal-type
product must contain less than 95 mg of cholesterol to qualify to use ``lean'' or ``extra lean'' claims. For these reasons,
FSIS concludes that raising the cholesterol disqualifying level from 90 to 95 mg per labeled serving for meal-type
products weighing at least 6 ounces, but less than 10 ounces, is warranted. This action would provide greater consistency
in qualifying criteria for health claims and nutrient content claims on meal-type products in the weight range of
6 ounces up to 10 ounces. 





