 

Addendum V_Medicare Coverage Issues Manual  


(For the reader's convenience, new material and changes to previously published material are in italics. If any part
of a sentence in the manual instruction has changed, the entire line is shown in italics. The transmittal includes
material unrelated to revised sections. We are not reprinting the unrelated material.)

 

Transmittal No. 67; section 505, Thermography. CHANGED Procedures_Effective Date: Services Furnished
on or  
After 12/21/92.  
Section 505, Thermography._This section excludes from coverage the use of thermography for all indications.
Do not open previously processed claims. However, if individual claims are brought to your attention, reopen and
process them retroactively to December 21, 1992.  
505 Thermography (Effective for services performed on and after December 21, 1992.  
Thermography is the measurement of self-emanating infrared radiation that reveals temperature variations at the
surface of the body. The thermographic device senses body temperature and demonstrates areas of differing heat emission
by producing brightly colored patterns. Each color represents a specific temperature level. Interpretation of
these color patterns according to designated anatomic distribution is thought to aid in diagnosing a vast array of
diseases.  
Thermography for any indication (including breast lesions which were excluded from Medicare coverage on July 20,
1984) is excluded from Medicare coverage because the available evidence does not support this test as a useful aid
in the diagnosis or treatment of illness or injury. Therefore, it is not considered effective. This exclusion was
published as a HCFA Final Notice in the Federal Register on November 20, 1992.  
Transmittal No. 67; Section, 6014, Infusion Pumps. CHANGED Implementing Instruction_Effective Date: For
services performed on or after 03/04/94.  
Section 6014, Infusion Pumps, has been revised to provide for coverage of implantable infusion pumps for use
in the treatment of spasticity and chronic intractable pain of malignant or nonmalignant origin, if specified patient
selection criteria are met.  
This section has also been revised to permit coverage of other uses of an implantable infusion pump if the pump is being
used to administer a drug that is included as an indicated use on the pump's approved labelling and the contractor's
medical staff determines that such is reasonable and necessary for an individual patient.  


6014Infusion Pumps  


The Following Indications For Treatment Using Infusion Pumps Are Covered Under Medicare:  
A. External Infusion Pumps._ 
1. Iron Poisoning (Effective for Services Performed On or After 9/26/84)._When used in the administration of deferoxamine
for the treatment of acute iron poisoning and iron overload, only external infusion pumps are covered.  
2. Thromboembolic Disease (Effective for Services Performed On or After 9/26/84)._When used in the administration
of heparin for the treatment of thromboembolic disease and/or pulmonary embolism, only external infusion pumps
used in an institutional setting are covered.  


