 

The Department's regulations provide that trustee officials may recover the ``reasonable and necessary'' costs
of an assessment. See 43 CFR 11.15(a)(3)(ii), as amended by 59 FR 14281. Some commenters have questioned whether this
provision would require trustee officials to demonstrate not only that their assessment costs were reasonable but
also that they were necessary. These commenters noted that CERCLA merely requires trustee officials to demonstrate
that their assessment costs were reasonable. 
The reference to ``necessary'' assessment costs was not intended to require trustee officials to make an additional
demonstration beyond that required by CERCLA. Therefore, the Department is considering deleting the reference
to ``necessary'' assessment costs. 
The Department's regulations provide examples of recoverable assessment costs. See 43 CFR 11.15(a)(3)(ii), as
amended by 59 FR 14281. Some commenters have suggested that the regulations be amended to include a list of specific
practices that would render assessment costs unreasonable. The Department questions whether addition of such a
list would be workable or necessary. 
Several commenters questioned whether attorneys' fees were recoverable assessment costs. The Department believes
that trustee officials will generally need the assistance of an interdisciplinary team of experts when performing
natural resource damage assessments. The regulations do not restrict recoverable assessment costs to the expenses
of particular types of professionals. The Department's regulations provide that recoverable assessment costs
are ``limited to those costs incurred or anticipated by the authorized official for, and specifically allocable
to, site-specific efforts taken in the assessment of damages.'' 43 CFR 11.60(d)(2). Therefore, if attorneys are
involved in work specifically allocable to an assessment, the resulting attorneys' fees are recoverable as assessment
costs under the regulations. The Department solicits comment on whether additional guidance on the recoverability
of attorneys' fees is warranted. 



B. Injury 


Some commenters have indicated that the injury definitions contained in the Department's regulations should be
relaxed. Several commenters thought that trustee officials should be allowed to document injury by measuring the
mere presence of the oil or hazardous substance in a natural resource. Other commenters have felt that the Department
should allow injury to be documented through a risk analysis. 
On the other hand, some commenters have advocated the development of more restrictive injury definitions. Several
commenters have contended that trustee officials should be required to link the specific substance found in a natural
resource to that of the discharge or release in question. Other commenters have suggested that injuries should be
limited to lost public uses of the natural resources. 
The regulations establish acceptance criteria for the development of biological injury definitions. 43 CFR 11.62(f)(2).
Some commenters have stated that these criteria should be applied not only when a new injury definition is developed
but also each time trustee officials document incident-specific injuries under existing injury definitions. Others
felt that the acceptance criteria should be applied to each hazardous substance for which a particular biological
injury definition was to apply. 
NOAA has proposed standards for determining injury under OPA that differ from those in the Department's regulations.
See 59 FR 11781180. 
The Department intends to carefully examine the type B standards and methods for determining injury during this review.
The Department encourages commenters to provide suggestions on injury determination and quantification. 



C. Economics 


1. Compensable Value 


Several commenters sought clarification on the economic values that are included in compensable value. Some commenters
questioned when lost economic rent constitutes a compensable value. The Department's regulations provide that
compensable value includes ``any economic rent accruing to a private party because the Federal or State agency or
Indian tribe does not charge a fee or price for the use of the resources.'' 43 CFR 11.83(c)(1), as amended by 59 FR 14286.
The Department's regulations also provide that compensable value includes changes in consumer surplus. Some commenters
requested clarification of what constituted consumer surplus. The Department solicits comment on whether the regulations
should provide additional guidance on the assessment of damages for lost economic rent and consumer surplus. 
A couple of commenters stated that compensable value should include not only the value of services lost to humans but
also the value of services lost to other resources as a result of the injuries. Under the Department's regulations,
trustee officials may consider not only the reduction in services to humans but also the reduction in services to other
resources when selecting appropriate restoration, rehabilitation, replacement, and/or acquisition measures
and estimating their costs. However, compensable value may be calculated only for the resource services lost to the
public pending completion of restoration, rehabilitation, replacement, and/or acquisition of equivalent resources.
See 43 CFR 11.83(c)(1), as amended by 59 FR 14286. The Department notes that compensable value does account indirectly
for certain services lost to other resources. For example, compensable value for lost fishing opportunities may
reflect the results of food web losses. If commenters think that additional values should be included in compensable
value, they should specify the values of interest, explain the legal basis for including such values, and provide
specific suggestions on how those values should be measured. 
The Department's regulations provide that in assessments where the scope of economic analysis is at the State level,
only the compensable value to the State should be counted. 43 CFR 11.84(h)(3), as amended by 59 FR 14287. Several commenters
suggested that this provision be revised to allow State trustee officials to assess and recover compensable value
for all individuals, not just those within the State. The Department solicits comment on the appropriate scope of
economic analysis for all trustee officials. 


2. Guidance on Methodologies 


There were numerous requests for additional guidance on implementation of the cost-estimating and valuation methodologies
listed in the regulations. With regard to cost-estimating methodologies, some commenters have stated that the guidance
provided on the incorporation of uncertainty into cost estimates is inadequate. See 43 CFR 11.84(d), as amended
by 59 FR 1428687. Other commenters requested additional guidance on selection and use of cost-estimating
methodologies. 
With regard to valuation methodologies, commenters raised concerns about the possibility of double counting if
a hedonic pricing methodology is used. One commenter noted that the regulations state, ``When regional travel cost
models exist, they may be used if appropriate.'' 43 CFR 11.83(c)(2)(iv), as amended by 59 FR 14286. This commenter
stated that this statement incorrectly implied that regional cost models were more appropriate than other models.
Another commenter stated that use of the travel cost methodology should not be allowed because the results of a travel
cost model can be skewed by the actions of one unusually avid traveler. 
The Department solicits comment on the need for and possible content of guidance on implementation of cost-estimating
methodologies. The Department also solicits comment on the need for and possible content of guidance on implementation
of methodologies for valuing lost use values. Commenters should restrict their remarks to the calculation of lost
use values, because, as noted above, the Department is addressing the estimation of lost nonuse values in a separate
rulemaking. See 59 FR 23097. 


3. Willingness to Accept 


Several commenters suggested that trustee officials be allowed to calculate compensable value by estimating the
minimum amount of money an individual would require once an injury occurred in order to be as well off as before the injury
occurred (willingness to accept). The Department agrees that, since natural resources are held in trust for the public,
willingness to accept is the correct theoretical measure of compensable value. However, because of the practical
difficulties entailed in reliably measuring willingness to accept, the Department's regulations require the use
of methodologies that measure the amount of money an individual would be willing to pay to prevent a natural resource
injury (willingness to pay). 43 CFR 11.83(c)(2), as amended by 59 FR 14286. The Department solicits comment on whether
reliable methods exist for measuring willingness to accept. The Department also solicits comment on the conditions
under which willingness to accept rather than willingness to pay would, in theory, result in significantly different
estimates of compensable value. 


4. Discount Rate 


The Department's regulations provide that trustee officials should discount the value of future costs and losses
using the discount rate specified in the Office of Management and Budget Circular A94 (OMB Circular A94),
dated March 27, 1972, which was ten percent. 43 CFR 11.84(e)(2). OMB Circular A94 has been revised. The current
version, dated October 29, 1992, indicates that the discount rate for public investment is 7 percent. 





