 

D. MC shall send U.S. EPA copies of preliminary determinations on PSD permit modifications and amendments at or prior
to the beginning of the public comment period. U.S. EPA will provide comments to MC prior to the close of the public comment
period.
E. MC shall send to EPA a copy of all applicability determinations and justifications made that would involve PSD exemptions
due to offsetting or netting (40 CFR 52.21(b)(3) and 52.21(b)(21).


III. Revisions to Title 40 CFR 52.21


A. This delegation covers any revisions that are promulgated for 40 CFR 52.21 and 40 CFR 124. The terms ``40 CFR 52.21''
and ``40 CFR 124'' as used in the delegation request and throughout this Agreement, include such regulations as are
in effect on the date this Agreement is executed and any revisions that are promulgated after that date.
B. In addition, the following U.S. EPA policies shall apply to PSD review:
1. U.S. EPA is responsible for the issuance of PSD permits on Indian Lands, under sections 110(c) and 301 of the Clean
Air Act. States (or their delegates) have no authority to establish air pollution control requirements on Indian
Reservations, unless requested to by the Tribal Governing Body. 
2. According to U.S. EPA guidance published on September 22, 1987 and supplemental guidance published on July 28,
1988, all delegated agencies must now consider pollutants not subject to the Clean Air Act in their Best Available
Control Technology (BACT) determinations. The BACT determinations must include a review of the toxic effects of
unregulated pollutants and the impact of the proposed BACT on the emissions of these pollutants.
3. MC shall consult with the appropriate Federal, State, and local land use agencies prior to issuance of preliminary
determinations on PSD permits. In particular, U.S. EPA requires that MC shall:
(a) Notify the Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) and U.S. EPA when a PSD permit application has been received, in order
to assist U.S. EPA in carrying out its non-delegable responsibilities under section 7 of the Endangered Species Act
(PL 97304).
(b) Notify potential applicants of the potential need for consultation between U.S. EPA and the FWS if an endangered
species may be affected by the project. U.S. EPA's data sheet may be used for this process (copy enclosed).
(c) Refrain from issuing a final PSD permit unless the FWS has determined that the proposed project will not adversely
affect any endangered species.
4. MC shall consider a dry scrubber for sulfur dioxide control, a baghouse or electrostatic precipitator for particulate
control, and efficient combustion techniques for carbon monoxide control in their BACT determinations for municipal
waste combustors pursuant to U.S. EPA guidance published on June 26, 1987.
5. MC shall begin any BACT determination with the most stringent control options available for that category, pursuant
to additional BACT guidance issued on December 1, 1987. U.S. EPA will consider as deficient any BACT determination
not complying with this ``top-down'' requirement.
6. Upon notification from EPA, MC shall implement such new regulations or directives pending revision of this Agreement.


IV. Permits


A. In any matter involving interpretation of sections 160169 of the Clean Air Act, or 40 CFR 52.21, and of 40 CFR
124 where guidance on the implementation, review, administration, or enforcement of these sections has not been
sent to MC, U.S. EPA will be contacted and requested to provide the appropriate guidance.
B. MC shall at no time grant any waiver to the PSD permit requirements.
C. Permits issued under this delegation shall contain language certifying that the Federal PSD requirements have
been satisfied.


