 




<USBUREAU>Employment Standards Administration; Wage and Hour Division</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Minimum Wages for Federal and Federally Assisted Construction; General Wage Determination Decisions</DOCTITLE>



General wage determination decisions of the Secretary of Labor are issued in accordance with applicable law and are
based on the information obtained by the Department of Labor from its study of local wage conditions and data made available
from other sources. They specify the basic hourly wage rates and fringe benefits which are determined to be prevailing
for the described classes of laborers and mechanics employed on construction projects of a similar character and
in the localities specified therein.

The determinations in these decisions of prevailing rates and fringe benefits have been made in accordance with 29
CFR Part 1, by authority of the Secretary of Labor pursuant to the provisions of the Davis-Bacon Act of March 3, 1931,
as amended (46 Stat. 1494, as amended, 40 U.S.C. 267a) and of other Federal statutes referred to in 29 CFR Part 1, Appendix,
as well as such additional statutes as may from time to time be enacted containing provisions for the payment of wages
determined to be prevailing by the Secretary of Labor in accordance with Davis-Bacon Act. The prevailing rates and
fringe benefits determined in these decisions shall, in accordance with the provisions of the foregoing statutes,
constitute the minimum wages payable on Federal and federally assisted construction projects to laborers and mechanics
of the specified classes engaged on contract work of the character and in the localities described therein.

Good cause is hereby found for not utilizing notice and public comment procedure thereon prior to the issuance of these
determinations as prescribed in 5 U.S.C. 553 and not providing for delay in the effective date as prescribed in that
section, because the necessity to issue current construction industry wage determinations frequently and in large
volume causes procedures to be impractical and contrary to the public interest.

General wage determination decisions, and modifications and supersedes decisions thereto, contain no expiration
dates and are effective from their date of notice in the 

Federal Register

, or on the date written notice is received by the agency, whichever is earlier. These decisions are to be used in accordance
with the provisions of 29 CFR Parts 1 and 5. Accordingly, the applicable decision, together with any modifications
issued, must be made a part of every contract for performance of the described work within the geographic area indicated
as required by an applicable Federal prevailing wage law and 29 CFR Part 5. The wage rates and fringe benefits, notice
of which is published herein, and which are contained in the Government Printing Office (GPO) document entitled ``General
Wage Determinations Issued Under The Davis-Bacon and Related Acts,'' shall be the minimum paid by contractors and
subcontractors to laborers and mechanics.

Any person, organization, or governmental agency having an interest in the rates determined as prevailing is encouraged
to submit wage rate and fringe benefit information for consideration by the Department. Further information and
self-explanatory forms for the purpose of submitting this data may be obtained by writing to the U.S. Department of
Labor, Employment Standards Administration, Wage and Hour Division, Division of Wage Determinations, 200 Constitution
Ave. NW., room S3014, Washington, DC 20210.



