 


The available data show that poisonings are occurring in 
large measure because of the efforts of children. Table 4 shows 
that in 9 of the 21 reported pediatric poisoning deaths that 
involved iron-containing products packaged in containers with 
CRC's, the victims gained access to multiple doses of iron-containing product by their own efforts or through the
efforts of 
another child. Most of these children were under 51 months of age. Thus, a label warning statement is unlikely to have
any 
meaning or significance to them. 



FDA requests comments on its tentative conclusion that label 
warning statements are not sufficient to ensure that the use of 
certain iron-containing products will be safe. Comments that 
bear on the effectiveness of labeling warning statements to deter 
young children from directly gaining access to these products 
will be most compelling if they contain supporting data and 
information. 



As stated above, FDA believes that label warning statements 
will help to reduce the incidence of pediatric poisoning because 
they will ensure that adults are aware of the pediatric toxicity 
of iron and will encourage responsible adults to properly reclose 
and store iron-containing products. However, FDA is concerned 
that warning statements alone will not prevent the misuse of 
CRP's that has contributed to the epidemic of iron poisonings of 
children. FDA notes that CRP's themselves are a de facto warning 
that the contents of the package present hazards for children. 
Yet, in 21 of the 26 pediatric poisoning deaths in which the type 
of packaging was reported, the product was packaged in containers 
with CRC's (Table 4). 



Furthermore, the effectiveness of label warning 
statements is generally considered to be dependent on 
several factors including, but not necessarily limited 
to: The personal relevance of the warning 
information; familiarity with the warning information; perceived hazard from the product; and desensitization
or 
habituation to warnings after repeated exposures (Ref. 24). 
Moreover, a report on the effectiveness of a labeling and 
educational program to prevent pediatric poisonings from 
accidental ingestion of prescription drugs shows that labeling 
and educational programs are not always sufficient to prevent 
pediatric poisonings, and that, in some instances, additional 
packaging safeguards are necessary to ensure the safe use of 
certain substances (Ref. 25). Therefore, FDA tentatively 
concludes that label warning statements will not be sufficient to 
ensure the safe use of certain iron-containing products. 



FDA finds that iron-containing drugs and dietary supplements 
pose a unique hazard to young children. The pediatric hazard 
presented by these products is directly related to their iron 
content. As discussed above in section I.B. of this 
document, ingestion of 25 mg or more iron per kg of body weight 
is considered a toxic dose, and ingestion of 100 to 200 mg iron 
per kg of body weight can be lethal. Once a potentially 
lethal dose of iron has been ingested and absorbed, medical 
intervention to halt the toxic progression of iron poisoning is 
difficult and often unsuccessful. Successful treatment for 
iron poisoning is determined primarily by the amount of iron 
ingested and how rapidly medical intervention occurs. 
In light of the risk of pediatric iron poisonings with 
irreversible and potentially fatal consequences that is 
presented by higher potency iron-containing products, and of the 
inherent limitations on the effectiveness of labeling and educational programs, FDA tentatively concludes that
it would be 
inappropriate to rely solely on these measures to ensure the safe 
use of these products. 



b. 

Are noncomplying CRP's a principal cause of iron 
poisoning deaths? 

The NDMA contends that new packaging 
requirements beyond those outlined in its petition are not 
necessary to reduce the incidence of pediatric iron poisonings. 
The NDMA petition asserts that the available data on pediatric 
iron-poisonings are deficient to the extent that it cannot be 
determined whether products associated with the poisonings were 
packaged in compliance with CPSC's packaging requirements, and it 
suggests that iron-containing products packaged in noncompliant 
CRP's are the principle cause of pediatric iron-poisonings. 
However, NDMA provided no information to support its view. 



FDA has carefully examined the available information on 
pediatric iron poisonings and could find no evidence to support 
the NDMA's contention that the iron-containing products 
associated with these poisonings were packaged in CRP's that did 
not comply with regulations established by CPSC. In the absence 
of such evidence, FDA can find no basis on which to conclude that 
noncompliant, child-resistant special packaging is the primary 
cause of pediatric iron-poisonings. 



c. 

Are additional packaging requirements appropriate? 

FDA 
tentatively concludes that full compliance with CPSC's CRP 
requirements, even if there are warning statements in labeling of iron-containing products and appropriate educational
programs, 
will not be adequate to ensure the safe use of certain iron-containing drugs and dietary supplements if bottle and
closure 
packaging were to continue as the predominant means of packaging 
such products. FDA recognizes that each of these measures either 
has been successful in limiting the number of poisonings or can 
be reasonably expected to be effective in reducing the number of 
poisonings. However, given the potentially fatal outcome that 
can result from pediatric iron-poisoning, FDA is not persuaded 
that these measures are adequate to ensure the safety of the use 
of certain iron-containing drugs and dietary supplements. FDA 
tentatively concludes that to reduce the incidence of pediatric 
iron poisonings to a level that would permit the agency to 
conclude that there is a reasonable certainty of no harm from the 
use of these products, it is necessary to require a specific type 
of physical barrier to access these products. Therefore, FDA 
tentatively concludes that additional packaging requirements are 
necessary. 



FDA requests comments on this tentative conclusion. The 
agency is particularly interested in receiving comments that bear 
on the effectiveness of different types of packaging to limit 
pediatric access to toxic amounts of iron. Comments will be most 
persuasive if they are supported by studies and other data and 
information. 



