 




<USBUREAU>Federal Railroad Administration</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Petitions for Waivers of Compliance</DOCTITLE>



In accordance with Title 49 CFR 211.9 and 211.41, notice is hereby given that the Federal Railroad Administration
(FRA) has received requests for waivers of compliance with certain requirements of the Federal safety laws and regulations.
The individual petitions are described below, including the parties seeking relief, the regulatory provisions
involved, the nature of the relief being requested and the petitioner's arguments in favor of relief.



Burlington Northern Railroad (BN), Waiver Petition Docket Number LI942



The BN seeks a waiver of compliance from certain Sections of 49 CFR part 229, Locomotive Safety Standards, for locomotives
used in switching service in Memphis, Tennessee.

The BN is seeking a waiver of compliance with 49 CFR 229.123 of the Locomotive Safety Standards_Pilots, snowplows,
end plates_for locomotives used in the Tennessee Yard Terminal, Memphis. The BN is requesting that it be permitted
to increase the height of the locomotive pilot above the top of the rail from the maximum allowable 6 inches to 9 inches.
The BN states that with the pilots at the maximum height of 6 inches above the top of rail, both the pilot and the retarder
equipment are being damaged when the locomotives go through the hump yard. This waiver would only apply to locomotives
used exclusively for hump service in the Tennessee Yard Terminal.



Union Pacific Railroad Company (UP), Waiver Petition Docket Number LI944



The UP is seeking a waiver of compliance from certain Sections of 49 CFR part 229, Locomotive Safety Standards, for
locomotives used in switching service in all of its hump yards.

The UP is seeking a waiver of compliance with 229.123 of the Locomotive Safety Standards_Pilots, snowplows,
end plates_for locomotives used in switch service in the hump yards located at Hinkle, Oregon, North Platte, Nebraska,
North Little Rock, Arkansas, Ft. Worth, Texas, Pocatello, Idaho, and Los Angeles, California.


The UP and the Missouri Pacific Railroad Company (MP) collectively own or lease 100 percent of the affected locomotives
used in the hump yards. The UP is requesting that it be permitted to increase the height of the locomotive pilot above
the top of the rail from the maximum permissible 6 inches to 83/4 inches in order to achieve sufficient clearance and
avoid damage to the locomotives and retarders. With the pilots at the maximum permissible height of 6 inches above
the top of rail, the pilot and the retarder equipment are being damaged when the locomotives go through the hump yard.
This waiver would only apply to locomotives used exclusively in switching service in the hump yards. Further, the
UP states that safety of its operations in hump yards will not be adversely affected. All affected locomotives will
be brought back to the maximum permissible clearance of 6 inches before used in any other service.



Northeast Illinois Railroad Corporation (Metra), Waiver Petition Docket Number LI9315



Metra is seeking a waiver of compliance with 49 CFR 229.133 Locomotive Conspicuity, Minimum Standards for Auxiliary
External Lights (ditch lights), for passenger equipment used in the Chicago metropolitan area.

Metra owns the former Rock Island, Milwaukee Road and Illinois Central Commuter service and oversees, through the
purchase of service agreements, the Chicago and North Western, Norfolk Southern (Southwest Service) and Burlington
Northern Computer Service. Metra has a fleet of 134 passenger locomotives, 7 switcher locomotives, 165 electric
multiple unit locomotives (M.U. locomotives) and 161 non-M.U. control cab locomotives (cab car) which fall under
the jurisdiction of 49 CFR 229.133. Metra has developed schedules and placed material purchase orders to install
ditch lights on its passenger equipment.


Metra is seeking a waiver from the interim rule requirement for the minimum height of the ditch lights on 165 MU locomotives,
which are currently being rebuilt. Section 229.133(b)(1) requires that two ditch lights shall be placed at the front
of the locomotive, not less than 36 inches nor more than 84 inches above top of rail. Metra says that the ditch lights
will be installed at a height of 25 inches above top of the rail, which is below the FRA minimum of 36 inches. Further,
at this height the lights have proven to be very conspicuous. Metra states that a higher location on these MU locomotives
would present an unnecessary financial burden that would not measurably enhance or improve the conspicuity of the
ditch lights. The burden would be attributable to extensive carbody and control cab modifications necessary to adapt
the car body structure for the mounting of recessed ditch lights at the 36 inch minimum height. Further, Metra states
that one route is parallelled on both sides by public streets, and separated by concrete barriers. If the height of
the ditch lights was raised above 25 inches above top of rail, the lights would be directed into the line of sight of vehicles
traveling next to the track and could contribute to motor vehicle accidents.

Interested parties are invited to participate in these proceedings by submitting written views, data, or comments.
FRA does not anticipate scheduling a public hearing in connection with these proceedings since the facts do not appear
to warrant a hearing. If any interested party desires an opportunity for oral comment, they should notify FRA, in writing,
before the end of the comment period and specify the basis for their request.

All communications concerning these proceedings should identify the appropriate docket number (e.g., Waiver Petition
Docket Number LI942) and must be submitted in triplicate to the Docket Clerk, Office of Chief Counsel,
Federal Railroad Administration, Nassif Building, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington, D.C. 20590. Communications
received before June 28, 1994, will be considered by FRA before final action is taken. Comments received after that
date will be considered as far as practicable. All written communications concerning these proceedings are available
for examination during regular business hours (9 a.m.5 p.m.) in room 8201, Nassif Building, 400 Seventh Street
SW., Washington, DC 20590.





Issued in Washington, DC on May 19, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Phil Olekzsyk, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Deputy Associate Administrator for Safety Compliance and Program Implementation.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9412738 Filed 52494; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 491006M
</BILLING>





