 

1. Closing Date for the Receipt of Applications



The closing dates for receipt of applications for the grant programs contained in this announcement are:



<TABLE>





1Program 
1Closing date 



BCP 
June 15, 1994.
TLP 
June 28, 1994.
DAPP 
July 12, 1994.
TTA 
July 12, 1994.


</TABLE>



Applications may be submitted to the following address: Department of Health and Human Services, Administration
for Children and Families, Division of Discretionary Grants, 370 L'Enfant Promenade, SW., Aerospace Building,
6th Floor, Washington, DC 20447. Attn: Maiso Bryant, ACF94ACYF/RHYP. Hand delivered applications
will be accepted during the normal working hours of 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, on or prior to the established
closing date at: Administration for Children and Families, Division of Discretionary Grants, 6th Floor OFM/DDG,
901 D Street, SW., Washington, DC 20447.

Envelopes containing applications must clearly indicate the specific program that the application is addressing:
Basic Center Program (BCP); Drug Abuse Prevention Program (DAPP), Transitional Living Program (TLP), or Training
and Technical Assistance (TTA).



2. Deadline for Submission of Applications



a. 

Deadline. 

Applications will be considered as meeting the deadline if they are either:

i. Received on or before the deadline date at the above address, or

ii. Sent on or before the deadline date and received by the ACF in time for the independent review under DHHS GAM I62.
(Applicants are cautioned to request a legibly dated U.S. Postal Service postmark or to obtain a legibly dated receipt
from a commercial carrier or the U.S. Postal Service as proof of timely mailing. Private metered postmarks are not
acceptable as proof of timely mailing.)

b. 

Late applications. 

Applications which do not meet the criteria stated above are considered late applications. The Administration for
Children and Families (ACF) will notify each late applicant that its application will not be considered in the current
competition.

c. 

Extension of deadline. 

The ACF may extend the deadline for all applicants because of acts of God such as earthquakes, floods or hurricanes,
etc., or when there is a widespread disruption of the mails. However, if ACF does not extend the deadline for all applicants,
it may not waive or extend the deadline for any applicants.



3. Checklist for a Complete Application





XXXX

 One original application signed in black ink and dated plus two copies.



XXXX

 A completed SPOC certification with the date of SPOC contact entered in item 16 on page 1 of SF 424, if applicable.



XXXX

 SF 424 (The original application must have the word ORIGINAL hand printed in bold block letters at the top margin of
its SF 424.



XXXX

 SF 424A.


XXXX

 Budget Justification.


XXXX

 SF 424B.


XXXX

 Certification Regarding Lobbying.


XXXX

 Program Narrative Statement (maximum of 40 pages, double-spaced).


XXXX

 Organizational Capability Statement (maximum of three pages, double-spaced).


XXXX

 Supporting Documents (maximum of 10 pages double-spaced).




(

Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance 

Number 93.623, Basic Center Program for Runaway and Homeless Youth; Number 93.657, Drug Abuse Education and Prevention
Program for Runaway and Homeless Youth; and Number 93.550, Transitional Living Program for Homeless Youth.)





Dated: April 27, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Olivia A. Golden,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Commissioner, Administration on Children, Youth and Families.


</SIGNJOB>
