 

The same limitations apply in the case of adopted children as in the case of biological children with regard to the use
of sick leave for the purpose of providing care for an adopted child as a result of physical or mental illness, injury,
impairment, pregnancy, or childbirth. These limitations are set forth in 630.401 (b) through (d).
Under 630.403, agencies may require employees to provide evidence that is administratively acceptable to
the agency in support of an employee's request for sick leave for adoption-related purposes. To ensure consistency
between the treatment of these employees and employees who may elect to invoke their entitlement to unpaid leave under
the FMLA for purposes relating to adoption, 630.1206 has been revised to allow an agency to require an employee
to provide evidence that is administratively acceptable to the agency in support of an employee's notification of
his or her intent to use FMLA leave for adoption-related purposes.


Retroactive Substitution of Sick Leave for Annual Leave


Section 629(b)(3) of Public Law 103329 permits an employee to substitute his or her accrued and accumulated
sick leave for all or any portion of any annual leave used for purposes relating to the adoption of a child between September
30, 1991, and September 30, 1994. If an employee elects to make this substitution, the law requires the employee to
submit a written application to his or her employing agency to have his or her annual and sick leave accounts adjusted
accordingly.
By law, an employee's written application to substitute sick leave retroactively for annual leave used for adoption-related
purposes must be submitted within 1 year after enactment of section 629 of Public Law 103329_i.e., September
30, 1995_or such later date as OPM may prescribe. We believe additional time may be needed to notify affected employees
of this benefit and permit employees to submit a written application to their employing agencies. Therefore, in 630.409,
OPM has extended the time period to 

September 30, 1996, 

for an employee to submit a written application to have his or her annual and sick leave accounts adjusted.
The employee's written request must specify the period(s) and the amount(s) of annual leave involved and the amount(s)
of accrued or accumulated sick leave to be substituted. The written request must include copies of available documentation
described in the regulations that specify the period(s) and amount(s) of annual leave that were used by the employee
for adoption-related purposes between September 30, 1991, and September 30, 1994. If an employee is unable to provide
a written request that meets the requirements in the regulations, no substitution of sick leave may be approved. The
law does not permit the substitution of sick leave for leave without pay. In addition, advanced sick leave may not be
used for this purpose.
After receiving an employee's written request for substitution of sick leave for annual leave, the employing agency
will deduct from the employee's sick leave account any amount of sick leave the employee elects to substitute for any
annual leave used for adoption-related purposes after September 30, 1991. The employing agency also will credit
the employee's annual leave account with an amount of annual leave equal to the amount of sick leave the employee elects
to substitute. If an agency determines that insufficient written documentation exists to honor the employee's request,
the employing agency must inform the employee of this determination in writing.
The annual leave credited to an employee's annual leave account shall be available for use by the employee on or after
the date the annual leave is credited in the same manner and for the same purposes as the employee's current accrued
and accumulated annual leave.




