 

1. Region V: Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, and Wisconsin.
2. Region X: Alaska, Idaho, Oregon, and Washington.
The new OSHA Training Institute Education Centers will be selected through a competitive process. This notice solicits
applications from organizations interested in participating in the project.
Applicants selected to participate as OSHA Training Institute Education Centers will be expected to present six
courses: four general industry OSHA courses: Course 204A, Machinery and Machine Guarding Standards; Course 501,
A Guide to Voluntary Compliance in Safety and Health; Course 521, OSHA Guide to Voluntary Compliance in the Industrial
Hygiene Area; and Course 600, Collateral Duty Course for Other Federal Agencies; and two constructions industry
course: Course 500, Instructor Course in Occupational Safety and Health Standards for the Construction Industry
and Course 510, Occupational Safety and Health Standards for the Construction Industry. Additional information
about each of these courses is in the appendix to this notice.
Applicants will be selected based upon their occupational safety and health experience, their nonacademic training
background, the availability of classroom and lodging facilities, and access to transportation. OSHA will support
the program by providing curriculum outlines, masters of student handouts, and orientation to OSHA course presentation.
OSHA also will provide assistance in presenting and/or answering questions on OSHA policy.
The project will be fifteen months in duration. OSHA will monitor each of the new OSHA Training Institute Education
Centers to evaluate the effectiveness of their programs. If performance is satisfactory at the end of the fifteen-month
period, OSHA will enter into a new agreement for a two-year period. Continuation of this agreement will be dependent
on continued satisfactory performance and mutual interest of the parties in continuing the OSHA Training Institute
Education Center program. OSHA may initiate modifications to agreements to increase or decrease the number of different
OSHA courses offered by the OSHA Training Institute Education Centers.


Eligibility


Any nonprofit public or private college or university is eligible to apply. Any other nonprofit organization that
can demonstrate that training or education is part of its mission and that more than 50 percent of its staff and dollar
resources is devoted to training or education is also eligible to apply.
In addition to meeting the eligibility criteria, applicants must have a physical presence in the Region for which
they are applying. For example, an eligible national organization based in San Francisco that has a training facility
in Chicago would have a physical presence in Region V. On the other hand, a national organization based in New York City
that rents hotel space to provide training at multiple sites around the county would be considered to have a physical
presence only in New York and would not be qualified to apply.
A training or educational institution may elect to apply for this program in partnership with a safety and health organization
that is not primarily a training organization. For example, a university could enter into an agreement with a labor
union that provides for the use of university classrooms and faculty supplemented by union safety and health professionals.
If two or more organizations wish to apply as a consortium, a training or educational member of the consortium must
be designated as the lead organization. OSHA will only enter into a nonfinancial agreement with the lead organization.


Financial Considerations


Organizations selected as OSHA Training Institute Education Centers will not be provided funding by OSHA to support
this effort. The Centers will be expected to support their OSHA training through their normal tuition and fee structures.


Length of Project


The project will start July 1, 1995, and will run for fifteen months.


OSHA Training Institute Education Center Responsibilities


Each OSHA Training Institute Education Center will be responsible for the following.
1. Arranging to have instructors assigned to teach OSHA courses attend OSHA orientation.
2. Scheduling courses. Courses are to be scheduled on a year-round basis, with each course being offered more than
once a year.
3. Publicizing the availability of courses.
4. Registering students.
5. Purchasing, or otherwise obtaining, audiovisual materials for use in courses.
6. Reproducing handouts for students.
7. Conducting courses in accordance with materials and instruction provided by OSHA.
8. Monitoring courses to ensure that OSHA course outlines are being followed.
9. Collecting course evaluation data from students in accordance with OSHA procedures.

