 

(4) Variations in the size or roundness of strands; 

(5) Discolorations other than stains not associated with rope damage; 

(6) Rotting; or 

(7) Distortion or other damage to attached hardware. 

(f) 

Thimbles.

 Properly fitting thimbles shall be used when any rope is secured permanently to a ring, shackle or attachment, where
practicable. 

(g) 

Synthetic web slings.

 (1) Slings and nets or other combinations of more than one piece of synthetic webbing assembled and used as a single
unit (synthetic web slings) shall not be used to hoist loads in excess of the sling's rated capacity. 

(2) Synthetic web slings shall be removed from service if they exhibit any of the following defects: 

(i) Acid or caustic burns; 

(ii) Melting or charring of any part of the sling surface; 

(iii) Snags, punctures, tears or cuts; 

(iv) Broken or worn stitches; 

(v) Distortion or damage to fittings; or 

(vi) Display of visible warning threads or markers designed to indicate excessive wear or damage. 

(3) Defective synthetic web slings removed from service shall not be returned to service unless repaired by a sling
manufacturer or an entity of similar competence. Each repaired sling shall be proof tested by the repairer to twice
the sling's rated capacity prior to its return to service. The employer shall retain a certificate of the proof test
and make it available for inspection. 

(4) Synthetic web slings provided by the employer shall only be used in accordance with the manufacturer's use recommendations,
which shall be available. 

(5) Fittings shall have a breaking strength at least equal to that of the sling to which they are attached and shall be
free of sharp edges. 

(h) 

Chains and chain slings used for hoisting.

 (1) The employer shall adhere to the manufacturer's recommended ratings for safe working loads for the size of wrought
iron and alloy steel chains and chain slings and shall have such ratings available for inspection. When the manufacturer
does not provide such ratings, the employer shall use Table 4A of Appendix II to this part to determine safe working
loads for alloy steel chains and chain slings only. 

(2) Proof coil steel chain, also known as common or hardware chain, and other chain not recommended by the manufacturer
for slinging or hoisting, shall not be used for slinging or hoisting. 

(3) (i) Sling chains, including end fastenings, shall be inspected for visible defects before each day's use and as
often as necessary during use to ensure integrity of the sling. 

(ii) Thorough inspections of chains in use shall be made quarterly to detect wear, defective welds, deformation or
increase in length or stretch. The month of inspection shall be indicated on each chain by color of paint on a link or
by other equally effective means. 

(iii) Chains shall be removed from service when maximum allowable wear, as indicated in Table 4B of Appendix II to this
part, is reached at any point of a link. 

(iv) Chain slings shall be removed from service when stretch has increased the length of a measured section by more
than five percent; when a link is bent, twisted or otherwise damaged; or when a link has a raised scarf or defective weld.


(v) Only designated persons shall inspect chains used for slinging and hoisting. 

(4) Chains shall only be repaired under qualified supervision. Links or portions of chain defective under any of the
criteria of paragraph (h)(3)(iv) of this section shall be replaced with properly dimensioned links or connections
of material similar to that of the original chain. Before repaired chains are returned to service, they shall be tested
to the proof test load recommended by the manufacturer for the original chain. Tests shall be performed by the manufacturer
or shall be certified by an agency accredited for the purpose under part 1919 of this chapter. Test certificates shall
be available for inspection. 

(5) (i) Wrought iron chains in constant use shall be annealed or normalized at intervals not exceeding six months.
Heat treatment certificates shall be available for inspection. Alloy chains shall not be annealed. 

(ii) No new part of a lifting appliance or item of loose gear shall be manufactured of wrought iron. 

(6) Kinked or knotted chains shall not be used for lifting. Chains shall not be shortened by bolting, wiring or knotting.
Makeshift links or fasteners such as wire, bolts or rods shall not be used. 

(7) Hooks, rings, links and attachments affixed to sling chains shall have rated capacities at least equal to that
of the chains to which they are attached. 

(8) Chain slings shall bear identification of size, grade and rated capacity. 

(i) 

Shackles.

 (1) If available, the manufacturer's recommended safe working loads for shackles shall not be exceeded. In the absence
of the manufacturer's recommendations, Table 5 of Appendix II to this part, shall apply. 

(2) Screw pin shackles provided by the employer and used aloft, except in cargo hook assemblies, shall have their pins
positively secured. 

(j) 

Hooks other than hand hooks.

 (1) The manufacturer's recommended safe working loads for hooks shall not be exceeded. Hooks other than hand hooks
shall be tested in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs (a), (c) and (d) of 1919.31 of this chapter,
except, that manufacturer's test certificates indicating performance to the criteria in 1919.31 (a), (c)
and (d) of this chapter shall be acceptable. 

(2) Bent or sprung hooks shall be discarded. 

(3) Teeth of case hooks shall be maintained in safe condition. 

(4) Jaws of patent clamp-type plate hooks shall be maintained in condition to grip plates securely. 

(5) Loads shall be applied to the throat of the hook only. 

(k) 

Pallets.

 (1) Pallets shall be made and maintained to support and carry loads being handled safely. Fastenings of reusable pallets
used for hoisting shall be bolts and nuts, drive screws (helically threaded nails), annular threaded nails or fastenings
of equivalent holding strength. 

(2) Reusable wing or lip-type pallets shall be hoisted by bar bridles or other suitable gear and shall have an overhanging
wing or lip of at least 3 inches (7.6 cm). They shall not be hoisted by wire slings alone. 

(3) Loaded pallets that do not meet the requirements of this paragraph shall be hoisted only after being placed on pallets
meeting such requirements, or shall be handled by other means providing equivalent safety. 

(4) Bridles for handling flush end or box-type pallets shall be designed to prevent disengagement from the pallet
under load. 




