 

(2) 2 m above the airport elevation for each 100 m from the nearest runway shorter than 1 km within 3.1 km of the antenna
structure.

(3) 4 m above the airport elevation for each 100 m from the nearest landing pad within 1.5 km of the antenna structure.

(c) A narrowband PCS station antenna structure no higher than 6.1 m (10 feet) above ground level at its site or no higher
than 6.1 m above any natural object or existing manmade structure, other than an antenna structure, is exempt from
the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section.

(d) Further details as to whether an aeronautical study and/or obstruction marking and lighting may be required,
and specifications for obstruction marking and lighting are contained in part 17 of the FCC Rules, Construction,
Marking and Lighting of Antenna Structures. To request approval to place an antenna structure higher than the limits
specified in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section, the licensee must notify the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) on FAA Form 74601 and the FCC on FCC Form 854.



24.41724.418

[Reserved]



24.419

Waiver of rules.



(a) 

Request for waivers. 

(1) Waivers of these rules may be granted upon application or by the Commission on its own motion. Requests for waivers
shall contain a statement of reasons sufficient to justify a waiver. Waivers will not be granted except upon an affirmative
showing:

(i) That the underlying purpose of the rule will not be served, or would be frustrated, by the application in a particular
case, and that grant of the waiver is otherwise in the public interest; or

(ii) That the unique facts and circumstances of a particular case render application of the rule inequitable, unduly
burdensome or otherwise contrary to the public interest. Applicants must also show the lack of a reasonable alternative.

(2) If the information necessary to support a waiver request is already on file, the applicant may cross-reference
to the specific filing where it may be found.

(b) 

Denial of waiver, alternate showing required. 

If a waiver is not granted, the application will be dismissed as defective unless the applicant has also provided an
alternative proposal which complies with the Commission's rules (including any required showings).



24.420

Defective applications.



(a) Unless the Commission shall otherwise permit, an application will be unacceptable for filing and will be returned
to the applicant with a brief statement as to the omissions or discrepancies if:

(1) The application is defective with respect to completeness of answers to questions, informational showings,
execution, or other matters of a formal character; or

(2) The application does not comply with the Commission's rules, regulations, specific requirements for additional
information or other requirements. See also 47 CFR 1.2105.

(b) Some examples of common deficiencies which result in defective applications under paragraph (a) of this section
are:

(1) The application is not filled out completely and signed;

(2)(4) [Reserved]

(5) The application (other than an application filed on FCC Form 175) does not include an environmental assessment
as required for an action that may have a significant impact upon the environment, as defined in 1.1307 of this
chapter.

(6) [Reserved]

(7) The application is filed prior to the Public Notice issued under 24.305 announcing the application filing
date for the relevant auction or after the cutoff date prescribed in that public notice; 

(c) [Reserved]

(d) If an applicant is requested by the Commission to file any documents or any supplementary or explanatory information
not specifically required in the prescribed application form, a failure to comply with such request within a specified
time period will be deemed to render the application defective and will subject it to dismissal.



24.421

Inconsistent or conflicting applications.



While an application is pending and undecided, no subsequent inconsistent or conflicting application may be filed
by the same applicant, his successor or assignee, or on behalf or for the benefit of the same applicant, his successor
or assignee.



24.422

Amendment of application for Narrowband Personal Communications Service filed on FCC Form 175.



(a) The Commission will provide bidders a limited opportunity to cure defects in FCC Form 175 specified herein except
for failure to sign the application and to make certifications, defects which may not be cured. See also 47 CFR 1.2105.

(b) In the Narrowband PCS, the only amendments to FCC Form 175 which will be permitted are minor amendments to correct
minor errors or defects such as typographical errors. All other amendments to FCC Form 175, such as ownership changes
or changes in the identification of parties to bidding consortia, will be considered to be major amendments. An FCC
Form 175 which is amended by a major amendment will be considered to be newly filed and cannot be resubmitted after applicable
filing deadlines. See also 1.2105.


