 


In many cases, State and local governments set a small purchase threshold below the Federal small purchase threshold.
State and local governments are encouraged to amend their thresholds in similar fashion so that grantees will be able
to more fully benefit from the change in Federal requirements that will result from this rulemaking. 




Impact Analysis 



Executive Order 12866 





Executive Order 12866 requires that a regulatory impact analysis be prepared for ``major'' rules which are defined
in the Order as any rule that has an annual effect on the national economy of $100 million or more, or certain other specified
effects. 



The participating agencies do not believe that this proposed modification to the common rule will have an annual impact
of $100 million or more or the other effects listed in the Order. However, the proposed rule would result in some savings
to governmental organizations receiving grants or subgrants. For this reason, the participating agencies have
determined that this proposed rulemaking would not create a major rule within the meaning of the Order. 




Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 





The Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 605(b)) requires that, for each rule with a ``significant economic impact
on a substantial number of small entities,'' an analysis must be prepared describing the rule's impact on small entities
and identifying any significant alternatives to the rule that would minimize the economic impact on small entities.




The participating agencies certify that this proposed rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial
number of small entities. The proposed rule does not affect the amount of funds provided in the covered programs, but
rather modifies and updates an administrative and procedural requirement that reduces burden on small entities.





Paperwork Reduction Act 





The participating agencies certify that this proposed rule would not impose any additional reporting or recordkeeping
requirements under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, 44 U.S.C. Chapter 35. 








Text of the Proposed Common Rule 


The text of this common rule as proposed for amendment in this document appears below: 



PART 

XXXX

_UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS FOR GRANTS AND COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS TO STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS 





1. Section 

XXXX

.36 is amended by revising paragraphs (d)(1), (g)(2)(ii) through (v), and (h) introductory text, and republishing
paragraph (g)(2) introductory text to read as follows: 





XXX

.36 

Procurement 



* * * * * 





(d) 

Methods of procurement to be followed. 

(1) Procurement by 

small purchase procedures.

 Small purchase procedures are those relatively simple and informal procurement methods for securing services,
supplies, or other property that do not cost more than the greater of $100,000 or the small purchase threshold (simplified
acquisition threshold) fixed at 41 U.S.C. 403(11) (currently set at $25,000). If small purchase procedures are used,
price or rate quotations shall be obtained from an adequate number of qualified sources. 



* * * * * 




(g) 

Awarding agency review. 




* * * * * 



