 

Section 843.24 is a new section which provides standards for OSM's oversight of State permitting decisions with respect
to ownership or control or the status of violations.


Paragraph (a) of 843.24 establishes the bases which require OSM to take action under the provisions of paragraphs
(b) and (c) of proposed 843.24. Paragraph (a) provides that OSM is required to take action whenever it determines,
through its oversight of the implementation of State programs, that a State has issued a permit without complying
with the State program equivalents of proposed 773.22 (verification of ownership or control application
information), 773.23 (review of ownership or control and violation information), 773.24 (procedures for challenging
ownership or control links shown in AVS), 773.25 (standards for challenging ownership or control links and the status
of violations), and 843.23. As has been explained previously, OSM has deferred action on adopting proposed
843.23 at this time. The reference, however, to that proposed rule has been placed in 843.24 in the event
that 843.23 is adopted. The use of such reference does not mean, however, that OSM will ultimately adopt proposed
843.23.

If, as a result of determination made under paragraph (a) of 843.24, OSM has reason to believe that the State
has issued a permit improvidently within the meaning of 30 CFR 773.20, paragraph (b) of 843.24 requires OSM
to initiate action under 30 CFR 843.21.

Paragraph (c) of 843.24 provides for remedial actions by OSM against a State which knowingly fails to comply
with the regulations relating to ownership or control and violation information during the permit application process.



B. General Comments



Numerous comments were made which addressed various issues with respect to the overall rulemaking. While such comments
also invoked particular sections of the proposed rules, these comments asserted several central themes which went
beyond particular sections of the rulemaking even through specific sections of the proposed rulemaking were referenced
as areas of concern by the commenters. Accordingly, OSM has decided to address these central issues in this portion
of the preamble. Within the context of such discussion, particular sections of the proposed and final rules will be
referred to as necessary. Nevertheless, in these responses, OSM focuses upon central issues which appear to be of
overarching concern to the commenters.




Due Process



Industry commenters asserted that the proposed rules violated due process and the underlying principles of the Act.
These commenters further argued that OSM's proposed rules violated due process principles because they did not allow
for a permit conditioned upon the outcome of an appeal of an ownership or control link, upon the challenge of the status
of the violation, or upon the challenge of the existence of the violation at the time it was cited. They also asserted
that because OSM did not allow for de novo challenges of the existence of violations by owners or controllers, the proposed
rules violated due process principles.


OSM disagrees with these commenters' characterizations. The proposed rules and the rules which have been adopted
today provide detailed procedures to assure that those wishing to contest ownership or control links and the status
of violations may do so. Further, the proposed and final rules provide that decisions on these matters are made based
upon credible evidence and fair processes. Those seeking to challenge the existence of violations have the opportunity
to do so, incident to permit denial, in accordance with currently existing rules which predate this rulemaking. See
Preamble to Requirements for Surface Coal Mining and Reclamation Permit Approval; Ownership and Control; Final
Rule, 53 FR 38868 at page 38885 (``Due Process Provided.'') (October 3, 1988). In addition, today's final rules clarify
that permittees may make such challenges within the context of the improvidently issued permit process. The procedures
provided in today's final rules supplement current rules contained at 30 CFR part 773 to provide more than sufficient
due process to protect the limited property interest a permit applicant has in the expectancy of a permit to engage
in surface coal mining operations.


 

