 




As indicated by the Clean Air Act's fleet program, Congress believed it appropriate to place more stringent controls
on centrally fueled fleet vehicles due fleet operators' greater control over and flexibility in the fuel used by their
vehicles. Likewise, EPA believes it appropriate to propose similar actions here to obtain necessary additional
emission reductions.

Consequently, in addition to meeting the requirements of the enhanced in-use compliance program described above,
EPA proposes an enhanced ILEV fleet program. This program would require that a fraction of the post-1998 model year
vehicles purchased by fleets in the South Coast area having 10 of more vehicles which currently are, or are capable
of, being centrally fueled must also qualify as ILEVs. EPA established a special class of clean fuel vehicles called
Inherently Low Emission Vehicles (ILEVs) in regulations concerning exemptions from transportation control measures
for clean fuel fleet vehicles (40 CFR 88.31193). ILEVs are required to have no significant evaporative emissions
even if their evaporative control systems malfunction. ILEVs therefore have an inherent emissions advantage over
other clean fuel vehicles since under any realistic enforcement program, some vehicles will be operating with dysfunctional
emission controls. Generally, ILEVs are alternative fueled vehicles since gasoline is a very volatile liquid; however,
high-technology diesel or low volatility gasoline vehicles might also be able to comply. Enhanced ILEVs would produce
all the emission benefits of other enhanced in-use compliance vehicles plus the benefits of no significant evaporative
emissions in-use.

EPA proposes that 50 percent of all LDVs, LDTs, and MDVs purchased in 1999 by covered fleet operators for their covered
fleet meet this requirement and 70 percent of LDVs, LDTs, and MDVs purchased in each calendar year thereafter.

EPA proposes to exempt from the enhanced ILEV fleet program the same types of vehicles which are exempt from the statutory
Clean Fuel Fleet program (section 241(5) of the Clean Air Act). The definitions promulgated by EPA for the Clean Fuel
Fleet program in 40 CFR 88.30294 (i.e., for ``covered fleet operator'', ``centrally fueled'', and ``capable
of being centrally fueled'', as well as several others) are proposed to apply to the enhanced ILEV fleet program. In
addition, EPA proposes that the procedures laid out in the preamble for that final rule for determining how many vehicles
are to be considered capable of being centrally fueled (58 FR 64684) are to be applied by fleet operators in the enhanced
ILEV fleet program. EPA requests comment on whether this procedure should be converted to regulatory text and published
in the final rule on this FIP.

In addition, EPA is proposing an enhanced ILEV purchase credit program similar to the Clean Fuel Fleet credit program
(40 CFR 88.30494). Each ILEV purchased early or in excess of a covered fleet operator's purchase requirement
could generate one purchase credit. EPA would issue a qualifying covered fleet operator a credit document which could
be held or sold. The original operator or any other covered fleet operator could redeem such credit documents in lieu
of enhanced ILEV purchases.

EPA proposes that violations of the enhanced ILEV fleet program be subject to civil penalties of not more than $25,000.
This proposed penalty is identical to that applied by the Clean Air Act (section 205(a)) to violations of the Clean
Fuel Fleet program required by Part C of Title II.

Since the enhanced in-use vehicle standards apply to composite NMHC, it is possible that enhanced ILEVs could have
higher exhaust NMHC emissions to compensate for their inherently low evaporative emissions. Therefore, EPA requests
comments on the likelihood of this occurring and on the option of establishing a numerically lower composite NMHC
standard for ILEVs. These more stringent enhanced in-use standards for ILEVs are shown in the table below. EPA is not
proposing to change the enhanced in-use NO

X

 standards for ILEVs from those proposed for all enhanced in-use compliance vehicles in Section A.(2) above. 

