 



Discussion:

 The Secretary has taken and will continue to take appropriate actions to ensure that guaranty agencies provide correct
information for use in calculating cohort default rates. The Secretary has found that, during the appeal process,
institutions have not generally proven significant errors in the calculation of their cohort default rates. Thus,
the Secretary rejects the commenters' claim that the cohort default rate information is inaccurate. Moreover, the
Secretary does not agree that the courts have reached this conclusion. The commenters are referring to certain preliminary
decisions reached by courts relying on the allegations raised by individual schools. The Secretary strongly objects
to the suggestion that the cohort default rate information is inaccurate. The Secretary also does not believe that
the commenters have shown any facts that support creation of a new appeal structure. However, the Secretary believes
that the changes made by the Technical Amendments of 1993 may resolve some of the commenters' concerns.



Changes:

 None.



Comments:

 One commenter asked why a loan is still counted as in default for purposes of the cohort default rate if the institution
pays off the loan.



Discussion:

 The Secretary does not believe that an institution should be allowed to buy its way out of the sanctions related to high
defaults by its students. The law holds institutions responsible for high default rates and wealthy institutions
should not be able to avoid their responsibility for these high rates by paying off loans.



Changes:

 None.



Comments:

 One commenter suggested that Federal PLUS loans should be included in the calculation of the cohort default rate.



Discussion:

 The definition of ``cohort default rate'' is in section 435(m) of the HEA and includes only Federal Stafford Loans
(both subsidized and unsubsidized), Federal SLS loans and Federal Consolidation Loans which are used to repay Federal
Stafford and SLS loans.



Changes:

 None.



Section 668.22 Institutional Refunds and Repayments.





General. Comments:

 Three commenters believed the specific 

pro rata

 refund requirements should not be limited solely to first-time students who received Title IV, HEA program assistance.



Discussion:

 The Secretary does not intend to extend this requirement beyond the scope of the statute; however, an institution
would not be prohibited from extending the 

pro rata

 refund requirements to other students.



Changes:

 None.



Comments:

 A few commenters contended that cost substantiation is unduly burdensome. The commenters maintained that costs
differ greatly between programs, that indirect expenses such as storage, maintenance, packaging, and shipping
would be difficult to justify, and that cost per student would be difficult to calculate if supplies were bought in
bulk. The commenters argued that for large schools with many programs, the costs would change too frequently to accurately
report and many costs are determined by student choice. The commenters stated that only estimates of costs are possible.
These commenters believed that this provision should apply only to institutions with compliance problems. Two commenters
contended that the free market will determine what costs are reasonable and this provision is beyond the Secretary's
authority. Two commenters believed that this provision should be moved to 668.44 (student consumer information).
Two commenters fully supported the Secretary's proposal, citing firsthand experience with institutions that attempt
to circumvent refund policies by inflating supply costs. One commenter recommended that the Secretary limit this
provision to the substantiation of only books and supplies that are required and that are institutional charges.
One commenter recommended that the provision be limited to requiring institutions to substantiate only the cost
of items that the institution supplies, not of those provided by a third-party organization. One commenter asserted
that accrediting agencies should monitor these costs.



Discussion:

 The Secretary believes that cost substantiation is appropriate if the institution wishes to exclude such costs from
the refund calculation. As noted by some commenters, the free market has not worked to contain costs charged to students
for supplies because the students have little, if any, discretion on the supplies that they are required to purchase
for most programs. Furthermore, based upon the Department's experience, some institutions have historically inflated
charges for supplies that students were required to purchase. This predatory pricing for supplies has, in turn, inflated
costs borne by the Title IV, HEA programs and reduced or eliminated refunds that would otherwise have been owed to the
Title IV, HEA programs for students who withdrew. The treatment of supply charges under these regulations will help
curb this abuse without significantly changing the supply charges that can be excluded from the refund calculation
by institutions that fairly price supplies to their students.

As a result of limiting the required cost substantiation to student charges for supplies sold by the institution or
by an affiliated or related entity, the institution is responsible for documenting the costs where a business relationship
exists between the seller and the institution. Furthermore, even if an institution purchases supplies in bulk and
takes advantage of purchasing discounts that cause the costs for such supplies to fluctuate over time, the Secretary
does not believe that it is unduly burdensome to require the institution to document its per-unit cost for the supplies
before it may exclude that amount from the refund calculation. Furthermore, the Secretary does not believe it is appropriate
for the institution to increase the documented supply costs by allocating any portion of the institution's fixed
charges to such calculation. Any such cost recovery for institutional overhead would make the calculation overly
complex, difficult to monitor, and more subject to abuse by some institutions. The procedures under the regulations
permit the institution to recover the actual cost of such supplies, but are not intended to recapture any additional
charges allocable to such items.

The Secretary also believes that the Department is the primary member of the triad that is responsible for monitoring
an institution's ability to comply with the requirements for prompt and accurate refund payments. Although an institution's
accrediting body or cognizant SPRE will have concerns about certain aspects of an institution's adoption and implementation
of its refund policy, HEA has given the Department the primary responsibility for establishing the requirements
for the timing, calculation and procedures for paying refunds to the Title IV, HEA programs.



Changes:

 None.



Comments:

 Six commenters supported the requirement for fair and equitable refunds, but suggested that to be truly equitable,
the requirement should be in force for all students, not just those who receive Title IV, HEA program assistance. Two
commenters supported the Secretary's proposal to limit these refund requirements to affect only recipients of Title
IV, HEA program assistance. Two commenters suggested refund requirements should differ among students based on
the reason for the student's withdrawal. The commenters believed students who officially withdraw for ``legitimate''
reasons, such as medical leave or a family emergency, deserve the benefit of a liberal refund policy. The commenters
believed, however, that students who withdraw without notification or whose reasons for withdrawal are ``irresponsible
or immature'' should be subject to a more stringent, less beneficial refund policy.



Discussion:

 As discussed in the preamble of the February 28, 1994 NPRM, several negotiators asserted that applying the refund
requirements to all students would be too costly for institutions. The Secretary acknowledges that having different
refund policies for students who received Title IV, HEA program assistance could be perceived as inequitable. However,
no institution is prohibited from adopting these refund requirements for all its students. The Secretary believes
Congress clearly intended to treat groups of students in a like manner with regard to refunds, regardless of an individual
student's reason for withdrawal. The Secretary believes a refund policy requiring the assessment of a student's
valid cause for withdrawal would be difficult to regulate and implement, and would require extensive professional
judgment on the part of the institution, thereby excessively increasing the institution's burden.



Changes:

 None. 

