 



It is further ordered that,

 For three (3) years after the last date of dissemination of any representation covered by this Order, respondents,
or their successors and assigns, shall maintain and upon request make available to the Federal Trade Commission for
inspection and copying:

A. Specimen copies of all materials disseminated which contain such representation;

B. All materials that were relied upon as substantiation in disseminating such representation;

C. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all work opportunity participants who paid any money to respondents
within the previous three years; and

D. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all work opportunity participants who earned any income or profits
from respondents during the previous three years, and for each such participant: All written agreements between
respondents and each participant during the previous three years; and the dates and amounts of all payments paid to
each participant for work completed pursuant to the work opportunity during the previous three years.



III 





It is further ordered:

A. That respondent Anthony L. Ingram shall pay to the FTC as consumer redress the sum of one million two hundred thousand
dollars ($1,200,000); provided however, that this liability will be suspended, subject to the provisions of subpart
B below.

B. That the Commission's acceptance of this Order is expressly premised upon the representations regarding the financial
condition of the respective respondents made to the FTC in: A ``Financial Statement of Debtor'' executed by Anthony
L. Ingram on October 20, 1992; a ``Financial Statement of Corporate Defendant'' relating to New Mexico Custom Designs,
Inc. executed by Anthony L. Ingram, as president, on October 20, 1992; the Federal income tax returns of New Mexico
Custom Designs, Inc., for 1989, 1990 and 1991; the federal income tax returns of Anthony L. Ingram for 1990 and 1991;
accounting statements for 1990, 1991 and 1992, referred to in, and enclosed with, a letter from Gary Harrell, Esq.,
to the Federal Trade Commission, dated 22 march 1993; and a letter from Gary Harrell, Esq., to the Federal Trade Commission,
dated 3 May 1993, After service upon respondents of an order to show cause, the FTC may reopen this proceeding to make
a determination whether there are any material misrepresentations for omissions in said representations regarding
the financial condition of the respective respondents. Respondents shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
on this issue. If, upon consideration of respondents' evidence and other information before it, the FTC determines
that there are any material misrepresentations or omissions in the financial statements and related documents,
that determination shall cause the entire amount of monetary liability of one million two hundred thousand dollars
($1,200,000) to become immediately due and payable to the Federal Trade Commission, and interest computed at the
rate prescribed in 28 U.S.C. 1961, as amended, shall immediately begin to accrue on the unpaid balance. Proceedings
initiated under Part III are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other civil or criminal remedies as may be provided
by law, including any proceedings the Federal Trade Commission may initiate to enforce this Order.



IV



It is further ordered,

 That the corporate respondent shall notify the Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to any dissolution, assignment,
or sale resulting in the emergence of a successor corporation, the creation or dissolution of subsidiaries, or any
other change in the corporation that may affect compliance obligations arising out of the Order.



V





It is further ordered that, 

The individual respondent shall promptly notify the Commission of the discontinuance of his present business or
employment and, for a period of five (5) years after the date of service of this order, shall promptly notify the Commission
of each affiliation with a new business or employment.



VI





It is further ordered that, 

Respondents shall, within sixty (60) days after service of this Order on them, and on the first through the fifth anniversaries
of the effective date of this order, file with the Commission a report in writing, setting forth in detail the manner
and form in which it has complied with this Order.



