 

(a) 

General Provisions

_(1) 

Scope.

 (i) This section prescribes good laboratory practices (GLPs) for conducting inhalation exposure studies relating
to motor vehicle emissions health effects testing under this part. These directions are intended to ensure the quality
and integrity of health effects data submitted pursuant to registration regulations issued under sections 211(b)
or 211(e) of the Clean Air Act (CAA) (42 U.S.C. 7545). 
(ii) This section applies to any study described by paragraph (a)(1)(i) of this section which any person conducts,
initiates, or supports on or after May 27, 1994. 
(iii) It is EPA's policy that all health effects data developed under sections 211(b) and (e) of CAA be in accordance
with provisions of this section. If data are not developed in accordance with the provisions of this section, EPA may
consider such data insufficient to evaluate the health effects of a motor vehicle's fuel or fuel additive emissions,
unless the submitter provides additional information demonstrating that the data are reliable and adequate and
EPA determines that the data are sufficient. 
(2) 

Definitions.

 As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings specified: 


Batch

 means a specific quantity or lot of a test fuel, additive/base fuel mixture, or reference substance that has been characterized
according to 79.60(f)(1)(i). 


CAA

 means the Clean Air Act. 


Carrier

 means any material which is combined with engine/motor vehicle emissions or a reference substance for administration
to a test system. ``Carrier'' includes, but is not limited to, clean, filtered air, water, feed, and nutrient media.



Control atmosphere

 means clean, filtered air which is administered to the test system in the course of a study for the purpose of establishing
a basis for comparison with the test atmosphere for chemical or biological measurements. 


Experimental start date

 means the first date the test atmosphere is applied to the test system. 


Experimental termination date

 means the last date on which data are collected directly from the study. 


Person

 includes an individual, partnership, corporation, association, scientific or academic establishment, government
agency, or organizational unit thereof, and any other legal entity. 


Quality assurance unit

 means any person or organizational element, except the study director, designated by testing facility management
to perform the duties relating to quality assurance of the studies. 


Raw data

 means any laboratory worksheets, records, memoranda, notes, or exact copies thereof, that are the result of original
observations and activities of a study and are necessary for the reconstruction and evaluation of the report of that
study. In the event that exact transcripts of raw data have been prepared (e.g., tapes which have been transcribed
verbatim, dated, and verified accurate by signature), the exact copy or exact transcript may be substituted for the
original source as raw data. ``Raw data'' may include photographs, videotape, microfilm or microfiche copies, computer
printouts, magnetic media, including dictated observations, and recorded data from automated instruments. 


Reference substance

 means any chemical substance or mixture, analytical standard, or material other than engine/motor vehicle emissions
and/or its carrier, that is administered to or used in analyzing the test system in the course of a study. A ``reference
substance'' is used to establish a basis for comparison with the test atmosphere for known chemical or biological
measurements, 

i.e.

, positive or negative control substance. 


Specimen

 means any material derived from a test system for examination or analysis. 



