 

(b) Determine the resources, both human and fiscal, available at the community level to provide quality services
to children with severe disabilities as well as resources available through other agencies or parties; 

(c) Carry out activities that would assist children with severe disabilities to achieve their highest potential
outcomes in general education settings within their neighborhoods_or, in the case of infants and toddlers, in natural
environments, including nonsegregated settings_by implementing planned, capacity building activities that
result in systematic and systemic change. These activities must include, but need not be limited to_ 

(1) Policy analysis and, if necessary, policy revision or further policy development, including development of
necessary interagency agreements; 

(2) Public awareness; 
(3) Product development and dissemination; 
(4) Site development; 
(5) Staff and parent training; 
(6) Technical assistance; and 
(7) Analysis and, if necessary, revision of existing teacher training programs, including inservice training of
faculty of institutions of higher education; 
(d) Disseminate formal, written policies and procedures to relevant State agencies, institutions of higher education,
local education agencies, other relevant community agencies, and professional and parent organizations for coordinating
services to the target population of children with severe disabilities; 
(e) Coordinate activities with the State and Multi-State Services Projects for Children with Deaf-Blindness, the
State educational agency (including the State coordinator of services for children with severe disabilities, the
coordinator for the comprehensive system of personnel development, and the State's transition project, if the State
has a federally funded grant under State Systems for Transition Services), the lead agency for part H of IDEA for early
intervention services, other relevant State agencies, and institutions of higher education, as well as with technical
assistance, information, and personnel development networks within the State, the Early Childhood Research Institute
on Integration, the National Early Childhood Technical Assistance System, and the Institute on Implementing Inclusive
Education for Children with Severe Disabilities; and 
(f) Implement an evaluation plan that includes performance measures for_

(1) Changes in the delivery of special education and related services to the target population, and, in the case of
infants and toddlers, changes in the delivery of early intervention services; 

(2) The movement of children and youth with severe disabilities in the State from segregated settings to neighborhood
general education settings_alongside their peers of the same age_and, in the case of infants and toddlers, to natural
environments; 

(3) The effectiveness of the training and technical assistance products and procedures; and 

(4) The types and numbers of sites where activities are conducted, number and types of persons trained, types of follow-up
activities, and number of children and families served at the site where activities were conducted. 



Competitive Priority:

 Within Absolute Priority 2, the Secretary, under 34 CFR 75.105(c)(2)(i), gives preference to applications that
meet the following competitive priority. The Secretary awards up to 10 points to an application that meets this competitive
priority in a particularly effective way. These points are in addition to any points the application earns under the
selection criteria for this program: 

Statewide Systems Change projects from States that have not received a new Statewide System Change award since 1987.




Project Period:

 Up to 60 months. 



Absolute Priority 3_Outreach Projects: Serving Children with Severe Disabilities in General Education and Community
Settings

 (84.086U). To be considered for funding under this priority, an outreach project must_
 
(a) Disseminate information about and assist in replicating a proven model or models_or proven components of models_that
provide or improve services for children with severe disabilities; 

(b) Coordinate its dissemination and replication activities with_

(1) The lead agency for part H of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) for early intervention services
or the State educational agency for special education; as well as 

(2) Technical assistance, information, and personnel development networks within the State; 

(c) Include_

(1) Approaches relevant to programming in general education and local community settings; 

(2) Active involvement of children and their families in the design, implementation, and evaluation of project activities;
and 

(3) Interagency coordination if multiple agencies are involved in the provision of services; 

(d) Ensure that the model or components of models are consistent with part B of the IDEA, are state-of-the-art, match
the needs of the proposed sites, and have recent unambiguous evaluation information supporting their effectiveness;


(e) Use activities that include, but need not be limited to, public awareness, product development and dissemination,
site development, training, and technical assistance; 

(f) Describe the effects of model components (e.g., expected costs, needed personnel, staff training, equipment)
on potential users, the sequence of implementation activities, and the criteria for selecting cooperating sites;
and 

(g) Evaluate the outreach activities to determine their effectiveness. The evaluation must include measures on
the number of children and families served at each site, child and family progress, types and numbers of sites where
outreach activities are conducted, number of persons trained, types of follow-up activities, and any changes in
the model made by sites. 



Competitive Priority:

 Within Absolute Priority 3, the Secretary, under 34 CFR 75.105(c)(2)(i), gives preference to applications that
meet the following competitive priority. The Secretary awards up to 10 points to an application that meets this competitive
priority in a particularly effective way. These points are in addition to any points the application earns under the
selection criteria for this program: 

Outreach projects that provide evidence that they will establish implementation sites in urban or rural areas, or
both. 



Project Period:

 Up to 36 months. 



For Applications and General Information Contact:

 Robin Buckler, U.S. Department of Education, 400 Maryland Avenue, SW., room 4617, Switzer Building, Washington,
DC 202022732. Telephone (202) 2058168. Individuals who use a telecommunications device for the deaf
(TDD) may call the TDD number at (202) 2058169. 



For Technical Information Contact:

 Dawn Hunter, U.S. Department of Education, 400 Maryland Avenue, SW., room 4620, Switzer Building, Washington, DC
202022644. Telephone: (202) 2055809. Individuals who use a telecommunications device for the deaf
(TDD) may call the TDD number at (202) 2058169. 



Program Authority:

 20 U.S.C. 1424. 


