 

(3) 

Defective paint. 

In the case of a unit constructed before 1978 that is for a family that includes a child less than six years of age, the
initial inspection under 887.207(c), and each periodic inspection under 887.257, shall include an
inspection for defective paint surfaces. If defective paint surfaces are found, treatment as required by 35.24(b)(4)
of this title shall be required, in accordance with 887.207(c) or 887.257, as appro-


priate. *** 


(4) 

Chewable surfaces. 

In the case of a unit constructed before 1978 that is for a family that includes a child less than six years of age with
an identified EBL condition, the initial inspection under 887.207(c), or a periodic inspection under 887.257,
shall include a test for lead-based paint on chewable surfaces. Testing shall be conducted by a State or local health
or housing agency, an inspector certified or regulated by a State or local health or housing agency, or an organization
recognized by HUD. Lead content shall be tested using an X-ray fluorescence analyzer (XRF) or other method approved
by HUD. Test readings of 1 mg/cm2 or higher shall be considered positive for the presence of lead-based paint. If the
laboratory reports the test results in percent by weight, 0.5 percent or 5000 parts per million (ppm) shall be considered
positive. When lead-based paint on chewable surfaces is identified, covering or removal of the paint surface in accordance
with 35.24(b)(4) of this title shall be required in accordance with 887.207(c) or 887.257, as
appropriate, and correction shall be completed within the time limits in paragraph (i)(3) of this section. 
(5) 

Abatement without testing. 

In lieu of the procedures set forth in paragraph (i)(4) of this section, at its discretion the PHA may forego testing
and require the owner to abate all interior and exterior chewable surfaces in accordance with the method set out in
35.24(b)(4) of this title. 


* * * * * 



PART 890_SUPPORTIVE HOUSING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES 


43. The authority citation for part 890 would be revised to read as follows:

 



Authority: 

42 U.S.C. 3535(d) and 8013.



44. Section 890.260 would be amended by: 
a. Revising paragraph (f)(1)(ii); 
b. Revising the second sentences of paragraphs (f)(2)(i) and (iii); 
c. Removing the definitions of ``Applicable surface'' and ``Defective paint surfaces'' and revising the introductory
text and the definitions of ``Chewable surface'', and ``Elevated blood lead level or EBL'' in paragraph (f)(2)(ii);

d. Adding the definition ``Defective paint surface'' in alphabetical order in paragraph (f)(2)(ii); and 
e. Revising paragraphs (f)(2)(iv), (v) and (vi), to read as follows: 


890.260 

Other Federal requirements. 


* * * * * 


(f) * * * 
(1) * * * 
(ii) In which any child less than six years of age resides or is expected to reside. 
(2)(i) * * * This paragraph is promulgated under 35.24(b)(6) and supersedes, with respect to the program, the
requirements prescribed in part 35, subpart C, of this title. 
(ii) The following definitions apply to paragraph (f) of this section: 


Chewable surface 

means any intact protruding painted surface up to five feet from the floor or ground that is readily accessible to children
less than six years of age (e.g., protruding corners, windowsills and frames, doors and frames, and other protruding
woodwork). 


Defective paint surface 

means the same as the term is defined in 35.22 of this title. 


Elevated blood lead level or EBL 

means the same as the term is defined in 35.3 of this title. 


* * * * * 


(iii) * * * Defective paint surfaces either must be tested for lead content or, if defective paint surfaces are not tested,
the presence of lead-based paint shall be assumed and the surfaces abated in accordance with 35.24(b)(4) of
this title. * * * 
(iv) In the case of a structure constructed or substantially rehabilitated prior to 1978, if the Owner is presented
with test results that indicate that a child less than six years of age occupies the structure and has an elevated blood
lead level (EBL), the Owner must cause the unit to be tested for lead-based paint on chewable surfaces. Testing shall
be conducted by a State or local health or housing agency, an inspector certified or regulated by a State or local health
or housing agency, or an organization recognized by HUD. Lead content shall be tested using an X-ray fluorescence
analyzer (XRF) or other method approved by HUD. Test readings of 1 mg/cm2 or higher shall be considered positive for
the presence of lead-based paint. If the laboratory reports the test results in percent by weight, 0.5 percent or 5000
parts per million (ppm) shall be considered positive. When lead-based paint on chewable surfaces is identified,
covering or removal of the paint surface in accordance with 35.24(b)(4) of this title is required. 
(v) When abatement will result from rehabilitation activities planned (i.e., when all defective or chewable surfaces
will be replaced, covered, or otherwise abated as described in this part), these surfaces do not have to be tested.






