 

One commenter stated that it would facilitate chartering if groups were able to obtain tentative approval of their
fields of membership early in the process. This commenter also believed that early submission of NCUA 4012 may also
speed the process.

The proposal stated that the subscribers should be responsible for paying the cost of credit reports and background
checks when applying for a credit union charter. Seven commenters agreed with this provision. Nine commenters believed
that the subscribers should not be responsible for paying the cost of credit reports and background checks when applying
for a new charter. Two commenters recommended that NCUA articulate the standards relied upon in disqualifying credit
union organizers.



B. NCUA Board Decision



The NCUA Board agrees with these suggestions and is hopeful that the result of all the changes made will be a significant
increase in new federal chartering activity. Small, vibrant credit unions, serving their members on a first-name
basis and willing to take reasonable credit risks based on personal knowledge of their members' character, are a vital
part of the credit union movement. Many credit unions which used to fill this niche have through their success grown
to the point where credit union management can no longer make these personal judgments on each individual member:
A new generation of small credit unions is needed to fill that void, particularly in the many poor inner-city and rural
areas where credit needs are now largely unmet.

The final IRPS provides:

&bull;That charter applicants will receive acknowledgment of the application's receipt in 10 business days

&bull;That tentative field of membership approval will be given early in the process

&bull;That early submission of NCUA 4012 will be encouraged

&bull;That the cost of credit reports and background checks will be borne by NCUA

The NCUA Board does not believe, however, that it would be productive to establish many other absolute standards and
guidelines. Each application is to some extent unique and may require somewhat different procedures and time frames.
The Board believes these are best left to be worked out between the prospective credit union officials and NCUA staff.



IV. Distress Situations Caused by Dramatic Changes in Economic Conditions Within a Federal Credit Union's Field
of Membership 



A. Comments



