 

The existing regulations regarding interim use of bottled water 
to avoid an unreasonable risk to health state that the PWS is fully 
responsible for the provision of sufficient quantities of bottled water to 
every customer via door-to-door delivery. The Option being proposed today 
(Option 1) would similarly require door-to-door delivery by the PWS to 
persons in the target population when the sulfate MCL is exceeded. EPA 
requests comment on whether this door-to-door delivery requirement is 
appropriate for the sulfate rulemaking, or whether the requirements should 
be more flexible. For example, several possible means of delivery might be 
allowed. Distribution points could be authorized to stock and supply 
bottled water to the target population, with coupons issued to consumers in 
the target population redeemable at the distribution point. PWSs supplying 
bottled water to households would deliver that water upon request and free 
of charge, except as discussed under III.B.4.c. above. EPA requests comment 
on the degree of flexibility needed in the mechanism for delivery of 
bottled water that meets the sulfate MCL. 
(2) POU/POE devices. 
The existing regulations for variance and exemption conditions 
(142.62) also describe the requirements for allowing a PWS to use POU or 
POE devices. These regulations state that it is the responsibility of the 
PWS to operate and maintain the POU and/or POE treatment system. Before 
POU or POE devices are installed, the PWS obtains the primacy agent's 
approval of a monitoring plan which ensures that the devices provide health 
protection to the target population equivalent to that provided by central 
treatment. The PWS must apply effective technology under a State-approved 
plan. The microbiological safety of the water must be maintained at all 
times. The State must require certification of adequate performance, field 
testing, and if not included in the certification process, an engineering 
design review of the POU/POE devices. Under 142.62(h), the design and 
application of the POU/POE devices must consider the potential for 
increasing concentrations of heterotrophic bacteria in water treated with 
activated carbon. The State must be assured that buildings connected to 
the system have sufficient POU or POE devices that are properly installed, 
maintained, and monitored such that all consumers will be protected. 
The existing regulations described above would be applied in both 
Options 1 and 4. EPA assumes that only Options 1 and 4 would entail the 
use of POU/POE devices, since in Options 2 and 3, bottled water would 
likely be more cost-effective, given the reduced target population. The 
Agency seeks comment on whether all of these existing requirements should 
be proposed in the case of sulfate MCL exceedence, or whether more flexible 
requirements would be appropriate. For example, if recordkeeping could 
demonstrate that an effective maintenance program was in place to ensure 
the proper functioning of the treatment equipment and compliance with the 
MCL, some reduction in monitoring might be foreseen. The efficiency or 
longevity of certain types of POU or POE devices might also be considered. 
(3) Effective Dates for Initial Monitoring. 
Initial monitoring for all systems would begin in the first 
January after the effective date of the rule. EPA's issuance of the final 
sulfate rule is scheduled for May 1996. The effective date will be 18 
months after the promulgation of the final rule, or November of 1997. If 
this schedule is maintained, the initial monitoring for sulfate would begin 
in January 1998 for all systems. 
(4) Sampling Location. 
Under the proposed regulation, both ground water and surface water 
systems would take a minimum of one sample at every entry point to the 
distribution system which is representative of each well or source after 
treatment. The number of samples a system must take will be determined by 
the number of entry points. This will make it easier to pinpoint possible 
contaminated sources (wells) within a system. In both surface and ground 
water systems, the system shall take each sample at the same sampling point 
unless conditions make another sampling point more representative of each 
source or treatment plant. 
(5) Monitoring Frequency. 
Surface water systems would be required to monitor annually and 
ground water systems would sample every three years. Systems which comply 
by Option 1 would not be required to continue monitoring the water in the 
distribution system for sulfate. That water may continue to exceed the 
sulfate MCL, but the PWS would be in compliance by providing Alternative 
Water and public notification to target populations. However, the water 
would still have to be monitored for and meet MCLs for other contaminants. 
(6) Public Notice Requirements. 
EPA proposes that PWSs who use central treatment and who are 
nevertheless not in compliance with the sulfate MCL would be subject to the 
public notification requirements in 141.32. However, the Agency recognizes 
that having different public education/notification requirements for those 
systems choosing central treatment and those choosing Option 1 may create 
confusion, and seeks comment on this issue. 
For PWSs authorized by the State to use whichever option (1 
through 4) is promulgated in the final sulfate rule, public notification 
requirements are proposed to be those described in section III.B.4.b.3 of 
this Notice. 
c. 

State Implementation.

 The Act provides that States may assume primary implementation and enforcement responsibilities for the PWS program
(primacy). 40 CFR part 
142 contains EPA's primacy regulations. In States or tribal governments 
where EPA has direct implementation, resource constraints make it unlikely 
that the Agency would offer the alternative options (1 through 4, whichever 
is promulgated) to systems. EPA Regional Offices will, however, have the 
discretion to consider particular circumstances in their decision about 
whether or not to offer and implement the alternative option. The Agency 
assumes that most States with primacy would offer the alternative option, 
but requests comment on this issue. 
Fifty-five out of 57 jurisdictions have applied for and 
received primacy under the Act. To implement the federal regulations for 
drinking water contaminants, States must have legal authorities which are 
at least as stringent as the federal regulations. To update their programs, 
States must comply with the requirements in 40 CFR 142.12 on revising 
approved primacy programs. This proposal describes the regulations and 
other procedures and policies States would need to adopt or have in place 
to implement the new regulations for sulfate. 
Under this proposal, States would be required to adopt the 
following requirements: Modifications to 141.23, Inorganic Chemical 
Sampling and Analytical Requirements, 141.32, Public Notification 
Requirements (i.e., mandatory health effects language to be included in 
public notification or violations), and 141.62(b), Maximum Contaminant 
Levels for Inorganic Contaminants, where sulfate has been added to the 
list. 
In addition to adopting drinking water provisions no less 
stringent than the federal regulations listed above, EPA is proposing to 
allow States to adopt certain requirements related to this regulation in 
order to have their program revision application approved by EPA. This rule 
proposes to provide flexibility to the State with regard to implementation 
of the monitoring requirements for sulfate depending on whether a system 
chooses central treatment or the alternative method of compliance 
promulgated in the final rule. In all cases, States would decide and 
inform PWSs as to whether the alternative method of compliance (referred to 
as Option 1 for simplicity) promulgated in the final sulfate rule will be 
allowed. Specifically, States would be authorized to offer Option 1 as a 
means of compliance to PWSs who exceed the sulfate MCL. Under Option 1, 
the State would need to approve the monitoring plan of a PWS that chooses 
the Alternative Water and public education/notification as a means of 
compliance. The requirements would be as follows: 
(1) State Primacy Requirements. 
To ensure that the State program includes all the elements 
necessary for an effective and enforceable program, the State's request for 
approval must include a plan that each system monitor for sulfate by the 
end of each compliance period. If the State is planning to authorize PWSs 
to use Option 1, it would need to submit the text of State laws requiring 
the Alternative Water and public notification/education program, and a 
description of the State's plan to oversee compliance of the program. 
States planning to issue monitoring waivers would do so according to the 
requirements of 142.16. 







