 

DOE proposes to perform the Defense Waste Processing Facility review in a supplement to the 1982 EIS for the Defense
Waste Processing Facility. Although the analysis could be included in the Savannah River Site Waste Management EIS,
DOE believes public review and DOE's decision making process would be facilitated by preparing a separate document
because the Defense Waste Processing Facility is a very specialized operation with limited connections to the activities
to be covered in the Waste Management EIS. Where there are interconnections, duplicate discussions within both documents
may be required or the documents may cross reference one another.
Activities at the Defense Waste Processing Facility have proceeded on the basis of the 1982 EIS and Record of Decision.
Construction of the Defense Waste Processing Facility is almost complete, testing of the system with cold chemicals
has begun and processing runs of simulated (non-radioactive) material will begin in the next few months. DOE committed
in an agreement with the Environmental Protection Agency and the state of South Carolina to adhere to a schedule that
provides for radionuclide testing at the Defense Waste Processing Facility to begin in December, 1995. In order to
support that schedule and to manage efficiently the high level radioactive wastes contained in the tank farms, in-tank
precipitation must begin in late 1994 or early 1995. A supplemental EIS focussing on the changes to the Defense Waste
Processing Facility can be completed in time to meet this schedule, while the Waste Management EIS is expected to take
several more months to prepare. These two EISs will be closely coordinated. Delay of start-up for the Defense Waste
Processing Facility would cost approximately $21,000,000 per month.
The Supplemental EIS will examine all reasonably foreseeable impacts of operating the Defense Waste Processing
Facility, including alternative methods of managing the waste streams from the facility. DOE believes that this
will provide sufficient information to decide whether to proceed with operation of the facility in advance of completion
of the Savannah River Waste Management EIS.
The proposed scope for the Savannah River Site Waste Management EIS does not include management of spent nuclear fuel
and other materials that have historically been the feed materials for Savannah River Site materials production
and reprocessing programs. Such nuclear materials are being addressed in several National Environmental Policy
Act documents under preparation by DOE: (1) The Programmatic EIS for Spent Nuclear Fuel Management will include,
among other issues, a programmatic analysis of the transportation, receipt, processing, and storage of spent nuclear
fuel at DOE sites, including the Savannah River Site; (2) the Environmental Assessment for Urgent Relief Acceptance
of Foreign Research Reactor Nuclear Spent Fuel and a subsequent broader scope EIS (Notice of Intent published October
21, 1993; 58 FR 54336) will analyze the proposed adoption and implementation of a policy for the acceptance of as many
as 15,000 spent nuclear fuel elements from foreign research reactors; and (3) the EIS for the Interim Management of
Nuclear Materials at the Savannah River Site (Notice of Intent published March 17, 1994; 59 FR 12588), will evaluate
and determine materials that can safely remain in their current form for an interim period (approximately five years)
until disposition decisions can be made and materials that require near-term stabilization to help maintain the
health and safety of workers and the public and to maintain environmental quality. In addition, DOE will also evaluate
converting some material into a useable form.


Environmental Restoration and Waste Management Programmatic EIS


The Savannah River Site Waste Management EIS will be prepared at the same time as, and in close coordination with, the
DOE Environmental Restoration and Waste Management Programmitic EIS, which will address DOE complex-wide issues
and alternatives for environmental restoration and waste management policies and practices. Alternatives under
that Programmatic EIS will include decentralization, regionalization, and centralization of waste management
functions.
The alternatives analysis in the Savannah River Site Waste Management EIS will be consistent with the DOE complex-wide
policies and practices that will be analyzed in the Programmatic EIS. The Savannah River Site Waste Management EIS
will be supplemented, as necessary, to maintain consistency with decisions reached on broader programmatic issues.


