 

Mitigation and Monitoring 





Comment: 

Many commenters stated that the proposed mitigation measures were inadequate. Many were concerned that aerial surveys
would be unsuccessful in detecting marine mammals because they spend 90 percent of the time submerged. 




Response: 

NMFS believes the mitigation measures required by the rule are adequate to protect marine mammals and reduce incidental
take to the lowest level practicable. While aerial surveys will have difficulty detecting those marine mammal species
that spend a significant portion of the time submerged, the regulations prohibit detonations if even a single marine
mammal (or sea turtle, sea bird flock or fish school) is sighted within the safety zone by aerial survey. The small take
authorization is for the unintentional take of marine mammals not sighted by aerial survey. Refer to the EA for a detailed
discussion on how the small take estimates were made. 



Comment: 

Some commenters suggested additional (or alternative) methods for detecting marine mammals during surveys, especially
for deep-diving species, such as sonobuoys and hydrophone arrays. One commenter also suggested, if possible, using
sound to cause some species to surface so they can be seen or to leave or avoid the test area. 



Response: 

Although the Navy proposes to employ hydrophone arrays at several locations to record the impulse pressure wave resulting
from the ship shock trial, these hydrophones will not be capable of recording marine mammal vocalizations. Also,
because the shock trial is a mobile exercise, and because it would be necessary to triangulate on vocalizing marine
mammals in order to determine whether or not they are within the vicinity of the shock trial, this suggestion is not
viewed as being practicable at this time. 

The practicality of using ``scare charges'' (smaller explosive charges) or high decibel noise devices in order to
scare marine mammals from the area of testing is equivocal at best. There is insufficient evidence to give assurance
that marine mammals would leave the area and not be attracted to the site. 



Comment: 

One commenter considered the 2-nm safety zone to be inadequate, believing that injury or harassment could occur at
distances greater than 2 nm. The commenter also considered 
``Area 1'' and ``Area 2'' to be artificial and anthropocentric. Other commenters were concerned that the effects
could extend to great distances, for example physical harassment could occur 22,000 ft (6,706 m) from the detonation
and acoustic harassment up to 121,000 ft (37,039 m) for a 10,000-lb (4,536 kg) charge. One commenter was concerned
that these distances would cause an impact very close to the nearest islands. 



Response: 

NMFS considers the 2-nm safety zone to be adequate to protect marine mammals from injury and death. As indicated in
the EA (Table 12) for the 10,000-lb (4,536 kg) charge, the 2-nm (i.e., 12,150-ft (3,704 m)) safety zone is greater than
the calculated limit for minimum eardrum injury (9,400 ft (2,865 m)). 

As noted in Table 12, while physical harassment could occur up to 22,000 ft (4.2 nm) from the detonation, as indicated
in the application, the safety zone exceeds the maximum horizontal ranges for physical harassment for mammals at
the shallow depths; however, for mammals at depths greater than 200 ft (67 m), there is a possibility for physical harassment
beyond the safety zones, since the surface reflected relief wave arrives later at these depths for these ranges. Refer
to the application for a detailed description of sound source levels in the marine environment. 





