 

The size of the commingling and distillation benefits resulting from substitution of ETBE for ethanol in summer RFG
depends on the market share of ethanol-blended gasolines in each market. As discussed above, EPA cannot quantify
such benefits with certainty; however, the Agency estimates that if a 30 percent market share for ethanol blends in
summer RFG were replaced entirely by ETBE blends, total VOC emissions could be reduced by as much as 5 percent beyond
the reductions that would have occurred without changes in the market share for ethanol blends. Thus, by encouraging
the conversion of summer ethanol into ETBE, the renewable oxygenate requirement will help assure that the RFG program
achieves the maximum possible VOC reduction.
b. 

Shoulder Season Environmental Impacts. 

EPA received comments raising the concern that the use of ethanol in the ``shoulder season'' (the months bordering
the high-ozone season) could lead to ozone violations in certain areas. The comments raise two separate mechanisms
by which ethanol use could increase emissions of ozone precursors. First, ethanol addition to gasoline causes fuel
volatility to increase by approximately 1 psi, and during the shoulder season this increase is not constrained by
the RFG program. Second, ethanol-blended fuels can produce emission increases due to the commingling and distillation
effects described in the preceding section.
EPA has considered the shoulder season issue in detail and has concluded that the emission reductions anticipated
as a result of the RFG program should in most cases more than offset any emission increases due to the increased use of
ethanol in the shoulder season. The basis for this conclusion is presented in section III.G of this notice and is discussed
in detail in the RIA. Nevertheless, EPA has decided to allow States to petition the Administrator to extend the season
during which ethanol blended into gasoline would not receive credit toward today's rule. The provisions governing
the petition process are described in detail in sections III.B and III.G of this notice.
c. 

Global Warming Benefits. 

In addition to the potential to reduce summer VOC emissions, the proposal for this rule stated that the renewable oxygenate
requirement has the potential to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide (and possibly other greenhouse gases) resulting
from the production and use of reformulated gasolines. However, the study by the Department of Energy cited previously
indicates that with current technology, the use of renewable oxygenates leads to similar carbon dioxide-equivalent
emissions (global warming potential of all emissions expressed as an equivalent mass of CO

2

 emissions) as those resulting from the use of nonrenewable MTBE. Testimony from the Oak Ridge National Laboratory
on behalf of the National Corn Growers Association given at the January 14, 1994 public hearing on this rule also indicated
that the use of renewable oxygenates (ethanol in particular) would have no impact on, and in some cases could lead to
a reduction in, the greenhouse gas emissions associated with the use of gasoline. Overall, current technologies
for ethanol production and use appear to have at best minimal benefits relative to nonrenewable MTBE production and
use.
But as noted by EPA in the proposal and as supported by comments received from the Department of Agriculture (see sections
II and VI of this notice) and others, the use of new feedstocks (particularly agricultural and municipal waste products)
and new, more efficient production technologies is likely to result in reduced emissions of CO

2

 related to fuel ethanol use. In addition, improved farming techniques can reduce emissions of other greenhouse gases,
particularly N

2

O. EPA expects that expanding the market for renewable oxygenates such as ethanol will accelerate the introduction
of more efficient feedstock and oxygenate production technologies. Improved efficiencies in these processes would
result in reduced emissions of CO

2

 and other greenhouse gases. Hence, EPA believes that while the renewable oxygenate program may not provide global
warming benefits currently, it will help stimulate the implementation of more efficient agricultural and oxygenate
production practices, leading to reduced emissions of greenhouse gases than would occur with nonrenewable oxygenates.


