 

(B) The earlier issue will not be redeemed within 90 days of the issue date of the later issue in connection with the refunding
of the earlier issue by the later issue; and
(C) More than 5 percent of the sale proceeds of the earlier issue financed an output facility that is part of the same
project as the output facility that is financed by more than 5 percent of the sale proceeds of the later issue.

(3) 

Benefits and burdens test applicable

_(i) 

In general.

 In applying the $15 million output limitation, the benefits and burdens test of 1.1417 applies, except
that ``$15 million'' is substituted for ``10 percent''. For this purpose, the amount of private business use with
respect to an output facility financed by an issue is determined by multiplying the percentage of private business
use over the contract term of the issue by the issue price of the issue.
(ii) 

Earlier issues for the project. 

If an earlier issue is outstanding that must be taken into account under paragraph (a)(2) of this section, the amount
of private business use and private security or payments for that issue (as determined under paragraph (a)(3)(i)
of this section) is multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the greater of the outstanding principal amount
or present value of the outstanding bonds of the earlier issue as of the issue date of the later issue, and the denominator
of which is the issue price of the earlier issue as of the issue date of that issue.
(b) 

Definition of project

_(1) 

General rule.

 For purposes of paragraph (a)(2) of this section, 

project

 has the meaning provided in this paragraph. Facilities having different purposes or serving different customer
bases are not ordinarily part of the same project. For example, the following are generally not part of the same project:
(i) generation and transmission facilities;
(ii) separate facilities designed to serve wholesale customers and retail customers; and
(iii) a peaking unit and a baseload unit.
(2) 

Separate ownership.

 Facilities that are not owned by the same person are not part of the same project. All participants in a joint powers
authority that issues bonds to finance a project are treated as related parties for purposes of applying the $15 million
limitation to bonds financing the same project. In the case of undivided ownership interests in a single output facility,
property that is not owned by the same person is treated as separate projects only if the separate interests are not
financed_
(i) With bonds of a single issuer; and
(ii) With a principal purpose of avoiding the limitation in this section.
(3) 

Generating property

_(i) 

Property on same site.

 In the case of property for the generation of output and related facilities (

generating property

), 

project

 means property located at the same site.
(ii) 

Special rule for generating units.

 Separate generating units (and related facilities) are not a part of the same project if one is placed in service (determined
under 1.1502(c)) more than 3 years before the other. Common facilities or property that will be functionally
related to more than one generating unit must be allocated on a reasonable basis. If a generating unit already is constructed
or is under construction (the 

first unit

) and bonds are to be issued to finance an additional generating unit (the 

second unit

), all costs for any common facilities paid or incurred before the earlier of the issue date of bonds to finance the second
unit or the commencement of construction of the second unit are allocated to the first unit. At the time that bonds are
issued to finance the second unit (or, if earlier, upon commencement of construction of that unit), any remaining
costs of the common facilities may be allocated among the first and second units so that in the aggregate the allocation
is reasonable.
(4) 

Transmission.

 In the case of property for the transmission of output and related facilities, 

project

 means functionally related or contiguous property used for transmission of output but only to the extent that the
property is placed in service during a single 2-year period. Separate property is not part of a single project, however,
unless it is intended to provide transmission between two significant output facilities (for example, a line to connect
two substations).
(5) 

Subsequent improvements. 

An improvement to generating or transmission property that is not part of the original design of that property (the


initial project

) is not part of the same project as the initial project if the construction, reconstruction, or acquisition of that
improvement commences more than three years after the initial project is placed in service and the bonds issued to
finance that improvement are issued more than three years after the initial project is placed in service.

