 

&bull;Describe a plan for collecting summary evaluation data from the funded programs and submitting an annual report
to the Children's Bureau that provides information on the number of clients served, their characteristics and the
services provided. This plan shall further include a process for developing outcome indicators across program sites
that reflect the intent of the legislation and the successes/achievements of the AIA service demonstration programs.
Additionally, the plan shall include the provision of technical assistance to the projects, as needed, to develop

the outcome indicators and a process to collect the data and prepare a report on the program outcomes. The timetable
to prepare the report on program outcomes must be included in the applicant's workplan. 
&bull;Outline a plan for interaction with ACF for implementation under a cooperative agreement including, as appropriate,
Headquarters and Regional Office staff. (A cooperative agreement is Federal Assistance in which substantial Federal
involvement is anticipated. The respective responsibilities of Federal staff and the awardee are negotiated prior
to award.) 


5. Project Duration:

 The length of the project shall not exceed 48 months. 


6. Federal Share of Project Costs:

 The Federal share of the project is $600,000 for each of the three initial 12 month budget periods, or $1,800,000 for
the initial 3 years of the project. Funding for Year 4 may exceed $600,000 but will not be greater than $675,000 for the
fourth 12 month budget period based on a needs assessment submitted by the grantee and approved by appropriate Children's
Bureau staff. 


7. Matching Requirements:

 The applicant must provide at least 10 percent of the total approved cost of the project. The total approved cost is
the sum of the ACYF share and the non-Federal share. The non-Federal share may be cash or in-kind contributions, although
applicants are encouraged to meet their match requirements through cash contributions. Therefore, a project requesting
$2,475,000 in Federal funds must include a match of at least $275,000 (10 percent of the total project cost of $2,750,000).



8. Anticipated Number of Projects to be Funded:

 It is anticipated that one project will be funded as a cooperative agreement. 


9. Length of Applications:

 The maximum length of the application shall not exceed 75 pages excluding appendices. 
CFDA: 93.551 The Abandoned Infants Assistance Act of 1988, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 670 note.


Part III_Review Process 


A. Eligible Applicants 


Before applications are reviewed, each application will be screened to determine that the applicant organization
is an eligible applicant as specified under the selected priority area. Applications from organizations which do
not meet the eligibility requirements for the priority area will not be considered or reviewed in the competition,
and the applicant will be so informed. 


B. Review Process and Funding Decisions 



Timely applications from eligible applicants will be reviewed and scored competitively. Experts in the field, generally
persons from outside of the Federal government, will use the evaluation criteria listed in Section C, Evaluation
Criteria, to review and score the applications. The results of this review are a primary factor in making funding decisions.

ACYF reserves the option of discussing applications with, or referring them to, other Federal or non-Federal funding
sources when this is determined to be in the best interest of the Federal government or the applicant. It may also solicit
comments from ACYF Regional Office staff, other Federal agencies, interested foundations, national organizations,
specialists, experts, States and the general public. These comments, along with those of the expert reviewers, will
be considered by ACYF in making funding decisions. 
In making decisions on awards, ACYF may give preference to applications which demonstrate or feature: Experience
in providing complex training and technical assistance in child welfare and/or related fields; an eclectic approach
to the substantive content of each topical area; a favorable balance between Federal and non-Federal funds available
for the proposed project; and the potential for high benefit for the level of Federal investment. 
To the greatest extent possible, efforts will be made to ensure that funding decisions reflect an equitable distribution
of assistance across geographic regions of the country. 




