 

This proposed rule reflects the committee's and the Department's appraisal of the need to make the specified changes.
The Department's view is that this action will have a beneficial impact on producers and handlers since it will help
ensure that only mature avocados are shipped to fresh markets. The committee considers that maturity requirements
for Florida grown avocados are necessary to improve grower returns and promote orderly marketing conditions. Although
compliance with these maturity requirements will affect costs to handlers, these costs will be offset by the benefits
of providing the industry and consumers with mature avocados. 
Paragraph (d) of 915.150 (7 CFR 915.150), currently requires that each handler, at the end of the day's operation,
report to the committee the number of containers (1/4 Bushel, 1/2 Bushel, and 4/5 Bushel) of avocados sold and delivered
within the State of Florida. This proposed action would suspend paragraph (d) of 915.150 for the next two seasons,
through March 31, 1996. This would temporarily suspend the requirement that handlers file the ``Avocado Handler
Daily Size Report Form.'' The committee has determined that information needed for operations, marketing policies,
and compliance, could sufficiently be obtained from inspection certificates collected on a daily basis by program
staff, and that information collected on the ``Avocado Handler Daily Size Report Form'' will not be needed for the
next two seasons. Further, Hurricane Andrew reduced avocado production by almost half, and this has reduced assessment
collections, resulting in a need to reduce staff and administration costs. 
The information collection requirements have been previously approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
under the provisions of 44 U.S.C. chapter 35 and have been assigned OMB Number 05810078. 
This rule would reduce the reporting burden on approximately 65 handlers of avocados who complete the form ``Avocado
Handler Daily Size Report Form,'' taking about 0.083 hour to complete each report. 
Based on available information, the Administrator of the AMS has determined that this action would not have a significant
economic impact on a substantial number of small entities. 


List of Subjects in 7 CFR Part 915 


Avocados, Marketing agreements, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. 



For the reasons set forth in the preamble, 7 CFR part 915 is proposed to be amended as follows: 



PART 915_AVOCADOS GROWN IN SOUTH FLORIDA 


1. The authority citation for 7 CFR Part 915 continues to read as follows: 





Authority:

 7 U.S.C. 601674. 



915.150 

[Amended]



2. Section 915.150, paragraph (d) is suspended in its entirety through March 31, 1996. 
3. Section 915.332 is revised to read as follows: 


915.332 

Florida avocado maturity regulation. 


(a) No handler shall handle any variety of avocados, except Hass, Fuerte, Zutano, and Edranol, grown in the production
area unless: 
(1) Any portion of the skin of the individual avocados has changed to the color normal for that fruit when mature for
those varieties which normally change color to any shade of red or purple when mature, except for the Linda variety;
or 
(2) Such avocados meet the minimum weight or diameter requirements for the Monday nearest each date specified, through
the Sunday immediately prior to the nearest Monday of the specified date in the next column, for each variety listed
in the following Table I: 

Provided

, that avocados may not be handled prior to the earliest date specified in column A of such table for the respective variety;


Provided further,

 There are no restrictions on size or weight on or after the date specified in column D; 

Provided further

, That up to a total of 10 percent, by count to the individual fruit in each lot may weigh less than the minimum specified
or be less than the specified diameter, except that no such avocados shall be over 2 ounces lighter than the minimum
weight specified for the variety: 

Provided further

, That up to double such tolerance shall be permitted for fruit in an individual container in a lot. 





