 

MS and SS cigarette smoke are chemically and physically complex mixtures consisting of electrically charged submicron
liquid particles at very high concentration consisting of permanent gases, reactive gases, and a large variety of
organic chemicals. The composition of the smoke and especially the total quantities of individual constituents
delivered are dependent on the conditions of smoke generation [Ex. 4311].

Nicotine, while found in the particulate phase in MS, is found predominantly in the gas phase in ETS [Ex. 4100].
The differences in size distribution for MS and SS particles, as well as the different breathing patterns of smokers
and nonsmokers, affect deposition of the produced particle contaminants in various regions of the respiratory tract.

There are substantial similarities and some differences between MS and SS emissions from cigarettes [Exs. 3689D,
4129, 4239]. Differences in MS and SS emissions are due to differences in the temperature of the combustion
of tobacco, pH, and degree of dilution with the air, which is accompanied by a correspondingly rapid decrease in temperature.
SS is generated at a lower temperature (approximately 600
&cir;C between puffs versus 800 to 900
&cir;C for MS during puffs) and at a higher pH (6.77.5 versus 6.06.7) than MS. Being slightly more alkaline,
SS contains more ammonia, is depleted of acids, contains greater quantities of organic bases, and contains less hydrogen
cyanide than MS. Differences in MS and SS are also ascribable to differences in the oxygen concentration (16% in MS
versus 2% in SS). SS contaminants are generated in a more reducing environment than those in MS, which will affect the
distribution of some compounds. Nitrosamines, for example, are present in greater concentrations in SS than in MS.

Many of the compounds found in MS, which were identified as human carcinogens, are also found in SS emissions [Exs.
3689D, 493, 4129, 4239, 4269] and at emission rates considerably higher than for
MS. SS contains ten times more polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, aza-arenes and amines as compared with MS [Ex. 4126].
All of the five known carcinogens, nine probable human carcinogens, and three animal carcinogens are emitted at higher
levels in SS than in MS, several by an order of magnitude or more. Several toxic compounds found in MS are also found in
SS (carbon monoxide, ammonia, nitrogen oxides, nicotine, acrolein, acetone, etc.), in some cases by an order of magnitude
or higher (Tables III6 and III7).

SS emissions, quantitatively, show little variability as a function of a number of variables (puff volume, filter
versus nonfilter cigarette, and filter ventilation [Exs. 41, 434, 454, 4128, 4129,
4141]. The lack of substantial variability in SS emissions is related to the fact that they are primarily related
to the weight of tobacco and paper consumed during the smoldering period, with little influence exerted by cigarette
design [Ex. 4129].



(b) Human Activity Pattern Studies Used to Assess Workplace Exposure. 

Human activity pattern studies utilize random samples of human activity patterns using questionnaires and time-diary
data to provide detailed generalizable data about human behavior. Such studies have been used to assess exposure
to ETS. In 19871988, the California Air Resources Board sponsored a probability-based cross-sectional sample
of 1,579 Californians aged 18 years and older, called the California Activity Pattern Survey (CAPS) [Exs. 4168,
4271]. The study was designed to provide information on time spent in various locations, including indoors,
outdoors, and in transit, as well as specific microenvironments, such as living rooms, kitchens, automobiles, or
buses. The study focused on time spent in activities such as cooking or playing sports, but more specifically targeted
activities and environments that had implications for air pollution exposure, such as the presence of smokers, use
of cooking equipment or solvents.

In analyzing the data from CAPS, Jenkins et al. [Ex. 4168] and Robinson et al. [Ex. 4271] found that time
spent at work had a high correlation with exposure to ETS. This association of ETS exposure with work settings remained
strong after controlling for the length of the activity episode, and hence was not simply a function of longer time
intervals at work. Robinson et al. [Ex. 4271] also found that men reported higher levels of exposure than women,
even after controlling for age, employment status, shorter working hours, etc. This finding suggests that the epidemiological
studies of passive smoking and lung cancer, which have focussed on women, may be underestimating the effect of ETS
on lung cancer.

Further analysis of the CAP study [Ex. 4169] verifies the high percentage of nonsmokers who are exposed to ETS
while at work. This is indicated when the data are analyzed by employed nonsmoker status. As indicated in Table III8,
51% of male and 38% of female nonsmokers reported ETS exposure at work. The average duration of this exposure was 313
minutes for males and 350 minutes for females. When the group that reported exposure at the workplace is analyzed further
it becomes apparent that the overwhelming exposure location for these employed nonsmokers is the workplace (Table
III9). As indicated in Table III9, 77% of males and 85% of females were exposed an average of 313 minutes
and 350 minutes, respectively.

One other finding is that the more time spent at work, the higher the likelihood of greater ETS exposure. For example,
the average duration of exposure to homemakers was approximately 2 hours a day, for workers the average duration of
exposure was approximately 3 hours a day.



