 

(4) A review of the policies and procedures related to the requirements for which deficiencies exist. 
(5) Investigation of any participation requirement at the discretion of the survey agency. 
(c) 

Timing and basis for survey. 

The survey agency must conduct an extended survey not later than 14 calendar days after completion of a standard survey
which found that the facility had furnished substandard quality of care. 


488.312 

Consistency of survey results. 


HCFA does and the survey agency must implement programs to measure accuracy and improve consistency in the application
of survey results and enforcement remedies. 


488.314 

Survey teams. 


(a) 

Team composition. 

(1) Surveys must be conducted by a multidisciplinary team of professionals, which must include a registered nurse.

(2) Examples of professionals include, but are not limited to, physicians, physician assistants, nurse practitioners,
physical, speech, or occupational therapists, registered professional nurses, dieticians, sanitarians, engineers,
licensed practical nurses, or social workers. 
(3) The State determines what constitutes a professional, subject to HCFA approval. 
(4) Any of the following circumstances disqualifies a surveyor for surveying a particular facility: 
(i) The surveyor currently works, or, within the past two years, has worked as an employee, as employment agency staff
at the facility, or as an officer, consultant, or agent for the facility to be surveyed. 
(ii) The surveyor has any financial interest or any ownership interest in the facility. 
(iii) The surveyor has an immediate family member who has a relationship with a facility described in paragraphs (a)(2)
(i) or (ii) of this section. 
(iv) The surveyor has an immediate family member who is a resident in the facility to be surveyed. For purposes of this
section, an immediate family member is defined at 488.301 of this part. 
(b) 

HCFA training. 

HCFA provides comprehensive training to surveyors, including at least the following: 
(1) Application and interpretation of regulations for SNFs and NFs. 
(2) Techniques and survey procedures for conducting standard and extended surveys. 
(3) Techniques for auditing resident assessments and plans of care. 
(c) 

Required surveyor training. 

(1) Except as specified in paragraph (c)(3) of this section, the survey agency may not permit an individual to serve
as a member of a survey team unless the individual has successfully completed a training and testing program prescribed
by the Secretary. 
(2) The survey agency must have a mechanism to identify and respond to in-service training needs of the surveyors.

(3) The survey agency may permit an individual who has not completed a training program to participate in a survey as
a trainee if accompanied on-site by a surveyor who has successfully completed the required training and testing program.



488.318 

Inadequate survey performance. 


(a) HCFA considers survey performance to be inadequate if the State survey agency_
(1) Indicates a pattern of failure to_
(i) Identify deficiencies and the failure cannot be explained by changed conditions in the facility or other case
specific factors; 
(ii) Cite only valid deficiencies; 
(iii) Conduct surveys in accordance with the requirements of this subpart; or 




