 

l. 

Purpose of Project:

 Project power would be sold. 

m. 

This Notice Also Consists of the Following Standard 
Paragraphs: 

A5, A7, A9, A10, B, C, and D2.

 


8a. 

Type of Application:

 Amendment of license. 

b. 

Project No.:

 2848017. 

c. 

Date Filed:

 March 10, 1994. 

d. 

Applicant:

 Idaho Power Company. 

e. 

Name of Project:

 Cascade Project. 

f. 

Location:

 On the North Fork Payette River in 
Valley County, Idaho. 

g. 

Filed Pursuant to:

 Federal Power Act, 16 U.S.C. 
791(a)825(r). 

h. 

Applicant Contact:

 Mr. Robert W. Stahman, 
Vice President, Secretary, and 
General Counsel, 
Idaho Power Company, 
1221 West Idaho Street, 
P.O. Box 70, 
Boise, ID 83707, 
(208) 3832676.

i. 

FERC Contact:

 Paul Shannon, (202) 2192866. 

j. 

Comment Date:

 May 16, 1994. 

k. 

Description of Amendment:

 Idaho Power Company (IPC) 
proposes to relocate approximately 0.65 miles of 
transmission lines along Warm Lake Road between State 
Highway 55 and Warm Lake. IPC proposes to relocate the line 
13 to 21 feet due north of the existing line because Valley 
County is widening Warm Lake Road. All new transmission 
poles will be of similar height and configuration to the 
existing poles and will be of raptor-safe design. The 
relocated poles will be within the road right-of-way and 
will meet Valley County's requirement of being no closer 
than 27 feet from the planned centerline of the new road 
alignment. 

l. 

This notice also consists of the following standard 
paragraphs: 

B, C1, and D2.

 


9a. 

Type of Application:

 Surrender of Exemption. 

b. 

Project No:

 8321003. 

c. 

Date Filed:

 January 18, 1994. 

d. 

Applicant:

 Murray W. Thurston. 

e. 

Name of Project:

 Thurston Mill Dam. 

f. 

Location:

 On the Swift River, Oxford County, 
Maine. 

g. 

Filed Pursuant to:

 Federal Power Act, 16 USC 
Section 791(a)825(r) 

h. 

Applicant Contact:

 Mr. Murray W. Thurston, 
The J. A. Thurston Co., Inc., 
Hale Road, 
Rumford, ME 04276, 
(207) 3647921. 

i. 

FERC Contact: 

Patricia Massie, (202) 2192681. 

j. 

Comment Date: 

May 4, 1994. 

k. 

Description of Proposed Action: 

The existing project, for 
which the exemption is being surrendered, consists of: (1) A 
concrete gravity dam, built in 1920; (2) a power canal with 
an intake gate and a fish passage; (3) a powerhouse with 3 
units having a total generating capacity of 350 kilowatts; 
and (4) appurtenant structures. The project is financially 
infeasible to operate. 

l. 

This notice also consists of the following standard 
paragraphs: 

B, C1, and D2. 



Standard Paragraphs 



A2. Development Application_Any qualified applicant desiring 
to file a competing application must submit to the Commission, on 
or before the specified deadline date for the particular 
application, a competing development application, or a notice of 
intent to file such an application. Submission of a timely 
notice of intent allows an interested person to file the 
competing development application no later than 120 days after 
the specified deadline date for the particular application. 
Applications for preliminary permits will not be accepted 
in response to this notice. 

A4. Development Application_Public notice of the filing of 
the initial development application, which has already been 
given, established the due date for filing competing applications 
or notices of intent. Under the Commission's regulations, any 
competing development application must be filed in response to 
and in compliance with public notice of the initial development 
application. No competing applications or notices of intent may 
be filed in response to this notice. 

A5. Preliminary Permit_Anyone desiring to file a competing 
application for preliminary permit for a proposed project must 
submit the competing application itself, or a notice of intent to 
file such an application, to the Commission on or before the 
specified comment date for the particular application (see 
18 CFR 4.36). Submission of a timely notice of intent allows 
an interested person to file the competing preliminary permit 
application no later than 30 days after the specified comment 
date for the particular application. A competing preliminary 
permit application must conform with 18 CFR 4.30(b)(1) and 
(9) and 4.36. 

A7. Preliminary Permit_Any qualified development applicant 
desiring to file a competing development application must submit 
to the Commission, on or before a specified comment date for the 
particular application, either a competing development 
application or a notice of intent to file such an application. 
Submission of a timely notice of intent to file a development 
application allows an interested person to file the competing 
application no later than 120 days after the specified comment 
date for the particular application. A competing license 
application must conform with 18 CFR 4.30(b)(1) and (9) and 
4.36. 

A9. Notice of intent_A notice of intent must specify the 
exact name, business address, and telephone number of the 
prospective applicant, and must include an unequivocal statement 
of intent to submit, if such an application may be filed, either 
a preliminary permit application or a development application 
(specify which type of application). A notice of intent must be 
served on the applicant(s) named in this public notice. 

A10. Proposed Scope of Studies under Permit_A preliminary 
permit, if issued, does not authorize construction. The term of 
the proposed preliminary permit will be 36 months. The work 
proposed under the preliminary permit would include economic 
analysis, preparation of preliminary engineering plans, and a 
study of environmental impacts. Based on the results of these 
studies, the Applicant would decide whether to proceed with the 
preparation of a development application to construct and operate 
the project. 




