 

The second principle would restate the legal requirement that rates, fees and charges to aeronautical users must
be fair and reasonable, with more detailed guidance on the practices and restrictions that define ``fair and reasonable.''
Among other things, the DOT/FAA proposed to provide airport proprietors with some flexibility to deviate from the
proposed policy guidance based on agreement with aeronautical users. In addition, the proposed policy statement
would recognize the legitimacy of either the compensatory or residual pricing approach and of combinations of both.
DOT/FAA did not propose to establish standards for rates and charges for nonaeronautical users (nonaeronautical
rates and charges) nor to limit the amount of revenues generated by nonaeronautical rates and charges.
The third principle would restate the legal prohibition on unjustly discriminatory rates and charges.
The fourth principle would restate the legal obligation of the airport sponsor to maintain a fee and rental structure
that makes the airport as self-sustaining as possible. Supplemental guidance encouraged the sponsor of an airport
that is not currently self-sustaining to establish long-term goal and targets to make the airport financially self-sustaining.
The fifth principle would restate legal requirements for the application and use of airport revenues. Supplemental
guidance would advise that airport revenue generated by nonaeronautical sources is subject to the same statutory
requirements governing use as aeronautical revenue. In addition, supplemental guidance would provide that progressive
accumulation of substantial amounts of airport revenues may warrant an FAA inquiry into the airport proprietor's
application of revenues to the local airport system.


Summary of Applicable 1994 Authorization Act Provisions


Section 110 of the 1994 Authorization Act amends the statement of policy for airport improvement, 49 U.S.C. 47101,
by adding statements ``that airport fees, rates, and charges must be reasonable'' and that ``in establishing new
fees, rates, and charges, and generating revenues from all sources, airport owners and operators should not seek
to create revenue surpluses that exceed the amounts to be used for airport system purposes and for other purposes for
which airport revenues may be spent under section 47107(b)(1) of this title, including reasonable reserves and other
funds to facilitate financing and cover contingencies.''
Section 113 of the 1994 Authorization Act adds a new section 47129 titled ``Resolution of airport-air carrier disputes
concerning airport fees.'' Section 47129 authorizes the Secretary of Transportation (Secretary) to issue a determination
on the reasonableness of an airport rate or fee imposed on an air carrier if the airport owner requests a determination
or if a complaint is filed by an affected air carrier. Section 47129 further provides that a fee may be calculated pursuant
to either a compensatory or residual fee methodology or any combination thereof, and section 47129 specifically
prohibits the Secretary from setting the level of the fee. Section 47129 further directs the Secretary to issue within
90 days after enactment final regulations or policy statements establishing (1) administrative procedures for
processing cases under section 47129 and (2) standards or guidelines to be used in determining the reasonableness
of a fee.
Section 112 of the Authorization Act strengthens existing requirements for the use of airport revenues by grant-obligated
airport sponsors. Section 112 of the Authorization Act amends 49 U.S.C. 47107 by adding a new subsection ``(l).''
Among other things, subsection (l) directs the Secretary to establish within 90 days after enactment policies and
procedures to assure prompt and effective enforcement of subsections (a)(13) and (b) of section 47107.


