 

IV





It is further ordered, 

That respondent Eggland's Best, Inc., a corporation, its successors and assigns, and its officers, agents, representatives
and employees, directly or through any corporation, subsidiary, division or other device, in connection with the
labeling, advertising, promotion, offering for sale, sale, or distribution of any food in or affecting commerce,
as ``food'' and ``commerce'' are defined in the Federal Trade Commission Act, do forthwith cease and desist from misrepresenting,
in any manner, directly or by implication, the existence, contents, validity, results, conclusions or interpretations
of any test or study.



V





It is further ordered, 

That respondent Eggland's Best, Inc., a corporation, its successors and assigns, and its officers, agents, representatives
and employees, directly or through any corporation, subsidiary, division or other device, in connection with the
labeling, advertising, promotion, offering for sale, sale, or distribution of eggs or any food containing egg yolk
in or affecting commerce, as ``food'' and ``commerce'' are defined in the Federal Trade Commission Act, do forthwith
cease and desist from:

A. Failing to disclose clearly and prominently in any advertisement or promotional material that refers, directly
or by implication, to the absolute or comparative amount of cholesterol, fat or saturated fat in such food, the average
cholesterol content of such food expressed in the following terms:

1. The number of milligrams; and

2. The percentage of ``Maximum Daily Value.''

The statements required by subparagraphs A.1 and A.2 of this Part shall appear in close proximity. For purposes of
this Part, the term ``Maximum Daily Value'' shall mean: (1) The daily reference value or other daily intake limit for
cholesterol established in an effective final regulation of the Food and Drug Administration; or (2) in the absence
of such a regulation, the daily intake limit of cholesterol advised by any one of the following three organizations:
the National Academy of Sciences, the Surgeon General of the Public Health Service, or the American Heart Association.
In the event that the Food and Drug Administration does not have a final effective regulation and none of the three named
organizations advises that daily cholesterol intake be limited to a specific maximum amount, subparagraph A.2 of
this Part shall not apply. 

Provided, however, 

That this Part will not be deemed to apply to any representation that is specifically permitted in labeling for such
food product by regulations promulgated by the Food and Drug Administration pursuant to the Nutrition Labeling and
Education Act of 1990.

B. For a time period of one year, beginning no later than forty-five (45) days from the date this Order becomes final,
offering for sale, selling, or distributing eggs unless the package label for such eggs clearly and prominently states,
in the exact language that follows, that: ``There are no studies showing that these eggs are different from other eggs
in their effect on serum cholesterol.'' 

Provided, however, 

That this requirement shall apply only in those geographic areas where respondent has disseminated or caused to be
disseminated advertising or promotional materials containing any representation, directly or by implication,
about the effect of Eggland's Best eggs or other eggs on serum cholesterol over a period of 12 weeks or more, or at any
time between January 1, 1993 and the date of the acceptance of this Order by the Commission for public comment, including
but not limited to those geographic areas listed in Attachment A to this Order.

For purposes of this Order, ``clearly and prominently'' shall mean as follows:

1. In a television or videotape advertisement, the disclosure shall be presented simultaneously in both the audio
and video portions of the advertisement. The audio disclosure shall be delivered in a volume and cadence and for a duration
sufficient for an ordinary consumer to hear and comprehended it. The video disclosure shall be of a size and shade,
and shall appear on the screen for a duration, sufficient for a ordinary consumer to read and comprehend it;

2. In a print advertisement, the disclosure shall be in type size which is at least the same size as that in which the principal
portion of the text of the advertisement appears, shall be located in close proximity to the statement or other reference
requiring the disclosure and shall be of a color or shade that readily contrasts with the background of the advertisement;

3. In a radio advertisement, the disclosure shall be delivered in a volume and cadence and for a duration sufficient
for an ordinary consumer to hear and comprehend it;

4. On a package label, the disclosure shall be in a conspicuous and prominent place on the package, in a conspicuous
format, and in conspicuous and legible type in contrast by typography, layout, or color with all other printed material
on the package. 

Provided, however, 

That if the disclosure is displayed on the top or front panel of a standard twelve-egg carton or on the top, front or side
panel of a standard six-egg carton, is in at least ten (10) point type and is either on a separate label or enclosed within
a border, and both the type and the border are of a color or shade that readily contrasts with the background of the carton,
the disclosure shall be deemed to have been made clearly and prominently for purposes of this Order.


