 

(9) the independent fiduciary will monitor the terms and the conditions of the exemption and the Lease throughout
its initial term plus the two Renewal terms and will take whatever action is necessary to protect the Plan's rights;



(10) the Plan will bear no costs or expenses with respect to the transactions described herein; and 


(11) the Employer will file form 5330 and pay the appropriate excise taxes for the period beginning June 9, 1989, to
the date this exemption, if granted, is published in the 

Federal Register

, within ninety (90) days of the publication date. 


For a more complete statement of facts and representations supporting the Department's decision to grant this exemption
refer to the notice of proposed exemption published on April 22, 1994 at 59 FR 24739/24741. 





<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Ekaterina A. Uzlyan, U.S. Department of Labor, telephone (202) 2198883. (This is not a toll-free number).





Radiation Medical Group Inc. Profit Sharing_401(k) 
Salary Savings Plan (the Original Plan), and Radiology Medical Group, Inc. 401(k) Salary 
Savings Plan (the New Plan; together, the Plans) 
Located in San Diego, California 




[Prohibited Transaction Exemption 9454; 
Exemption Application Nos. D9343  D9344] 




Exemption 




The restrictions of sections 406(a), 406(b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resulting from the application
of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1)(A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to (1) the transfer
by the Original Plan of a 57 percent interest (the Interest) in certain real property (the Property), including a 57
percent lessor's interest, to the New Plan; and (2) the leases of the Property (the New Leases) by the Original Plan
and the New Plan to Radiology Medical Group, Inc., and Radiation Medical Group, Inc. (together, the Employers), the
sponsors of the Plans; provided the following conditions are satisfied: 


(A) All terms of the transactions are no less favorable to the Plans than those which the Plans could obtain in arms-length
transactions with unrelated parties; 


(B) The interests of the Plans under the New Leases are represented by an independent fiduciary, the Union Bank of San
Diego, California (the Fiduciary), which will monitor the Employers' performance of obligations under the New Leases
and compliance with the conditions of this exemption, including all actions necessary to enforce such obligations
and conditions; 


(C) At all times under the New Leases, the Plans receive rent which is no less than the fair market rental value of the
Property and which is net of all real estate taxes and costs of repair, maintenance and insurance; 


(D) At all times under the New Leases, each Plan's interest in the Property constitutes less than twenty-five percent
of the total value of all assets held by the Plan; and 


(E) Any extension or renewal of the New Leases beyond the initial terms is expressly approved by the Fiduciary. 


For a more complete statement of the facts and representations supporting the Department's decision to grant this
exemption, refer to the notice of proposed exemption published on May 12, 1994 at 59 FR 24736. 




</FURTHER>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Ronald Willett of the Department, telephone (202) 2198881. (This is not a toll-free number.) 







</FURTHER>
