 

The specified range of required photometric output for CHMSLs from 10U to 5D was developed from SAE J186a and is presumably
intended to allow manufacturers latitude in locating CHMSLs for the myriad of vehicle designs, while assuring that
sufficient light is available to signal drivers of following vehicles. For example, the 10U photometric angle helps
to assure that drivers of large vehicles (such as medium and heavy duty trucks), perceive a preceding vehicle's CHMSL
signal, regardless of the size of that vehicle or the CHMSL's mounting location. 



 However, the Cadillac CHMSL is mounted relatively high in relation to other passenger vehicles on the road, and is
located in the passenger compartment, not on the deck lid. Therefore, the light emitted from the Cadillac CHMSL at
the upward-most photometric angles is not as critical as light at those same angles emitted from vehicles with CHMSLs
located rearward and closer to the ground. 


 To illustrate this point, GM compared the Cadillac CHMSL to the CHMSL on the Mazda Miata. The Miata sits comparatively
low to the ground, and its CHMSL is mounted low on the deck lid. After determining that the 16 candela photometric output
required by FMVSS 108 at 10U-V is provided by the Cadillac CHMSL with a worst case intrusion at 8U, GM overlaid the mounting
location and 10U line of the Mazda Miata on a drawing of the Cadillac CHMSL and 8U line, placing the rear of the vehicles
at the same location *
9*
9*. The result shows that the 8U and 10U lines cross 37.4 feet behind the vehicles and 9.3 feet above the ground;
until that point, the Cadillac CHMSL provides more light to the extreme up positions than does the fully compliant
Miata CHMSL. 


 GM then overlaid on the drawing of the Cadillac and Miata CHMSLs the average eye ellipse location for heavy duty trucks
(cab over) and medium duty trucks, which are 7.7 feet and 6.8 feet from ground, respectively *
9*
9*. The fact that these eye-ellipse locations fall well below the 9.3 feet intersection point of the Cadillac
CHMSL 8U line and the Miata CHMSL 10U line demonstrates that the Cadillac CHMSL provides sufficient usable light to
all following drivers. 


 That is, because GM designed the subject vehicles with a high and forward CHMSL mounting location, drivers sitting
at the highest positions from the road will see the photometric output intended by the Standard for the upward-most
angles, regardless of (worst case) obscuration of the lamp. The Cadillac CHMSL actually provides a greater area of
visible light than a vehicle with a fully compliant lamp that is mounted lower and rearward. 


 There are vehicles with fully compliant CHMSLs, at mounting locations approximating that of the Cadillac, that cast
more light in the upper extreme areas behind the vehicle. However, *
9*
9* a compliant CHMSL (mounted at the same location as the Cadillac CHMSL) will provide only an additional triangular
area six feet in length and eleven inches high of potentially usable light, starting 20 feet behind the vehicle. This
small area is only visible to drivers of the largest vehicles. Given that and negligible decrease of light emitted
by the Cadillac CHMSL, GM believes that the Cadillac CHMSL will perform its intended function effectively identical
to fully compliant CHMSLs mounted at the same location. Furthermore, as demonstrated above, the Cadillac CHMSL provides
more light at the extreme up angles than other fully compliant CHMSLs mounted lower and rearward. These factors, together
with the small number of Cadillacs involved, support GM's belief that the CHMSLs at issue here will not have an adverse
affect on motor vehicle safety. 


 The CHMSLs otherwise meet all FMVSS 108 requirements, and the photometric output of the stop lamps, which are supplemented
by the CHMSL, far exceeds FMVSS 108 minimum requirements. 


 GM is not aware of any accidents, injuries, owner complaints or field reports related to this issue. 


 General Motors believes that the noncompliance that results from a small obstruction of the CHMSL by blackout paint
on the rear window is inconsequential as it relates to motor vehicle safety. In consideration of the foregoing, General
Motors petitions that it be exempted from the recall and remedy provisions of the Act for this specific noncompliance
with FMVSS 108. 


 No comments were received on the application.

 


 
In presenting its arguments, GM has separated its noncomplying vehicles into two categories, those in which the diminished
luminous intensity of the CHMSL might be discernible, and those in which it might pass unnoticed. 


 The noncompliance that is most likely to have a consequential effect on safety is the degradation in light output that
``would likely be discernible in a subjective side-by-side comparison with a conforming light.'' This appears to
occur only in vehicles where compliance along the 10U line is affected. GM argues that, in the worst case, there is full
compliance along a hypothetical 8U line, and that ``visible light is still emitted at the 10U line.'' Thus, the effect
on safety of a diminished luminous intensity in the two degrees between 8U and 10U must be considered. GM has pointed
out the obvious, that the mounting height of the CHMSL is not standardized among vehicles, and that factor, in addition
to the differing eye height of following drivers and the angle of approach, results in an infinite number of perceptions.
The result of this is that, in some instances, the noncompliant Cadillac CHMSL ``actually provides a greater area
of visible light'' than a complying CHMSL ``that is mounted lower and rearward.'' With respect to the two-degree area
of noncompliance, a complying lamp ``will provide only an additional triangular area six feet in length and eleven
inches high of potentially usable light, starting 20 feet behind the vehicle.'' Terming this a ``small area,'' GM
submits that it ``is only visible to drivers of the largest vehicles.'' 


 NHTSA reviews noncompliances involving performance failures with special concern, and it has done so here. But it
has concluded that GM has met this concern with respect to the possible effect of this specific noncompliance upon
motor vehicle safety, and has decided that it does not affect safety in a consequential manner. 




