 







<USDEPT>ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY</USDEPT>



<CFRNO>40 CFR Part 52 </CFRNO>




<RINDOCK>[AL3715925a; FRL50906] </RINDOCK>



Approval and Promulgation of Implementation Plans Alabama: Title V, Section 507, Small Business Stationary Source
Technical and Environmental Compliance Assistance Program 



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Direct final rule.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 EPA is approving revisions to the State Implementation Plan (SIP) submitted by the State of Alabama through the Alabama
Department of Environmental Management (ADEM) for the purpose of establishing a Small Business Stationary Source
Technical and Environmental Compliance Assistance Program (PROGRAM), which will be fully implemented by November
15, 1994. This implementation plan was submitted by the State on November 13, 1992, to satisfy the federal mandate
to ensure that small businesses have access to the technical assistance and regulatory information necessary to
comply with the Clean Air Act as amended in 1990 (CAA).



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 This final rule is effective on December 30, 1994 unless notice is received by November 30, 1994 that someone wishes
to submit adverse or critical comments. If the effective date is delayed, timely notice will be published in the 

Federal Register

.



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Written comments should be addressed to: Kimberly Bingham, Regulatory Planning and Development Section, Air Programs
Branch, Air, Pesticides  Toxics Management Division, Region IV Environmental Protection Agency, 345 Courtland
Street, NE., Atlanta, Georgia 30365. 



Copies of the material submitted by the State of Alabama may be examined during normal business hours at the following
locations: 




Air and Radiation Docket and Information Center (Air Docket 6102), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 401 M Street,
SW., Washington, DC 20460. 

Environmental Protection Agency, Region IV Air Programs Branch, 345 Courtland Street, NE., Atlanta, Georgia 30365.


Alabama Department of Environmental Management, Office of General Counsel, 1751 Congressman W.L. Dickinson Drive,
Montgomery, Alabama 36130.



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Kimberly Bingham, Regulatory Planning and Development Section, Air Programs Branch, Air, Pesticides  Toxics
Management Division, Region IV Environmental Protection Agency, 345 Courtland Street, NE., Atlanta, Georgia 30365.
The telephone number is 404/3473555 ext. 4195.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 Implementation of the CAA will require small businesses to comply with specific regulations in order for areas to
attain and maintain the national ambient air quality standards (NAAQS) and reduce the emission of air toxics. In anticipation
of the impact of these requirements on small businesses, the CAA requires that states adopt a PROGRAM, and submit this
PROGRAM as a revision to the federally approved SIP. In addition, the CAA directs the EPA to oversee the small business
assistance program and report to Congress on their implementation. The requirements for establishing a PROGRAM
are set out in section 507 of title V of the CAA and the EPA guidance document Guidelines for the Implementation of section
507 of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments. In order to gain full approval, the state submittal must provide for each of
the following PROGRAM elements: (1) The establishment of a Small Business Assistance Program to provide technical
and compliance assistance to small businesses; (2) the establishment of a state Small Business Ombudsman to represent
the interests of small businesses in the regulatory process; and (3) the creation of a Compliance Advisory Panel (CAP)
to determine and report on the overall effectiveness of the SBAP. The plan must also determine the eligibility of small
business stationary sources for assistance in the PROGRAM. The plan includes the duties, funding and schedule of
implementation for the three PROGRAM components. 



Section 507(a) and (e) of the CAA set forth requirements the State must meet to have an approvable PROGRAM. The State
of Alabama has addressed these requirements and established a PROGRAM as described below. 



1. Small Business Assistance Program (SBAP) 



Alabama has established a mechanism to implement the following six requirements set forth in section 507 of title
V of the CAA:




A. The establishment of adequate mechanisms for developing, collecting and coordinating information concerning
compliance methods and technologies for small business stationary sources, and programs to encourage lawful cooperation
among such sources and other persons to further comply with the CAA; 

B. The establishment of adequate mechanisms for assisting small business stationary sources with pollution prevention
and accidental release detection and prevention, including providing information concerning 
alternative technologies, process changes, products and methods of operation that help reduce air pollution; 

C. The development of a compliance and technical assistance program for small business stationary sources which
assist small businesses in determining applicable permit requirements under the CAA in a timely and efficient manner;




</SUPPLEM>
