 

Another possible explanation for the low juvenile to adult ratios is that individuals are attempting to reproduce,
but the young of these birds are experiencing high mortality rates prior to reaching the ocean. Predation at marbled
murrelet nest sites may have significant impacts on the population. Predation by corvids (common crows (

Corvus brachyrhynchos

), ravens (

Corvus corax

), and Steller's jays (

Cyanocitta stelleri

)), great horned owls (

Bubo virginianus

), and sharp-shinned hawks (

Accipiter striatus

) have been identified as causes of marbled murrelet nest failure. From 1974 through 1991, approximately 71 percent
of all known marbled murrelet nests in the Pacific Northwest failed; 70 percent of these failed due to predation by
these species (Nelson 

in litt. 

1992). 

Corvids are often considered ``edge species'' that have been found to increase in numbers with increased forest fragmentation
(Andren 

et al. 

1985, Wilcove 1985, Small and Hunter 1988). Similar findings have been reported in central Oregon regarding great
horned owls (Johnson 1993). In addition, corvid predation on small bird nests is known to increase with increased
forest fragmentation and/or decreased distance of nests from a forest edge (Gates and Gysel 1978, Andren 

et al. 

1985, Small and Hunter 1988, Yahner and Scott 1988). The marbled murrelet's main defense against predation is camouflage.
The ability to successfully hide from arboreal predators is likely related to the number of nesting (or hiding) opportunities
available. Timber harvest reduces the number of nesting opportunities through the removal of nesting habitat within
the landscape, thus reducing the area predators must search. 

In addition to effects on marbled murrelet nesting habitat, the species is affected by impacts and threats to their
marine foraging habitat and food supply, as well as direct mortality from human activities such as oil spills and gill
netting. Attributes of foraging habitat include distance from shore, prey populations, and potential disturbances.


Marbled murrelets are typically distributed in the marine environment in a manner that roughly corresponds to the
location of concentrations of inland nesting habitat. Marbled murrelets generally forage in near-shore marine
waters. 

Marine systems producing sufficient prey to support a stable or growing population of marbled murrelets are important
foraging habitat for the species. Marbled murrelets have been reported feeding on a variety of small fish and invertebrates,
including Pacific herring (

Clupea harengus

), Pacific sandlance (

Ammodytes hexapterus

), northern anchovy (

Engraulis mordax

), capelin (

Mallotus villosus

), smelt, euphids, 

(Eupahsia pacifica, Thysanoessa spinifera) 

and mysids (Sealy 1975, Sanger and Jones 1981, Sanger 1987, Carter and Sealy 1990, Strong 

et al.

 1993). 

Mortality in the marine environment, primarily associated with oil spills and net fisheries in Washington, adversely
affects marbled murrelets. The impact of this loss is generally thought to be less than impacts to nesting habitat.
Protection of foraging areas from disturbance such as oil spills, net fisheries, and pollution would benefit marbled
murrelets. 



Management Considerations 



Marbled murrelets are found in forest stands containing a variety of forest structures, which are, in part, the result
of varied management practices. In many areas, management practices have resulted in fragmentation of the remaining
older forests and creation of large areas of younger forests that have yet to develop habitat characteristics suitable
for marbled murrelet nesting. Past forest management practices have also resulted in a forest age distribution unnaturally
skewed toward younger-aged stands. 

In many portions of the range of the marbled murrelet, forest management has historically concentrated on clearcut
logging. After forests are clearcut, the areas are traditionally replanted to a single or few tree species and maintained
as even-aged stands for maximum wood-fiber production. Site-preparation and management activities may further
decrease species diversity. These methods include prescribed burning and the use of herbicides or mechanical methods
to control competing vegetation. 

Historical logging practices in some portions of the species' range consisted of more selective timber harvesting,
leaving remnant patches of forests of varying ages with older forest characteristics. The uneven-age management
practices used in these areas usually resulted in more diverse stands, but with few trees containing suitable marbled
murrelet nesting structure. These areas may contain low concentrations of reproducing marbled murrelets, which
are difficult to locate. 

Current and historic marbled murrelet habitat loss is generally attributed to timber harvest and land conversion
practices, although natural disturbances such as forest fires have caused losses as well. Reduction of the remaining
older forest has not been evenly distributed over western Washington, Oregon, and California. Harvest has been concentrated
at the lower elevations and in the Coast Ranges (Thomas 

et al. 

1990), generally equating with the range of the marbled murrelet. 




