 




<USBUREAU>Health Care Financing Administration</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Statement of Organization, Functions, and Delegations of Authority; </DOCTITLE>
Bureau of Policy Development 


Part F of the Statement of Organization, Functions, and Delegations of Authority for the Department of Health and
Human Services, Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), (

Federal Register

, Vol. 59, No. 60, pp. 1463814641, dated Tuesday, March 29, 1994) is amended to reflect changes in the substructure
of the Bureau of Policy Development (BPD). The BPD functional statement has not been changed. The remaining BPD substructure
is being published to reflect the organizational changes resulting from streamlining efforts. 
The specific amendments to Part F are as follows: 
&bull;Section F.10.C.2. (Organization) is amended to read as follows:



2. Bureau of Policy Development 


a. Office of Correspondence 
(1) Division of Correspondence Development 
(2) Division of Correspondence Analysis and Resources 
b. Management and Systems Support Staff 
c. Office of Regulations 
(1) Division of Part A and Medicaid 
(2) Division of Part B and Operations 
d. Technology and Special Analysis Staff 
e. Office of Hospital Policy 
(1) Division of Prospective Payment System 
(2) Division of Hospital Services 
(3) Division of Cost Principles and Reporting 
(4) Division of End Stage Renal Disease 
f. Office of Physician and Ambulatory Care Policy 
(1) Division of Outpatient Surgery and Services 
(2) Division of Ambulatory Care Services 
(3) Division of Physician Services 
g. Office of Chronic Care and Insurance Policy 
(1) Division of Skilled Nursing Care 
(2) Division of Home Care and Therapy 
(3) Division of Beneficiary and Insurance Issues 
(4) Division of Durable Medical Equipment and Devices



&bull;Section F.20.C.2. (Functions) is amended by deleting the statement and substructure in their entirety and
replacing them with the new functional statements. The new functional statements read as follows: 


a. Office Of Correspondence (FKA4) 


&bull;Plans, directs, and coordinates the correspondence program for the bureau. 
&bull;Receives, controls, tracks, prepares and/or forwards to appropriate components, Bureau assignments from
all sources, including the Department, HCFA and its components, the White House, members of Congress, State and local
agencies, officials of professional organizations, representatives of providers of health care, regional offices,
the mass media and correspondence from beneficiaries and their representatives. 
&bull;Assigns, controls, tracks, and coordinates all work assigned to, or generated within the Bureau, except regulations.

&bull;Coordinates Bureau responses on all assignments requiring input from two or more offices. 
&bull;Prepares or coordinates the preparation of responses to Secretary and Administrator correspondence and
Inspector General and General Accounting Office reports. 
&bull;Handles Bureau Freedom of Information requests, determining what information may and may not be released
to the public, and ensuring that bureau replies are fully responsive. 
&bull;Manages Bureau-wide internal control systems. 
&bull;Prepares responses to correspondence. 
&bull;Provides technical assistance upon request to 
components and field offices. 




