 

EPA has estimated the costs associated with the survey database for the 272 active ingredients. Option 3/S would cost
$26.9 million annually and would result in one facility closure and 147 product line closures or conversions. The
expanded coverage of all active ingredients (except for sodium hypochlorite) is estimated to increase the costs
to a final total of $56.1 million annually and would result in an estimated 2 plant closures, and 256 product line closures
or conversions. 

EPA expects that many facilities which formulate, package or repackage both pesticide chemicals and sanitizer chemicals
will not realize any significant relief in their regulatory requirements through Option 3/S (and 3/S.1) as compared
to Option 3. This is because the non-interior waste streams which the Agency is proposing to exclude from coverage
(equipment exterior cleaning, floor washing, laboratory equipment cleaning, safety equipment cleaning, air pollution
scrubbers and contaminated stormwater) for the sanitizer chemicals tend to be related to the activities occurring
throughout the facility not to specific products or even specific production lines. Therefore, unless a combined
facility has dedicated lines that physically separate the sanitizer and non-sanitizer wastewaters, the non-interior
PFPR waste streams will contain both sanitizer and non-sanitizer chemicals and therefore will be controlled by the
pretreatment standards for the non-sanitizer chemicals active ingredients. EPA emphasizes that products which
contain a sanitizer active ingredient and non-sanitizer active ingredient shall be considered not subject to the
sanitizer exemption. 

EPA has not provided the same exemption for small sanitizer facilities in the BPT, BAT and BCT regulations. EPA has
evaluated whether this would be appropriate, but could find no basis for expanding the exemption. The BPT requirements
have covered all PFPR waste streams since those requirements were issued in 1978, and EPA believes there is no reason
to relax those requirements. However, EPA invites comments on this issue. The Agency would consider revising the
BPT, BCT and BAT regulations to be consistent with the PSES standards with respect to the small sanitizer facilities
exemption if new information and comments indicate that extending that exemption to the direct discharger facilities
would be appropriate (i.e., based on the ability to relieve significant impacts on small direct discharge entities
while sacrificing only a small number of toxic-weighted pounds). 

The following discussion of the Options considered reflects estimated costs and loadings for the wastewater generated
from formulating, packaging or repackaging the 272 active ingredients only. 

Option 1 is estimated to cost $33.6 million annually for the 2400 facilities analyzed, and would remove an estimated
111,653 pounds of active ingredients per year. EPA's analysis of the impacts of these costs projects that eleven plants
would close and 189 plants would discontinue their pesticides production (i.e. would have line conversions). EPA's
estimates are based on the cost required to install a Universal Treatment System, including one or more of the identified
Universal Treatment System control technologies and holding tanks, pumps, and piping as needed. For ease of analysis,
EPA assumed conservatively that this cost would be imposed on all facilities that currently discharge to POTW's and
that no existing facilities would have any savings due to treatment already in place. EPA estimated costs on a plant-by-plant
basis for all plants surveyed that reported discharge of process wastewater to a POTW. Although there are a small number
of surveyed facilities that reported treating their wastewater prior to discharging it to a POTW, in most cases this
treatment was not intended to control active ingredients. For the majority of facilities, EPA costed treatment technology
(and equipment to accomplish recycle and reuse as needed) for the total volume reported in the questionnaire as being
discharged currently. For facilities that are engaged in both pesticide manufacturing and formulating, packaging
or repackaging EPA assumed that costs would be incurred for PFPR wastewater treatment and recycle and reuse equipment
believed to be needed beyond the equipment these facilities already have in place. 

Option 1 was rejected because it does not incorporate any recycle or water conservation, pollution prevention techniques
that are widely demonstrated and practiced in this industry. Therefore, it does not represent the best available
technology. Also, the Agency would be unable to control the discharge of all pollutants due to a lack of analytical
methods for some active ingredients. EPA also notes that Option 1 would require significant additional data on a large
number of pollutants for which the Agency would have to establish standards and for which facilities would need to
monitor. EPA did consider setting standards for one or more pollutants that could be used as surrogates for the active
ingredients and other priority pollutants. The Agency considered, for example, using immunoassays as a less expensive
alternate method for demonstrating compliance. EPA performed tests using these immunoassay techniques as written
up in Environmental Lab; June/July 1993, Vol. 5, Number 3, page 27. As stated in this article, the immunoassay tests
appear to work reasonably well if the monitoring involves a relatively small number of analytes overall. 




