 

16. FDA received two comments on proposed 314.52(a). One comment agreed with the provision, but stated that
notice to the holder of the approved application should be considered only as informational ``with no legal ramifications
since the NDA holder has 

no

 patent rights by reason of its NDA.'' (Emphasis added in original.) 
The legal ramifications under patent law, if any, of this notice of certification of invalidity or noninfringement
of a patent are beyond the scope of this rulemaking. 
17. One comment objected to proposed 314.52(a)(3). The comment explained that the provision would permit
an applicant whose application did not cover any use claimed in a patent to refrain from making any patent certifications
or providing any notice. The comment would require all applicants to provide notice of certification of invalidity
or noninfringement of a patent to all patent owners whose patents claim the active ingredient that is the subject of
the application. 
Under section 505(b)(2)(A) of the Act, an application must contain a certification with respect to each patent which
claims the listed drug or which claims a use for such listed drug for which the 505(b)(2) applicant is seeking approval.
One of these patent certifications is that the patent is invalid or will not be infringed by the manufacture, use, or
sale of the new drug for which the application is submitted. (See section 505(b)(2)(A)(iv) of the Act). If an applicant
makes a ``paragraph IV'' certification, it must give notice to the patent owner and the NDA holder. (See section 505(b)(3)(A)
of the Act.) If, however, the applicant is not seeking approval for a use that is covered by a use patent, the statute
does not require a ``paragraph IV'' certification or notice to that patent owner and NDA holder. (See section 505(b)(2)(B)
and (b)(2)(A) of the Act.)
Thus, 314.52(a) is consistent with the statute, and FDA declines to revise it as suggested by the comment. 
18. FDA received three comments on proposed 314.52(c) regarding the content of a notice of certification of
invalidity or noninfringement of a patent. Two comments favored extremely detailed statements of the factual and
legal basis of the applicant's opinion that the patent is not valid or will not be infringed. These comments would require
the applicant to list all components used in the proposed drug product, the proportions of each component, and list
all grounds supporting its opinion that the patent is invalid or will not be infringed. One comment opposed disclosure
of the proposed drug product's formulation and also objected to the use of a ``designated intermediary'' in proposed
314.52(c)(6)(iii). 
In general, the statute requires a notice of certification of invalidity or noninfringement of a patent to state that
an application has been submitted and to include ``a detailed statement of the factual and legal basis of the applicant's
opinion that the patent is not valid or will not be infringed.'' (See section 505(b)(3)(B) and 355(j)(2)(B)(ii).)
The proposed rule listed the type of information FDA considered necessary to enable patent owners to decide whether
to sue for patent infringement. The list at proposed 314.52(c) and 314.95(c) generated substantial
debate, as reflected in the comments, as to the details to be included in a notice. The agency is neither prepared nor
required to become involved in issues concerning sufficiency of notice for purposes of enforcing patent law. Therefore,
FDA has revised both 314.52(c) and 314.95(c) so that the detailed statement of the factual and legal
basis behind the applicant's opinion that the patent is invalid, unenforceable, or will not be infringed must include:
(1) For each claim of the patent alleged not to be infringed, a full and detailed explanation why the claim is not infringed;
and (2) for each claim of a patent alleged to be invalid or unenforceable, a full and detailed explanation of the grounds
supporting the allegation. These provisions, as revised, paraphrase the statutory language. The sufficiency of
the notice, for purposes of patent enforcement, is an issue to be resolved by the applicant and the patent owner or the
holder of the approved application. 
The agency has also revised 314.52(c)(6) and 314.95(c)(6) by removing paragraphs (c)(6)(iii) entirely.
FDA is making this change due to the numbers of comments that objected to the use of a ``designated intermediary'' and
the ``referee'' concept in proposed 314.52 and 314.95. 
19. One comment would amend proposed 314.52(e) pertaining to documentation of receipt of notice of certification
of invalidity or noninfringement of a patent. The comment would include a signed receipt or delivery manifest as documentation
of notice. 
Section 314.52(e) clearly states that documentation of notice may be a copy of the return receipt or ``other similar
evidence of the date the notification was received.'' The provision also states that FDA will accept as adequate documentation
of the date of receipt a return receipt or ``a letter acknowledging receipt by the person provided the notice.'' Thus,
314.52(e) does not limit an applicant to a particular form of documentation of notice. Applicants are required,
however, to obtain agreement from FDA in advance if they intend to use a form of documentation other than return receipt.

20. The agency has also revised 314.52(f) to state that the 45-day period provided for in section 505(c)(3)(C)
of the Act will begin on the day following the date of receipt of the notice by the patent owner or its representative
and by the approved application holder. The reasons for this change are described in comment 62 below. 
The agency, on its own initiative, has also revised 314.52(f) to state that the agency may begin the 45-day period
on a later date if the applicant has amended its application to state that a later date should be used. This could occur,
for example, where the applicant has amended its notice to the patent owner to provide more information regarding
the applicant's notice of invalidity or noninfringement. This revision is also consistent with the corresponding
provision for ANDA's. 




