 

Finally, OJJDP proposes to increase the maximum number of waivers of termination from three to four. There are several
States that may need to receive a fourth waiver in order to be eligible for a Fiscal Year 1992 or 1993 Formula Grant Award.




Executive Order 12866 



This notice is not a ``significant regulatory action'' for purposes of Executive Order 12886 because it does not result
in: (1) an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more or adversely affect in a material way the economy, a sector
of the economy, productivity, competition, jobs, the environment, public health or safety, or state, local or tribal
governments or communities; (2) create a serious inconsistency or otherwise interfere with action taken or planned
by another agency; (3) materially alter the budgetary impact of entitlements, grants, user fees, or loan programs
or the rights and obligations of recipients thereof; and (4) does not raise novel legal or policy issues arising out
of legal mandates, the President's priorities or the principles of Executive Order No. 12866. 



Regulatory Flexibility Act 



This proposed regulation, if promulgated, will not have a ``significant'' economic impact on a substantial number
of small ``entities,'' as defined by the Regulatory Flexibility Act (Pub.L. 96354). 



Paperwork Reduction Act 



No collection of information requirements are contained in or effected by this regulation (See the Paperwork Reduction
Act, 44 U.S.C. 3504(H)). 



Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs 



In accordance with Executive Order 12372 and the Department of Justice's implementing regulation 28 CFR Part 30,
States must submit Formula Grant Program applications to the State ``Single Point of Contact,'' if one exists. The
State may take up to 60 days from the application date to comment on the application. 



Lists of Subjects in 28 CFR Part 31 



Grant programs_law, juvenile delinquency, grant programs. 
For the reasons set forth in the preamble, it is proposed to amend the OJJDP Formula Grants Regulation, 28 CFR Part 31,
as follows: 



PART 31_[AMENDED] 



1. The authority citation for Part 31 would continue to read 
as follows:





Authority:

 Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5601 et seq.).




2. Section 31.3 is revised to read as follows: 



31.3 

General. 



Formula Grant Applications for each fiscal year should be submitted to OJJDP by August 1 (60 days prior to the beginning
of the fiscal year) or within 60 days after the States are officially notified of the fiscal year formula grant allocations.
Beginning with Fiscal Year 1995 and each subsequent fiscal year, all Formula Grant Applications must be submitted
no later than March 31 of the fiscal year for which the funds are allocated. 

3. Section 31.101 is revised to read as follows: 



31.101 

Designation of State agency. 



The Chief Executive of each State which chooses to apply for a formula grant shall establish or designate a State agency
as the sole agency for supervising the preparation and administration of the plan. The plan must demonstrate compliance
with administrative and supervisory board membership requirements established by the OJJDP Administrator pursuant
to section 299(c) of the JJDP Act. States must have available for review a copy of the State law or executive order establishing
the State agency and its authority. 



