 

<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 
Background 


The Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended (16 U.S.C. 1531 

et seq.

) (Act) requires the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Commerce (depending on jurisdiction) to determine
whether species are endangered or threatened. In defining ``species,'' the Act as originally passed included, ``***
any subspecies of fish or wildlife or plants and any other group of fish or wildlife of the same species or smaller taxa
in common spatial arrangement that interbreed when mature.'' In 1978, the Act was amended so that the definition read
``*** any subspecies of fish or wildlife or plants, and any distinct population segment of any species
of vertebrate fish or wildlife which interbreeds when mature.'' This change restricted application of this portion
of the definition to vertebrates. The authority to list a ``species'' as endangered or threatened is thus not restricted
to species as recognized in formal taxonomic terms, but extends to subspecies, and for vertebrate taxa, to distinct
population segments. 


Because the Secretary must ``*** determine whether any species is an endangered species or a threatened
species'' (section 4(a)(1)), it is important that the term ``distinct population segment'' be interpreted in a clear
and consistent fashion. Furthermore, Congress has instructed the Secretary to exercise this authority with regard
to distinct population segments ``*** sparingly and only when the biological evidence indicates
that such action is warranted.'' (Senate Report 151, 96th Congress, 1st Session). The Services have used this authority
relatively rarely; of nearly 300 native vertebrate species listed under the Act, only about 20 are given separate
status as distinct population segments. 


It is important in light of the Act's requirement to use the best available scientific information in determining
the status of species that this interpretation follow sound biological principles. Any interpretation adopted
should also be aimed at carrying out the purposes of the Act (i.e., ``*** to provide a means whereby
the ecosystems upon which endangered species and threatened species depend may be conserved, to provide a program
for the conservation of such endangered species and threatened species, and to take such steps as may be appropriate
to achieve the purposes of the treaties and conventions set forth in subsection (a) of this section'' (section 2(b)).



Available scientific information provides little specific enlightenment in interpreting the phrase ``distinct
population segment.'' This term is not commonly used in scientific discourse, although ``population'' is an important
term in a variety of contexts. For instance, a population may be circumscribed by a set of experimental conditions,
or it may approximate an ideal natural group of organisms with approximately equal breeding opportunities among
its members, or it may refer to a loosely bounded, regionally distributed collection of organisms. In all cases, the
organisms in a population are members of a single species. 



The National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) has developed a Policy on the Definition of Species under the Endangered
Species Act (56 FR 5861258618; November 20, 1991). The policy applies only to species of salmonids native to
the Pacific Ocean. Under this policy, a stock of Pacific salmon is considered a distinct population segment if it represents
an evolutionarily significant unit (ESU) of a biological species. A stock must satisfy two criteria to be considered
an ESU: 





(1) It must be substantially reproductively isolated from other conspecific population units; and 

(2) It must represent an important component in the evolutionary legacy of the species. 






This document proposes an interpretation of the term ``distinct population segment'' for the purposes of listing,
delisting, and reclassifying vertebrates by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and NMFS. It is consistent with the
policy on Pacific salmon, but more broadly applicable. 
The following principles would, if adopted, guide the Services' listing, delisting and reclassification of distinct
population segments of vertebrate species. Any proposed or final rule affecting status determination for a distinct
population segment would clearly analyze the action in light of these guiding principles.
</SUPPLEM>
