 

III. Commission Findings and Conclusions






The Commission has reviewed the proposal to list and trade options on the Big Cap Index. As discussed below, the Commission
believes that the proposed rule change is consistent with the requirements of section 6(b)(5) of the Act and the rules
and regulations thereunder applicable to a national securities exchange. In particular, the Index is broad-based,
the proposed options are designed to reduce the potential for manipulation, and the proposal to list and trade options
on the Big Cap Index is consistent with the Exchange's obligation to promote investor protection.



The Commission finds that the trading of options on the Index will permit investors to participate in the price movements
of the 50 securities on which the Index is based. Further, trading of options on the Index will allow investors holding
positions in some or all of the securities underlying the Index to hedge the risks associated with their portfolios.
Accordingly, the Commission believes the Big Cap Index options will provide investors with an important trading
and hedging mechanism that should reflect accurately the overall movement of 50 of the largest and most widely-held
U.S. common stocks. By broadening the hedging and investment opportunities of investors, the Commission believes
that the trading of Index options will serve to protect investors, promote the public interest, and contribute to
the maintenance of fair and orderly markets.
<FOOTCITE>17</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
17

</FOOTNAME>
Pursuant to section 6(b)(5) of the Act, the Commission must predicate approval of any new option or warrant proposal
upon a finding that the introduction of such new derivative instrument is in the public interest. Such a finding would
be difficult for a derivative instrument that served no hedging or other economic function, because any benefits
that might be derived by market participants likely would be outweighed by the potential for manipulation, diminished
public confidence in the integrity of the markets, and other valid regulatory concerns. In this regard, the trading
of listed options on the Big Cap Index will provide investors with a hedging vehicle that should reflect the overall
movement of the 50 component stocks.





</FOOTNOTE>


The trading of options on the Big Cap Index, however, raises several concerns, namely issues related to index design,
customer protection, surveillance, and market impact. The Commission believes, for the reasons discussed below,
that the Exchange has addressed these concerns adequately.





A. Index Design and Structure





The Commission finds that the Big Cap Index is a broad-based index, and thus it is appropriate to permit Exchange rules
applicable to the trading of broad-based index options to apply to the Index options. Specifically, the Commission
believes the Index is broad-based because it contains 50 actively-traded stocks representing 25 industry groups,
and thus reflects a substantial segment of the U.S. equities market.




The Commission also finds that the large capitalizations, liquid markets, and relative weighings of the Index's
component stocks significantly minimize the potential for manipulation of the Index. First, the Index represents
and consists of the common stock values of 50 actively-traded U.S. companies. Second, as of December 1, 1993, no one
stock comprised more than 6.38 percent of the Index's total value and the percentage weighting of the five largest
issues in the Index accounted for 27.62 percent of the Index's value. Third, the overwhelming majority of the stocks
that comprise the Index are actively-traded, with a mean average daily trading volume and average monthly trading
volume of approximately 1,168.000 and 24,523,000 shares, respectively. Fourth, as of December 1, 1993, the market
capitalizations of the stocks in the Index were substantial, ranging from a high of $81.8 billion to a low of $7.4 billion,
with the mean and median at $25.6 billion and $20.2 billion, respectively. Fifth, the Index is comprised of stocks
representing a diverse group of industries, the most heavily represented by Index weight including technology,
manufacturing, and telecommunications industries. Sixth, all of the component securities currently are eligible
for options trading.
<FOOTCITE>18</FOOTCITE>
 Finally, the Commission believes that, as discussed below, existing mechanisms to monitor trading activity in those
securities will help deter as well as detect illegal trading activity involving the index option.




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
18

</FOOTNAME>
The Exchange's option listing standards, which are uniform among the options exchanges, provide that a security
underlying an option must, among other things, meet the following requirements:

(1) The public float must be at least 7,000,000 shares; 

(2) There must be a minimum of 2,000 stockholders; 

(c) Trading volume must have been at least 2.4 million shares over the preceding twelve months; and


(4) The market price must have been at least $7.50 for a majority of the business days during the preceding three calendar
months. See Phlx Rule 1009, Commentary .01.




</FOOTNOTE>

