 

(4) Respiratory protection and other personal protective equipment and clothing must be provided in accordance
with Subpart I of part 1915. 
Previous 1915.12(a)(2) prohibits workers from entering areas containing concentrations of flammable gases
or vapors at or above 10 percent of their LELs. The only exception to this rule is contained in the previous 1915.13(a)(2)
for highly volatile residues. (This provision has not been carried forward into the final rule. See the summary and
explanation of final 1915.13, later in this preamble, for a discussion of the reasons why this exception has
been dropped.) 
The proposal also contained a general prohibition against employees entering spaces containing hazardous concentrations
of flammable gases or vapors. However, as noted earlier, proposed 1915.12(d) also provided exceptions for
emergencies and for brief duration entries. The proposal would have required the same precautionary measures required
by the final rule, except that respiratory equipment and other personal protective equipment was identified as being
required, under Subpart I, through means of a note following proposed 1915.12(d)(3). 
As explained earlier, OSHA has decided to permit entries for emergency rescue and for short duration entries to install
ventilation equipment even if the space contains a hazardous atmosphere. No one objected to the precautionary measures
proposed in 1915.12(d), and they have been carried forward into the final rule. The proposed note regarding
the use of respiratory protection and other personal protective equipment has been converted into a requirement
(1915.12(b)(3)(iv)). Even though employers are already obligated to comply with these requirements under
Subpart I, OSHA believes that providing a mandatory reference in the text of the regulation will serve to emphasize
the importance of the required personal protective equipment. 
The Agency has concluded that entry made following the requirements contained in the exception to 1915.12(b)(3)
will protect employees by controlling and minimizing the hazards involved. No ignition sources may be present in
the space so that, if the atmosphere becomes flammable, there will be no energy source to ignite it. The atmosphere
in the space must be maintained above the UEL, and the atmosphere must be continuously monitored to minimize the possibility
that a flammable atmosphere could develop. Lastly, personal protective equipment must be worn to protect the employee
from exposure to the hazardous materials involved. 
Paragraph (c) of final 1915.12 sets precautions to be taken before employees enter areas that present hazards
related to toxic atmospheres. Paragraph (c)(1) of final 1915.12 requires spaces and adjacent spaces that
contain or have contained gases, liquids, or solids that are toxic, corrosive, or irritant to be: 
(1) Inspected visually by a competent person to determine whether or not toxic, corrosive, or irritant residue contaminants
are present, and 
(2) Tested by a competent person before initial entry by any employee, to determine the concentration of toxics, corrosives,
and irritants in the air within the space. 
The previous 1915.12(b)(1) requires the following spaces to be inspected and tested by a Marine Chemist, industrial
hygienist, or other qualified person: 
(1) Cargo spaces and other spaces containing or having last contained bulk gases, liquids, or solids of a toxic, corrosive,
or irritant nature, 
(2) Spaces that have been fumigated, and 
(3) Spaces immediately adjacent to these two types of spaces. 
Paragraphs (c)(1), (c)(2), and (c)(3) of proposed 1915.12 would have continued the previous language without
change, except that the proposal specified that the tests had to be performed by a Marine Chemist, a certified industrial
hygienist, or a U.S. Coast Guard authorized person. Although this may have appeared to be a departure from the previous
standard, the NPRM explained that the proposal simply codified OSHA interpretation of the previous standard. The
NPRM also requested comments on the proposed definition of ``certified industrial hygienist.'' 
Most commenters agreed that a Marine Chemist or a Certified Industrial Hygienist was qualified to perform the toxicity
tests required under 1915.12(c) (Ex. 610, 612, 613, 620, 623, 624,
628, 633). They noted that the intensive training in toxicology and in appropriate control measures
these persons receive makes them uniquely qualified to test and inspect confined and enclosed spaces and other dangerous
atmospheres. 
OSHA agrees with these comments, and the final rule recognizes that tests and inspections for the presence of toxic,
corrosive, or irritant substances may be performed by Marine Chemists and Certified Industrial Hygienists. 
The rulemaking participants expressed some disagreement, however, over whether or not a Coast Guard authorized
person had the proper qualifications to test and inspect areas for hazards related to the toxicity of various chemicals.
Some believed that a Coast Guard authorized person would be qualified to perform the required tests and inspections
(Ex. 624, 628, 633). These commenters stated that the use of a Coast Guard authorized person would
be limited to situations in which a Marine Chemist or certified industrial hygienist was not available. Several other
commenters argued that a Coast Guard authorized person is not required to receive training in hazards related to the
toxicity of various chemicals (Ex. 613, 615). In fact, the U.S. Department of Transportation (Ex. 613),
which administers requirements in Title 46 of the Code of Federal Regulations related to Coast Guard authorized persons,
stated:



Testing required by 46 CFR 35.01, 71.60, and 91.50 is primarily concerned with oxygen deficiency and combustibility
prior to conducting hot work. ``Coast Guard authorized persons'' who would be expected to conduct such testing under
Coast Guard regulations should not be considered equivalent to a Marine Chemist or Industrial Hygienist for the purpose
of evaluating toxic hazards in shipyards.


