 


Statement of Organization, Functions, Delegations of Authority





Part S of the Statement of Organization, Functions and Delegations of Authority for the Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) covers the Social Security Administration (SSA). Notice is being given that Chapter S3, the Office
of the Deputy Commissioner for Programs is being amended. The Office of Retirement and Survivors Insurance (ORSI)
and the Office of Supplemental Security Income (OSSI) are being abolished and a new Office of Retirement and Survivors
Insurance and Supplemental Security Income Policy (ORSISSIP) is being established to replace them. The changes
are as follows:




Chapter 3





Office of the Deputy Commissioner, Programs




S3.00Mission


S3.10Organization


S3.20Functions




Section S3.10The Office of the Deputy Commissioner, Programs_(Organization)




Delete





D. The Office of Retirement and Survivors Insurance (S3B).



F. The Office of Supplemental Security Income (S3E).




Establish





D. The Office of Retirement and Survivors Insurance and Supplemental Security Income Policy (S3J).




Reletter





``G'' to ``F'' and ``H'' to ``G''




Section S3.20The Office of the Deputy Commissioner, Programs_(Functions)




Delete





D. The Office of Retirement and Survivors Insurance (S3B) in its entirety.



F. The Office of Supplemental Security Income (S3E) in its entirety.




Establish





D. The Office of Retirement and Survivors Insurance and Supplemental Security Income Policy (S3J) develops, coordinates
and evaluates the program issues the operational policies, standards and instructions for the RSI and SSI programs.
Develops cost estimates for the SSI program. Develops and issues policies and guidelines for use by State and Federal
organizations which implement the SSI provision. Develops agreements with the States that govern State supplementation
programs, Medicaid eligibility, data exchange programs, food stamps and fiscal reporting processes. Plans and
directs continuing performance evaluation and economic and social survey programs to evaluate the current impact
and future needs of the RSI and SSI programs.




Reletter





``G'' to ``F'' and ``H'' to ``G''.



Add Subchapter




Subchapter S3J





Office of Retirement and Survivors Insurance and Supplemental Security Income Policy




S3J.00Mission


S3J.10Organization


S3J.20Functions




Section S3J.000The Office of Retirement and Survivors Insurance and Supplemental Security Income Policy_(Mission)





The Office of Retirement and Survivors Insurance and Supplemental Security Income Policy (ORSISSIP) provides SSA-wide
leadership and direction to the development, coordination and promulgation of RSI and SSI policies and procedures.
It develops, coordinates and evaluates the program and issues the operational policies, standards and instructions
for the RSI and SSI programs. Develops cost estimates for the SSI program. Develops and issues policies and guidelines
for use by State and Federal organizations which implement the SSI provision. Develops agreements with the States
that govern State supplementation programs, Medicaid eligibility, data exchange programs, food stamps and fiscal
reporting processes. Plans and directs continuing performance evaluation and economic and social survey programs
to evaluate the current impact and future needs of the RSI and SSI programs.




