 



Service Response:

 The Service expects that the establishment of the Refuge will be adequate to protect Guam's endangered forest species
and the habitats on which they depend. However, the establishment of the Refuge will not affect the extent of development
or the possibility of military expansion outside of the areas designated for protection. 


Issue 5:

 Opposition was expressed to the exclusion of private lands from critical habitat designation. 


Service Response:

 No lands on Guam are currently being considered for critical habitat designation. Private lands were not included
in the Refuge because of prohibitive costs associated with land acquisition. The Service believes that the Guam National
Wildlife Refuge provides for increased protection, management, and program funding for the bulk of essential forest
habitat on Guam, and that the protection of endangered forest species' habitat on private lands would best be accomplished
through existing environmental compliance processes. 


Issue 6:

 Opposition to critical habitat designation was expressed on the grounds that it would place serious economic and
operational constraints on potential military and private development activities. The economic analysis pertaining
to the proposed rule was criticized as not adequately addressing real economic impacts. 


Service Response:

 The purpose of the economic analysis on the designation of critical habitat is to gather the best available data on
economic or other impacts of the proposed critical habitat designation to assist in determining whether adjustments
should be made before the critical habitat designation is made final. The economic analysis addressed the possible
impacts of the critical habitat designation on Federal, Territory of Guam, and local landowners and the regional
and national economies. The analysis was conducted by examining the possible ways the designation of critical habitat
might restrict the use of Federal funds or permits for activities affecting or affected by the designation. Use of
private, Territory of Guam, or local funds for activities that do not require a Federal permit is not restricted by
a critical habitat designation and was beyond the scope of the economic analysis. The economic analysis was conducted
using the best information available, and it addressed the economic impacts to the greatest extent possible. 
The effects of establishing the Refuge on the economic environment were also evaluated in the Environmental Assessment
for the Guam National Wildlife Refuge. Because the Service is only including Federal lands within the Refuge, and
given the restrictions of the Act upon Federal lands, the potential development of important native forest lands
in Federal ownership, even without the establishment of a Refuge, is not likely. 


Issue 7:

 The opinion was expressed that critical habitat designation alone does not adequately address endangered species
concerns on Guam. Development pressure and additional military uses were predicted to take over, and concern was
indicated that, unless adequate, high quality, habitat is protected now, it will not be available for reintroductions.



Service Response:

 The Service strongly agrees with these concerns and, therefore, has established the Guam National Wildlife Refuge.
The purposes for establishing the Refuge are: (1) To protect and restore essential habitats and provide for recovery
actions for Guam's endangered and threatened species (which include reintroductions); (2) to conserve migratory
species and their habitats; (3) to protect and manage migratory species and other native wildlife and their habitats;
(4) to control predation upon native species, particularly by the brown tree snake; (5) to complement ongoing Government
of Guam and Department of Defense (DOD) programs in natural resource management, conservation, law enforcement,
research, and education; (6) to provide opportunities for public education, enjoyment of wildlife, cultural use
of resources, and scientific research; and, (7) to maintain the scenic values of the protected areas. The Refuge has
been established through a memorandum of understanding and managed through cooperative agreements among the U.S.
Navy, U.S. Air Force, and Service. The Service has determined that the establishment of the Refuge adequately addresses
the threats to the endangered forest species on Guam and provides for the protection of their habitat. 


Issue 8:

 Critical habitat designation was opposed for including too much land. 


Service Response:

 No habitat is currently being considered for designation as critical habitat on Guam and only Federal lands are included
in the Refuge. To determine which lands the Service should include within the boundaries of the Refuge, habitat was
evaluated on the basis of its biological importance to endangered and threatened species, migratory birds, other
native wildlife, and the conservation of biological diversity. Federal lands that were identified as ``essential
habitat'' in published recovery plans for endangered forest birds, waterbirds, and fruit bats were considered priority
areas for protection. Other areas with outstanding conservation values that were considered for inclusion in the
Refuge included wetlands, migratory bird foraging and loafing areas, and sea turtle nesting beaches. 


Issue 9:

 An overlay refuge was supported as the best method for the protection and recovery of endangered species on Guam. 


Service Response:

 The Service agrees with this statement and has established the Guam National Wildlife Refuge. 


Issue 10:

 Critical habitat designation was opposed as a Federal condemnation of land and plot to steal lands from Guam's people.



Service Response:

 Designation of critical habitat is a regulatory exercise; it is not a Federal condemnation of land. Designation of
critical habitat does not result in additional legal restrictions on private lands unless such lands are subject
to actions that are authorized, funded, or carried out by Federal agencies. Non-Federal, as well as Federal lands,
with or without designated critical habitat, are still subject to prohibitions against take of listed species on
their land, pursuant to section 9 of the Act. Designation of critical habitat is a requirement of the Endangered Species
Act for threatened and endangered species whenever such designation is prudent and determinable. 


Finding and Withdrawal 


The Service finds that designation of critical habitat is not prudent. The constituent elements of the habitat will
be protected on an area sufficient to provide for the conservation of listed species through refuge designation.
A designation of critical habitat would have provided some extra assurances that actions funded, authorized, or
carried out by the Federal government would not destroy or adversely modify habitat needed by Guam forest species.
Unless such Federal involvement exists, the designation of critical habitat does not affect actions of private landowners
or local government activities. The establishment of the Guam National Wildlife Refuge allows for the protection
and active management of refuge lands. Additionally, many more of Guam's native species will directly benefit from
management provided by the Guam National Wildlife Refuge. By establishing a refuge on Guam, most of the lands identified
in the proposed rule for critical habitat will benefit from active protection and wildlife management programs as
well as 
increased cooperation among the Service, Government of Guam, U.S. Navy, and U.S. Air Force. A total of 21,204 acres
originally proposed as critical habitat are now in the refuge, including all of the acreage actually occupied by the
extant forest species. The Service will maintain a resident staff on Guam to coordinate and conduct wildlife management,
research, and educational and public use programs in cooperation and coordination with the Government of Guam and
the Service's military refuge partners. Biological monitoring, wildlife and habitat enhancement and recovery
programs, and brown tree snake control programs have and will continue to be developed, coordinated, and implemented
by the cooperating agencies within the framework of the refuge cooperative agreements. Refuge establishment enables
the Service to implement research and endangered species recovery programs that could not be implemented by designating
critical habitat. Law enforcement will continue and will be conducted in conjunction with DOD and the Government
of Guam. 



