 




<DOCTITLE>Sasse/Bell Ridge Road Access, Wenatchee National Forest, Kittitas County, WA</DOCTITLE>



<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Forest Service, USDA.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Notice of intent to prepare an environmental impact statement.






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Forest Service, USDA, will prepare an environmental impact statement (EIS) to analyze and disclose the environmental
impacts of a site-specific proposal to issue a permit and authorize use of an existing road and construction of additional
roads across National Forest System (NFS) lands located in the Bell Creek and Little Salmon La Sac Drainages. The action
is proposed in response to an application seeking legal access to approximately 1000 acres in three separate sections
of non-Federal land located within the Forest Boundary on the Cle Elum Ranger District. The proposed action is located
approximately 12 miles northwest of Cle Elum, Washington. The purpose of the EIS will be to develop and evaluate a range
of alternatives including a no action Alternative, and possible additional alternatives to respond to issues identified
during the scoping process. The proposed project will be in compliance with the direction in the Wenatchee National
Forest Land and Resource Management Plan (March 1990) which provides the overall guidance for management of the area.
The agency invites written comments on the scope of this project. In addition, the agency gives notice of this analysis
so that interested and affected people are aware of how they may participate and contribute to the final decision.



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

Comments concerning the scope of this proposal must be received by June 10, 1994.



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Submit written comments and suggestions to Sonny J. O'Neal, Forest Supervisor, Wenatchee National Forest, P.O.
Box 811, Wenatchee, Washington 98807.



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:



Questions and comments about this EIS should be directed to Douglas Campbell, Lands Specialist, Cle Elum Ranger District,
803 West Second, Cle Elum, Washington 98922; phone (509) 6744411.



</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

The Wenatchee National Forest is initiating this action in response to an application filed by Plum Creek Timber Company.
The applicant requests rights-of-way across NFS lands for the purpose of establishing temporary legal access to
approximately 1000 acres in three sections of land owned by the applicant. The sections of land to be accessed are surrounded
by NFS lands and no legal road access to the sections currently exists. 



The applicant seeks legal access pursuant to the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (ANILCA). The ANILCA
directs the Forest Service to grant access to inholdings of non-Federal land within the National Forest boundary
for the reasonable use and enjoyment of those lands by the landowner. The applicant has stated that it intends to manage
the lands to be accessed for long term timber production utilizing conventional ground based logging systems. The
applicant intends to build roads on the permitted rights-of-way sufficient to support the intended use of the land.
The access involves approximately 3511 feet of road on 3 acres of NFS land for the Sasse sections, and 3000 feet of road
on 2.4 acres of NFS land for the Bell Ridge sections.

A range of alternatives will be considered, including a no action alternative. Other alternatives will be developed
in response to issues received during scoping.

The major issues that have been identified to date include the following: water quality; fisheries; Snoqualmie Pass
Adaptive Management Area; Teanaway Recreation Area; habitat for spotted owl, peregrine falcon and the gray wolf;
cumulative effects of both the road access and the management of the private land and Forest Service.

Public participation will be especially important at several points during the analysis. The Forest Service will
be seeking information, comments, and assistance from Federal, State, and local agencies, and other individuals
or organizations who may be interested in or affected by the proposed actions. This information will be used in preparation
of the draft EIS. The scoping process includes:




1. Identifying potential issues.

2. Identifying issues to be analyzed in depth.

3. Eliminating insignificant issues or those which have been covered by a relevant previous environmental process.

4. Exploring additional alternatives.

5. Identifying potential environmental effects of the proposed action and alternatives (i.e. direct, indirect,
and cumulative effects and connected actions).

6. Determining potential cooperating agencies and task assignments.




The draft EIS is expected to be filed with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and to be available for public
review by January 31, 1995. At that time, copies of the draft EIS will be distributed to interested and affected agencies,
organizations, and members of the public for their review and comment. EPA will publish a notice of availability of
the draft EIS in the 

Federal Register

.

The comment period on the draft EIS will be no less than 45 days from the date the EPA notice appears in the 

Federal Register

. It is very important that those interested in the management of the Wenatchee National Forest participate at that
time.

The Forest Service believes, at this early stage, it is important to give reviewers notice of several court rulings
related to public participation in the environmental review process. First, reviewers of draft EIS's must structure
their participation in the environmental review of the proposal so that it is meaningful and alerts an agency to the
reviewer's position and contentions. 

Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp. 

v. 

NRDC

, 435 U.S. 519, 553 (1978). Also, environmental objections that could be raised at the draft EIS stage but that are not
raised until after completion of the final EIS may be waived or dismissed by the courts. 

City of Angoon 

v. 

Hodel, 

803 F. 2d 1016, 1022 (9th Cir. 1986) and 

Wisconsin Heritages, Inc. 

v. 

Harris

, 490 F. Supp. 1334, 1338 (E.D. Wis. 1980). Because of these court rulings, it is very important that those interested
in this proposed action participate by the close of the comment period so that substantive comments and objections
are made available to the Forest Service at a time when it can meaningfully consider them and respond to them in the final
EIS.

To assist the Forest Service in identifying and considering issues and concerns on the proposed action, comments
on the draft EIS should be as specific as possible. It is also helpful if comments refer to specific pages or chapters
of the draft EIS. Comments may also address the adequacy of the draft EIS or the merits of the alternatives formulated
and discussed in the statement. Reviewers may wish to refer to the Council on Environmental Quality Regulations for
implementing the procedural provisions of the National Environmental Policy Act at 40 CFR 1503.3 in addressing these
points.

The final EIS is scheduled to be completed by May 1, 1995. In the final EIS, The Forest Service is required to respond
to comments and responses received during the comment period that pertain to the environmental consequences discussed
in the draft EIS and applicable laws, regulations, and policies considered in making the decision regarding this
proposal. Sonny J. O'Neal, Forest Supervisor, Wenatchee National Forest is the responsible official. As the responsible
official he will document the decision and reasons for the decision in the Record of Decision. That decision will be
subject to Forest Service appeal regulations (36 CFR 215).




Dated: May 10, 1994.


</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Sonny J. O'Neal,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Forest Supervisor.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9412250 Filed 51894; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 341011M
</BILLING>


