 






Startup

 means the setting in operation of a stationary 
source or emission unit for any purpose. 



Stationary source (source or facility)

 means any building, 
structure, facility, or emissions unit which emits or may emit 
any regulated pollutant directly or as fugitive emissions. 

(1) The terms ``building,'' ``structure,'' ``facility,'' or 
``emissions unit'' include all pollutant-emitting activities which: 

(i) Belong to the same industrial grouping; and 

(ii) Are located on one property or on two or more 
contiguous properties; and 

(iii) Are under the same or common ownership, operation, or 
control or which are owned or operated by entities which are 
under common control. 

(2) Pollutant-emitting activities shall be considered as 
part of the same industrial grouping if: 

(i) They belong to the same two-digit standard industrial 
classification code under the system described in the 1987 
Standard Industrial Classification Manual; or 

(ii) They are part of a common production process. (Common 
production process includes industrial processes, manufacturing 
processes and any connected processes involving a common 
material.) 

(3) The emissions within district boundaries of cargo 
carriers associated with the stationary source shall be 
considered emissions from the stationary source to the extent 
that emission reductions from cargo carriers are proposed as 
offsets. 



Surplus

 means emission reductions that are in excess of any 
emissions reduction which is: 

(1) Required or encumbered by any laws, rules, regulations, 
agreements, or orders; or 

(2) Attributed to a control measure noticed for workshop in 
the district, or proposed or contained in a State Implementation 
Plan or Federal Implementation Plan; or 

(3) Proposed or contained in a district air quality 
attainment plan for attaining reductions required by the Clean 
Air Act. 



Temporary source

 means emission sources such as pilot 
plants, and portable facilities that will be terminated or 
located outside the district after less than a cumulative total 
of 90 days of operation in any 12 continuous months, and the 
emissions resulting from the construction phase of a new source. 



Title V permits

 means permits issued, denied, renewed, 
amended, or reopened pursuant to the Clean Air Act as amended in 
1990 (42 U.S.C. 7401 

et seq

.), and 40 CFR part 70, ``State Operating Permit Programs.'' 



Total reduced sulfur compounds 

means the sulfur compounds 
hydrogen sulfide, methyl mercaptan, dimethyl sulfide and dimethyl 
disulfide. 

(c) 

Standards

. 

(1) 

Authority to construct

. Any person building, erecting, 
altering or replacing any article, machine, equipment or other 
contrivance, the use of which may cause, eliminate, reduce, or 
control the issuance ROC or NO

X

, shall obtain authorization for 
such construction from the EPA as specified in paragraph (e)(3) 
of this section, prior to beginning actual construction. An 
Authority to Construct shall remain in effect until it expires or 
the application is cancelled. An Authority to Construct shall 
expire no later than two years following the date of permit 
issuance, unless the applicant has commenced construction prior 
to that date. If the applicant has commenced construction, the 
Authority to Construct shall remain in effect for the life of the 
emissions unit(s), unless the EPA has taken action to modify or 
revoke it. 

(i) An Authority to Construct shall be valid beyond two 
years if: 

(A) Commencement of construction has occurred; and 

(B) Construction is completed in a reasonable period of 
time, as determined by the EPA. 

(ii) If a written request to extend the Authority to 
Construct is received by the EPA prior to the expiration of the 
Authority to Construct, an extension may be granted for up to two 
years at the discretion of the EPA. 

(iii) The EPA shall be notified of the anticipated date of 
initial startup or operation of any permitted article, machine, 
equipment or other contrivance. Such notice shall be made no less 
than 30 days prior to the startup date. 

(iv) The EPA shall be notified of the actual date of 
initial startup within five days after such date. 

(2) 

Standards for granting applications

. 

(i) The EPA shall deny an Authority to Construct except as 
provided in 52.3001, New Source Review, if the applicant does 
not show that every article, machine, equipment or other 
contrivance, the use of which may cause, eliminate, reduce, or 
control the issuance of air contaminants, is so designed, 
controlled, equipped, and operated with such air pollution 
control equipment that it may be shown to operate without 
emitting or without causing to be emitted air contaminants in 
violation of these rules and regulations or of such state or 
federal statutes as may be enforceable by the EPA on the date the 
application is deemed complete. 

(ii) The EPA shall require enforceable emission limitations 
as permit conditions in Authorities to Construct to assure 
compliance with all analyses performed for the issuance of the 
permit, including the permanence of surplus actual emissions 
reductions applied for use as internal reductions or authorized 
emission reduction credits in accordance with 52.3001, New 
Source Review, and 52.3002, Emissions Reduction Credit 
Authorization. 

(iii) Approval to construct shall not relieve any owner or 
operator of the responsibility to comply fully with applicable 
requirements, including applicable provisions of the California 
State Implementation Plan or any applicable Federal 
Implementation Plan, district rules and regulations, or state or 
federal law. 

(3) 

Provision of sampling and testing facilities

. In 
addition to the monitoring and testing required to comply with 
state or federal laws or regulations, the EPA may, upon 
reasonable written notice or before an Authority to Construct is 
granted, require the applicant or the owner or operator of any 
article, machine, equipment, or other contrivance, the use of 
which may cause the issuance of air contaminants, or the use of 
which may eliminate, reduce, or control the issuance of air 
contaminants to: 



