 

Restoration of Nearshore Breeding Seabird Colonies on the Central California Coast



Introduction



Nearshore breeding colonies of common murres (

Uria aalge

) throughout central coastal California decreased by 60% between 1980 and 1986 (Takekawa et al. 1990). This population
decline was attributed to high mortality from gill-net fishing, oil spills (including the Apex Houston spill), and
a severe El Nino-Southern Oscillation event in 19821983 (Takekawa et al. 1990, Swartzman and Carter 1991).
The 

Apex Houston

 oil spill, which occurred principally between San Francisco and the Monterey Peninsula, killed nearly 9,000 seabirds
in February 1986 (Siskin et al. 1993). These mortalities included approximately 1,293 rhinoceros auklets (

Cerorhinca monocerata

), 180 small alcids, 12 marbled murrelets (

Brachyramphus marmoratus

), and 1,206 other birds (including loons, grebes, scoters, cormorants, shorebirds, and gulls) killed as a result
of the spill (Siskin et al. 1993). In addition, approximately 6,000 common murres were killed (Siskin et al. 1993).
The common murre colony at Devil's Slide Rock was found to be abandoned, subcolonies at Castle Rocks disappeared,
and other central coastal breeding sites (e.g., Hurricane Point Rocks, Point Reyes) were greatly reduced after the
spill (Takekawa et al. 1990, Swartzman and Carter 1991)(Figure 1).

In the early 1900's, common murres bred at Prince Island in southern California (Carter et al. 1992), However, the
central coastal California population currently represents the southernmost range for breeding common murres
in the Pacific. Future oil spills and other catastrophic events (e.g., disease, predation, climate change) could
result in the extirpation of this population as well as a reduction in the species' geographic range. The restoration
of former common murre colonies would aid in securing the central coastal California common murre population and
would spread the risk of future disasters among colony sites over a wider range of the California coast.

The goal of this project is to recolonize common murres at historic breeding colonies in central California. The project
will be conducted over approximately 10 years. A total of $4.92 million is available for this project.



Purpose



The restoration funds were recovered under the Clean Water Act, the National Marine Sanctuaries Act, the California
Harbors  Navigation Code 293 and 294, and other State law. A Trustee Council, comprised of representatives
of each Trustee, was established to review and select restoration actions. As part of the settlement in the 

Apex Houston

 litigation, approximately $4.92 million has been allocated for the restoration of common murre colonies that suffered
damage from the 

Apex Houston

 oil spill. This project should protect the central California common murre populaton. This will be achieved by restoring
this population to a larger part of its historic range and spreading the risk of future catastrophic events (e.g. oil
spills, disease, storms) between more colony sites and over a broader section of the California coast.


