 

Because FSIS is convinced that it is important to communicate consistent messages about dietary goals, and about
the role meat and poultry products can play in meeting dietary recommendations, it is proposing to provide, as an option,
for meat and poultry products that meet the ``total fat'' and ``cholesterol'' criteria for ``extra lean'' to carry
health claims about cancer, and products that meet all the requirements for the ``extra lean'' claim to carry health
claims about heart disease. Because many meat and poultry products, including individual foods such as mixed dishes
and meal-type products, contain ample amounts of foods from the fruit and vegetable group and/or the grain products
group to be suitable in nature to bear claims about cancer and heart disease, FSIS believes it is appropriate to allow
meat and poultry products meeting ``extra lean'' criteria to qualify for the companion claims about the relationships
of diets high in fruits, vegetables, and grain products to cancer and heart disease. Such action would be consistent
with dietary guidance efforts to encourage healthful diets by choosing diets with plenty of fruits, vegetables,
and grain products, as well as choosing lean meats and poultry.
To be consistent with the use of ``extra lean'' criteria for health claims about cancer and heart disease, FSIS believes
it is appropriate to permit meat and poultry products that are individual foods to meet the ``extra lean'' cholesterol
criterion to carry the calcium/osteoporosis, sodium/hypertension, and folate/neural tube defects health claims.
To not make this allowance would introduce disparity among meat and poultry products to qualify for all claims. Therefore,
FSIS is proposing to permit meat and poultry products which meet the ``cholesterol'' criterion for ``extra lean''
to carry health claims about osteoporosis, hypertension, and neural tube defects, provided they meet all other requirements
to bear those claims.
FSIS proposes to require that the labeling of a product disclose the presence of any nutrient that exceeds the disqualifying
level in conjunction with a claim when FSIS permits the claim. Therefore, when a claim is allowed on an individual food
despite the fact that its cholesterol level exceeds the disqualifying level, the labeling would be required to carry
a disclosure statement to read ``See [appropriate panel or Nutrition Facts] for information about [nutrient requiring
disclosure] and other nutrients,'' e.g., ``See side panel for information about cholesterol and other nutrients,''
or ``See Nutrition Facts for information about cholesterol and other nutrients.'' This action would be consistent
with FDA's disclosure requirements.


Nutritive Value


FSIS agrees with FDA that when claims are made about the effects of consuming a substance at other than decreased levels,
the level of the substance must be sufficiently high to justify the claim. For such claims, FSIS is proposing to adopt
levels required to meet regulatory definitions for ``good source'' or ``high'' prior to any nutrient addition. However,
in defining requirements for nutrient content claims for ``good source'' and ``high'' at 9 CFR 317.354 and 381.454
for meat and poultry products, respectively, FSIS did not provide a specific definition for a meal-type product.
Rather, the claims are allowed for a food contained in a meal-type product based on the reference amount customarily
consumed of the component food. Because the actual serving of a component food, when used as a side dish in a meal, may
be much less than the reference amount, FSIS is concerned that the actual quantitative amount of the substance, e.g.,
calcium or dietary fiber, in the entire meal may not be sufficient to justify use of the claim on the product. To ensure
sufficient levels of substances in a meal-type product, FSIS is proposing to base the qualifying nutrient criteria
on the labeled serving of the entire product.
FSIS believes health claims should not be made on foods that do not make a nutritional contribution to the diet. Therefore,
FSIS is proposing, as a general requirement, to prohibit health claims for any product that contains less than 10 percent
of the Reference Daily Intake or Daily Reference Value for vitamin A, vitamin C, iron, calcium, protein, or fiber per
reference amount customarily consumed prior to any nutrient addition for individual foods and per labeled serving
prior to any nutrient addition for meal-type products. FSIS interprets nutrient addition as addition specifically
to meet the requirements for a health claim. For example, the requirement does not preclude claims on products where
a nutrient is added to meet a standard of identity; a nutrient is added for technological purposes, e.g., L-ascorbic
acid (vitamin C) in curing meats; a non-meat or non-poultry ingredient fortified in accordance with FDA requirements
and policy is used; or, an ingredient that is a nutrient source, e.g., textured vegetable protein, is used.


Additional Limits on Claims


FSIS agrees with FDA that claims should be prohibited for any product where a substance, other than one for which a disqualifying
nutrient level is established, is present at an inappropriate level as specified in the provision authorizing the
claim. For example, a product containing more phosphorus than calcium on a weight-per-weight basis would not be eligible
to bear the calcium/osteoporosis health claim because high levels of dietary phosphorus, when calcium intake is
low, would impair the utilization of calcium by bone. The presence of the claim on a product not having an appropriate
calcium to phosphorus ratio would be misleading in that it would not be possible to get the full calcium benefits from
such a product.


