 

IV. Provisions of the Final Rule 



In this final rule, we are deleting the conditions for 
coverage specified in 42 CFR part 494, subpart B, which 
screening mammography suppliers must meet to qualify for 
coverage of the services under the Medicare program. 
Instead, we are cross-referencing the applicable FDA 
certification requirements, published in the Federal 
Register on December 21, 1993 (58 FR 67558 and 58 FR 67565), 
that suppliers of the services must meet effective 
October 1, 1994. 

Based on our analysis of section 354 of the PHS Act, as 
added by the MQSA, and the related FDA interim regulations, 
we believe that we have fulfilled our responsibility to 
establish quality standards under section 1834(c)(3) of the 
Act by adopting the quality standards and related 
certification requirements specified in the FDA regulations. 

Section 1834(c)(3) of the Act requires the Secretary to 
establish standards to ensure the safety and accuracy of 
screening mammography services performed under Medicare 
Part B. The quality standards that must be established 
include: (1) Standards that require the use of equipment 
specifically designed for mammography and that meet other 
radiological standards established by the Secretary for 
mammography; (2) standards that require that the mammography 
be performed by individuals who are licensed by a State to 
perform radiological procedures, or who are certified as 
qualified to perform radiological procedures by an 
appropriate program as the Secretary specifies in 
regulations; (3) standards that require that the results of 
the mammography be interpreted by a physician who is 
certified as qualified to interpret radiological procedures 
by such an appropriate board (or program) as the Secretary 
recognizes in regulations; and (4) requirements that, with 
respect to a woman's first screening mammography performed 
for which payment is made under the program, the results of 
the mammography will be placed in the woman's permanent 
medical records. 

In the FDA interim final rule, 21 CFR subpart B, 
900.11 (``Requirements for certification''), paragraph (a) 
provides that after October 1, 1994, ``a certificate issued 
by FDA will be required for lawful operation of all 
facilities'' and that in order to obtain a certificate from 
FDA, facilities ``are required to meet the quality standards 
in 900.12 and to be accredited by an accrediting body 
approved by FDA'' as described in 21 CFR part 900, subpart A, 
900.1 through 900.7. In 900.12 of the interim final 
rule, FDA established standards for mammography equipment, 
personnel, and practices. These standards are substantially 
the same as the Medicare interim quality standards that were 
published on December 31, 1990, but when they do differ from 
the existing Medicare standards, they still appear to be 
consistent with our mandate under section 1834(c)(3) of the 
Act. Thus, this final rule will remove the existing 
Medicare interim quality standards and, instead, will cross-refer to applicable interim FDA certification requirements

for mammography services. 

In addition, we are making several technical and other 
clarifying revisions in the remaining provisions of the 
existing interim regulations that we published in the 


Federal Register

 on December 31, 1990 (55 FR 53510). With 
the exception of two points of clarification, a technical 
change, and certain conforming changes to part 405, 
subpart E (``Criteria for Determination of Reasonable 
Charges; Payment for Services of Hospital Interns, 
Residents, and Supervising Physicians''), the rationale for 
these revisions is discussed in the ``Discussion of Public 
Comments'' in section III. of this rule. 

In 405.534 (``Limitation on payment for screening 
mammography services''), we are making technical changes to 
cross-refer to the fee schedule for physicians' services. 
The current 405.534 refers to 405.533. The latter was 
removed from the CFR on November 25, 1991, with the 
publication of the fee schedule for physicians' services in 
the 

Federal Register

 (56 FR 59622). We are also revising 
paragraphs (c) and (d) so that, effective for a screening 
mammography procedure furnished beginning January 1, 1995, 
the payment for the screening mammography procedure reflects 
the relationship between the relative value units for the 
professional and technical components established for a 
diagnostic mammography procedure under the physicians' fee 
schedule. Effective January 1, 1995, the apportionment of 
the payment limit between the professional and technical 
components will be changed to reflect the relationship of 
the two components for diagnostic bilateral mammograms under 
the fee schedule for physicians' services for 1995. 




