 

In addition, the ``Chemistry Laboratory Guidebook'' (section 6.010F, page 633) has been revised to include
a procedure that could be applied to mechanically separated product made in part from mature chickens. That procedure
involves a determination of the relative mature and young chicken proportions when product is made from a combination
of young and mature chickens. 
3. 

Bone particle size. 

FSIS is proposing that at least 98 percent of the bone particles present in MS(K) be restricted to a maximum size no greater
than 1.5 millimeter (mm) in their greatest dimension and no bone particles shall be larger than 2.0 millimeter in their
greatest dimension. The need to limit the size of bone particles in MS(K) has been acknowledged since the poultry industry
began to use mechanical methods for manufacturing this product. 
FSIS' objective is that the limitation imposed be adequate to prevent any digestibility problems while not restricting
the operation of equipment in accordance with good manufacturing practices more than is necessary for this purpose
or to protect finished product quality. In the 1979 health and safety report, it was recommended that bone particle
size be controlled to ensure that equipment type or processing does not result in unacceptably large fragments. The
report concluded that, provided this is done, the bone particles in the product will not present any health hazard
because of size or hardness. 
4. 

Recordkeeping. 

FSIS is also proposing that establishments that manufacture MS(K) maintain records of bone solids content and bone
particle size as a measure of process control. These records must be made available to the inspector and any other duly
authorized representative of the Secretary upon request. 
B. 

Limitations on Use 
FSIS is proposing certain limitations with respect to the use of MS(K) in the formulation of poultry and meat food products.
FSIS is proposing such restrictions based on the potential fluoride contribution of MS(K) made from fowl (i.e., mature
female chickens) and the characteristics of MS(K), including the kind of poultry from which it is made and its consistency.
FSIS believes that such requirements are necessary to prevent potential health and safety problems, and to maintain
the quality and integrity of the poultry and meat food product supply. FSIS is also proposing that MS(K) may be used,
except in certain cases, in any product defined by regulatory standards or Agency policies whereby ``(Kind)'' or
``(Kind) Meat'' are being used, provided that it is identified as ``Mechanically Separated (Kind).'' 
1. Kind of product limitation. 

FSIS is proposing that when a poultry product is required to be prepared from a particular Kind or Kinds of poultry (e.g.,
chickens), use of MS(K) of any other kind (e.g., mechanically separated turkey) would not be permitted. This provision
would assure that MS(K) made from a different kind of poultry is not used in a poultry product represented as containing
ingredients from a particular kind or kinds of poultry. 
The proposed definition and standard for MS(K) covers MS(K) prepared from any kind of poultry. FSIS would not permit
use of MS(K) as an ingredient in any given poultry product regardless of the kind of poultry from which it is made. Such
action would be inconsistent with existing regulatory requirements and could, among other things, result in false
or misleading labeling. For example, the definition and standard for ``(Kind) patties'' (9 CFR 381.160) requires
that poultry product ingredients be ``of the kind indicated'' (e.g., turkey products in turkey patties). FSIS believes
that proposing to provide for the use of MS(K) as a distinctive poultry product ingredient should not abrogate this
requirement (e.g., to not permit use of mechanically separated chicken in turkey patties). 
2. 

Limitations on product made from fowl. 

FSIS is proposing that the use of mechanically separated chicken made, in whole or in part, from fowl (i.e., mature
female chickens, as defined in 9 CFR 381.170(a)(1)(vi)) not be permitted in baby, junior, or toddler foods. These
restrictions are based on the potential fluoride contribution of product made from fowl to dietary intakes. The 1979
health and safety report found only slight differences between the fluoride content of MS(K) made from poultry other
than fowl and that of poultry products produced by traditional deboning techniques, but considerably higher amounts
in MS(K) made from fowl. 





