 

(v) a copy of the court order or other legal basis for detention; 
(vi) name, title, agency and signature of arresting officer; 
(vii) charge or charges; 
(viii) date and place of birth; 
(ix) ethnic origin or tribal affiliation; 
(x) present or last place of employment; 
(xi) emergency contact name, relationship, address and phone number; 
(xii) record of telephone calls made by arrestee at time of admission; 
(xiii) driver's license and social security number; 
(xiv) identifying information, including height, weight, gender and identifying marks, such as birthmarks, scars
or tattoos; 
(xv) photograph and fingerprints (optional); 
(xvi) notation of cash and all property; 
(xvii) initial classification and special needs; 
(xviii) an indication that the health and suicide screening was completed; 
(xix) name of legal representative if any; and 
(xx) name of booking officer. 
(11) 

Conducting research

. All research conducted shall comply with federal and tribal regulations pertaining to conducting and disseminating
research findings as well as professional and scientific ethics. The administrator, the Agency Superintendent
and the Area Director shall approved all research prior to implementation. 


10.52 

Physical plant. 


(a) 

Building and safety code compliance

_(1) 

Building and safety code compliance

. If owned by the Bureau, the facility shall comply with 29 CFR Part 1910, Subparts D, E, G and L. If owned by a tribe, the
facility shall comply with the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Life Safety Code 101 Chapters 2, 4 through
7, and 14 (if new holding occupancy) or 15 (if existing holding occupancy), or comparable tribal regulations. 
(2) 

Zoning

. The facility shall comply with applicable zoning and land use requirements. 
(3) 

Accessibility

. The facility shall comply with 25 U.S.C. 794 (the Rehabilitation Act of 1973) as amended, 41 CFR 10119.6 (Uniform
Federal Accessibility Standards), and 43 CFR Part 17. 
(4) 

OSHA compliance

. The facility shall comply with 29 CFR Part 1910, Subparts C through E, G, K, L and S (Occupational Health and Safety
Standards) or comparable tribal regulations. If other activities governed by sections of 29 CFR Part 1910 not identified
in this standard are carried out in the facility, the section(s) of 29 CFR Part 1910 governing that activity or comparable
tribal regulations apply. 
(5) 

Health and safety inspection

. In compliance with 29 CFR Part 1960 Subparts B through D, the facility shall receive at least one inspection each year
by a qualified safety and health inspector and Environmental Health Specialist and/or Sanitarian. Any request for
inspection shall be directed to the Area Safety Manager or Officer through the Agency Superintendent. 
(6) 

Furnishings and equipment code compliance

. The administrator shall maintain documentation by an independent, qualified source that the interior furnishing
materials in inmate living areas, exit areas and places of public assembly shall be in accordance with NFPA Life Safety
Code Section 65 or comparable tribal regulations. 
(b) 

Facility organization

_(1) 

Separation of adults and juveniles

. If the adult facility temporarily holds juveniles for periods of less than twenty-four hours, it shall comply with
42 U.S.C. 223(a)(ii) (the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974) as amended and 28 CFR Part 31. 
(2) 

Separation of inmates

. The facility shall be designed and constructed so that inmates can be separated according to the requirements identified
in these standards. 
(3) 

Separation of males and females

. The facility shall provide for sight and sound separation of male and female inmates in their housing areas. 
(4) 

Continuously observable housing

. The facility shall provide a minimum of two single occupancy cells that can be continuously observed by staff and
allow inmates to communicate with staff. 
(5) 

Rated capacity

. The number of inmates shall not exceed the facility's rated capacity with the exception of mass arrests. 
(c) 

Environmental conditions

_(1) 

Artificial light levels

. Lighting levels in inmate cells or rooms shall be at least twenty footcandles at the desk and in the personal grooming
areas. Lighting levels throughout the facility shall be appropriate to the tasks and activities carried out in its
spaces. An independent, qualified source shall document lighting levels. 
(2) 

Noise levels

. Noise levels shall not exceed seventy decibels in the daytime and forty-five decibels at night. An independent,
qualified source shall document noise levels. 
(3) 

Indoor air quality

. Air circulation shall be at least ten cubic feet of outside or recirculated filtered air per minute per occupant.
An independent, qualified source shall document air circulations. 
(4) 

Use of tobacco

. The administrator shall regulate the use of tobacco in the facility by staff, inmates and the public. 
(5) 

Heating and cooling

. Temperatures shall be appropriate to the summer and winter comfort zones. 
(d) 

Security

_(1) 

Control center

. The facility shall maintain a secure control center, which has a system for immediate communication with the inmate
living areas. The control center shall monitor and coordinate the facility's security, life safety and communications
systems. 
(2) 

Perimeter security

. The perimeter shall be secured in a way that inmates remain in the perimeter and that access by the general public is
denied without proper authorization. There shall be security doors between inmate areas and areas to which the public
has access. 
(3) 

Security equipment storage

. The facility shall provide space for the secure storage of chemical agents, restraining devices and related security
equipment. The equipment shall be located outside inmate living and activity areas in a place that is readily accessible
to authorized persons only. The facility shall store firearms in a secure area or cabinet outside the security perimeter
of the facility in a place that is accessible only to authorized persons. 



