 

(D) Provide that the prior lienholder will not declare the lien in default for any nonmonetary reason if FmHA commences
liquidation proceedings against the property and thereafter acquires the property. 
(ii) When the prior lien secures future advances, including the lienholder's costs for borrower liquidation or bankruptcy,
which under state law have priority over the mortgage being taken (or a FmHA mortgage already held), the prior lienholder
shall agree not to make advances for purposes other than taxes, insurance or payments on other prior liens without
written consent of the State Director. 
(iii) The prior lienholder shall consent to FmHA making (or transferring) the loan and taking (or retaining) the related
mortgage if the prior lien instrument prohibits a loan or mortgage (or transfer) without the prior lienholder's consent.

(iv) The prior lienholder shall consent to FmHA transferring the property subject to the prior lien after FmHA has
obtained title to the property either by foreclosure or voluntary conveyance if the prior lien instrument prohibits
such transfer without the prior lienholder's consent. 
(2) 

Notice of foreclosure agreements. 

These agreements will be obtained only when required by a state supplement. As a precautionary measure, the state
supplement will require notice agreements when OGC determines that state law permits junior liens of private parties
to be extinguished by foreclosure of a prior lien without the junior lienholder being made parties or being given actual
notice. The state supplement will specify the number of days within which notice of foreclosure is required by the
agreement. 
(3) 

Leaseholds. 

When the FmHA security interest is on a leasehold, the approval official must review the lease to make sure that it meets
the security and duration requirements of the program instructions. If not, it will be necessary for the landlord
and tenant to amend the lease to meet these requirements at closing. 
(4) 

Agreement by holder of vendor's interest under land contract. 

If the buyer's interest in the security property is that of a buyer under a land contract, it will be necessary for the
seller (vendor) to execute, in recordable form, an agreement containing all of the following provisions: 
(i) The vendor shall agree not to sell or voluntarily transfer the vendor's interest under the land contract without
the prior written consent of the FmHA State Director. 
(ii) The vendor shall agree not to encumber or cause any liens to be levied against the property. 
(iii) The vendor shall agree not to commence or take any action to accelerate, forfeit or foreclose the buyer's interest
in the security property until a specified period of time after notifying the State Director of intent to do so. This
period of time will be ninety (90) days unless a state supplement otherwise provides. The agreement shall give FmHA
the option to cure any monetary default by paying the amount of the buyer's delinquent payments to the vendor, or paying
the vendor in full and having the contract assigned to FmHA. 
(iv) The vendor shall consent to FmHA making the loan and taking a security interest in the borrower's interest under
the land contract as security for the FmHA loan. 
(v) The vendor shall agree not to take any actions to foreclose or forfeit the interest of the buyer under the land contract
because FmHA has acquired the buyer's interest under the land contract by foreclosure or voluntary conveyance, or
because FmHA has subsequently sold or assigned the buyer's interest to a third party who will assume the buyer's obligations
under the land contract. 
(vi) When FmHA acquires a buyer's interest under a land contract by voluntary conveyance or foreclosure, FmHA will
not be deemed to have assumed any of the buyer's obligations under the contract, provided that the failure of FmHA to
perform any such obligations while it holds the buyer's interest is a ground to commence an action to terminate the
land contract. 
(5) 

Form of agreement. 

The form of prior lienholder's agreement, forbearance agreement, notice of foreclosure or assignment, and agreement
by holder of vendor's interest under land contract will be prescribed in a state supplement with the concurrence of
OGC. When only forbearance agreements are needed, they will be obtained on Form FmHA 19278, ``Agreement with
Prior Lienholder,'' or, if that form is not legally satisfactory, on a state form having the same title. When only notice
of foreclosure or assignment are required, a separate form for this purpose will be used. When both forbearance agreements
and notices of foreclosure or assignment are required, Form FmHA 19278 may be amended in order to serve both
purposes, a substitute state form may be used for both purposes, or Form FmHA 19278 may be used and the notice
agreement obtained on a separate state form. 
(6) 

Executing, acknowledging, and recording. 

When an agreement is required by paragraphs (d)(1), (d)(2), (d)(3), or (d)(4) of this section, the closing agent will
determine at the time of closing that the agreement is properly completed, executed, sealed, witnessed, acknowledged,
and recorded as required by state law or state supplement. 
(e) 

Correction of errors in recorded security instruments. 

A state supplement, subject to OGC's review and approval, will be issued to provide guidance in correcting error(s)
in recorded security instruments. 





