 

<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
A. Introduction and Purpose 


The purpose of this program announcement is to announce the availability of Fiscal Year 1994 financial assistance
to promote the goal of environmental regulatory enhancement for American Indians and Alaska Natives through the
planning, development and implementation of projects that advance tribal capacity to perform environmental regulatory
functions. Funds will be awarded under section 803(d) of the Native American Programs Act of 1974, as amended, 42 U.S.C.
2991 et seq. 
The Congress has enacted statutes for the purpose of protecting the environment. Several of these statutes provide
a role for Indian tribes. In addition, tribes may also regulate the environment pursuant to their own laws. 
Despite this increasing environmental responsibility and growing awareness of environmental issues on Indian
lands, there has been a lack of resources available to tribes to develop tribal environmental programs that are responsive
to tribal needs. In many cases, this lack of resources has resulted in a delay in action on the part of the tribes. Some
of the critical issues identified by tribes before congressional committees include: the need for assistance to
train professional staff to monitor and enforce tribal environmental programs; the lack of adequate data for tribes
to develop environmental statutes and establish environmental quality standards; and the resources to conduct
studies to identify sources of pollution and the ability to determine the impact on existing environmental quality.
As a result, Congress enacted Public Law 101408 to strengthen tribal governments through building capacity
within the tribes to identify, plan, develop, and implement environmental programs in a manner that is consistent
with tribal culture. ANA is to support these activities on a government-to-government basis in a way that acknowledges
tribal sovereignty and is consistent with tribal culture. 
Proposed projects will be reviewed on a competitive basis against the evaluation criteria in this announcement.



Background


The Administration for Native Americans believes that responsibility for achieving environmental regulatory
enhancement rests with the governing bodies of Indian tribes, Alaska Native villages, and with the leadership of
Native American groups. 
Progress toward the goal of environmental regulatory enhancement would include the strengthening of tribal environmental
laws, providing for the training and education of those employees responsible for ensuring compliance with and enforcement
of these laws, and the development of programs to conduct compliance and enforcement functions. Other functions
leading toward enhancing local regulatory capacity include, but are not limited to: environmental assessments,
development and use of environmental laboratories, and development of court systems for enforcement of tribal and
Federal environmental laws. Ultimate success in this program will be realized when the applicant's desired level
of environmental quality is acquired and maintained. 
The Administration for Native Americans bases its policies on three interrelated goals: 
(1) 

Governance: 

To assist tribal and village governments, Native American institutions, and local leadership to exercise local
control and decision-making over their resources, including environmental resources. 
(2) 

Economic Development: 

To foster the development of stable, diversified local economies and economic activities which will provide jobs
and promote economic well-being, consistent with environmental protection. 
(3) 

Social Development: 

To support local access to, control of, and coordination of services and programs (including pollution prevention
activities) which safeguard the health and well-being of people and the tribal environment, provide support services
and training so people can work and which are essential to a thriving and self-sufficient community. 
To achieve these goals, ANA supports tribal and village governments, and other Native American organizations, in
their efforts to develop and implement community-based, long-term governance, social and economic development
strategies (SEDS)_strategies that promote the goal of self-sufficiency in local communities. These basic ANA goals
also form the basis for this environmental program. 
The SEDS policy supports ANA's goals and is based on two fundamental principles: 
(1) The local community and its leadership are responsible for determining goals, setting priorities, and planning
and implementing programs aimed at achieving those goals. The unique mix of socio-economic, political, and cultural
factors in each community makes local self-determination necessary. The local community is in the best position
to apply its own cultural, political, and socio-economic values to its long-term strategies and programs. 
(2) Economics, governance, and social development are interrelated. Development in one area should be balanced
with development in the others in order to move toward self-sufficiency. Consequently, comprehensive development
strategies should address all aspects of the governmental, economic, and social infrastructures (including those
for environmental protection) needed to promote self-sufficient communities. 

</SUPPLEM>
