 



Discussion: 

The Secretary agrees with the commenters that institutions may need an additional period to take possible year-end
adjustments into account. Therefore, the Secretary will allow an institution up to 90 days from the last day of its
fiscal year to report that it fails to satisfy the 85 percent rule. However, if an institution determines that it fails
to satisfy the 85 percent rule, it will be ineligible as of the last day of that fiscal year; therefore the longer an institution
takes to report its ineligibility, the greater its potential liability for improperly disbursed title IV, HEA program
funds. 

The Secretary believes that an institution does not need to wait for an audit to determine the percent of its revenue
that was derived from title IV, HEA program funds. The institution should be keeping track of these amounts over the
course of its fiscal year to avoid becoming ineligible. Moreover, since an institution must now determine its revenues
on a cash accounting basis, it is relatively easy for an institution to know its position relative to the 85 percent
rule. 


Changes:

 An institution will have 90 days from the last day of its fiscal year to report its ineligibility to the Department of
Education under the 85 percent rule. 


Comment:

 A number of commenters suggested that although an institution may give its best efforts to track revenues and keep
within the guidelines of the 85 percent rule, the institution will not know positively of the result until its annual
audited financial statement is completed. The commenters suggested that given the dire consequences of having title
IV, HEA program funds exceed 85 percent of its revenues, and the fact that a great many students could be potentially
harmed by such precipitous action, the Secretary should add a provision that allows an institution to voluntarily
refund any excess money to bring its percentage in compliance with the 85 percent rule. 


Discussion:

 The purpose of the 85 percent rule is to preclude the participation in the title IV, HEA programs of proprietary institutions
of higher education whose overwhelming source of revenue is title IV, HEA program funds. The repayment of title-IV,
HEA program funds to the Department of Education is not consistent with that statutory purpose. Moreover, since a
refund of title IV, HEA program funds would reduce both the numerator and denominator of the fraction used to determine
this rule, any conforming refund would involve a significantly large amount of money. 


Changes: 

None. 


Section 600.7Conditions of Institutional Ineligibility





Comment:

 As a general rule, an institution may not have 
50 percent or more of its students enrolled in correspondence courses and retain its eligibility under the HEA. However,
as a result of the Higher Education Technical Amendments of 1993, the Secretary may waive this requirement for an institution
that offers a 2-year associate-degree or 4-year bachelor's-degree program for ``good cause.'' In the NPRM, the Secretary
solicited comments as to what should be considered ``good cause''. 
One comment was received on this provision. The commenter suggested that a waiver should be granted for ``good cause''
only if the students attending the institution's correspondence courses received a minimal percent of the title
IV, HEA programs at that institution. 


Discussion:

 The Secretary agrees with the commenter's suggestion. 


Changes:

 Section 600. 7(b)(3) has been amended to provide that the Secretary will waive this requirement for an institution
that offers a 2-year associate-degree or 4-year bachelor's-degree program if the students enrolled in the institution's
correspondence courses receive no more than 5 percent of the title IV, HEA program funds received by students at that
institution. 


Comment:

 One commenter suggested that an institution should not permanently lose its eligibility if its current owner or Chief
Executive Officer (CEO) has been found guilty of a crime involving title IV, HEA program funds and that owner or CEO
disassociates himself or herself from the institution. The commenter also asked for clarification as to what is meant
by ``judicially determined to have committed fraud.'' 


Discussion:

 The Secretary believes that if the current owner or CEO of an institution has been found guilty of a crime involving
title IV, HEA program funds, that institution should no longer be eligible to participate in the title IV, HEA programs.
The phrase ``judicially determined to have committed fraud'' means that a court of competent jurisdiction has made
such a finding. 


Changes:

 None. 


Comment:

 Section 481(a)(3)(D) of the HEA provides that an institution that does not offer an associate or bachelor's degree
is not an eligible institution if more than 50 percent of its enrollment consists of students without a high school
diploma or its recognized equivalent (ATB students). As a result of an amendment by the Higher Education Technical
Amendments of 1993, the Secretary may waive the limitation for nonprofit institutions. However, to receive a waiver,
the institution must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Secretary that it exceeds the limitation because it serves,
through contracts with Federal, State, or local government agencies, significant numbers of ATB students. 
In the NPRM, the Secretary requested comments regarding the conditions under which the Secretary should grant this
waiver. Comments were particularly requested on the purpose of the referenced contracts, what constitutes a ``significant''
number of ATB students, and the duration of a waiver. 
Two commenters suggested that an institution should receive a waiver if the purpose of the referenced contracts is
to provide job training for low-income people who are in need of such services. 
One commenter suggested that 20 to 25 percent of an institution's enrollment constitutes a significant number, another
suggested 40 percent, and yet another suggested 50 percent. 
One commenter suggested that a waiver should be issued for a period of one year at a time, renewable on a yearly basis,
depending upon graduation and employment rates. A second commenter suggested that a waiver should be issued for the
duration of the certification agreement period. A third commenter suggested that the waiver should be issued for
the period in which the institution is in good standing with its accrediting agency. 


Discussion:

 For purposes of granting this waiver, the Secretary agrees with the commenters regarding the type of contract that
supports a waiver. The Secretary thus agrees that the contracts must provide job training for low-income individuals
who are in need of such services. An example of such a contract is a job training contract under the Job Training Partnership
Act (JTPA). 
Further, to receive a waiver, an institution must demonstrate that its enrollment of ATB students exceeded 50 percent
of its total enrollment because it served a substantial number of those students through contracts. That is, the institution
must demonstrate cause and effect; it exceeded the statutory limit because it served a significant number of ATB students
through contracts. 
An institution cannot satisfy this waiver provision simply by demonstrating it served a large number of ATB students
under a contract. For example, if an institution's enrollment of ATB students who were not served under contract exceeded
51 percent of its total enrollment, that institution would not satisfy the waiver requirement regardless of the number
of additional ATB students it served under contract. Similarly, if an institution's enrollment of ATB students who
were not served under contract equaled 50 percent of its total enrollment, so that one additional ATB student would
put the institution over the 50 percent limitation, the institution would not satisfy the waiver requirement regardless
of the number of additional ATB students it served under contract. In neither case did the institution's enrollment
of ATB students exceed 50 percent of its total enrollment because it served a significant number of ATB students under
contract. 
In view of the above, the critical factor in whether an institution qualifies for a waiver is the percentage of its enrollment
who are ATB students not being served under contract. 
An institution is evaluated to determine whether it falls within the limitation set forth in 600.7(a)(1)(i)
on an 
award-year basis. If the Secretary grants a waiver to an institution under this section, the waiver will extend indefinitely
provided that the institution satisfies the waiver requirements in each award year. If an institution fails to satisfy
the waiver requirements for an award year, the institution becomes ineligible on June 30 of that award year. (This
policy is applicable to all waivers provided for under 600.7.) 



