 

3. Saiga Antelope (

Saiga tatarica

)


EIA submitted a draft proposal to the Service to include the saiga antelope in Appendix I of CITES. There are two recognized
subspecies: The Russian saiga (

Saiga tatarica tatarica

) and the Mongolian saiga (

Saiga tatarica mongolica

). Historically the saiga antelope ranged from the Ukraine to western Mongolia. Today, the species remains only in
the area stretching from the steppe east of the lower Volga River across Kazakhstan through the Dzungarian Basin of
northwest China to Mongolia. Presently, its distribution within Russia is not continuous, but is divided into disjunct
populations. Saiga antelopes inhabit steppes and semideserts, from sea level to 5,000 feet. This antelope lives
in large herds, and the early maturation and fecundity of this species allow for rapid population increases, reaching
60 to 80 percent annually.

In the 1960s the saiga antelope was the most widespread wild ungulate in the U.S.S.R., and it was estimated that approximately
2 million animals inhabited Asia. However, the population in Mongolia is listed as endangered under the U.S. Endangered
Species Act (ESA). Other than humans, wolves are the main predator of the species. Lack of fodder in winter is the most
important natural calamity causing mass mortality of saiga antelopes. This species is harvested for its meat, hides,
fat, as well as the horns, which are exported to China. Since the 1960s, little scientific information is available
on population size and trade in parts. The Service solicits additional information on international trade and population
status, in order to make its final decision on whether to propose the entire species for listing in Appendix II, and
if so, whether to propose any populations for Appendix I.


4. Urial (

Ovis vignei

)


At the Plenipotentiary meeting of the CITES Parties in 1973, 

Ovis vignei

 was included in Appendix I, as proposed by India, and was also referred to as urial and shapo. However, because there
was no supporting documentation submitted at the time of the proposed listing, and because different references
available in early 1973 attributed different subspecies and populations to 

Ovis vignei,

 it is not completely clear what population(s) the Parties intended to protect. Ellerman and Morrison-Scott's Checklist
of Palaearctic and Indian Mammals (1966, British Museum) considered 

 O. vignei

 to be restricted to those populations in Kashmir and Ladak. 

Ovis orientalis vignei

 had been described by Blyth in 1841 from specimens collected in Ladak, India.
Also at the Plenipotentiary meeting, Afghanistan proposed including 

Ovis orientalis

 in Appendix III (Afghanistan proposed subspecies listings for five other mammals but not for 

Ovis orientalis

). However, it never did list this species; whether this is because it considered their populations to be covered by
the 

Ovis vignei

 listing or whether the desire of the government to include them in Appendix III had changed by the time that Afghanistan
acceded to CITES on January 28, 1986, is unknown.
At the time of the Second Meeting of the Conference of the Parties (COP2) in 1979, the Parties apparently considered


Ovis vignei

 to include populations of urial in Iran. This interpretation is based on the absence of any debate on the coverage of
the Appendix I listing when Iran proposed to delete 

Ovis vignei arkal

 from Appendix I. (Iran later withdrew the proposal.) While one might have expected several Plenipotentiary meeting
participants to also have participated in COP2 and to have commented on any inconsistency between the original listing
and the proposal presented at COP2, it is not known with certainty what was the original intent of the Parties.
In the CITES-adopted checklist for mammals, Mammal Species of the World by Honacki, Kinman, and Koeppl (1982), 

Ovis vignei

 is considered to represent those populations from eastern Iran to Ladak, and 

Ovis orientalis

 (also known as 

Ovis aries

) is considered to represent those populations from western Iran to Turkey.

Adoption of a new nomenclatural reference by the Parties cannot change the entity originally listed, and, as previously
noted, that listing seems unclear. A new reference, Mammals Species of the World, 2nd edition, by Wilson and Reeder
(1993), retains the distribution assigned to 

Ovis vignei

 and 

Ovis aries

 (=

orientalis

) in the earlier 1982 checklist, but further highlights the issue by including synonyms (usually subspecies or species)
that are associated with 

Ovis vignei

 and 

Ovis aries

 (=

orientalis

). For 

Ovis vignei

 these synonyms include some names that some individuals have associated with 

Ovis orientalis

, e.g., 

arabica, arkal, blanfordi, bochariensis, cycloceros, dolgopolovi, punjabiensis, severtzovi, varentsowi.







Note:

 The entity referred to above as 

severtzovi

 is located between population centers of 

Ovis vignei

 and 

Ovis ammon,

 and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has previously included this entity as 

Ovis ammon

 in the listing of this species as endangered pursuant to the U.S. Endangered Species Act.




The CITES Nomenclature Committee has not considered the listing issue to be clear enough to make a nomenclatural interpretation,
and therefore, since the Parties should make this decision, the Service is considering submitting a proposal to clarify
what populations are included in Appendix I as a result of the 1973 listing of 

Ovis vignei.



