 

Suzuki provided model year 1990 production numbers for the Chevrolet Sprint, Firefly and GEO Metro (including production
numbers for both the hardtop and convertible models) lines. The Sprint is sold in Puerto Rico as the Firefly. General
Motors (GM) has already provided NHTSA with production figures for the Chevrolet Sprint (including the Firefly).
Since GM certifies compliance with the theft prevention standard for the Sprint line, NHTSA will base the final theft
rates for these lines using GM's production numbers.

GM also certifies theft standard compliance for the GEO Metro. GM's data, however, did not include production numbers
for the convertible GEO Metros. Therefore, the final theft rates for the GEO Metro reflect the additional information
provided by Suzuki.

In addition to the above changes, NHTSA is making the following corrections to the list of high theft lines with theft
rates below the median theft rate. Two lines that were inadvertently omitted, the Saturn SC and Lotus Elan, are added.
One line that was inadvertently included, the Mercedes-Benz 129 line, is removed.

Fiat noted that the production figures shown in the agency's August 1993 document correspond to the figures in the
1990 and 1991 model year CAFE reports, and expressed the belief that NHTSA's theft regulation requires theft marking
subjection to be based on actual calendar year production. As indicated above, the equation that NHTSA must use in
determining the theft rates for each vehicle line is set forth in section 603(b) of the Coast Savings Act. That section
provides that the agency is to use ``the sum of the respective production volumes of all passenger motor vehicles of
[a] line (as reported to the Environmental Protection Agency under title V of this Act) which are of [two specified]


model years.

'' (Emphasis added.) Therefore, it is correct to use model year production figures rather than the calendar year production
figures suggested by Fiat.



3. Implementation Date



Four commenters discussed whether, for the new vehicle lines determined to be high theft based on the CY 19901991
theft data, parts marking should begin in MY 1995. Each of the four commenters, Honda, Nissan, Toyata, and Volkswagen,
asked that the required marking begin with MY 1996. Essentially, each manufacturer stated it needed more leadtime
to be able to comply, and it would be a hardship to begin marking in MY 1995. Some commenters cited start up difficulties
since they would be parts marking for the first time. Volkswagen noted that for some manufacturers, requiring parts
marking in model year 1995 may not provide enough leadtime for the manufacturers to be able to submit timely petitions
for exemption from parts marking, pursuant to part 543, Exemption from Vehicle Theft Prevention Standard.


