 

(iv) If the service could be performed by the average nonmedical person, the absence of a competent person to perform
it does not cause it to be a skilled nursing service. 

(2) The skilled nursing care must be provided on a part-time or intermittent basis. 

(3) The skilled nursing services must be reasonable and necessary for the treatment of the illness or injury. 

(i) To be considered reasonable and necessary, the services must be consistent with the nature and severity of the
beneficiary's illness or injury, his or her particular medical needs, and accepted standards of medical and nursing
practice. 

(ii) The skilled nursing care provided to the beneficiary must be reasonable within the context of the beneficiary's
condition. 

(iii) The determination of whether skilled nursing care is reasonable and necessary must be based solely upon the
beneficiary's unique condition and individual needs, without regard to whether the illness or injury is acute, chronic,
terminal, or expected to last a long time. 

(c) 

Physical therapy, speech-language pathology services, and occupational therapy. 

To be covered, physical therapy, speech-language pathology services, and occupational therapy must satisfy the
criteria in paragraphs (c)(1) through (4) of this section. Occupational therapy services initially qualify for
home health coverage only if they are part of a plan of care that also includes intermittent skilled nursing care, physical
therapy, or speech-language pathology services as follows: 

(1) Speech-language pathology services and physical or occupational therapy services must relate directly and
specifically to a treatment regimen (established by the physician, after any needed consultation with the qualified
therapist) that is designed to treat the beneficiary's illness or injury. Services related to activities for the
general physical welfare of beneficiaries (for example, exercises to promote overall fitness) do not constitute
physical therapy, occupational therapy, or speech-language pathology services for Medicare purposes. 

(2) Physical and occupational therapy and speech-language pathology services must be reasonable and necessary.
To be considered reasonable and necessary, the following conditions must be met: 

(i) The services must be considered under accepted standards of medical practice to be a specific, safe, and effective
treatment for the beneficiary's condition. 

(ii) The services must be of such a level of complexity and sophistication or the condition of the beneficiary must
be such that the services required can safely and effectively be performed only by a qualified physical therapist
or by a qualified physical therapy assistant under the supervision of a qualified physical therapist, by a qualified
speech-language pathologist, or by a qualified occupational therapist or a qualified occupational therapy assistant
under the supervision of a qualified occupational therapist (as defined in 484.4 of this chapter). Services
that do not require the performance or supervision of a physical therapist or an occupational therapist are not considered
reasonable or necessary physical therapy or occupational therapy services, even if they are performed by or supervised
by a physical therapist or occupational therapist. Services that do not require the skills of a speech-language pathologist
are not considered to be reasonable and necessary speech-language pathology services even if they are performed
by or supervised by a speech-language pathologist . 

(iii) There must be an expectation that the beneficiary's condition will improve materially in a reasonable (and
generally predictable) period of time based on the physician's assessment of the beneficiary's restoration potential
and unique medical condition, or the services must be necessary to establish a safe and effective maintenance program
required in connection with a specific disease, or the skills of a therapist must be necessary to perform a safe and
effective maintenance program. If the services are for the establishment of a maintenance program, they may include
the design of the program, the instruction of the beneficiary, family, or home health aides, and the necessary infrequent
reevaluations of the beneficiary and the program to the degree that the specialized knowledge and judgment of a physical
therapist, speech-language pathologist, or occupational therapist is required. 

(iv) The amount, frequency, and duration of the services must be reasonable. 

8. A new 409.45 is added to read as follows: 



409.45 

Dependent services requirements. 



(a) 

General. 

Services discussed in paragraphs (b) through (g) of this section may be covered only if the beneficiary needs skilled
nursing care on an intermittent basis, as described in 409.44(a); physical therapy or speech-language pathology
services as described in 409.44(b); or has a continuing need for occupational therapy services as described
in 409.44(c) if the beneficiary's eligibility for home health services has been established by virtue of a
prior need for intermittent skilled nursing care, speech-language pathology services, or physical therapy in the
current or prior certification period; and otherwise meets the qualifying criteria (confined to the home, under
the care of a physician, in need of skilled services, and under a plan of care) specified in 409.42. Home health
coverage is not available for services furnished to a beneficiary who is no longer in need of one of the qualifying skilled
services specified in this paragraph. Therefore, dependent services furnished after the final qualifying skilled
service are not covered, except when the dependent service was not followed by a qualifying skilled service as a result
of the unexpected inpatient admission or death of the beneficiary, or due to some other unanticipated event. 

(b) 

Home health aide services. 

To be covered, home health aide services must meet each of the following requirements: 

(1) The reason for the visits by the home health aide must be to provide hands-on personal care to the beneficiary or
services that are needed to maintain the beneficiary's health or to facilitate treatment of the beneficiary's illness
or injury. The physician's order must indicate the frequency of the home health aide services required by the beneficiary.
These services may include but are not limited to: 




