 

The FDIC recognizes that the proposed rule on other loss sharing arrangements essentially treats all such arrangements
in an identical manner regardless of the terms of the arrangement and, as a consequence, may not encourage banks that
sell multifamily housing loans with recourse to limit their exposure to risk. However, these concerns extend to asset
sales with recourse in general because of the broad scope of the Call Report instructions in this area and their relationship
to the risk-based capital framework. The FDIC and the other banking agencies, under the auspices of the Federal Financial
Institutions Examination Council, have been pursuing a more comprehensive resolution of the capital issues surrounding
asset sales with recourse and other forms of credit enhancement. This interagency effort is seeking to develop revisions
to the agencies' risk-based capital standards that will better distinguish between the degrees of risk in loss sharing
arrangements involving asset sales in general, not just those involving multifamily housing loans. The FDIC expects
that these revisions would be more likely to fully satisfy the intent of section 618(b)(3) with respect to other loss
sharing arrangements than the approach taken in the proposed rule. Nevertheless, the FDIC does not wish to further
delay the issuance of a final rule that lowers the risk weight for certain multifamily housing loans and provides guidance
on the risk-based capital treatment of pro rata loss sharing arrangements while the interagency effort to address
recourse issues is proceeding. Therefore, as an interim measure, the FDIC is adopting the treatment of other loss
sharing arrangements as originally proposed. 



Other Issues 



Several commenters suggested changes to the proposed rule that would conflict with the requirements set forth in
the statute. These suggestions included a lower debt service coverage ratio requirement, a shorter minimum maturity
requirement, and a 75 percent rather than 50 percent risk weight for multifamily housing loans. These suggestions
have not been adopted. 




IV. Final Rule 




After considering the comments received and consulting with the other agencies, the FDIC is adopting a final rule
to implement section 618(b) of the RTCRRIA. The final rule will also satisfy that portion of section 305 of the FDICIA
relating to the application of the FDIC's risk-based capital guidelines to multifamily housing loans. 


The final rule adds a new paragraph on multifamily housing loans to the discussion of the types of assets accorded a
50 percent risk weight in the section of the FDIC's risk-based capital guidelines on risk weights for balance sheet
assets (section II.C.). The new paragraph enumerates the criteria that a multifamily housing loan must satisfy in
order to be eligible for this favorable risk weight. A conforming change has been made to the summary of risk weights
and risk categories in table II of the guidelines. 


The eligibility criteria contained in the final rule include those set forth in section 618(b) and two added by the
FDIC based on the authority granted in the statute. These criteria are that the loan must be secured by a first lien on
a multifamily residential property, the loan-to-value ratio for the property must not exceed 80 percent (75 percent
if the rate of interest on the loan changes over the term of the loan), the ratio of annual net operating income generated
by the property (before debt service) to annual debt service on the loan must not be less than 120 percent (115 percent
if the rate of interest on the loan changes over the term of the loan), the amortization period for principal and interest
on the loan must not exceed 30 years, the loan must have a minimum original maturity for principal repayment of not less
than seven years, the loan must have had timely payment of principal and interest in accordance with the loan terms
for at least one year before the loan is placed in the 50 percent risk weight category, the loan must not be 90 days or more
past due or carried in nonaccrual status, and the loan must have been made in accordance with prudent underwriting
standards. 


For purposes of satisfying the one year's timely repayment performance criterion in the case where the existing owner
of a multifamily residential property refinances a loan on that property, the final rule provides that all principal
and interest payments on the loan being refinanced must have been made on a timely basis in accordance with the terms
of the loan for at least the preceding year. In this situation, all of the other eligibility criteria must also be met
in order for the new loan to qualify for the 50 percent risk weight. For example, the annual debt service required on
the new loan would be used when determining whether the debt service coverage requirement has been satisfied. 


Under the final rule, the loan-to-value ratio requirement must be met based on the most current appraisal or evaluation
of the property, whichever may be appropriate, and, at the origination of loans to purchase an existing property,
the term ``value'' means the lesser of the actual acquisition cost or the estimate of value for the property. In addition,
the final rule explains that, to satisfy the debt service coverage requirement, a property owned by a cooperative
housing corporation or nonprofit organization must generate sufficient cash flow to provide protection to the bank
comparable to that specified in the statute. 





