 

&bull;For an additional 12 months as long as the individual intends to repair or replace the property and good cause
still exists for not yet having done so. 


Existing regulations for the exclusion of monies to repair or replace an excluded resource have been adequate to cover
past situations, including other disasters. However, the damage caused by Hurricane Andrew was so extensive and
destroyed so much of the existing infrastructure (e.g., governmental and public services and utilities, construction
and repair industry and equipment, etc.) that the current maximum 18-month period, in this context, is not adequate.
Many SSI recipients hurt by Hurricane Andrew who have received insurance settlements have not been able to rebuild
or repair their homes or even contract for those services. Through this regulatory change, we are providing additional
time for victims of this extraordinary disaster to make arrangements to effect repair or replacement without interruption
in their SSI benefits. 


During the extension period, we will make periodic contacts with each individual to determine whether the individual
still intends to repair or replace the property and, if so, whether good cause for not yet having done so still exists.
We will obtain evidence to make these determinations. 




Regulatory Procedures





We are publishing these new SSI resource counting rules as interim final rules with a request for comments instead
of as proposed rules. The Department, even when not required by statute, as a matter of policy, generally follows the
Administrative Procedure Act (APA) notice of proposed rulemaking and public comment procedures specified in 
5 U.S.C. 553 in the development of its regulations. The APA provides exceptions to its notice and comment procedures
when an agency finds that there is good cause for dispensing with such procedures on the basis that they are impracticable,
unnecessary, or contrary to the public interest. After due consideration, we have determined that, under 5 U.S.C.
553(b)(B), good cause exists for waiver of notice of proposed rulemaking on these regulations because such procedures
would be contrary to the public interest. The process of notice and comment rulemaking generally requires many months
before culminating in a final rule. If SSI recipients who are victims of Hurricane Andrew do not receive the beneficial
effect of this rule by March 1994, some will lose their SSI eligibility. Since it is in the public interest that these
individuals continue to receive SSI benefits while they make arrangements to repair or replace their excluded resources
that have been damaged or destroyed by Hurricane Andrew, we believe that the public interest warrants immediate promulgation
of these rules. Accordingly, promulgation of these rules pursuant to notice and comment rulemaking would be contrary
to the public interest and thus may be dispensed with pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 553(b)(B). However, we are asking the public
to comment on these interim final rules and will determine if these regulations need revision on consideration of
any comments received. 




Executive Order 12866 




These interim final regulations do not meet the criteria for a significant regulatory action under section 3(f) of
E.O. 12866 and, thus, are not subject to Office of Management and Budget (OMB) review under E.O. 12866. 




Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 




These interim final regulations do not contain reporting requirements. However, they extend the initial regulation
that did. Inadvertently, we did not publish a narrative for that regulation concerning the need for clearance by the
Office of Management and Budget (OMB). We would normally seek approval of the reporting requirements contained in
the initial regulation (under the Paperwork Reduction Act) from OMB. We are not doing so in this situation because
we already have their clearance to collect this kind of information using the SSA795 (Statement of Claimant
or Other Person), OMB Control Number 09600045. 


We expect that approximately 450 SSI recipients will be involved, and that it will take them an estimated five minutes
each to provide this information. The annual burden for this reporting requirement is estimated at 37.5 hours. The
respondents are SSI recipients who have excess countable resources as a result of the damage caused by Hurricane Andrew.





Regulatory Flexibility Act 




We certify that these interim final regulations will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number
of small entities because they affect eligibility for or the amount of SSI payments of individuals. Therefore, a regulatory
flexibility analysis as provided in Public 
Law 96354, the Regulatory Flexibility Act, is not required.





(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Program No. 93.807, Supplementary Security Income) 





