 




<RINDOCK>[A821805 and A821806] </RINDOCK>




<DOCTITLE>Notice of Preliminary Determinations of Sales at Less Than Fair Value and Postponement of Final Determinations:
Pure and Alloy Magnesium From the Russian Federation </DOCTITLE>



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Import Administration, International Trade Administration, Department of Commerce.



</AGENCY>
<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE:

 November 17, 1994.




</DATE>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Ellen Grebasch or Erik Warga, Office of Antidumping Investigations, Import Administration, International Trade
Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce, 14th Street and Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, D.C. 20230;
telephone: (202) 4823773 or (202) 4820922, respectively. 





PRELIMINARY DETERMINATIONS: 

We preliminarily determine that imports of pure magnesium and alloy magnesium from the Russian Federation are being,
or are likely to be, sold in the United States at less than fair value (``LTFV''), as provided in section 733 of the Tariff
Act of 1930, as amended (``the Act''). The estimated margins are shown in the ``Suspension of Liquidation'' section
of this notice. 



Case History 



Since the initiation of these investigations on April 20, 1994, (59 FR 21748, April 26, 1994), the following events
have occurred. 

On May 16, 1994, the U.S. International Trade Commission (ITC) notified the Department of Commerce (the Department)
of its preliminary determinations that there was a reasonable indication that an industry in the United States is
materially injured, or threatened with material injury, by reason of imports of pure and alloy magnesium from the
Russian Federation. 

On June 13, 1994, we sent the antidumping questionnaire to the Embassy of the Russian Federation and the two Russian
manufacturers (which were identified in the petition). (The antidumping questionnaire was divided into three sections:
Section A requesting general information on each company; section C requesting information on, and a listing of,
U.S. sales made during the period of investigation (``POI''); and, section D requesting information on the production
process, including specific amounts of each input used in manufacturing pure or alloy magnesium.) We requested the
Embassy's assistance in forwarding the questionnaire to all exporters and producers of pure or alloy magnesium from
the Russian Federation and submitting complete questionnaire responses on their behalf. 

In addition to sending questionnaires to the Russian Embassy, during July and August, the Department independently
attempted to identify other possible exporters of pure magnesium and alloy magnesium from Russia to the United States
during the POI based on information obtained from petitioners, and through examination of PIERS data and other sources
of information. Our efforts consisted of issuing an August 8, 1994, survey requesting information on exports to the
United States of the subject merchandise; issuing the antidumping questionnaire (limited to Sections A and C) to
trading companies operating in various European countries (on August 19, September 7, and September 13, 1994); and
a September 15, 1994, follow-up letter to unresponsive questionnaire recipients. 

We sent either the survey, the questionnaire, or both documents to 56 companies, with the following results. 

Six companies in the pure magnesium proceeding, AIOC, Gerald Metals, Hunter Douglas, Interlink, MG Metals, and Razno
Alloys; and two companies in the alloy magnesium proceeding, Gerald Metals and SMW, provided information in response
to Sections A and C of the questionnaire. 

Twenty-two companies in the pure magnesium proceeding and 27 companies in the alloy magnesium proceeding indicated
that they did not sell the subject merchandise to the United States during the POI. The companies that did not export
were (a) alloy only: AIOC; HDM; Interlink; MG Metals; Razno and FS; (b) pure only: SMW (except for a small-quantity
trial sale) and (c) both pure and alloy: Intreid; Kemokomplex; Raba Company; Alamet; Compagnie de Mines et Metals;
Expromptorg; Fred Lonner  Co., Inc.; Metal Exchange Corporation; Minmeta S.A.; Minmetals Canada, Inc.; Scandinavian
Steel AB; Stena Metall Atervinning AB; Sinex AG; Sassoon Metals and Chemicals; IMEX Consulting Sprl; AL; Steinweg
Handelsveem; A. Hartrodt; C. Steinweg Handelsveem B.V.; J. Oosterom  Zoom; and Siegfried Kahn AG. 




</FURTHER>
