 

7. Vehicle Selection 


a. 

1990 Equivalency. 

Section 211(k)(3) of the CAA specifies that the required reductions in VOC and toxics emissions are to be measured
from the emissions of those pollutants from ``baseline vehicles.'' Section 211(k)(10)(A) defines baseline vehicles
as representative model year 1990 (MY90) vehicles. However, in order to simplify test vehicle selection and
remain consistent with the practices used to develop the complex model, other model year vehicles may be included
in the test program. Specifically, 1986 through 1989 model year vehicles may be tested if the 1990 version had an engine
and exhaust system that was not different from the earlier model year versions in ways that could affect the emission
performance of the vehicles (i.e., if the model's EPA emission certification data were ``carried over'' through
the 1990 model year

4

). EPA retains the right to reject any non-1990 model year vehicle that the manufacturer deems to be different in terms
of emission control technology or engine design from 1990 vehicles made by that manufacturer. The test fleet must
be composed only of light-duty vehicles and light-duty trucks, in keeping with the practices followed in developing
the complex model. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


4

</FOOTNAME>
For a more complete explanation of this issue, please see ``1990 Baseline Vehicles,'' memorandum from David Korotney
to EPA Air Docket A9212, November 30, 1993. 
</FOOTNOTE>


b. 

Vehicle selection criteria. 

Another consideration in vehicle selection is the condition of the test vehicles. EPA believes that Congress intended
that the required VOC and toxics emission reductions be achieved not only at certification but also in-use. In order
for this to be true, the test vehicles' condition should be representative of that of in-use vehicles. Therefore,
for the purposes of the reformulated gasoline program, representative vehicles must have emission performances
typical of the in-use emission performance of 1990 vehicles over their lifetime, a technology mix similar to that
of the 1990 model year fleet, and a minimum of 4,000 miles of service to assure break-in of engine and emission control
system components. In addition, the test fleet must contain vehicles with a distribution of VOC emissions similar
to that of in-use vehicles. Emissions of other pollutants tend to respond in a similar manner (e.g., carbon monoxide
and air toxics) or in an essentially uncorrelated manner (e.g., NO

X

). 
In order for the emissions effects measured during vehicle testing to reflect the emission effects that will be experienced
by actual in-use vehicles, EPA considers it necessary to control the composition of the test fleet. As discussed in
Section IV, EPA's complex model has identified significant differences in the effects of fuel modifications on emissions
among vehicles from different emitter classes and technology groups. EPA's vehicle fleet requirements are intended
to assure that a sufficient number of vehicles are tested to provide statistical confidence in observed emission
effects, to assure that the vehicles tested are representative of the emission characteristics of in-use vehicles,
and to assure that the vehicles tested have emission control technologies that are representative of emission control
technologies found on 1990 model year vehicles. 
(1) 

Higher Emitters/Normal Emitters. 

In order that the test fleet for exhaust emission testing reflect the distribution in vehicle emission performance
in-use, the test fleet must consist of two exhaust VOC emitter subfleets, normal emitters and higher emitters. The
proportion of vehicles in each subfleet is to be set equal to the distribution of vehicle emission performance when
enhanced I/M programs are in place. These proportions are shown in Table V.6, which is based on an EPA analysis

5

 of the distribution of the in-use emission performance of a hypothetical fleet composed entirely of 1990 model year
vehicles when subject to an enhanced I/M program. This distribution is consistent with the assumptions made in developing
the Phase II Complex Model. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


5

</FOOTNAME>
``Exhaust VOC Emission Inventory By Vehicle Emitter Class Following Implementation of an Enhanced Inspection and
Maintenance (I/M) Program'', Memorandum from Christian Lindhjem and David Brzezinski to EPA Air Docket A9212,
June 24, 1993.

</FOOTNOTE>

