 

(d) within a reasonable amount of time after the 
offense occurred; 



8. subject to an appeals and/or hearing process; 
9. assessed to the districts; 
10. assessed to the involved landholders; 
11. collected by Reclamation; 
12. credited to districts' contract obligations.




In addition to the above comments, some respondents questioned Reclamation's authority to impose assessments for
administrative costs. A few respondents also questioned whether the assessments will have the intended effect of
improving compliance with the requirements of the RRA. One respondent commented that Reclamation should not use
the assessments to replace the current requirement that landholders must submit an RRA form as a condition for receipt
of irrigation water. Another stated that RRA compliance levels would improve if Reclamation conducted water district
reviews and district training sessions more frequently. Two respondents requested Reclamation to increase the
40-acre threshold for exemption from the RRA form requirements, while another requested that the current class 1
equivalency provisions be revised. 

Reclamation received several suggestions for establishing the amount of the assessments. Two respondents thought
the assessment should be $100 for instances where RRA forms contain minor errors. One suggested that in cases where
form errors are more significant; for example, failure to disclose land held in excess of a non-full-cost entitlement,
the full-cost rate plus a $2,000 fee should be charged. Another suggestion was that Reclamation should ask Congress
to pass legislation authorizing the agency to charge twice the full-cost rate if irrigation water is delivered to
excess land. 

All comments were considered during preparation of the proposed rule except for those relating to the forms exemption
threshold, equivalency provisions, deliveries to excess land, water district reviews, and RRA training. These
topics are outside the scope of the subject rulemaking. 



Summary of Proposed Rule 



The proposed rule provides for the imposition of assessments for administrative costs incurred by Reclamation in
conjunction with noncompliance with the form requirements. A district will be assessed for administrative costs
when RRA forms are not submitted prior to receipt of irrigation water. The assessment will be applied on a yearly basis
in each district for each direct and indirect landholder that failed to comply with the form requirements. A district
will also be assessed for administrative costs when corrections to RRA forms are not provided within a 45-day grace
period. The assessment will be applied on a yearly basis in each district for each direct and indirect landholder for
which corrected forms are not provided within the grace period. These assessments for administrative costs will
replace the full-cost charges that Reclamation currently assesses for form violations pursuant to its compensation
policy. The administrative cost assessments will not be subject to the underpayment interest component as set forth
in 426.23. 

The assessment for administrative costs is initially set at $260 per form violation. The amount is based on a review
of the costs Reclamation incurred in 1991, 1992, and 1993 performing activities to address RRA form violations. The
assessment reflects the average direct and indirect costs incurred Reclamation-wide for: (1) communicating with
district representatives or landholders to obtain missing or corrected forms, (2) assisting landholders in completing
certification or reporting forms for the period of time 
they were not in compliance with the form requirements, 
(3) performing onsite visits to determine if irrigation water deliveries have been terminated to landholders that
failed to submit the required forms, and (4) performing other activities necessary to address form violations. The
assessment will be reviewed at least once every 5 years and, if needed, will be adjusted to reflect new cost data. 

As with other assessments, districts will be held responsible for payment of the assessments because of their contractual
obligation with the United States. As required by 31 U.S.C. 3302, charges collected through the imposition of assessments
for administrative costs will be credited to the general fund of the Treasury as miscellaneous receipts. 

Payment of the assessments set forth in the proposed rule does not exempt districts and landholders from the form requirements
of the RRA or Acreage Limitation Rules and Regulations. Districts are not permitted to continue water deliveries
to ineligible recipients simply because they are willing to pay the assessments. Reclamation will take all necessary
actions to prevent the delivery of irrigation water to ineligible land. 

The Department of the Interior has determined that the proposed rule does not constitute a significant regulatory
action under Executive Order 12866 because it will not: (1) have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more
or adversely affect in a material way the economy, a sector of the economy, productivity, competition, jobs, the environment,
public health or safety, or State, local or tribal governments or communities; (2) create a serious inconsistency
or otherwise interfere with an action taken or planned by another agency; (3) materially alter the budgetary impact
of entitlements, grants, user fees, or loan programs or the rights and obligations of recipients thereof; or (4) raise
novel legal or policy issues arising out of legal mandates, the President's priorities, or the principles set forth
in the executive order. 






