 

Container and Pack Requirements (Nectarines) 



Section 916.350 specifies container and pack requirements for fresh nectarine shipments. Paragraph (a)(4)(iv)
of 916.350 specifies the tray-pack size designations which must be marked on loose-filled or tight-filled
containers, depending on the size of the fruit. The size designations specify the maximum number of nectarines in
a 16-pound sample for each tray-pack size designation. This rule revises paragraph (a)(4)(iv) of 916.350
by modifying Table 1 to specify weight-count standards for early-season and mid-season nectarine varieties, and
adding a new Table 2 to specify weight-count standards for late-season nectarine varieties. 

The NAC recommended these revised container marking requirements for nectarines after a comprehensive review of
the appropriate size pack-count relationships between the tray-pack containers and loose-filled or tight-filled
containers for all nectarine varieties. The revised provisions more precisely reflect the characteristics of different
varieties of fruit during the course of the season. 

This rule also revises 916.350 by adding a proviso to paragraph (a)(4)(iv), and revises 916.356 by redesignating
current paragraph (b) as (c) and adding a new paragraph (b) to that section. These revisions specify the procedure
to be used in determining whether nectarines meet the minimum size requirements specified for each size category
in this section when applying the 16-pound sample requirements. Under this procedure, a sample consisting of one-half
of the number of fruit specified for a 16-pound sample for a particular size category shall be used, provided such sample
weighs at least 8 pounds. When one-half the specified number of fruit in a sample results in a number ending with one-half
a fruit, the smaller full number of fruit is used to determine the sample weight. If a sample fails with respect to minimum
size requirements on the basis of an 
8-pound sample, a full 16-pound sample must be used to determine if the fruit meets minimum size requirements. 

The NAC recommended this sampling procedure change after determining that the size of nectarines could be adequately
determined by using an 8-pound sample in most instances, and finding that application of this procedure would reduce
inspection time and inspection costs. 



Maturity Requirements (Nectarines) 



Section 916.356 specifies maturity guides for fresh nectarines in paragraph (a)(1)(i), including Table 1, for fruit
being inspected and certified as meeting the maturity requirements for ``well matured'' fruit. Such maturity guides
(e.g., color chips) are specified in Table 1 of 916.356 for nectarines. This rule revises Table 1 of paragraph
(a)(1)(i) of 916.356 for nectarines to add maturity guides for 18 nectarine varieties and to change the maturity
guide for two nectarine varieties. 

The NAC recommended these maturity guide changes for these nectarine varieties based on a continuing review of their
individual maturity characteristics, and the identification of the appropriate color chip corresponding to the
``well matured'' level of maturity for such varieties. 



Size Requirements (Nectarines) 



Section 916.356 specifies size requirements for fresh nectarines in paragraphs (a)(2) through (a)(9). This rule
revises 916.356 to establish variety-specific size requirements for seven nectarine varieties that were
produced in commercially significant quantities of more than 10,000 packages for the first time during the 1993 season.
Paragraph (a)(3) is revised to include the May Kist variety; and paragraph (a)(6) of 916.356 is revised to include
the Arctic Rose, Del Rio Rey, Kay Diamond, Late Red Jim, Prima Diamond, and Red Glen varieties. 

This rule also revises 916.356 to remove five nectarine varieties from the variety-specific size requirements
specified in the section, because less than 5,000 packages of each of these varieties were produced during the 1993
season. Paragraph (a)(4) of that section is revised to remove the Apache and Early May Grande nectarine varieties;
and paragraph (a)(6) is revised to remove the Nectarine #4, Tasty Free, and 9860487 nectarine
varieties. Nectarine varieties removed from the nectarine variety-specific list become subject to the non-listed
variety size requirements specified in paragraphs (a)(7), (a)(8), and (a)(9) of 916.356. 

This rule also lowers the minimum size requirement for the Zee Grand variety by permitting as many as 88 nectarines
to be packed in a lug box rather than 84 nectarines, and as many as 83 nectarines when packed otherwise rather than 75
nectarines. This is accomplished by reassigning that variety to paragraph (a)(4) from paragraph (a)(5) in 916.356.
The NAC recommended this change based on a more accurate evaluation of this variety's sizing and maturity characteristics.


Further, in 916.356, paragraphs (a)(6)(i) and (a)(9)(i) are revised to permit as many as 84 nectarines to be
packed in a No. 22D standard lug box if they are ``well matured'', and paragraphs (a)(6)(ii) and (a)(9)(ii) are revised
to permit as many as 75 nectarines in a 16-pound sample if they are ``well matured''. These changes permit late-season
nectarine varieties to be shipped to the fresh market at a slightly smaller size than in past seasons, if they meet the
higher ``well matured'' maturity standard. The higher maturity standard is important for such smaller size fruit,
because it will assure that the smaller fruit is of acceptable maturity and quality to be shipped to the fresh market
in the interest of growers, handlers, and consumers. 





