 

For Further Information Contact: Mr. E.F. Williams of the 
Department, telephone (202) 2198194. (This is not a toll-free number.)



[Prohibited Transaction Exemption 9462; Exemption Application No. D9613] Abbott Pension Plan (the
Plan) 
Located in Lynn, MA; Exemption 



The restrictions of sections 406(a), 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resulting from the application
of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the proposed

transfer by the Plan, of certain limited partnership interests (the Interests) to Abbott House Nursing Home, Inc.
(Abbott); Winthrop Nursing Home, Inc. (which does business as the Bay View Nursing Home and is referred to herein as
Winthrop/Bay View); Devereux House Nursing Home, Inc. (Devereux); and the Greenview House Nursing Home, Inc. (Greenview),
in satisfaction of certain cash advances made to the Plan by these entities. (Abbott, Winthrop/Bay View, Devereux
and Greenview, which are parties in interest with respect to the Plan, are collectively referred to herein as the Nursing
Facilities.) 

This exemption is conditioned upon the following requirements: (1) the transfer represents a one-time transaction
and satisfies certain cash advances made by the Nursing Facilities to the Plan; (2) the Interests are transferred
for the greater of their historical cost to the Plan, their fair market value or the total amount of cash advanced to
the Plan; (3) for purposes of the transfer, the fair market value the Interests has been established by a qualified,
independent appraiser; and (4) the Plan does not pay any fees or commissions in connection with the transfer. 

For a more complete statement of the facts and representations supporting the Department's decision to grant this
exemption, refer to the notice of proposed exemption published on June 21, 1994 at 59 FR 32017. 

For Further Information Contact: Ms. Jan D. Broady of the Department, telephone (202) 2198881. (This is not
a toll-free number.) 










