 



(3) 

Components of a plan. 

(i) An employer shall prepare a plan using a standard plan form developed by the EPA. The plan will include all information
required by the standard plan form, including the following information: 

(A) The name of the employer, address of the work location, and name, title, and signature of the Employee Transportation
Coordinator (ETC) at the work location appointed by the employer; 

(B) The results of the most recent APO survey and a description of the procedure used to conduct the APO survey; 

(C) A description of the physical and transportation service characteristics of the work location, and demographic,
work, and travel-related characteristics of the employee population; 

(D) A description of ECO strategies currently implemented that provide commute alternative incentives to employees
at the work location and additional ECO strategies the employer will implement at the work location; an employer desiring
advice and suggestions on ECO strategies should refer to resource materials provided by the EPA. 

(E) Activities planned by the employer to implement the ECO program and a time schedule for implementation of the program;


(F) A description of the process by which the employer will periodically monitor and review progress toward the APO
target. 

(ii) Each employer shall provide information included in paragraphs (i)(3)(i) (A) through (F) of this section in
the compliance plan to establish a baseline against which future years can be compared. Beginning with the 19992000
update plan and for any subsequent update plan, an employer that has not achieved the target APO shall update any changes
to the information under paragraphs (i)(3)(i) (A) through (F) of this section and provide the following: 

(A) A discussion of the employer's ``good faith efforts'', described in paragraph (k)(4) of this section, to achieve
the target APO; 

(B) An explanation of why the ECO strategies included in the last plan did not produce the target APO; and 

(C) A discussion of how the employer plans to achieve the APO target within one year. 

(4) Required additional elements of plan submittals.

 A complete compliance plan submittal to the Administrator shall include of the following additional elements: 

(i) An executive summary plan that shall consist of a cover sheet that includes information described in paragraphs
(i)(3)(i) (A) and (B) of this section, and a summary of information described in paragraphs (i)(3)(i) (C) through
(F) of this section, and paragraph (i)(3)(ii) of this section as appropriate; 

(ii) A letter signed by the highest ranking responsible officer at the work location who shall attest that the employer
will implement the plan as described, retain all ECO documents on file, as required by paragraph (i)(7) of this section,
and make such documents available for review by the Administrator or an agent designated by the Administrator; 

(iii) A letter signed by the highest ranking responsible officer at the work location or plan preparer, if different
from the employer, who shall attest to the correctness of the information included in the plan. 

(5) 

Alternative plan preparers.

 An employer may contract with a transportation planning consultant, TMA or outside entity to prepare or assist in
preparation of a compliance plan or report. The use of an outside entity for this purpose shall not, however, remove
or reduce the responsibility of the employer with regard to any of the requirements of this section. 

(6) 

Requirement for an ETC.

 An employer shall designate an employee transportation coordinator (ETC) at each work location with 100 or more employees
to administer the ECO program at that work location. 

(7) 

Document recordkeeping.

 An employer shall maintain copies of all documents prepared or used in the document preparation by the employer or
by other entities acting on behalf of the employer in accordance with this section in the office of the ETC for a period
not less than four years from the date the documents were first generated. These documents shall include, but not be
limited to documents related to: 

(i) Conduct of the APO survey; 

(ii) Calculation of work location APO; 

(iii) Preparation of compliance, update, and maintenance plans and APO survey reports; 

(iv) Program implementation, including all organizational policies and procedures; and 



