 

(14) A flight attendant is not considered to be scheduled for duty in excess of duty period limitations if the flights
to which the flight attendant is assigned are scheduled and normally terminate within the limitations but due to circumstances
beyond the control of the domestic, flag, or supplemental air carrier or commercial operator (such as adverse weather
conditions) are not at the time of departure expected to reach their destination within the scheduled time.
(c) Notwithstanding paragraph (b) of this section, a domestic, flag, or supplemental air carrier or commercial operator
may apply the flight crewmember flight time and duty limitations and rest requirements of this part to flight attendants
for all operations conducted under this part provided that_
(1) The certificate holder establishes written procedures that_
(i) Apply to all flight attendants used in the certificate holder's operation;
(ii) Include the flight crewmember requirements contained in subparts Q, R, or S of this part, as appropriate to the
operation being conducted, except that rest facilities on board the aircraft are not required;
(iii) Include provisions to add one flight attendant to the minimum flight attendant complement for each flight crewmember
who is in excess of the minimum number required in the aircraft type certificate data sheet and who is assigned to the
aircraft under the provisions of subparts Q, R, and S, as applicable, of this part;
(iv) Are approved by the Administrator and are described or referenced in the certificate holder's operations specifications;
and
(2) Whenever the Administrator finds that revisions are necessary for the continued adequacy of the written procedures
that are required by paragraph (c)(1) of this section and that had been granted final approval, the certificate holder
must, after notification by the Administrator, make any changes in the procedures that are found necessary by the
Administrator. Within 30 days after the certificate holder receives such notice, it may file a petition to reconsider
the notice with the FAA Flight Standards District Office that is charged with the overall inspection of the certificate
holder's operations. The filing of a petition to reconsider stays the notice, pending decision by the Administrator.
However, if the Administrator finds that an emergency requires immediate action in the interest of safety, the Administrator
may, upon a statement of the reasons, require a change effective without stay.
5. Section 121.683 is amended by revising paragraph (a)(1) to read as follows:


121.683

Crewmember and dispatcher record.


(a) ***
(1) Maintain current records of each crewmember and each aircraft dispatcher (domestic and flag air carriers only)
that show whether the crewmember or aircraft dispatcher complies with the applicable sections of this chapter, including,
but not limited to, proficiency and route checks, airplane and route qualifications, training, any required physical
examinations, flight, duty, and rest time records; and


* * * * *


PART 125_CERTIFICATION AND OPERATIONS: AIRPLANES HAVING A SEATING CAPACITY OF 20 OR MORE PASSENGERS OR A MAXIMUM
PAYLOAD CAPACITY OF 6,000 POUNDS OR MORE


6. The authority citation for part 125 is revised to read as follows:





Authority:

 49 U.S.C. 106(g), 1354, 1421 through 1430, and 1502.



7. Section 125.37 is amended by revising the heading and paragraph (a) to read as follows:


125.37

Duty period limitations.


(a) Each flight crewmember and flight attendant must be relieved from all duty for at least 8 consecutive hours during
any 24-hour period.


* * * * *


PART 135_AIR TAXI OPERATORS AND COMMERCIAL OPERATORS


8. The authority citation for part 135 continues to read as follows:






