 

(3) Commentary



On August 3, 1994, the Board published for comment a proposed commentary to Part 707 (59 FR 39486). The commentary is
designed to provide guidance to credit unions in applying the regulation to specific transactions and is a substitute
for, and a supplement to, individual staff interpretations. The Board received 47 comments: 3 from national trade
associations; 14 from state credit union leagues; 1 from a state credit union supervisor; 2 from state-chartered
credit unions; 21 from federal credit unions; 1 from a credit union data processor; 1 from a credit union consultant;
2 from law firms; 1 from an insurance company; and 1 from a bank holding company. Commenters generally supported the
proposal.

The Board contemplates updating the commentary periodically to address significant questions that arise. Due to
the special needs of small, nonautomated credit unions, and for the reasons explained by the Board in the Final Rule
adopted at the July Board meeting, the Board has decided to extend the compliance date of part 707 until January 1, 1996
for credit unions that are not automated and are under $2 million in assets as of December 31, 1993. 59 Fed. Reg. 39425
(August 3, 1994).

In large measure, the commentary incorporates supplementary information accompanying prior rulemakings, and
reflects the views expressed therein without substantive change. (See final rule published on September 27, 1993
(58 FR 50394), and final rule, corrections and correcting amendments, published on March 22, 1994 (59 FR 13435).)
The commentary also addresses issues that have arisen since the publication of the regulation and technical suggestions
or concerns raised by commenters. NCUA's proposed commentary was published before the publication of the FRB's final
commentary to Regulation DD. 59 FR 40217. NCUA's final commentary adopts many of the changes made by the FRB in their
final commentary. The commentary also reflects NCUA staff's understanding of the FRB's interpretations which have
not been publicly published. The commentary, for the most part, does not repeat information provided in part 707.
The Board also notes, in response to seven commenters' requests for a delayed compliance date for all credit unions,
that most credit unions have already been granted 14 months by the Board to get ready for TISA and part 707. In addition,
credit unions can take advantage of the FRB's Regulation DD, and its compliance by other depository institutions,
which was implemented in June of 1993. 58 FR 271 (January 5, 1993). The Board notes that the commentary makes no substantive
changes to the actual regulation, but merely provides guidance. Therefore, the Board declines to extend the compliance
date of the rule; but, to provide credit unions time to comply with the guidance provided in this commentary, and to
provide parity to the compliance period provided by the FRB when it promulgated the final Regulation DD commentary,
the Board has made compliance with this commentary optional until a period of six months after publication in the 

Federal Register

, at which time compliance with the commentary shall be mandatory.

To avoid unnecessary detail, the discussion accompanying the final commentary does not individually mention technical
amendments that clarify the proposed text but make no substantive change in meaning.

On December 6, 1993, the Federal Reserve Board (``FRB'') published a proposal to amend the regulation's rules for
calculating the annual percentage yield for accounts that send dividends or interest prior to maturity (58 FR 64190).
(See also the notice extending the comment period published on January 13, 1994, 59 FR 1921.) This FRB proposed rule
was withdrawn on May 11, 1994 (59 FR 24376). In its place, a new FRB proposed rule was published on May 11, 1994 (59 FR 24378),
as amended on July 11, 1994 (59 FR 35271). The FRB amendments focus on two issues: a desire for the annual percentage
yield to reflect the time value of money, and the concern of compliance costs and the impact on depository institutions
if the proposed rule is adopted. The NCUA Board is delaying action regarding any adoption of similar amendments to
part 707 until the completion of the FRB's rulemaking.



Section 707.1Authority, Purpose, Coverage and Effect on State Laws



(b) Purpose



One commenter, a trade association for thrifts, correctly commented that the purpose of TISA was to enhance consumer
shopping of depository accounts at all financial institutions_credit unions, thrifts, and banks, and urged the
NCUA Board to stress this in the commentary. While the commenter is correct, the NCUA Board notes that the purpose is
already correctly stated in 707.1(c) of the rule, and that the purpose of the commentary is to enhance and explain
the rule. Since this matter is already clearly covered in the rule, the Board has decided not to repeat it in the commentary.
In this same vein, the commenter requested that the NCUA Board encourage credit unions to institute deposit, as opposed
to share, accounts in order to provide uniformity of accounts for consumers. The Board does not agree with this comment
for many reasons. First, the FCU Act and many state acts require credit unions to have share accounts instead of deposit
accounts, and to change these laws is beyond the authority of the Board. Secondly, the members' equity, expressed
in share accounts, is a major defining characteristic of credit unions, and has served the credit union movement well
throughout its history. Thirdly, the Board does not believe that credit union uniformity in all respects with other
financial institutions has been proven to be a desirable goal. While many other financial institutions have been
faltering, credit unions, due to their uniqueness, have been growing better and stronger. The membership structure,
represented by share accounts, has kept them close to their members and enabled them to provide services unavailable
on the same terms from other entities. ``Not for profit, not for charity, but for service'' is a motto that characterizes
the entire credit union movement. For these reasons, the Board declines the commenter's suggestion.



(c) Coverage



In response to questions raised regarding applicability of the rule to United States-chartered credit unions with
overseas branches or offices, the Board would like to clarify that the rule does cover such operations, if accounts
at such locations are either insured, or insurable, by the National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund (NCUSIF). In
addition, if any foreign-chartered credit unions were to establish and maintain branch operations in the United
States under the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), if accounts at such foreign-chartered branches were
insured or insurable by the NCUSIF, those operations would also be subject to the coverage of part 707. For this reason,
NCUA deleted a reference to state-chartered and federally-chartered credit unions in comment 1(c)1.



(d) Effect on State Laws


