 

As for the types of products that have been involved in 
pediatric iron poisonings, none of the 37 pediatric fatalities 
was reported to be associated with a multivitamin/mineral 
supplement product. All of the products reported to be involved 
in these fatalities were either single or double nutrient 
products that were provided for use as prenatal supplements. 
Single or double nutrient iron-containing products generally 
contain 30 mg or more iron per dosage unit. 


As for the potency of the products involved, all of the 
pediatric fatalities were reported to be associated with iron-containing products at potencies of 40 mg iron or more
per dosage 
unit. FDA is not aware of any pediatric iron poisoning 
fatalities associated with iron-containing products whose potency 
was less than 40 mg iron per dosage unit. Moreover, only 1 of 
the 37 pediatric fatalities was reported to be associated with an 
iron-containing product that contained less than 60 mg iron per 
dosage unit. Thus, FDA observed that requiring unit-dose 
packaging of products that contain 30 mg or more iron per dosage 
unit will provide about a two-fold margin of safety from the 
potency of products that have usually been associated with 
pediatric fatalities. 


The information available to the agency shows that products 
that contain 30 mg or more iron per dosage unit are primarily 
sold to women of childbearing age for prenatal 
use. Prenatal iron-containing products may be obtained 
as dietary supplements or prescription drug products. 
FDA notes that all of the iron-containing products 
associated with the 37 pediatric poisoning fatalities were apparently obtained as prenatal drugs or supplements.
FDA finds 
that prenatal iron-containing drugs and supplements present the 
greatest potential for pediatric iron poisonings and fatalities 
because of their iron content, and because they are likely to be 
available in households with young children. Prenatal iron-containing products are likely to be in households with
young 
children either because they remain in the household after 
childbirth, or because young children are present in the 
household during pregnancy. 


Fourth, FDA notes that both the AG and NDMA citizen 
petitions recommended 30 mg iron per dosage unit as an 
appropriate level to establish additional safeguards to reduce 
the incidence of pediatric iron poisonings. 


Therefore, FDA is proposing unit-dose packaging for all 
dietary supplements and drugs containing 30 mg or more iron per 
dosage unit. FDA tentatively concludes that unit-dose packaging 
will reduce the incidence of pediatric poisonings by providing 
the additional safeguards necessary to limit pediatric access to 
a potentially fatal amount of iron. 




b. Practical effect. 

As discussed above, CPSC's child-resistant packaging regulations require that any iron-containing 
drug or dietary supplement packaged in a container with 250 mg or 
more iron must be packaged in accordance with their child-resistant packaging regulations (16 CFR 1700.14(a)(12)
and 
(a)(13)). Therefore, FDA anticipates that manufacturers and 
distributors of drugs and dietary supplements containing 30 mg or more iron per dosage unit, and containing 250 mg
or more total 
iron per package, under this proposed action and CPSC's current 
regulations (16 CFR 1700.14(a)(12) and (a)(13)), a manufacturer 
or packer will have the option of packaging the product in child-resistant unit-dose packaging (e.g., child-resistant
blisters, 
child-resistant pouches), or of exercising its right to an 
exemption to CPSC's special packaging requirements to allow 
access by elderly or handicapped persons. However, under this 
proposed rule, in the latter case, the products will have to be 
packaged in conventional unit-dose packaging and will be subject 
to CPSC's requirements for exempt packaged products (16 CFR 
1700.5). 


FDA tentatively concludes that, regardless of which 
packaging option a manufacturer or packer uses, unit-dose 
packaging of all iron-containing drugs and supplements that 
contain 30 mg or more per dosage unit will ensure the safe use of 
such products by limiting unintended access to such products by 
young children. 



