 



Closed-loop biomass

 means plant matter, other than standing timber, grown for the sole purpose of being used to generate electricity.




Deciding Official

 means the Assistant Secretary for Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (or any DOE official to whom the authority
of the Assistant Secretary may be redelegated by the Secretary of Energy). The duties of the Assistant Secretary may
not be sub-delegated without the written approval of the Secretary. 



DOE

 means the Department of Energy. 



Finance Office

 means the DOE Office of the Chief Financial Officer (or any office to which that office's authority may be redelegated
by the Secretary). 



Fiscal year

 means the Federal fiscal year beginning October 1 and ending on September 30 of the following calendar year. 



Nonprofit electrical cooperative

 means a cooperative association that is treated as tax exempt under section 501(c)(12) of the Internal Revenue Code
and that is organized under the laws of any State for the purpose of providing electric service to its members and other
customers. 



Renewable energy facility

 means a system or an integrated set of components necessary to generate electric energy in whole or in part from a renewable
energy source, including_ 

(1) Solar photovoltaic cells which convert sunlight to direct current electricity; 

(2) Solar thermal electric systems which use a fluid heated by the sun to drive a turbine generator; 

(3) Wind energy systems which capture wind energy through aerodynamically shaped blades rotating about a horizontal
or vertical axis and drive an alternating current or direct current generator; 

(4) Biomass energy systems which use heat derived from combustion of plant matter or from combustion of gases or liquids
derived from plant matter or animal waste or from combustion of gases derived from landfills in order to drive an electric
generator; and 

(5) Geothermal systems which use natural heat stored underground in rocks or underground in an aqueous liquid or vapor,
whether or not under pressure, in order to drive an electric generator. 



Renewable energy source

 means solar heat, solar light, wind, geothermal, and biomass energy except for exclusions set forth in section 451.4(e)
of this part. 



State

 means the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and any of the States, territories, and possessions of the United States.




451.3 



Who may apply. 



Any owner, or operator with the written consent of the owner, but not both, of a qualified renewable energy facility,
may apply for incentive payments for electric energy generated from a renewable energy source and sold. 



451.4 



What is a qualified renewable energy facility. 



In order to be eligible for an incentive payment under this part, a renewable energy facility must meet the following
qualifications_ 
(a) 

Ownership. 

The owner must be-

(1) A State (or agency, authority, or instrumentality thereof); 

(2) Any political subdivision of a State (or agency, authority, or instrumentality thereof); 

(3) Any corporation or association wholly owned, directly or indirectly, by a State or a political subdivision of
a State; or 

(4) A nonprofit electric cooperative. 

(b)

 What must be owned.

 The owner must have all rights to the beneficial use of the renewable energy facility, and legal title must be held by,
or for the benefit of, the beneficial owner. 

(c)

 Sales affecting interstate commerce.

 The renewable energy facility must generate electric energy for sale in, or affecting, interstate commerce among
the States. 

(d)

 Type of renewable energy sources.

 Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, the source of the electric energy for which incentive payments
is sought must be solar heat, solar light, wind energy, biomass energy, or geothermal energy. 






