 

The public should be aware that FSIS continues to have interest in investigations of protein quality which include
among their objectives the identification of improved methods for determining protein quality. In evaluating the
possible use of alternative approaches to assuring protein quality, FSIS will consider data and other comments submitted
by the public.
(5) 

Tentative position: Protein and fat contents. 

FSIS is considering allowing for two categories of MDP for use in the formulation of poultry products and meat food
products: (1) A category which meets minimum protein and maximum fat content requirements of not less than 14 percent
and not more than 25 percent, respectively, and (2) a category designated ``for processing'' for which there are no
protein or fat content requirements. As discussed below, it is contemplated that a wider range of use would be permitted
for product containing not less than 14 percent protein and not more than 25 percent fat, than for product for processing.
Poultry products produced by traditional deboning techniques vary significantly in fat content, largely depending
on the extent to which they include skin (with attached fatty tissue) and/or separable fat_the major sources of fat
in poultry. A similar pattern was evident in the data on mechanically deboned poultry products reviewed in the 1979
health and safety report, although mechanically deboned product tended to contain more fat. This tendency is not
surprising since mechanically deboned product frequently is prepared from necks, which have a higher skin content
than other poultry parts, and/or backs, which have a higher skin content than other poultry parts, and because it can
include bone marrow, which contains as much or more fat than skin.
While, as with fat content, there is considerable variability in the protein content of both mechanically deboned
poultry and poultry products produced by traditional deboning techniques, in the data reviewed in the 1979 health
and safety report on MDP, MDP generally contained less protein. In addition, the 1979 report found much higher moisture
to protein ratios in mechanically deboned poultry, indicating considerable dilution of poultry product, possibly
by ice.
Currently, the poultry products inspection regulations do not directly control the fat or protein content of poultry
product ingredients. However, they do differentiate between ``poultry meat'' and ``poultry,'' i.e., chicken meat
and chicken, with the latter encompassing edible parts such as skin and fat not in excess of their natural proportions
in addition to poultry meat. As skin (with attached fatty tissue) and separable fat are the places in which most of the
fat in poultry products is found and poultry products are composed essentially of fat, protein, and moisture, these
definitions have served, to some extent, to distinguish among poultry products in terms of their relative fat and
protein contents. Moreover, these differentiations in fat and protein have consequences for the use of poultry product
ingredients, since many of the standards of identity or composition for finished poultry products include minimum
poultry meat requirements (9 CFR 381.167) and others limit skin and fat to natural proportions (9 CFR 381.160).
The goal FSIS is considering is to develop a regulatory approach that fulfills its responsibility to protect the public
by maintaining the quality and integrity of the poultry and meat food product supply while continuing to permit flexibility
in the composition of mechanically deboned poultry product, as well as in its use at various levels in a broad range
of products. In FSIS's view, its responsibility to the public includes the objectives of preventing increases in
the fat content of this portion of the food supply and preventing poultry product dilution that could result in the
public no longer being able to rely on poultry products and meat food products as reasonably good sources of high quality
dietary protein.
FSIS is considering that MDP should have a fat content of not more than 25 percent and a protein content of not less than
14 percent or it shall be deemed to be product for processing. If these views are adopted, the effect of this provision
would be to impose no maximum on the fat content or minimum on the protein content of this ingredient where other regulatory
provisions assure that the fat content of finished products does not exceed appropriate limits and protect against
decreases in their protein content by establishing finished product content requirements. In such a product, it
is contemplated that MDP could be used, regardless of its fat or protein content, in ingredient mixtures that accord
with the standard for the finished product.
(6) 

Tentative position: Quality control. 

FSIS is considering that a quality control program is necessary to assure that establishments manufacture mechanically
deboned poultry product that complies consistently with the tentative definition and standard that is being considered
by FSIS. Utilization of such a program in producing the ingredient MDP would be a prerequisite for the approval of labels
for products consisting of or containing MDP. The function of plant quality control is to restrict potential variability
within the limits of the tentative requirements FSIS is considering by controlling the factors that can affect the
resulting product's characteristics.


