 

To be eligible for funding under the HSISP, a project area must 
have at least 50 but no more than 200 infant deaths per year, and 
must have an average infant mortality rate of at least 14.5 deaths 
per 1000 live births, from vital statistics data, for the 3-year 
period 19881990. The minimum of fifty infant deaths per year is 
meant to assure selection of communities with a sufficient 
magnitude of the problem to justify concentrating resources to 
reduce infant mortality. The upper limit of 200 infant deaths per 
year is meant to assure projects of a manageable size. The 
eligibility thresholds are identical for urban and rural areas. 



Eligible Applicants 



Eligible applicants are public or nonprofit private organizations, 
and tribal organizations, applying on behalf of an existing 
community-based consortium. Applications must be approved by the 
chief elected official of the city or county in which the project 
area is located (or, if there is more than one such entity, the 
chief elected officials acting in concert), or by the tribal 
leadership of the tribe or tribal organization which has 
jurisdiction over the project area. No more than one application 
may be made for a given project area. 

The 15 entities that are currently receiving Healthy Start 
Initiative funds are not eligible for Special Project grants. 



Review Criteria 



Applications for grants will be reviewed and evaluated according 
to the following criteria: 

1. Existence of an operational consortium that includes 
appropriate representation of project area providers and 
consumers. 

2. The effectiveness of the consortium's activities over the 
previous two years, as demonstrated by implemented strategies to 
reduce infant mortality. 

3. The extent to which the applicant's proposed activities 
appear feasible and likely to achieve the project's goals and 
objectives within the two year project period. 

4. Demonstrated ability to maximize and coordinate existing 
resources and acquire additional resources. 

5. Substantial involvement of the State and local Maternal 
and Child Health and other agencies. 

6. Demonstrated ability to effectively manage the project's 
fiscal resources. 


