 

PART 113_STANDARD REQUIREMENTS 



1. The authority citation for part 113 would continue to read as follows: 






Authority:

 21 U.S.C. 151159; 7 CFR 2.17, 2.51, and 371.2(d). 




2. In 113.3, paragraphs (b)(7), (b)(8) and (b)(9) would be revised, paragraph (b)(10) would be removed, paragraph
(c) would be revised, and new paragraphs (d) and (e) would be added to read as follows: 



113.3 

Sampling of biological products. 



* * * * * 



(b) ***

(7) 

Diagnostic test kits:

 Two samples of diagnostic test kits. The licensee or permittee will hold one of these selected samples at the storage
temperature recommended on the label while awaiting a request by the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service to
submit the additional sample. If submissions are not requested by the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service,
the additional sample may be returned to the serial inventory after the serial is released. 

(8) 

Autogenous biologics:

 Ten samples shall be selected from each serial of autogenous biologic that exceeds 50 containers. No samples, other
than those required by paragraph (e) of this section, are required for a serial of autogenous biologic with 50 or fewer
containers. 

(9) 

Miscellaneous:

 The number of samples from products not in the categories provided for in paragraphs (b)(1) through (b)(8) of this
section shall be prescribed in the filed Outline of Production for the product. 

(c) 

Prelicensing and Outline of Production changes:

 Samples needed to support a license application or a change in the Outline of Production for a licensed product shall
be submitted only upon request from the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service. Except for miscellaneous products
specified in paragraph (b)(9) of this section, the number of such samples shall be at least one and one-half times the
number prescribed for such product in paragraph (b) of this section. Samples of Master Seeds and Master Cell Stocks
with a minimum individual volume of 1 ml shall be submitted as follows: 

(1) Ten samples of Bacterial Master Seeds. 

(2) Thirteen samples of Viral Master Seeds or Nonviral Master Seeds requiring cell culture propagation. For Master
Seeds isolated or passed in a cell line different from the species of intended use, an additional 2 samples are required
for each additional species. For Master Seeds grown in cell culture and intended for use in more than one species, an
additional 2 samples are required for each additional species. 

(3) Thirty-six 1 ml samples or six 1 ml samples plus one 20 ml sample and one 10 ml sample of Master Cell Stocks. In the case
of Master Cell Stocks which are persistently infected with a virus, an additional four 1 ml samples are required. If
these persistently infected cell stocks are intended for use in more than one species, an additional two 1 ml samples
are required for each additional species. 

(4) Four samples of the Master Cell Stock + n (highest passage) cells. 

(d) 

Sterile diluent:

 A sample of Sterile Diluent shall accompany each sample of product, other than Marek's Disease Vaccine, if such diluent
is required to rehydrate or dilute the product before use. The volume of diluent shall be an appropriate amount to rehydrate
or dilute the product. Samples of Sterile Diluent prepared for use with Marek's Disease Vaccine shall be submitted
upon request from the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service.

(e) Reserve samples shall be selected from each serial and subserial of biological product. Such samples shall be
selected at random from final containers of completed product by an employee of the Department, of the licensee, or
of the permittee, as designated by the Administrator. 

Each sample shall: (1) Consist of 5 single-dose packages, 2 multiple-dose packages, or 2 diagnostic test kits, as
the case may be; 

(2) Be adequate in quantity for appropriate examination and testing; 

(3) Be truly representative and in final containers; 

(4) Be held in a special compartment set aside by the licensee or permittee for holding these samples under refrigeration
at the storage 
temperature recommended on the labels for 6 months after the expiration 
date stated on the labels. The samples that are stored in this manner shall be delivered to the Animal and Plant Health
Inspection Service upon request. 




(Approved by the Office of Management and Budget under control number 05790013) 




3. In 113.309, paragraph (c)(4), the words ``Veterinary Services'' are removed and the words ``Animal and
Plant Health Inspection Service'' are added 
in their place. 





Done in Washington, DC, this 17th day of March 1994.



<SIGNER>
Patricia Jensen,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Assistant Secretary, Marketing and Inspection Services. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 946947 Filed 32394; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 341034P
</BILLING>


