 

Applicants' Representations



1. Laurel Fund is a Maryland corporation registered under the Act as an open-end management investment company. Laurel
presently consists of the following separate investment portfolios: The Laurel Funds, Inc., Laurel Prime Money
Market I Portfolio, Laurel U.S. Treasury Money Market I Portfolio, Laurel Tax-Exempt Money Market I Portfolio, Laurel
Prime Money Market II Portfolio, Laurel Government Money Market II Portfolio, Laurel U.S. Treasury Money Market
II Portfolio, Laurel Stock Portfolio, Laurel Ginnie Mae Portfolio, Laurel Intermidate Income Portfolio, Laurel
Short-Term Bond Fund Portfolio, Laurel Tactical Asset Allocation Portfolio, Laurel U.S. Treasury Only Money Market
Portfolio, Laurel SP 500 Stock Index Portfolio, Laurel Balanced Portfolio, Laurel Midcap Stock Portfolio,
Laurel Bond Market Index Portfolio, and Laurel European Portfolio.
2. FRIMCo is the administrator, and the RFD is the distributor of Laurel Fund. Mellon Bank is Laurel Fund's investment
adviser, custodian, and transfer agent. 

3. TBC Fund, TBCIS Fund, and TBCTF Fund are Massachusetts business trusts. TBC Fund presently consists of the following
series: Capital Appreciation Fund, Special Growth Fund, Government Money Fund, Cash Management Fund, Managed Income
Fund, Asset Manager's Fund, and Intermediate Term Government Securities Fund. TBCIS Fund presently consists of
the following series: International Fund, Short-Term Bond Fund, Asset Allocation Fund, and Contrarian Fund. TBCTF
Fund consists of the Massachusetts Tax-Free Money Fund, Massachusetts Tax-Free Bond Fund, Tax-Free Money Fund,
Tax-Free Bond Fund, California Tax-Free Money Fund, California Tax-Free Bond Fund, New York Tax-Free Money Fund,
and New York Tax-Free Bond Fund. The Boston Company Advisors, Inc. is the investment adviser for, and FDI is the Distributor
for TBC Fund, TBCIS Fund, and TBCTF Fund. The Boston Company Advisors, Inc. is an indirect subsidiary of Mellon Bank
Corporation.

4. Applicants request that the relief granted hereby apply to all existing and future portfolios of Laurel Fund, TBC
Fund, TBCIS Fund, and TBCTF Fund (the ``Portfolios''), and to all future registered investment companies distributed
by RFD or FDI, or for which Mellon Bank serves in the future as investment adviser, or for which any person controlling,
controlled by, or under common control with Mellon Bank (within the meaning of section 2(a)(9) of the Act) may in the
future serve as investment adviser. Any such future investment companies that rely on the requested relief will abide
by all of the representations and conditions to the application.
5. The Portfolios consist of both money market funds and non-money market funds. Shares of the Portfolios are sold
and redeemed daily at net asset value without a sales or redemption charge. The Funds have adopted plans pursuant to
rule 12b1 under the Act for using up to 0.35% of each Portfolio's net assets annually to aid in the distribution
of their shares.
6. Applicants propose to create a multi-class distribution system (the ``Multi-Class System''). The Funds will
create an unlimited number of additional classes of shares in some or all of their existing and future Portfolios.
Shares will be issued in connection with either a plan adopted pursuant to rule 12b1 under the Act (the ``12b1
Plan'') and/or a non-rule 12b1 administrative plan (the ``Administrative Plan,'' and collectively with
the 12b1 Plan, the ``Plans'').
7. With respect to each class of shares, the Funds will enter into a 12b1 Plan agreement and/or an Administrative
Plan agreement (the ``Plan Agreements'') with groups, organizations or institutions (``Organizations'') to provide
certain services to the clients, members, or customers of such Organizations who beneficially own shares offered
in connection with a particular class (``Class Shareholders'').
8. The services to be provided by Organizations to their Class Shareholders under the 12b1 Plan could include:
providing facilities to answer questions from prospective investors about the Funds; receiving and answering correspondence,
including requests for prospectuses and statements of additional information; preparing, printing, and delivering
prospectuses and shareholder reports to prospective Class Shareholders; complying with federal and state securities
laws pertaining to the sale of shares; and assisting investors in completing application forms and selecting dividend
and other account options.
9. The services to be provided by Organizations to their Class Shareholders under the Administrative Plan could include:
receiving, aggregating, and processing Class Shareholder orders; sweep program servicing; shareholder sub-accounting;
providing and maintaining elective Class Shareholder services such as check writing and wire transfer services;
providing and maintaining pre-authorized investment plans; periodic communications with Class Shareholders;
acting as the sole shareholder of record and nominee for Class Shareholders; maintaining account records for Class
Shareholders; answering questions and handling correspondence from Class Shareholders about their accounts;
issuing confirmations for transactions by Class Shareholders; and similar account administrative services.


