 

NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION 



<CFRNO>10 CFR Part 50 </CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>RIN: 3150AD57 </RINDOCK>


Fracture Toughness Requirements for 
Light Water Reactor Pressure Vessels 



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Proposed rule. 




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) is proposing to amend its 
regulations for light-water-cooled nuclear power plants to clarify several 
items related to the fracture toughness requirements for reactor pressure 
vessels (RPV). The proposed amendments would clarify the pressurized thermal 
shock (PTS) requirements, make changes to the Fracture Toughness Requirements 
and the Reactor Vessel Material Surveillance Program Requirements, and provide 
new requirements for thermal annealing of a reactor pressure vessel. 


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 The comment period expires January 3, 1994. Comments 
received after this date will be considered if it is practical to do so, but 
the Commission is able to assure consideration only for comments received on 
or before this date. 


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Mail comments to: The Secretary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear 
Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555, Attention: Docketing and 
Service Branch. 




Comments may be delivered to: One White Flint North, 11555 Rockville 
Pike, Rockville, MD 20852, between 7:30 am and 4:15 pm on Federal workdays. 
Comments received on the proposed rules may be examined at the NRC Public 
Document Room, 2120 L Street NW. (Lower Level), Washington, DC. 
A free single copy of draft regulatory guides DG1023, DG1025, and 
DG1027 may be requested by those considering public comment by writing to the 
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, ATTN: Distribution and Mail Services 
Section, Room P130A, Washington, DC 20555. A copy is also available for 
inspection and/or copying in the NRC Public Document Room, 2120 L Street NW. 
(Lower Level), Washington, DC. 


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Alfred Taboada, Division of Engineering, 
Office of Nuclear Regulatory Research, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 
Washington, DC 20555, telephone: (301) 4156014. 

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 
Background 


Maintaining the structural integrity of the reactor pressure vessel 
(RPV) of light-water-cooled reactors is a critical concern related to the safe 
operation of nuclear power plants. To assure the structural integrity of 
RPVs, NRC regulations and regulatory guides have been developed to provide 
analysis and measurement methods and procedures to assure that each RPV has 
adequate safety margins for continued operation. Structural integrity of a 
reactor pressure vessel is generally assured through a fracture mechanics 
evaluation, including measurement or estimation of the fracture toughness of 
the materials which compose the RPV. However, the fracture toughness of the 
RPV materials varies with time. As the plant operates, neutrons escaping from 
the reactor core impact the vessel beltline materials (e.g. the materials that 
surround the reactor core), causing embrittlement of those materials. The 
NRC's regulations and regulatory guides related to RPV integrity provide the 
criteria and methods needed to estimate the extent of the embrittlement, to 
evaluate the consequences of the embrittlement in terms of the structural 
integrity of the RPV, and to provide methods to mitigate the deleterious 
effects of the embrittlement. 
The NRC has several regulations and regulatory guides that establish 
criteria and procedures for assuring the structural integrity of RPVs. With 
the addition of a proposed rule on thermal annealing and several draft 
regulatory guides, the existing and proposed regulatory documents contribute 
to a comprehensive set of regulations and regulatory guidance pertaining to 
RPV integrity, including: 



1. The fracture toughness criteria that each RPV must satisfy (10 CFR 
50.60, 10 CFR 50.61, and 10 CFR Part 50, Appendix G). 
2. Irradiation embrittlement surveillance requirements (10 CFR Part 
50, Appendix H). 
3. Guidance for estimating the fracture toughness of the RPV 
(Regulatory Guide 1.99 and a draft regulatory guide on dosimetry). 
4. Guidance for cases in which the RPV is estimated to exceed 
specified screening criteria (Regulatory Guide 1.154 and a draft 
regulatory guide on evaluating RPVs with Charpy upper-shelf energy 
less than 50 ft-lb). 
5. Requirements and guidance for using thermal annealing of the RPV 
as a method for mitigating the effects of neutron irradiation 
(proposed 10 CFR 50.66 and a draft regulatory guide). 



This notice proposes changes to the following requirements: 



a. The Pressurized Thermal Shock (PTS) rule (10 CFR 50.61). 
b. Appendix G of 10 CFR Part 50, ``Fracture Toughness Requirements.'' 
c. Appendix H of 10 CFR Part 50, ``Reactor Vessel Material Surveil- 
lance Program Requirements.'' 



This notice also proposes a thermal annealing requirement, 10 CFR 50.66. 
In addition to the proposed amendments addressed in this document, the 
NRC will publish for public comment a draft regulatory guide on thermal 
annealing, DG1027 (the availability of this draft regulatory guide for will be announced in the 

Federal Register

 at a later date 
comment.) 
Two related draft regulatory guides have been published for public 
comment (58 FR 51392; October 1, 1993). These draft regulatory guides are: 



1. A draft regulatory guide that addresses evaluation of RPVs with Charpy 
upper-shelf energy levels less than 50 ft-lb (DG1023). 
2. A draft regulatory guide on dosimetry (DG1025). 



Other regulatory guides pertaining to RPV integrity, Regulatory Guides 
1.99 and 1.154, are under evaluation. Revisions to these guides, if any, will 
be addressed in the future. 
Other regulatory issues related to reactor pressure vessel integrity, 
such as low temperature over-pressure protection system setpoints, are being 
addressed as part of a broader scope evaluation of the pressure vessel 
regulations and are not part of this proposed amendment. 


</SUPPLEM>
