 

Foreign air carrier's security programs provide security procedures for foreign air carriers while operating to
and from the United States, which is a counterpart to the procedures required under part 108.

Security programs of individual companies largely are based on standard security programs and amendments developed
by the FAA and industry. As new threats are identified, and as improved countermeasures are developed, the FAA develops
standard means to respond to the threats and improve security.

Other sources of information and countermeasures are in Security Directives and Information Circulars, described
in 108.18. They address threats to civil aviation security and countermeasures to respond to those threats.
In addition, there is information concerning various security devices, such as metal detectors and X-ray machines,
that is sensitive.



The Need to Protect Security Information



The FAA has, over the years, adopted security procedures to respond to the growing threat to civil aviation. The trend
has been towards a more sophisticated and dangerous threat.

Until 1984, hijackings of U.S. air carriers primarily were conducted by single individuals who were asylum seekers,
expatriates desiring to return to Cuba, mentally disturbed persons, or single individuals who were carrying out
their criminal acts for personal motives. Beginning in 1985, however, there were a series of sophisticated hijackings
and attempted hijackings of airliners of U.S. registry. These hijackings were conducted by relatively well-organized
teams of trained individuals with political motives primarily connected to international affairs in the Middle
East. The June 1985 hijacking of TWA 847 and intelligence reporting in subsequent years clearly indicated that U.S.
air carriers were facing a higher level and type of threat. Similar incidents that occurred over the next few years
routinely involved murder and extended hostage takings.

The change in the hijacking threat faced by U.S. air carriers was accompanied by increasingly sophisticated and deadly
sabotage attacks against civil aviation. These attacks also were perpetrated by well-organized international
terrorist groups with, in some cases, nation states also involved as supporters and facilitators, if not direct participants.
These groups and countries repeatedly attempted to collect information concerning extant security countermeasures
and to devise methods of attack to bypass or defeat those countermeasures.

With the 1985 terrorist attacks on the airport terminals in Rome and Vienna and the December 1988 explosion and crash
of Pan American World Airways [Pan Am] Flight 103 in Lockerbie, Scotland, the FAA, along with the world civil aviation
community, recognized that an entirely new phase of terrorism had opened. In response, the FAA issued new, detailed,
amendments to the air carrier standard security program to counter the threat to U.S. carriers at foreign airports.
The FAA also developed new procedures to decrease the vulnerability of airports to terrorist attacks. These procedures,
both foreign and domestic, went into both the air carrier and airport security programs.

Because of the increasing sophistication of those who may pose a threat to civil aviation, it is increasingly important
that information regarding the manner in which the FAA, the airport operators, and the air carriers may seek to guard
against criminal threats be protected. The unauthorized disclosure of sensitive aviation security information
could assist in the development of techniques to counter those measures.

The FAA is mindful of the public's legitimate interest in how the FAA operates and how it regulates the aviation industry.
The FAA has a corresponding responsibility to prevent undue disclosure of information that could compromise public
safety if it falls into the wrong hands. The proposals in this notice have been carefully considered to cover only information
that could reasonably be anticipated to be damaging to the security of the traveling public if given to unauthorized
persons.

Security programs are absolutely essential mechanisms through which the FAA regulates the air carriers' and airports'
detailed obligations with respect to ensuring civil aviation security. Much of the effectiveness of the programs
depends on strictly limiting access to such information to those persons who have a need to know. Unauthorized disclosure
of the specific provisions of the air carrier and airport security programs or other aviation security information
would allow potential attackers of civil aviation to devise methods to circumvent or otherwise defeat the security
provisions. It would also discount the deterrent effect inherently provided in prohibiting disclosure of security
measures that may or may not be in place.



