 

The guidelines for cancellation of claims arising from defaults involving merchandise which are based upon negligence
do not distinguish between those violations involving merchandise that do not necessarily involve a threat to the
revenue (i.e., manipulation of merchandise without Customs permit or not in accordance with the activity described
in the permit) and those which do involve a threat to the revenue (i.e., removal of merchandise from the warehouse without
permit, or failure to locate or account for merchandise in the warehouse.) The guidelines are amended to provide for
a revenue-based distinction in violations involving merchandise. Violations involving merchandise which result
from negligence but involve no loss of revenue shall be cancelled upon payment of an amount between one and fifteen
percent of the value of the merchandise but not less than $100 nor more than $10,000. No distinction shall be made between
violations involving restricted merchandise and violations involving merchandise which is not restricted; however,
if the violation does involve restricted merchandise, that shall be considered to be an aggravating factor which
will result in less generous mitigation. Violations involving merchandise which result from negligence but involve
a potential loss of revenue shall be cancelled upon payment of an amount between one and three times the loss of revenue
on the merchandise which cannot be accounted for, unless that merchandise is restricted, in which case the claim shall
be cancelled upon payment of an amount between three and five times the loss of revenue but in no case less than 10 percent
of the value of such merchandise. If the violation is found to be intentional in nature, then no relief from the claim
shall be granted. 



Change to Section VIII 



Under Section VIII of the guidelines, a reference is made to cancellation of claims for liquidated damages arising
from violation of airport security regulations as published in 122.14 of the Customs Regulations (19 CFR 122.14).
In Treasury Decision 9082, the provisions of 122.14 were renumbered as 19 CFR 122.181 et. seq. The guidelines
are amended to reflect that change. 

For violations involving unauthorized entry into a secured area, failure to openly display or possess the identification
card, strip or seal, or failure to surrender identification upon demand by an authorized Customs officer, under current
guidelines a first violation is cancelled upon payment of $200, a second violation is cancelled upon payment of $500
and a third or subsequent violation results in no mitigation. If a bond principal has three employees or contractors
who enter into a secured area without authorization, three violations immediately occur and any benefit given for
a first or second violation dissipates. In order to provide a district director with more administrative discretion,
the first, second and third violation distinctions are being eliminated. The district director will be able to cancel
any claim arising from the violative conduct described above upon payment of an amount between $250 and $500. A district
director will always have the discretion to deny relief in these cases based upon articulable aggravating factors.
Inasmuch as the district director will be afforded the noted discretion, old paragraph F of the guidelines, which
permits greater mitigation to a prior violator who does not incur a violation for six months, is being eliminated.


The guidelines for airport security violations are also being amended to permit the district director to apply Option
1 mitigation procedures, if the facts of a particular case are undisputed and the circumstances surrounding such
case so warrant. 



