 

3. ``Operation Lifesaver''_making rail/highway crossings safer; 

4. Hazardous Materials Transportation Emergency Preparedness Assistance; and 

5. Youth Traffic Safety Education Programs. 

Each of these five programs are explained in more detail later in this RFP and are referred to throughout as the ``DOT
Programs.'' 

DOT will evaluate all of the proposals that it receives based on the criteria and priorities set forth in Section 4 of
this RFP, and will enter into formal agreements to establish partnerships with service organizations that submit
the proposals that are selected. Initially, these projects 
will most likely be concentrated in geographic areas of the greatest need based on the criteria set forth in the regulations
issued under the National and Community Service Trust Act (see ``Needs'' under Section 4.1, ``General Criteria''
in this RFP). However, DOT views these initial projects to be the beginning of a broader, more comprehensive program.


DOT plans to fund the initial projects in these programs through two sources. First, DOT funds appropriated to DOT
agencies will be available to partially finance projects in some of the five DOT Programs in fiscal year 1994. In addition,
DOT may apply to the National Service Corporation for additional funding for operational costs and for educational
awards (if requested) from the funds set aside by the National Service Corporation for Federal agency programs. (Since
there is no guarantee that DOT will receive funding from the National Service Corporation, a proposal selected by
DOT ultimately might not be fully funded or funded at all if DOT's request for funding from the National Service Corporation
is not granted.) The service organizations sponsoring the project will have to provide matching funds for a portion
of project costs. 

Any funds that DOT receives from the National Service Corporation will be from the $16.3 million that has been earmarked
for Federal agencies. Therefore, the DOT Programs may provide service organizations with access to a source of funds
for which they are otherwise not eligible. 

DOT will inform applicants prior to April 15, 1994, as to whether they have been selected to receive DOT funding and
whether they will be included in DOT's application to the National Service Corporation. DOT anticipates that notification
of National Service Corporation awards for Federal agency programs will occur in May or June of 1994. 



1.3General Program Requirements 



Any proposal submitted under this RFP must comply with the general requirements for service programs that are set
forth in the National and Community Service Trust Act and related regulations. These requirements include: 

1. Employing participants on a full-time basis (1700 hours for a period of not less than nine months and not more than
a year); or on a part-time basis (900 hours for a period of not more than two years, or, if the individual is enrolled in
an institution of higher education while performing all or part of the service, not more than three years). 

2. Employing at least 20 full time equivalent participants unless an explanation is provided as to why a smaller number
is appropriate. 

3. Paying participants a living allowance of at least $7,440 for fiscal year 1994 (but not more than twice that amount).


4. Providing participants with health care benefits and, if necessary, child care benefits during the term of service.


5. Providing for participants to receive educational awards (either from the National Service Corporation or from
some other source) in an amount of $4,725 for one full-time term of service or $2,360 for one part-time term of service,
for up to two terms of service. (If educational awards will not be received by all participants, the program must ensure
that the distribution of educational awards is performed in an equitable manner that treats equally all participants
doing the same or essentially similar work. Distribution based solely on economic needs of participants is not encouraged.)


6. Not displacing other employees or positions, nor supplanting the hiring or promotion of employees. The written
concurrence of any local labor organization representing employees engaged in the same or substantially similar
work must be obtained. 

If a proposal is selected and funded, the service organization will be required to enter into a formal agreement to
establish the partnership with DOT, which will set forth the specific terms and conditions of the partnership arrangement,
including provisions for monitoring and evaluating the project. The selected service organization will also be
required to enter into formal agreements with the participants in its project to spell out the terms and conditions
of service. 



1.4Eligibility Requirements 



1.4.1Eligible Service Organizations 



Subdivisions of states, Indian Tribes, public or private nonprofit organizations (including labor organizations),
institutions of higher education, or a consortia of entities that propose to administer or operate a national or community
service program are eligible to submit proposals 
for the DOT Programs. 



1.4.2Eligible Participants 



Eligibility for individual participation in community and national service projects is limited to participants
who: (1) are 17 years of age or older at the commencement of service, unless the individual is in a youth corps program,
in which case the participant must be between the ages of 16 and 25; (2) either have received a high school diploma or
its equivalent, including an 
alternative diploma or certificate for those individuals with mental and physical disabilities for whom such alternative
diploma or certificate is appropriate, or agree to obtain a high school diploma or its equivalent. (However, if the
program conducts an independent evaluation demonstrating that the potential participant is incapable of obtaining
a high school diploma or 
its equivalent, this requirement may be waived); (3) have not dropped out of elementary or secondary school in order
to enroll as a national service participant, unless the participant is enrolled in an institution of higher education
on an ability to benefit basis and is considered eligible for funds under section 484 of the Higher Education Act of
1965; (4) are citizens or 
nationals of the United States; and (5) meet the task-related eligibility requirements established by the program.




