 

Today's proposal is to receive a preliminary export report from U.S. companies at the time they initiate an export
and authorize a contingent refund of consumption allowances with verification conducted later when the company
submits the bill of lading and invoice for the export. However, the Agency considered two other options for today's
proposed rulemaking: (1) to maintain the status quo requirements and reporting procedures in the current regulation
for the remaining control period from January 1, 1995 to January 1, 1996, (2) to eliminate the requirement that consumption
allowances be expended if the controlled substance is produced for export to a Party to the Protocol. EPA seeks comments
on today's proposal and the other options considered for controlled substances exported to Parties of the Protocol.


3. Administrative Changes to Production Allowance Requirements for Exports that are Transformed or Destroyed 

EPA is proposing that a person who produces a controlled substance for exportation to a Party to the Protocol for transformation
or destruction may request from the Agency the refund of the production allowances expended in the production of the
substance. The proposal pertains to the production of class I controlled substances for the control period beginning
January 1, 1995 and ending January 1, 1996, except for methyl bromide. For methyl bromide, the proposed refund of expended
production allowances for quantities exported to Parties which are certified to be for transformation or destruction
would begin January 1, 1995 and extend until January 1, 2001. As with the procedures for refunding consumption allowances,
a person in the U.S. producing or purchasing a class I controlled substance may, upon export to a Party for subsequent
transformation or destruction, request from EPA a ``refund'' of production allowances with a certification that
the production allowances were expended in the production of the substance. To ensure that the controlled substance
is in fact transformed or destroyed by the recipient in a Party country, the Agency is proposing exporters be required
to include in the sales contract a certification of the future transformation or destruction. In parallel with the
administrative changes proposed in the previous section for consumption allowances, the Agency proposes accelerating
the procedures for requesting production allowances for the export of substances that will be transformed or destroyed.
This proposal would permit a U.S. company to report the export of a controlled substance for transformation or destruction
at the time the export is initiated, rather than requiring a completed bill of lading and invoice with a certification
in order to grant additional production allowances. EPA would authorize the refund of production allowances contingent
upon verification of the export for transformation or destruction by the bill of lading and invoice and the certification
of transformation or destruction. The company could expend the contingent production allowances to meet their production
or importation needs in a timely manner. However, in the event that documentation submitted by the company does not
support the export for transformation or destruction, EPA will consider that the granting of the production allowances
never occurred, which may mean the company is in violation if they do not have sufficient production allowances for
the quantity of controlled substances produced. In making today's proposal, EPA also considered eliminating the
expenditure of production allowances for class I controlled substances to be exported to Parties of the Protocol
for transformation or destruction. Under this option, the production of all class I controlled substances explicitly
for transformation or destruction in the U.S. or in a Party after January 1, 1995, would not require the producer to
expend production allowances. The producer would need a certification of intent to transform or verification of
destruction. To ensure that the controlled substance is transformed or destroyed by the recipient in a Party country,
the Agency would require the exporter to include a certification of future transformation or destruction in the sales
contract. EPA seeks comments on today's proposal to allow a person to request production allowances for the export
of class I controlled substances to Parties for transformation or destruction. 



