 

(b) If a State seeks reimbursement for indirect costs, 
the State shall_

(1) Use the restricted indirect cost rate, computed under 
34 CFR 75.564, and approved by the Secretary under 34 CFR 75.561; and 

(2) Not charge as a direct cost any cost that qualifies as an indirect cost. 

(c) The direct costs of carrying out the activities described in paragraph (a) of this section include, but are not
limited to_

(1) The salary of State employees engaged in allowable activities; 

(2) Travel costs incurred_

(i) Consulting with institutions in developing standards and complaint procedures; and 

(ii) Reviewing referred institutions; 

(3) Training for_ 

(i) State employees to perform reviews of referred institutions; and 

(ii) Institutional and other personnel regarding the State review standards; 

(4) Contracting with private organizations, accrediting agencies, and peer review systems to carry out required
activities; and 

(5) Costs incurred by the State for administrative actions and legal proceedings.




(Authority: 20 U.S.C. 1099a1099a3) 



667.15 

Fiscal procedures and records. 



 (a) A State must account for the funds it received under this part in accordance with the procedures it uses to account
for the expenditure of its own funds and must keep fiscal and accounting records that support, on audit, its expenditure
of funds under this part. 

 (b) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (b)(2) of this section, the State must keep intact and accessible records relating
to its activities under this part for five years after the end of the period for which funds were provided. 

 (2) The State shall keep records on any claim or expenditure questioned on audit until any audit question is resolved.


(c) A State must have an audit performed of the SPRE's activities under this part at least once every two years and must
submit that audit to the Secretary. An audit conducted under the Single Audit Act satisfies this requirement.




(Authority: 20 U.S.C. 1099a1099a3) 



667.16 

Supplement, not supplant, requirement. 



 The Secretary reimburses a State for the costs of necessary SPRE activities which supplement, but do not supplant,
existing licensing or review functions conducted by the State.




(Authority: 20 U.S.C. 1099a2) 



Subpart C_State Review Standards, SPRE Reviews, and Termination of Institutional Participation. 



 667.21 

State review standards. 



(a) Each State participating under this part must develop standards, in consultation with institutions in the State,
under which the SPRE reviews referred institutions. The State-developed review standards must evaluate, with regard
to a referred institution_

(1) The extent to which the institution makes available to its students and prospective students its catalogs, admission
requirements, course outlines, tuition and fee schedules, refund policy, course cancellation policy, its rules
and regulations, and its enrollment agreement if appropriate; 

(2) Whether the institution's descriptions of its courses and programs are accurate; 

(3) Whether the institution has a method to assess that a student has the ability to complete successfully the educational
program for which he or she applies; 

(4) The extent to which the institution's method to assess that a student has the ability to complete successfully
the educational program for which he or she applies accurately assesses that ability as measured by the completion
rate of that program; 

(5) Whether the institution maintains and enforces standards relating to satisfactory progress; 

(6) Whether the institution maintains adequate student and other records; 





