 

Section 2 of the FMIA (21 U.S.C. 602) and section 2 of the PPIA (21 U.S.C. 451) state that unwholesome, adulterated,
or misbranded meat or meat food products and poultry products are injurious to the public welfare, destroy markets
for wholesome, not adulterated, and properly marked, labeled, and packaged products, and result in sundry losses
to producers and processors of meat and poultry products, as well as injury to consumers. Therefore, Congress has
granted the Secretary authority to regulate meat, meat food products, and poultry products to protect consumers'
health and welfare. Subsection 1(n)(12) of the FMIA (21 U.S.C. 601(n)(12)) and subsection 4 (h)(12) of the PPIA (21
U.S.C. 453(h)(12)) state that the term ``misbranded'' applies to any product if it fails to bear, directly thereon
or on its container, as the Secretary may be regulations prescribe, the inspection legend, and unrestricted by any
of the foregoing, such information as the Secretary may require in such regulations to assure that it will not have
false or misleading labeling and that the public will be informed of the manner of handling required to maintain the
article in a wholesome condition. Section 7(d) of the FMIA (21 U.S.C. 607(d)) states: ``No article subject to this
title shall be sold or offered for sale by any person, firm, or corporation, in commerce, under any name or other marking
or labeling which is false or misleading, or in any container of a misleading form or size, but established trade names
and other marking and labeling and containers which are not false or misleading and which are approved by the Secretary
are permitted.'' The PPIA contains similar language in section 8(c) (21 U.S.C. 457(c)).



Safe Handling Labeling Instructions



In 1972, the American Public Health Association, individual consumers, and six other public health and consumer
interest groups brought suit in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia against the U.S. Department of
Agriculture alleging that labels placed on meat and poultry products were false and misleading because they failed
to warn consumers against the dangers of foodborne illness caused by Salmonella and other bacteria in such products.
The Court of Appeals affirmed the District Court's order dismissing the action, and ruled that the Secretary of Agriculture
did not abuse his discretion by choosing to undertake a consumer education program instead of requiring labeling
instructions for meat and poultry products. Since that ruling, USDA has conducted a massive and increasingly targeted
food safety campaign to inform consumers about safe handling and cooking of meat and poultry products. FSIS has offered
a toll-free nationwide hotline, staffed by food safety specialists, and conducted campaigns, directed at such specialized
audiences as food handlers, institutions, health professionals, and at-risk populations, as well as food handlers
in the home. Additionally, FSIS has permitted the voluntary labeling of poultry products with safe handling instructions
since 1987. FSIS does not monitor participation in voluntary labeling; however, one trade association has said that
75 percent of its members offer handling instructions on their labels.



New Policy Direction



In recent years, FSIS has been aware that a growing percentage of the U.S. population consists of persons lacking experience
in food preparation and knowledge of safe food handling and storage methods. Studies of foodborne illness outbreaks
have repeatedly shown improper food handling to be the frequent cause of foodborne illnesses. Improper cooling of
cooked foods has been ranked as the leading factor. Other factors cited included inadequate cooking, cross-contamination,
and inadequate reheating.

Studies of consumer knowledge and practices indicate that a significant number lack basic food safety information
and skills, particularly with respect to the relationship between temperature and foodborne illness.

Information from the CDC revealed that: (1) Undercooking was a factor in 108 of 345 (31.3 percent) home outbreaks of
foodborne illness that occurred between 1973 and 1982 (data include all foods); and (2) cooking foods ahead, i.e.,
12 hours or more before serving, was a factor in 12.8 percent of the home outbreaks.

While the Agency has long been committed to a program of consumer education to help prevent foodborne illness, as exemplified
by its distribution of publications for consumers and its Meat and Poultry Hotline, it has become convinced of the
need for more direct methods of placing food safety information in the hands of consumers. Thus, Agency officials
in early January 1993 began to advocate in their speeches and writings that the mandatory safe handling instructions
on the labeling of meat and poultry products was a necessary component of a program to combat foodborne illness.

The Agency's new policy direction gained additional impetus following the January 1993 outbreaks of a severe foodborne
illness that led to four deaths among approximately 500 confirmed cases in Washington, Idaho, California, and Nevada.
The outbreaks were linked to the pathogenic bacterial strain 

E. coli

 0157:H7. Because most of the cases were attributed to undercooked hamburgers served at a fast-food restaurant chain,
Federal and local authorities have intensified their regulatory activities. In June and July of 1993, the Department
became aware of nine separate incidents where 

E. coli

 0157:H7 was the direct or suspected cause of illness or death. The incidents led the Department to conclude that it
was time to immediately require safe handling information on raw and partially cooked meat and poultry products.
On August 16, 1993, FSIS published in the 

Federal Register

 an interim rule (58 FR 43478) mandating safe handling instructions on all raw and partially cooked meat and poultry
product labeling. Also, FSIS established a permanent liaison position with the CDC. The responsibilities of this
position include monitoring and tracking all 

E. coli

 epidemics reported to the CDC. Preliminary data for 1993 from CDC indicates 17 reported clusters of 

E. coli

 0157:H7 infections. Many of these cases occurred after publication of the interim rule.

Several noteworthy developments in previously cited cases of foodborne illness and new incidents, not reported
in the prior rulemaking publication, which reinforce the exigent need for safe handling instructions are summarized
below:
 

