 

The statute allocates legal responsibility among the entities that compose the program integrity triad. While specific
statutory responsibilities for the three triad entities may overlap, when viewed as a whole the triad brings together
in a coordinated fashion three different but very important aspects of institutional review. Within this statutory
scheme, the Secretary has sought to assure that the gatekeeping system operates as efficiently as possible, with
maximum integration among the three triad entities and without unnecessary burden on postsecondary institutions.
In order to assist the Secretary in designing a final regulation that achieve these goals, the Secretary specifically
requests comment on the following questions: 

(1) In several areas, the statute specifically requires each triad entity to evaluate an institution under the same
or similar standards. For example, a SPRE and an accrediting agency may establish different standards for evaluating
the financial responsibility of an institution or for evaluating the success of an institution's educational program.
Thus, a reviewed institution would need to satisfy the SPRE's and the accrediting agency's standards even though
those standards address the same areas. How should final regulations be structured to both reduce the burden on institutions
and enable the triad entities to carry out effectively their statutory functions? 

(2) Should the final regulations be more explicit in identifying levels, characteristics, or definitions for any
of the assessment or review criteria that a triad entity is expected to consider in its evaluation of an institution?


Subpart 1 of part H creates a new program, the State Postsecondary Review Program, or SPRP, under which State oversight
of institutions participating in the Title IV, HEA programs is strengthened. Subpart 2 of part H establishes procedures
and criteria under which the Secretary recognizes an accrediting agency as a reliable authority as to the quality
of the education or training offered by institutions that the agency accredits. Lastly, Subpart 3 specifies the procedures
the Secretary uses to determine whether an institution meets the eligibility requirements and has the administrative
capacity and financial responsibility to administer the Title IV, HEA programs. 

Along with this Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, the Secretary publishes in the 

Federal Register

 the NPRM to implement the accrediting agency provisions in Subpart 2 of part H of the HEA. This provides interested
parties the opportunity to comment on the SPRP and accreditation NPRMs in a coordinated way. The Secretary also intends
to publish in the 

Federal Register

 a NPRM implementing subpart 3 of part H of the HEA before the date the proposed regulations for Subparts 1 and 2 of part
H of the HEA become final regulations. 

Under the SPRP, each State designates a single SPRE that reviews institutions participating in the Title IV, HEA programs
that are referred to the State for review by the Secretary under specific statutory provisions. 

The SPRE reviews referred institutions using standards that it must develop in consultation with institutions located
in the State. Areas that those standards must cover are also set forth in specific statutory provisions. Before a SPRE
may review an institution under those standards, the standards must be evaluated by the Secretary and not disapproved
by the Secretary. 

If a SPRE finds that an institution it reviews does not satisfy the State's review standards, the SPRE may require the
institution to take prompt actions to bring itself into compliance with the State's standards, or the SPRE may determine
that the institution should no longer participate in the 
Title IV, HEA programs. The Secretary recognizes that, in the former case, an institution may have cause for not meeting
the State's review standards. Therefore, the Secretary proposes that SPREs provide the institution the opportunity
to present compelling evidence that demonstrates that its failure to meet the State's review standards does not warrant
any further action by the SPRE. 

Where the SPRE determines that an institution should no longer participate in the Title IV, HEA programs, the SPRE
notifies the Secretary of that determination; and, as required under section 494C(h) of the HEA, the Secretary immediately
terminates the institution's participation in the Title IV, HEA programs. 




