 




<USBUREAU>National Institutes of Health</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Notice of Meetings of Panel</DOCTITLE>



Notice is hereby given of the first meeting of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Human Embryo Research Panel,
a panel of special consultants to the Advisory Committee to the Director (ACD), NIH, established to recommend guidelines
for Federal funding of human embryo research. The Panel's first meeting will be held February 23, 1994, from
9 a.m. to 5 p.m. on the 2nd, and 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on the 3rd. The meeting will be held at the Bethesda Marriott Hotel,
5151 Pooks Hill Road, Bethesda, Maryland. Dates of subsequent Panel meetings will be determined at the first meeting.

Until June 1993, Federal regulations governing research on human subjects (45 CFR part 46) required research involving
in vitro fertilization (IVF) to be reviewed by an Ethics Advisory Board (EAB). Because of the absence of an EAB since
1980, Federal funding of IVF protocols was not possible. With the enactment of the NIH Revitalization Act of 1993 (Pub.
L. 10343), the regulatory provision requiring EAB review of IVF proposals was nullified. As a result, IVF proposals,
as well as research involving human embryos that result from IVF or other sources, may now be considered for Federal
funding.

The NIH has received a number of applications for support in this area and in the related field of parthenogenesis.
However, before proceeding with the consideration of specific human embryo research proposals for funding, the
NIH must address the profound moral and ethical issues raised by the use of human embryos in research and develop guidelines
to govern the review and conduct of Federally-funded research. Panel members will be asked to consider various areas
of research involving the human embryo and provide advice as to those areas they view to be acceptable for Federal funding,
areas that warrant additional review, and areas that are unacceptable for Federal support. For those areas of research
considered acceptable for Federal funding, the Panel will be asked to recommend specific guidelines for the review
and conduct of this research. Ethical issues related to human germ-line gene modification are not within the Panel's
purview. The Panel's final report will be presented to the ACD for review.

The NIH invites public input into this process. Those who wish to share their views about Federal funding of human embryo
research may address the Panel during public comment periods that will be scheduled during each meeting. The public
comment period during the first meeting is scheduled to take place February 2 from 3 p.m. to 5 p.m. Those who wish to address
the Panel at this or subsequent meetings are asked to contact Ms. Peggy Schnoor, by telephoning 3014961454
or by sending a facsimile message to 3014020280 or 3014021759. Oral statements must not
exceed five minutes in length, and opportunities to present statements will be determined by the order in which requests
are received. Those who wish to present oral statements should forward a one-page summary of their remarks in advance
of the scheduled presentation date. Individuals and organizations may also submit written comments of any length
to the Panel. These should be forwarded to the NIH in care of Ms. Schnoor at 9000 Rockville Pike, Building 1, room 218,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The NIH will endeavor to provide seating for all members of the public who wish to attend the meetings. Individuals
are, however, asked to notify the NIH of their interest in attending by using the telephone or facsimile numbers listed
above. Individuals who require special accommodations are also asked to contact Ms. Schnoor at the above number.
General questions about the Panel or the first meeting should also be directed to Ms. Schnoor.

Future meetings of the Panel will be announced in this publication.




Dated: January 10, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Harold Varmus,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Director, NIH.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 941017 Filed 11394; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 414001M
</BILLING>



