 




<RINDOCK>[CDC464] </RINDOCK>



<DOCTITLE>Announcement of a Cooperative Agreement to the World Health Organization </DOCTITLE>



Summary 


The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), announces the availability of funds for fiscal year (FY) 1994
for a sole source cooperative agreement with the World Health Organization (WHO) to conduct polio surveillance,
provide technical assistance in developing a laboratory network, provide programmatic assistance to carry out
operational and applied research, and to provide oral polio vaccine for supplemental immunization activities for
the global initiative to eradicate polio by the year 2000. Approximately $1.2 to $1.6 million will be available in
FY 1994 to support this project. It is expected the award will begin on July 1, 1994, for a 12-month budget period within
a 3-year project period. The funding estimate is subject to change. Continuation awards within the project period
will be made on the basis of satisfactory progress and availability of funds.

The purpose of this cooperative agreement is to support the polio eradication initiative by providing technical,
laboratory, programmatic consultants, operational and applied research, oral polio vaccine, and other services,
as needed, to the governments of polio endemic countries. Specific activities should be in the areas of polio surveillance
to define and assess the polio endemic countries, including surveillance for acute flaccid paralysis, development
of a laboratory network for poliovirus isolation in developing countries, and assistance to foreign governments
in planning and implementing national immunization days and other polio eradication activities.

CDC will collaborate by providing (1) technical assistance to WHO in support of activities implemented under this
agreement; (2) programmatic support to national governments for planning, implementing, and evaluating polio
eradication activities; (3) technical training, support, and consultation to expert staff hired by WHO to assist
in the polio eradication initiative; (4) expertise for the surveillance to assess, define, and prioritize the assistance
needs of polio endemic countries and assist in the development of a laboratory network for poliovirus isolation in
developing countries; and (5) other technical assistance in support of this project, as needed.

The Public Health Service (PHS) is committed to achieving the health promotion and disease prevention objectives
of Healthy People 2000, a PHS-led national activity to reduce morbidity and mortality and improve the quality of life.
This announcement is related to the priority area of Immunization and Infectious Diseases. (For ordering a copy of
``Healthy People 2000,'' see the Section ``Where To Obtain Additional Information.'')


Authority


This program is authorized under sections 301 and 307 of the Public Health Service Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 241 and
242

l

, and section 104 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, 22 U.S.C. 2151b. 


Smoke-Free Workplace 


The Public Health Service strongly encourages all grant recipients to provide a smoke-free workplace and promote
the non-use of all tobacco products. This is consistent with the PHS mission of promoting the protection and advancement
of an individual's physical and mental health.


Eligible Applicant


Eligibility for assistance is limited to the World Health Organization for this project. No other applications are
solicited. The program announcement and application kit have been sent to WHO.
WHO is the most appropriate and qualified agency to conduct the activities under this cooperative agreement because:
A. WHO has the lead responsibility among the United Nations organizations for implementing the World Health Assembly
resolution of 1988 calling for the global eradication of polio by the year 2000. WHO is the only organization with a
worldwide mandate for the control and prevention of vaccine preventable diseases. 
B. The proposed program is strongly supportive of and directly related to the achievement of WHO and CDC/National
Immunization Program objectives for the control and prevention of vaccine preventable diseases. 
C. WHO, together with UNICEF, the Pan American Health Organization, Rotary International, and CDC, is a member of
the Polio Eradication Network, an organization formed to increase support and visibility for the polio eradication
initiative.


Executive Order 12372 Review


The application is not subject to review under Executive Order 12372, Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs.


Public Health System Reporting Requirements


This program is not subject to the Public Health System Reporting Requirements. 


Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Number 


The Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Number for this program is 93.185, Immunization Research, Demonstration,
Public 
Information, and Education, Training, and Clinical Skills Improvement Projects. 


Other Requirements 


Human Subjects 


If any of the proposed projects involve research on human subjects, the applicant must comply with the Department
of Health and Human Services Regulations, 45 CFR Part 46, regarding the protection of human subjects. Assurance must
be provided to demonstrate that the project will be subject to initial and continuing review by an appropriate institutional
review committee. The applicant will be responsible for providing assurance in accordance with the appropriate
guidelines and form provided in the application kit. 


Where to Obtain Additional Information 


If you are interested in obtaining additional information regarding this project, please refer to Announcement
464 and contact Carole J. Tully, Grants Management Specialist, Grants Management Branch, Procurement and Grants
Office, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 255 East Paces Ferry Road, NE., room 300, Mailstop E09,
Atlanta, GA 30305, telephone (404) 8426880. 
A copy of ``Healthy People 2000'' (Full Report, Stock No. 017001004740) or ``Healthy People
2000'' (Summary Report, Stock No. 017001004731) referenced in the ``Summary'' may be obtained
through 
the Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 204029325, telephone (202)
7833238. 




Dated: May 27, 1994.



<SIGNER>
Ladene H. Newton,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Associate Director for Management 
and Operations, 
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC).


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9413494 Filed 6294; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416318P
</BILLING>


