 

Background


The Class B airspace area (Terminal Control Area prior to September 16, 1993) program was developed to reduce the midair
collision potential in the congested airspace surrounding airports with high density air traffic by providing an
area in which all aircraft will be subject to certain operating rules and equipment requirements. The density of traffic
and the types of operations being conducted in the airspace surrounding major terminals increase the probability
of midair collisions. In 1970, an extensive study found that the majority of midair collisions occurred between a
general aviation (GA) aircraft and an air carrier, military or another GA aircraft. The basic causal factor common
to these conflicts was the mix of uncontrolled aircraft operating under visual flight rules (VFR) and controlled
aircraft operating under instrument flight rules (IFR). Class B airspace areas provide a method to accommodate the
increasing number of IFR and VFR operations. The regulatory requirements of Class B airspace area afford the greatest
protection for the greatest number of people by giving air traffic control (ATC) increased capability to provide
aircraft separation service, thereby minimizing the mix of controlled and uncontrolled aircraft. To date, the FAA
has established a total of 29 Class B airspace area designations. The FAA is proposing to take action to modify or implement
additional Class B airspace area, to provide greater protection of air traffic in the airspace regions most commonly
used by passenger-carrying aircraft.


Pre-NPRM Public Input


The North Carolina State Department of Transportation, Division of Aviation, coordinated the establishment and
oversight of an ad hoc committee to develop a viable Class B airspace area design recommendation. Representation
from airport users and local aviation groups, including those that participated in the original Terminal Control
Area ad hoc committee, was solicited and attained. Local control tower facility representatives provided technical
input to the ad hoc committee. The committee's comments and recommendations were forwarded to the FAA's Southern
Region for evaluation, on February 19, 1992, for review and incorporated into the proposed Charlotte, Class B airspace
area modification. As announced in the 

Federal Register

, 57 FR 14745, April 22, 1992, pre-NPRM airspace meetings were held on June 17 and 18, 1992, at the North Carolina Air
National Guard Dining Facility, to allow other local interested airspace users an opportunity to provide input to
the proposed Charlotte, Class B airspace area modification. As a result of those informal airspace meetings, seven
letters were received from aviation organizations, soaring organizations and private citizens. The ad hoc committee
report, letters submitted to the FAA, and the minutes of both airspace meetings are contained in the FAA airspace docket.
The context of these letters, airspace meeting comments/concerns, and the FAA's findings, are summarized as follows:



1. Some persons were disappointed because they were not selected to be members of the ad hoc committee. The ad hoc committee
members were chosen by the committee chairman, Mr. J.L. Bondurant, under the oversight of the North Carolina State
DOT, Aviation Division. All significant aviation interests were represented by the committee. Any persons who did
not participate on the committee had the opportunity during this phase to express their views for the FAA's consideration.
2. The Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association (AOPA) requested that the Class B airspace area altitude be lowered
from 10,000 feet MSL to 8,000 feet MSL. The FAA rejected that proposal. Lowering the ceiling of the Class B airspace
area would encourage VFR flight over the Class B airspace area between 8,000 feet MSL and 10,000 feet MSL, especially
east/west operations. Should VFR pilots begin operating in that area, they would encounter heavy arrival and departure
traffic within 15 miles of the Charlotte/Douglas International Airport. Traffic routinely descends on the downwind
leg of the landing pattern, from altitudes above 8,000 feet MSL. Additionally, VFR pilots would conflict with traffic
on VOR Federal Airway V37, a route commonly used for IFR operations into and out of the Class B airspace area.
3. One commenter stated that lowering the floor of the Class B airspace area from 6,000 feet MSL to 3,600 feet MSL within
the 20 to 25 mile segment north and south of the airport would allow placement of aircraft at a dangerously low altitude
a long way from the runway. Aircraft outside the existing Class B airspace area are at these altitudes because of the
requirements necessary to conduct simultaneous instrument approaches to parallel runways within the Class B airspace
area. Under those approach procedures, it is not unusual or dangerous to have aircraft at these altitudes and distances
on the final approach course.
4. Members of the Soaring Association proposed that the Class B airspace area not be amended until actual air traffic
growth warrants further change. They also questioned whether more airspace would increase the airport's ability
to handle a higher number of aircraft. The decision to propose modifying the Class B airspace area was based on the current
air traffic growth and operational requirements (See discussion of specific growth figures later in this document).
At times, aircraft cross the boundary of the Class B airspace area during simultaneous instrument approaches to parallel
runways. Since modification is being pursued at this time for operational reasons, it is desirable for the FAA to consider
all factors, including future airport and air traffic growth forecast.
5. Several commenters noted that other existing Class B airspace areas have primary airports with runway configurations
similar to Charlotte/Douglas International, and the Class B airspace area does not extend beyond 20 miles in any direction.
The commenters stated that, because the runway configuration of the Charlotte/Douglas International Airport is
similar to those other primary airports, the FAA's proposal, which includes Class B airspace area out to 30 miles,
is inappropriate. The FAA's responsibility is to manage effectively the airspace surrounding the Charlotte area,
while providing the requisite level of safety. Comparison with other airports is generally inappropriate, since
no two airports are the same. Each Class B airspace area must be site specific; and to meet the operational needs of the
Charlotte area, the Charlotte Class B airspace area is required to extend out to 30 nautical miles.
6. The Chester Soaring Association questioned the need to modify the airspace to accommodate simultaneous instrument
approaches that occur less than 50 percent of the time. Regardless of the percentage of use, it is unacceptable to the
FAA to have any aircraft routinely vectored beyond the boundaries of the Class B airspace area into airspace where
aircraft separation is not provided to all aircraft.


