 

&bull;Asbestos/cement (A/C) pipe installation; 

&bull;Asbestos/cement (A/C) sheet installation; 

&bull;Floor products installation; 

&bull;Plumbing repairs in commercial/residential buildings; 

&bull;Floor repairs in commercial/residential buildings; 

&bull;Gasket removal and installation in general industry; and 

&bull;Pipe insulation repairs in general industry. 

For the remaining activities, respiratory protection was necessary in order to reach the current PEL of 0.2 
f/cc. OSHA assumed that employers would choose the most cost-effective approach and supply their workers with half-mask
supplied-air respirators (or full-facepiece supplied-air respirators for asbestos removal projects) in order
to eliminate the need for exposure monitoring [OSHA, 1986]. Thus, in the 1986 RIA, OSHA assumed that workers in many
higher-risk construction activities would be provided supplied-air respirators. 

OSHA now believes that the prior analytical assumption of widespread use of supplied-air respirators may not be consistent
with field experience. OSHA believes that supplied-air respirators are used in many construction activities_particularly
removal and demolition, where exposures tend to be highest. For other construction activities where peak exposures
are generally lower and episodic, many abatement and maintenance personnel appear to be complying with the current
standard using a combination of engineering controls, work practices and lighter respirators. 

Construction employers also appear to meet the requirements for daily monitoring (1926.58(f)(3) in the current
standard) by compiling historical exposure data documenting compliance with the current OSHA PEL during representative
projects. OSHA anticipates that some construction employers will meet the requirements of revised Paragraph (f)
Exposure assessments and monitoring, through the use of selective initial monitoring to establish an historical
exposure data record, which can form the basis for achieving all necessary requirements of the standard. Where exposures
may exceed levels documented by objective data, additional respiratory protection may be necessary, and is judged
by OSHA to be technologically feasible based on field experience and information in the rulemaking record [Corn,
1992; HEIAR, 1992]. 

As in the standard for general industry, OSHA is proposing the prohibition of high-speed sanding and the use of highly
abrasive pads during asbestos floor tile work. In CONSAD's 1985 study [CONSAD 1985] and in OSHA's 1986 RIA [OSHA, 1986],
exposures during floor tile installation, removal, and sanding were reported to be generally below 
0.2 f/cc when the recommendations of the Resilient Floor Covering Institute were followed. These recommended practices
included wet sweeping and handling, and the prohibition of power sanding and blowing asbestos dust. OSHA estimated
current exposures in floor repair at 
0.024 f/cc under the assumption that the Institute's recommended practices have been adopted by a majority of establishments.
Therefore, the prohibition of high-speed sanding in the current proposal is not expected to significantly affect
floor repair. 

With the final PEL of 0.1 f/cc, additional respiratory protection may be necessary. Specifically, some projects
involving A/C pipe installation, A/C sheet installation, floor removal, floor repair, large-scale gasket removal,
pipe repair, and custodial work in industrial, commercial and residential buildings would require the use of half-mask
respirators to meet the revised PEL. In addition, drywall demolition projects may need to upgrade their respiratory
protection to full-facepiece negative-pressure respirators to meet the lower permissible exposure limit. 

Assessing current respirator usage and predicted demand under the revised standard, OSHA concludes that nearly
all construction activities will require respiratory protection during at least part of the project-day in order
to comply with the 0.1 f/cc PEL. Based on the lower-bound exposure estimates provided in the literature and reported
in CONSAD [CONSAD, 1990, 1985], it appears that a variety of routine maintenance activities and some abatement jobs
may be able to achieve the proposed PEL of 0.1 f/cc without respirators. From its analysis of current exposures, OSHA
anticipates that only in small-scale gasket removal and installation will respiratory protection not be necessary
for most project-days. 

The other incremental controls necessary to comply with OSHA's final asbestos standard, include (depending upon
the construction activity): 

&bull;HEPA vacuums or HEPA vacuum/ventilation systems; 

&bull;Wet methods; 

&bull;Glove bags; 

&bull;Regulated areas (air-tight or demarcated with caution signs); 

&bull;Critical barriers; 

&bull;Protective disposable clothing; 

&bull;Impermeable drop cloths; 

&bull;Decontamination area (adjacent to regulated area or remote showers and changerooms); 

&bull;Lunch areas; 

&bull;Competent person supervision; 

&bull;Training; 

&bull;Medical exams; 

&bull;Recordkeeping (exposure assessment, medical exams and training); 

&bull;Notification of building owners and employees by contractors; 

&bull;Notification of contractors and building occupants by building owners; 





