 

c. Use RfDs, RfCs, or CSFs that are calculated by standard methods but not verified by the Agency. These values can be
found in a number of different types of Agency documents and EPA uses the following hierarchy when reviewing these
documents: Health Effects Assessment Summary Tables (HEAST); Human Health Assessment Group for Carcinogens; Health
Assessment Summaries (HEAs) and Health and Environmental Effects Profiles (HEEPs); and Health and Environmental
Effects Documents (HEEDs). 

d. Use RfDs or CSFs that are calculated by alternative methods, such as surrogate analysis, including structure activity
analysis, and toxicity equivalency. 

All HBLs and their bases for this listing determination are provided in a document entitled ``Dye and Pigment Waste
Listing Support Health Effects Background Document'' (RTI,1994), which can be found in the RCRA docket for this rule
at EPA Headquarters (see 

ADDRESSES 

section). 

Acute toxicity data such as lethal doses for the oral and dermal routes and lethal concentrations for the inhalation
route also were evaluated for all analytes in the record samples. These data also are presented in the Health Effects
Background Document prepared for this rule. 



Use of Metabolic Products 



There are three compounds commonly identified in the record samples for which EPA has found no reliable health effects
data. These compounds are: Acetoacet-

o

-anisidide (AAOA), acetoacet-

o

-toluidide (AAOT), and acetoacetanilide (AAA). Because of the lack of health effects data on these compounds, the
Agency explored the use of metabolic pathway information to develop toxicologic values. This approach involves
the use of health effects information for compounds expected to follow a similar metabolic pathway to those of the
three chemicals of concern to estimate toxicity. 

The metabolic pathways for the class of compounds identified as aromatic amines have been extensively studied, and
acetylation and N-hydroxylation have been identified as initial metabolic reactions of this class of compounds.
Using this information, the Agency proposes to use the toxicity of aniline to represent the toxicity of AAA and the
toxicity of 2-aminotoluene to represent the toxicity of AAOA and AAOT. The Agency has assumed a direct quantitative
relationship between the constituents of concern (

i.e.

, AAOA, AAOT, AAA) and these compounds (

i.e.

, aniline, 2-aminotoluene) that follow a similar metabolic route. 

In humans as much as 60 percent of aniline that is absorbed is oxidized in a dose-dependent manner to give 

o

- and 

p

-aminophenol, the first step in amide formation for this pathway. The metabolites of these products include acetylated
arylamines, and are responsible for the toxicity of aniline. 

Acetoacetanilide (AAA) is a structural analog of aniline and the metabolic pathways are expected to be similar. Since
the acetyl group is already part of AAA, initial acetylation may be considered complete. 

Because the metabolic conversions occur on a molar basis and the doses in laboratory studies are reported as parts
per million, the difference in molecular weight must be considered. Also, since only 60 percent of the aniline is expected
to be metabolized by the acetylation pathway and AAA is acetylated in its original form, the toxicity of AAA is expected
to be proportionally greater than the toxicity of aniline. Therefore, the HBL for AAA is estimated to be 0.003 mg/L
as compared to 0.006 mg/L for aniline. 

Acetoacet-

o

-toluidide (AAOT), and acetoacet-

o

-anisidide (AAOA) are structural analogues of 2-aminotoluene, and the metabolic pathways are expected to be similar
to those previously described for aniline. Since the acetyl group is already part of AAOT and AAOA, initial acetylation
may be considered complete. 

Because the metabolic conversions occur on a molar basis and the doses in laboratory studies are reported as parts
per million, the difference in molecular weight must be considered. Also, since only 25 percent of the aminotoluene
is expected to be metabolized by the acetylation pathway, and AAOT and AAOA are acetylated in their original forms,
their toxicities are expected to be proportionally greater than the toxicity of 2-aminotoluene. Therefore, the
HBLs for AAOT and AAOA are estimated to be 0.00004 mg/L and 0.00005 mg/L, respectively, as compared to 0.0001 mg/L for
2-aminotoluene. 

2-Methoxyaniline also has been identified in the azo pigment wastestream. 2-Aminotoluene has been selected as the
surrogate for the toxicity of 2-methoxyaniline, because of the structural similarity of the compounds and the similarity
of metabolic mechanisms described above. The Agency requests comment on the use of metabolic pathway information
to determine health effects, and on alternate approaches. 



2. Coeluting Compounds 



A number of compounds detected in the wastes generated from dye and pigment manufacture coelute (

i.e., 

overlap) on the Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (GC/MS) curve, making it impossible to confirm the concentration
and, in some cases, the presence of the individual coeluting compounds. For example, the three constituents, 2- and
4-aminoaniline, and 2-methoxyaniline, coelute on the GC/MS curve. The coelution is such that the presence of 2- and
4-aminoaniline is indistinguishable, yet the presence of 2- methoxyaniline can be verified. This occurs because
the curve for 2-methoxyaniline contains an extra peak in addition to the peaks that overlap with 2- and 4-aminoaniline.
However, the individual contributions to the total concentration found in the waste can not be established. 

Because the contributions from the individual contaminants can not be established, the Agency assumed that any of
the three contaminants could be present at 100 percent of the concentration detected. The Agency evaluated all coeluting
compounds independently in the risk assessment and used the highest risk calculated for the compounds to ensure the
risk was not underestimated. 

However, 2-methoxyaniline is the expected contaminant in wastes generated from facilities that manufacture azo
pigments using acetoacet-

o

-anisidide (AAOA) as a raw material because 2-methoxyaniline is an expected hydrolysis product of AAOA (refer to
Section II.E, Wastewater Treatment Sludge from the Production of Azo Pigments, K162, for a discussion on the hydrolysis
of AAOA). Therefore, for wastes generated from the manufacture of azo pigments using AAOA as a raw material, the Agency
conducted the risk assessment for these coeluting compounds based on toxicity information for 2-methoxyaniline
(see discussion of metabolic products, above, and the Dye and Pigment Waste Listing Support Health Effects Background
Document for discussions on the toxicity surrogate used for 2-methoxyaniline). 




