 

8. Insurance Period



In accordance with the provisions under section 11 (Insurance Period) of the Common Crop Insurance Policy (457.8),
the calendar date for the end of the insurance period is the date immediately following planting as follows:



<TABLE>





1

1




(a) For corn insured as grain:


(1) Val Verde, Edwards, Kerr, Kendall, Bexar, Wilson, Karnes, Goliad, Victoria, and Jackson Counties, Texas, and
all Texas counties lying south thereof 
September 30.
(2) Clark, Cowlitz, Grays Harbor, Island, Jefferson, King, Kitsap, Lewis, Pierce, Skagit, Snohomish, Thurston,
Wahkiakum, and Whatcom Counties, Washington 
October 31.
(3) All other counties and states 
December 10.


(b) For corn insured as silage:


All states 
September 30.


(c) For grain sorghum:


(1) Val Verde, Edwards, Kerr, Kendall, Bexar, Wilson, Karnes, Goliad, Victoria, and Jackson Counties, Texas, and
all Texas counties lying south thereof 
September 30.
(2) All other Texas counties and all other states 
December 10.


(d) For soybeans: All states 
December 10.


</TABLE>



9. Causes of Loss


In accordance with the provisions of section 12 (Causes of Loss) of the Common Crop Insurance Policy (457.8),
insurance is provided only against the following causes of loss which occur within the insurance period:
(a) Adverse weather conditions;
(b) Fire;
(c) Insects, but not damage due to insufficient or improper application of pest control measures;
(d) Plant disease, but not damage due to insufficient or improper application of disease control measures;
(e) Wildlife;
(f) Earthquake;
(g) Volcanic eruption; or
(h) Failure of the irrigation water supply, if applicable, due to an unavoidable cause of loss occurring within the
insurance period.


10. Replanting Payments


(a) In accordance with section 13 (Replanting Payment) of the Common Crop Insurance Policy (457.8), replanting
payments for coarse grains are allowed if the coarse grains are damaged by an insurable cause of loss to the extent that
the remaining stand will not produce at least ninety percent (90%) of the production guarantee for the acreage and
it is practical to replant (see subsection 1.(m)).
(b) The maximum amount of the replanting per acre will be the lesser of twenty percent (20%) of the production guarantee
or the number of bushels (tons for corn insured as silage) set out herein, multiplied by your price election multiplied
by your insured share or the share determined under 10.(c), if applicable. The number of bushels or tons are 8 bushels
for corn grain; 1 ton for corn silage; 7 bushels for grain sorghum; and 3 bushels for soybeans.
(c) When more than one person insures the same crop on a share basis, a replanting payment based on the total shares insured
by us may be made to the insured person who incurs the total cost of replanting. Payment will be made in this manner only
if an agreement exists between the insured persons which:
(1) Requires one person to incur the entire cost of replanting; or
(2) Gives the right to all replanting payments to one person.
(d) When the insured crop is replanted using a practice that is uninsurable as an original planting, the liability
for the unit will be reduced by the amount of the replanting payment which is attributable to your share. The premium
amount will not be reduced.


11. Duties in the Event of Damage or Loss


(a) In accordance with the requirements of section 14 (Duties in the Event of Damage or Loss) of the Common Crop Insurance
Policy (457.8), if you initially discover damage to any insured crop within 15 days of or during harvest, you
must leave representative samples of the unharvested crop for our inspection. The samples must be at least 10 feet
wide and extend the entire length of each field in the unit, and must not be harvested or destroyed until the earlier
of our inspection or 15 days after harvest of the balance of the unit is completed.
(b) For any corn unit that has separate dates for the end of the insurance period (grain and silage):
(1) In lieu of paragraph 14.(a)(2) of the Common Crop Insurance Policy (457.8), if damage occurs:
(i) Before the earliest end of insurance period date (grain or silage), you must give us notice within 72 hours of your
initial discovery of damage (but not later than 15 days after that earliest end of insurance period date); or
(ii) If damage does not occur before the earliest end of insurance period date (grain or silage), but occurs before
the latest end of insurance period date (grain or silage), you must give notice within 72 hours of your initial discovery
of damage (but not later than 15 days after that latest end of insurance period date).
(2) In lieu of subsection 14.(c) of the Common Crop Insurance Policy (457.8), in addition to complying with
all other notice requirements, you must submit a claim for indemnity declaring the amount of your loss not later than
60 days after the latest date for the end of insurance period for the unit. This claim must include all the information
we require to settle the claim.


