 

(2) Demarcation. The regulated area shall be demarcated in any manner that minimizes the number of persons within
the area and protects persons outside the area from exposure to airborne concentrations of asbestos. Where critical
barriers or negative pressure enclosures are used, they may demarcate the regulated area. Signs shall be provided
and displayed pursuant to the requirements of paragraph (k)(6) of this section.

(3) Access. Access to regulated areas shall be limited to authorized persons and to persons authorized by the Act or
regulations issued pursuant thereto.

(4) Respirators. All persons entering a regulated area where employees are required pursuant to paragraph (h)(2)
of this section to wear respirators shall be supplied with a respirator selected in accordance with paragraph (h)(2)
of this section.

(5) Prohibited activities. The employer shall ensure that employees do not eat, drink, smoke, chew tobacco or gum,
or apply cosmetics in the regulated area.

(6) Competent Persons. The employer shall ensure that all asbestos work performed within regulated areas is supervised
by a competent person, as defined in paragraph (b) of this section. The duties of the competent person are set out in
paragraph (o) of this section.

(f) Exposure assessments and monitoring_(1) General monitoring criteria. (i) Each employer who has a workplace
of work operation where exposure monitoring is required under this section shall perform monitoring to determine
accurately the airborne concentrations of asbestos to which employees may be exposed.

(ii) Determinations of employee exposure shall be made from breathing zone air samples that are representative of
the 8-hour TWA and 30-minute short-term exposures of each employee.

(iii) Representative 8-hour TWA employee exposure shall be determined on the basis of one or more samples representing
full-shift exposure for employees in each work area. Representative 30-minute short-term employee exposures shall
be determined on the basis of one or more samples representing 30 minute exposures associated with operations that
are most likely to produce exposures above the excursion limit for employees in each work area.

(2) Initial Exposure Assessment. (i) Each employer who has a workplace or work operation covered by this standard
shall ensure that a ``competent person'' conducts an exposure assessment immediately before or at the initiation
of the operation to ascertain expected exposures during that operation or workplace.

The assessment must be completed in time to comply with requirements which are triggered by exposure data or the lack
of a ``negative exposure assessment,'' and to provide information necessary to assure that all control systems planned
are appropriate for that operation and will work properly.

(ii) Basis of Initial Exposure Assessment: The initial exposure assessment shall be based on data derived from the
following sources: (A) If feasible, the employer shall monitor employees and base the exposure assessment on the
results of exposure monitoring which is conducted pursuant to the criteria in paragraph (f)(2)(iii) of this section.

(B) In addition, the assessment shall include consideration of all observations, information or calculations which
indicate employee exposure to asbestos, including any previous monitoring conducted in the workplace, or of the
operations of the employer which indicate the levels of airborne asbestos likely to be encountered on the job. However,
the assessment may conclude that exposures are likely to be consistently below the PELs only as a conclusion of a ``negative
exposure assessment'' conducted pursuant to (f)(2)(iii) of this section.

(C) For Class I asbestos work, until the employer conducts exposure monitoring and documents that employees on that
job will not be exposed in excess of the PELs, or otherwise makes a negative exposure assessment pursuant to paragraph
(f)(2)(iii) of this section, the employer shall presume that employees are exposed in excess of the TWA and excursion
limit.

(iii) Negative Exposure Assessment: For any one specific asbestos job which will be performed by employees who have
been trained in compliance with the standard, the employer may demonstrate that employee exposures will be below
the PELs by data which conform to the following criteria; 
(A) Objective data demonstrating that the product or material containing asbestos minerals or the activity involving
such product or material cannot release airborne fibers in concentrations exceeding the TWA and excursion limit
under those work conditions having the greatest potential for releasing asbestos; or 
(B) Where the employer has monitored prior asbestos jobs for the PEL and the excursion limit within 12 months of the
current or projected job, the monitoring and analysis were performed in compliance with the asbestos standard in
effect; and the data were obtained during work operations conducted under workplace conditions ``closely resembling''
the processes, type of material, control methods, work practices, and environmental conditions used and prevailing
in the employer's current operations, the operations were conducted by employees whose training and experience
are no more extensive than that of employees performing the current job, and these data show that under the conditions
prevailing and which will prevail in the current workplace there is a high degree of certainty that employee exposures
will not exceed the TWA and excursion limit; or 
(C) The results of initial exposure monitoring of the current job made from breathing zone air samples that are representative
of the 8-hour TWA and 30-minute short-term exposures of each employee covering operations which are most likely during
the performance of the entire asbestos job to result in exposures over the PELs.

(3) Periodic monitoring. (i) Class I and II operations. The employer shall conduct daily monitoring that is representative
of the exposure of each employee who is assigned to work within a regulated area who is performing Class I or II work,
unless the employer pursuant to (f)(2)(iii) of this section, has made a negative exposure assessment for the entire
operation.

(ii) All operations under the standard other than Class I and II operations. The employer shall conduct periodic monitoring
of all work where exposures are expected to exceed a PEL, at intervals sufficient to document the validity of the exposure
prediction.

(iii) Exception: When all employees required to be monitored daily are equipped with supplied-air respirators operated
in the positive-pressure mode, the employer may dispense with the daily monitoring required by this paragraph. However,
employees performing Class I work using a control method which is not listed in paragraph (g)(4) (i), (ii), or (iii)
of this section or using a modification of a listed control method, shall continue to be monitored daily even if they
are equipped with supplied-air respirators.

(4) (i) Termination of monitoring. If the periodic monitoring required by paragraph (f)(3) of this section reveals
that employee exposures, as indicated by statistically reliable measurement, are below the permissible exposure
limit and excursion limit the employer may discontinue monitoring for those employees whose exposures are represented
by such monitoring.

(ii) Additional monitoring. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (f) (2) and (3), and (f)(4) of this section,
the employer shall institute the exposure monitoring required under paragraph (f)(3) of this section whenever there
has been a change in process, control equipment, personnel or work practices that may result in new or additional exposures
above the permissible exposure limit and/or excursion limit or when the employer has any reason to suspect that a change
may result in new or additional exposures above the permissible exposure limit and/or excursion limit. Such additional
monitoring is required regardless of whether a ``negative exposure assessment'' was previously produced for a specific
job.

(5) Observation of monitoring. (i) The employer shall provide affected employees and their designated representatives
an opportunity to observe any monitoring of employee exposure to asbestos conducted in accordance with this section.

(ii) When observation of the monitoring of employee exposure to asbestos requires entry into an area where the use
of protective clothing or equipment is required, the observer shall be provided with and be required to use such clothing
and equipment and shall comply with all other applicable safety and health procedures.

(g) Methods of compliance_(1) Engineering controls and work practices for all operations covered by this section.
The employer shall use the following engineering controls and work practices in all operations covered by this section,
regardless of the levels of exposure: 

