 


(1) Deer and willow flycatcher protection and management_Reduce cattle grazing effects on key deer and willow flycatcher
habitat by changing season of use and number of cattle.


(2) Intensive range management_Control cattle utilization and provide additional return of organic matter to the
riparian and meadow system by using a rest rotation strategy.


(2A) Intensive range management with riparian area mitigation_Same grazing strategy as Alternative 2 except it
adjusts cattle numbers and/or season of use to protect riparian areas.



(3) Riparian and wildlife protection by short-term rest_Minimum level management strategy. A non-use period for
entire allotment.



(4) Intensive herding with emphasis on specialized monitoring training for permittees_Emphasizes a greater partnership
role and Forest Service and Permittee by having the permittee conduct monitoring of cattle utilization.



(5) Long term rest_No grazing would be allowed for five years, long term rest (5 years) of the allotment. Other uses
would continue.




Public Involvement




The public will be invited to participate in the scoping process, review of the draft environmental impact statement
and two public meetings. Initial comments are now being excepted through September 26 from those who wish to participate.
The first public meeting will be September 7, 1994, 7PM at the Clovis Memorial Building located at the corner of 5th
and Hughs Streets in Clovis, California. The second meeting will depend on the progress of the analysis and will be
announced at a latter date in the Fresno Bee newspaper.


Estimated release of the draft environmental impact statement for public comment will be on April of 1995. The comment
period on the draft environmental impact statement will be 45-days from the date the Environmental Protection Agency
publishes the notice of availability in the 

Federal Register

. After the comment period ends, the comments will be analyzed and considered by the Forest Service in preparing the
final EIS. As a result, the final environmental impact statement should be ready for release in September of 1995.


The Forest Service believes, at this early stage, it is important to give reviewers notice of several court rulings
related to public participation in the environmental review process. First, reviewers of draft environmental impact
statements must structure their participation in the environmental review of the proposal so that it is meaningful
and alerts an agency to the reviewer's position and contentions. 

Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp. v. NRDC,

 435 U.S. 519, (1978). Also, environmental objections that could be raised at the draft environmental impact statement
stage but that are not raised until after completion of the final environmental impact statement may be waived or dismissed
by the courts. 

City of Angoon v. Hodel,

 803 F.2d 1016, 1022 (9th Cir. 1986) and 

Wisconsin Heritage, Inc. v. Harris,

 490 F. Supp. 1334, 1338 (E.D. Wis. 1980). Because of these court rulings, it is very important that those interested
in this proposed action participate by the close of the 30 day comment period (ending on the 26th of September) so that
substantive comments and objections are made available to the Forest Service at a time when it can meaningfully consider
them and respond to them in the final environmental impact statement.



To assist the Forest Service in identifying and considering issues and concerns on the proposed action, comments
on the draft environmental impact statement should be as specific as possible. It is also helpful if comments refer
to specific pages or chapters of the draft statement. Comments may also address the adequacy of the draft environmental
impact statement or the merits of the alternatives formulated and discussed in the Statement. Reviewers may wish
to refer to the Council on Environmental Quality Regulations for implementing the procedural provisions of the National
Environmental Policy Act at 40 CFR 1503.3 in addressing these points.





Dated: August 25, 1994.



<SIGNER>

James L. Boynton,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>

Forest Supervisor, Sierra National Forest.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9421480 Filed 83094; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 341011M
</BILLING>


