 

(vi) If the controlled substance is destroyed, the efficiency 
of the destruction process. 
(2) Until January 1, 1996, for all class I controlled 
substances, except Group VI, and until January 1, 2001, for class 
I, Group VI, the Administrator will review the information and 
documentation submitted under paragraph (e)(1) of this section 
and will assess the quantity of class I controlled substance that 
the documentation and information verifies was transformed or 
destroyed. The Administrator will issue the person production 
allowances equivalent to the controlled substances that the 
Administrator determines were transformed or destroyed. For 
controlled substances completely destroyed under this rule, the 
Agency will grant allowances equal to 100 percent of volume 
intended for destruction. For those controlled substances 
destroyed at less than a 98 percent destruction efficiency, the 
Agency will grant allowances commensurate with that percentage of 
destruction efficiency that is actually achieved. The grant of 
allowances will be effective on the date that the notice is 
issued. 
(3) Until January 1, 1996, for all class I controlled 
substances, except Group VI, and until January 1, 2001, for class 
I, Group VI, if the Administrator determines that the request for 
production allowances does not satisfactorily substantiate that 
the person transformed or destroyed controlled substances as 
claimed, or that modified allowances were not expended, the 
Administrator will issue a notice disallowing the request for 
additional production allowances. Within ten working days after 
receipt of notification, the person may file a notice of appeal, 
with supporting reasons, with the Administrator. The 
Administrator may affirm the disallowance or grant an allowance, 
as she/he finds appropriate in light of the available evidence. 
If no appeal is taken by the tenth day after notification, the 
disallowance will be final on that day. 
(f) Until January 1, 1996, for all class I controlled 
substances, except Group VI, and until January 1, 2001, for class 
I, Group VI, a person may obtain production allowances for that 
controlled substance equal to the amount of that controlled 
substance produced in the United States that was exported to be 
transformed or destroyed within a Party in the cases where 
production allowances were expended to produce such substance in 
accordance with the provisions of this paragraph. 
(1) Until January 1, 1996, for all class I controlled 
substances, except Group VI, and until January 1, 2001, for class 
I, Group VI, a person must submit a request for production 
allowances that includes the following: 
(i) The identities and addresses of the exporter and the 
recipient of the exports; 
(ii) The exporter's Employer Identification Number; 
(iii) The names and telephone numbers of contact persons for 
the exporter and the recipient; 
(iv) The quantity and type of controlled substances 
exported; 
(v) The source of the controlled substance and the date 
purchased; 
(vi) The date on which, and the port from which, the 
controlled substances were exported from the United States or its 
territories; 
(vii) The country to which the controlled substances were 
exported; 
(viii) The bill of lading and the invoice indicating the net 
quantity of controlled substances shipped and documenting the 
sale of the controlled substances to the purchaser for either 
transformation or destruction; 
(ix) The commodity code of the controlled substance 
exported. 
(x) Written statement from the producer that the controlled 
substance was produced with expended allowances. 
(2) Until January 1, 1996, for all class I controlled 
substances, except Group VI, and until January 1, 2001, for class 
I, Group VI, the Administrator will review the information and 
documentation submitted under paragraph (f)(1) of this section 
and will assess the quantity of class I controlled substance that 
the documentation and information verifies was exported to be 
transformed or destroyed. The Administrator will issue the 
person production allowances equivalent to the controlled 
substances that the Administrator determines were exported to be 
transformed or destroyed. The Agency will grant allowances equal 
to 100 percent of volume intended for destruction or 
transformation. The grant of allowances will be effective on the 
date that the notice is issued. 
(3) Until January 1, 1996, for all class I controlled 
substances, except Group VI, and until January 1, 2001, for class 
I, Group VI, if the Administrator determines that the 
documentation for production allowances does not satisfactorily 
substantiate that the person exported for transformation or 
destruction as claimed, the Administrator will issue a notice 
disallowing the request for additional production allowances. 
Within ten working days after receipt of notification, the person 
may file a notice of appeal, with supporting reasons, with the 
Administrator. The Administrator may affirm the disallowance or 
grant an allowance, as she/he finds appropriate in light of the 
available evidence. If no appeal is taken by the tenth day after 
notification, the disallowance will be final on that day. 
(g) Effective January 1, 1996, and until January 1, 2000, a 
person may obtain destruction or transformation credits for a 
class I controlled substance (except class I, Group VI) equal to 
the amount of that controlled substance produced in the United 
States that was destroyed or transformed within the United States 
in cases where the controlled substance was produced for an 
emissive use in accordance with the provisions of this subpart, 
subtracting an offset of 15 percent. 
(1) Effective January 1, 1996, and until January 1, 2000, a 
person must submit a request for destruction or transformation 
credits that includes the following:


