 

14. Section 1924.13(e)(1)(v)(J) 





Comment:

 There was agreement that FmHA implement these new forms. One respondent suggested that more specific requirements
be added such as years in business, work performed other than on FmHA-financed. 



FmHA response:

 The new Form FmHA 194431 will require the entity to disclose number of years in business. We do not feel that identification
of the work performed on other than FmHA-financed projects is necessary since the entity is certifying that it is an
on-going business. 



15. Section 1924.13(e)(1)(vii)(B)(

1

) and 1924.13(e)(2)(iii)(A) 





Comment:

 One respondent expressed an opinion that this section will eliminate the smaller developers. There was some feeling
that this would discourage the participation of owner-builders or that it will cause undue delay in the processing
of the preapplication. One respondent recommended that the determination of whether to grant an exception to competitive
bidding be made at the application stage rather than at the preapplication stage. One respondent misinterpreted
this section to mean competitive bids would be granted rather than the negotiated contracts. 



FmHA response:

 The only new language added to this section requires that FmHA document, in writing, the examination required prior
to the State Director granting an exception to competitive bidding. We do not feel that small developers are any more
at risk now than before the change since the requirement is not new to this revision. FmHA agrees that the determination
of whether to grant an exception to competitive bidding be made during the application stage and have changed the language
to reflect this requirement. The correct meaning of this section is that negotiated contracts may be allowed once
the State Director has determined all requirements for granting an exception to competitive bidding have been met.




16. Section 1924.13(e)(2)(i)(G) 





Comment:

 One respondent wanted to know under what circumstances will cost estimation services be required and asked where
else in the regulation this subject is discussed. Another respondent raised issues which appear to be unrelated to
this section and we could not determine to which section the comment referred. Other comments pertain to the deletion
of cost certification fees which was previously discussed under 1924.13(e)(1)(iv). 



FmHA response:

 The existing regulation contained a provision for cost estimation services to be used if FmHA did not agree with the
owner-builder's estimate. This was seldom, if ever, imposed. Our recent test of using estimating services proved
to be unreliable and inconsistent. The reference to cost estimation has been removed from the regulation. 



17. Section 1924.13(e)(2)(iv) 





Comment:

 One respondent suggested that allowances for general overhead, general requirements, and a builder's profit be
based on a regional cost rather than on a State average. 



FmHA response:

 This section states that the amounts may be determined by local investigation and also from HUD data for the area. It
does not mention a State average. 



18. This Respondent Refers to 1924.13(e)(1)(vii)(D)



There is no such section in FmHA Instruction 1924A. 



19. Section 1924.13(e)(2)(viii) 





Comment:

 One respondent asked if the requirement that projects have their costs ``audited by FmHA'' refers to cost certification
contracted by FmHA, OIG or other FmHA audit. Another respondent points out that this section contains a cost certification
cutoff for projects of $350,000 or more and expresses an opinion that there should be no difference between identity
of interest and owner-builder. One respondent points out that a FmHA 192413 is mandatory for all loans of over
$350,000 and that if the loan is publicly bid this form should not be mandatory. 



FmHA response:

 The reference to ``audited by FmHA'' falls within the same provision that was discussed earlier concerning FmHA contracting
for all cost certifications. The respondent is correct in his observation concerning the $350,000 cutoff for owner-builders.
All owner-builders are identity of interest entities which automatically require a cost certification. The reference
to $350,000 has been removed from this section. FmHA regulation 1944E now requires that all applicants submit
Form FmHA 192413 to facilitate the tracking of line item costs in the Agency's upcoming computerized cost tracking
system. This applies to all applicants regardless of whether or not an identity of interest is involved. 



20. Section 1924.13(e)(2)(viii)(B) 





Comment:

 One respondent suggested that further clarification be added to the section regarding amounts for general overhead,
general requirements, and builder's profit as being treated as individual and separate line items amounts or whether
all three should be combined, thus eliminating the need for Administrative Notice explanation. Another comment
did not appear to pertain to this section. 


