 

In the Benzene decision, the Supreme Court indicated when a reasonable person might consider the risk significant
and take steps to decrease it. The Court stated:

 

It is the Agency's responsibility to determine in the first instance what it considers to be a ``significant'' risk.
Some risks are plainly acceptable and others are plainly unacceptable. If, for example, the odds are one in a billion
that a person will die from cancer by taking a drink of chlorinated water, the risk clearly could not be considered significant.
On the other hand, if the odds are one in a thousand that regular inhalation of gasoline vapors that are 2% benzene will
be fatal, a reasonable person might well consider the risk significant and take the appropriate steps to decrease
or eliminate it. (

IUD 

v. 

API, 

448 U. S. at 655). 



A. Environmental Tobacco Smoke


Two of the adverse health effects associated with exposure to ETS are lung cancer and heart disease (coronary heart
disease, excluding strokes). Clinically, lung cancer is almost always fatal. However, heart disease runs the gamut
from severe to disabling to fatal. Both of these diseases then constitute the type of ``material impairment of health
or functional capacity'' which the Act seeks to reduce or eliminate. Therefore a standard aimed at reducing the incidence
of these impairments is an appropriate exercise of the Secretary's regulatory authority. 
In the case before us the Agency estimates that there will be approximately between 144 and 722 cases of lung cancer
per year among nonsmoking American workers exposed to ETS in the workplace. When considered over a working lifetime,
this translates into an excess lung cancer rate in the workplace of one per thousand. As noted above, the Benzene court
clearly indicated that a risk of one in a thousand could be considered significant and that the Agency would be justified
in prescribing reasonable efforts to reduce such a risk. 
Therefore, the risk from lung cancer associated with worker exposure to ETS in the workplace meets the Benzene court's
characterization of what could be considered significant. 
In addition, in evaluating the significance of the risk posed by any particular workplace hazard, the Secretary is
entitled to take into consideration not only the rate of risk but the total number of workers exposed to such risk and
the absolute magnitude of effects. In this case, evidence in the record shows that approximately between 144 and 722
lung cancer deaths per year are attributable to ETS and that there are presently over 74 million nonsmoking American
workers exposed to ETS in their places of employment. On the basis of these data, it would also be reasonable to conclude
that Agency action is warranted to reduce this widespread and significant risk, although the Agency would reach this
conclusion even without the great magnitude of effects. 
As noted above, cancer is not the only serious adverse health effect associated with exposure to ETS. Preliminary
estimates indicate that the risk of mortality from heart disease due to ETS exposure is even greater than that of cancer.
The Agency estimates that there will be between 2,094 and 13,000 deaths from heart disease per year among nonsmoking
American workers exposed to ETS in the workplace. When considered over a working lifetime, this translates into an
excess death rate of approximately between 7 and 16 cases of heart disease per thousand attributed to workplace exposure
to ETS. Clearly, this risk is significant in itself and combined with the lung cancer risk, the significance of risk
is very great. 
The proposal seeks to protect nonsmoking employees from the hazards of exposure to ETS in the workplace. It does this
by prescribing the conditions under which employees would be allowed to smoke in the workplace, that is, only in separately
enclosed designated areas which are separately ventilated. No employee can be required to work in an area where there
will be contamination from ETS. This in OSHA's view reduces significant risk to only a small percentage of the current
risk. To the extent that there are failures of enforcement of the smoking limitation and of the ventilation system,
the risk will not be totally eliminated. Since there is no definition of, nor an established method for quantifying,
exposure, it is not possible to determine a ``dose limit'' that would eliminate significant risk. Even if that were
possible, it is not clear it would be the correct policy approach. 
29 CFR Part 1990_Identification, Classification and Regulation of Potential Occupational Carcinogens sets forth
certain procedures for regulating occupational carcinogens. Those procedures may not allow for the level of public
input and policy review that is appropriate for this rulemaking, involving many different types of health effects
and a broad range of employers and workers. Accordingly, the Assistant Secretary finds pursuant to 29 CFR Section
1911.4 that ``in order to provide greater procedural protections to interested persons or for other good cause consistent
with the applicable laws'' ``it is found necessary or appropriate'' to adopt different procedures here. 


B. Indoor Air Quality 


Poor indoor air quality creates a variety of material impairments of health, two aspects of which are Building-Related
Illness and Sick Building Syndrome. 
One of the most severe health effects associated with Building-Related Illness is legionellosis, a disease associated
with microbial contamination of water sources which is commonly found in the water present in heating and cooling
systems of buildings. Legionnaire's disease, caused by the 

Legionella 

organism, results in pneumonia which is fatal in approximately 20% of the cases. Even when not fatal, it is usually
very severe, requiring substantial treatment or hospitalization. As many as 5% of those exposed to 

Legionella 

will get sick

1

. Legionnaire's disease and other illnesses associated with microbial contamination due to poor indoor air quality
are serious health effects that constitute material impairment. Compliance with the indoor air quality provisions
set forth in the proposal will substantially reduce these illnesses. 


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


1

</FOOTNAME>
Raw figures from 1992 show approximately 1300 cases of Legionella reported although this is most certainly a gross
under-estimation of the scope of the problem, since the disease resembles others and is frequently misdiagnosed.

</FOOTNOTE>


There are numerous other adverse health effects such as nausea, dizziness, fatigue, pulmonary edema, asthma and
aggravation of existing cardiovascular disease, which have been associated with poor indoor air quality. Evidence
in the record indicates that between 20 and 30% of office buildings are ``sick'', having environments which may lead
to a variety of these effects. Unfortunately, quantitative data are not systematically available on all of these
effects. 
For purposes of risk evaluation, however, as explained more fully in the risk assessment discussion, the Agency has
primarily focussed on two health effects commonly associated with poor indoor air quality: upper respiratory symptoms
and severe headaches. The upper respiratory symptoms associated with poor indoor air quality (sick building syndrome)
include stuffy nose, runny nose, dry itchy eyes, nose and throat. For purposes of our evaluation, ``severe headaches''
are defined as those serious enough to require medical attention or restrict activity, but excludes migraines. 
Unlike lung cancer and heart disease (health effects associated with exposure to ETS), these effects will not lead
to death. There is no doubt, however, that OSHA does have the authority to regulate working conditions that lead to
the type of upper respiratory effects and severe headaches described herein.




