 

Paperwork Requirements



Manufacturers opting to apply ascorbic acid, erythorbic acid, citric acid, sodium ascorbate, or sodium citrate
to fresh beef and lamb cuts will be required to develop and maintain a partial quality control (PQC) program. FSIS will
receive, evaluate, and either approve or disapprove requests for such PQC programs. The PQC program will be placed
on file in the establishment, and be available to any duly authorized representative of the Secretary. The information
collection requirements contained in this final rule have been approved by the Office of Management and Budget under
approval number 05830087.



Background



Wilson Foods Petitions



On December 13, 1988, and October 24, 1991, Wilson Foods Corporation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, submitted petitions,
along with supporting technical data, to FSIS to permit the application of ascorbic acid, erythorbic acid, sodium
ascorbate, citric acid and sodium citrate, singly or in combination, to fresh beef cuts and fresh lamb cuts to delay
discoloration of the meat cuts.
<FOOTCITE>1</FOOTCITE>
 The intended effect of ascorbic acid, erythorbic acid, and sodium ascorbate is to serve as antioxidants; the intended
effect of citric acid and sodium citrate is to serve as sequestrants. The petitioner's data demonstrate that the required
amount to accomplish the intended effects, singly or in combination, would be at levels not to exceed 500 ppm or 1.8
milligrams (mg) per square inch of the product's surface of ascorbic acid, erythorbic acid, or sodium ascorbate,
and/or not to exceed 250 ppm or 0.9 mg per square inch of the product's surface of citric acid or sodium citrate. The data
submitted by the petitioner were the results of experiments on products which were packaged in a modified atmosphere
of carbon dioxide, oxygen, and nitrogen. It is the Agency's understanding that the benefits provided by the addition
of these substances occur regardless of packaging conditions. However, this rulemaking concerns the addition of
substances, rather than packaging gases, which are not a part of this rule.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
1

</FOOTNAME>
Copies of the petitions and supporting technical data are available for review in the FSIS Hearing Clerk's office.

</FOOTNOTE>


The petitioner's data further demonstrate that such treatments result in delaying undesirable discoloration of
the product for a period of time that does not exceed the product's microbiological shelf life. Fresh beef cuts and
fresh lamb cuts treated with the substances mentioned above and stored at refrigerator temperature will remain wholesome
for up to 21 days. Loss of the ``fresh'' color and marketability of beef cuts and lamb cuts occurs before the product
becomes microbiologically unsafe. Some consumers are reluctant to purchase fresh beef or lamb cuts because of the
change to a darker color of the product before spoilage.



Current Regulations



Section 318.7(c)(4) of the Federal meat inspection regulations (9 CFR 318.7(c)(4)) allows the use of ascorbic acid,
erythorbic acid, citric acid, sodium ascorbate, and sodium citrate on fresh pork cuts to maintain color at levels
not to exceed either 500 ppm or 1.8 mg/sq inch of surface of ascorbic acid, erythorbic acid or sodium ascorbate, singly
or in combination, and/or not to exceed either 250 ppm or 0.9 mg/sq inch of surface of citric acid or sodium citrate,
singly or in combination. In addition, 9 CFR 318.7(c)(4) requires the use of such substances under an approved PQC
program under 9 CFR 318.4(d) and (e). Section 317.8(b)(37) of the Federal meat inspection regulations (9 CFR 317.8(b)(37))
requires that when ascorbic acid, erythorbic acid, citric acid, sodium ascorbate, and sodium citrate, singly or
in combination, are added to fresh pork cuts, there shall appear on the label of that product, in letters of the same
style and type and not less than one-fourth the size of letters in the product name, contiguous to the name of the product,
a statement identifying the specific approved substance(s) by its common name and the purpose for which it is added
such as ``Sprayed with a solution of water, ascorbic acid and citric acid to maintain color.''

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) lists ascorbic acid in 21 CFR 182.3013, erythorbic acid in 21 CFR 182.3041,
and sodium ascorbate in 21 CFR 182.3731 as generally recognized as safe (GRAS) when used in accordance with good manufacturing
practices for use as preservatives. FDA lists citric acid in 21 CFR 182.6033 and sodium citrate in 21 CFR 182.6751 as
GRAS when used in accordance with good manufacturing practices for use as sequestrants.



Proposed Rule



On October 4, 1993, FSIS published a proposed rule in the 

Federal Register

 (58 FR 51581) to permit the application of ascorbic acid, erythorbic acid, citric acid, sodium ascorbate, and sodium
citrate, singly or in combination, to the surface of fresh beef cuts or fresh lamb cuts to delay discoloration of such
meat cuts. The proposed rule would allow these substances to be used, singly or in combination, at levels of not more
than 500 ppm or 1.8 milligrams per square inch of product surface area for ascorbic acid, erythorbic acid or sodium
ascorbate, and/or not more than 250 ppm or 0.9 milligrams per square inch of surface area for citric acid or sodium citrate
to achieve the intended technical effects.


