 

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 



Rural Electrification Administration


<CFRNO>7 CFR Part 1751 </CFRNO>




<RINDOCK>RIN 0572AB07 </RINDOCK>



Telecommunications System Planning and Design Criteria, and Procedures 



<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Rural Electrification Administration, USDA. 



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Proposed rule. 




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Rural Electrification Administration (REA) proposes to amend its interim rule regarding the State Telecommunications
Modernization Plan requirements. The proposed changes are in response to comments received from the public regarding
the interim rule. All Telephone Borrowers will be affected by this proposed rule. 



</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Comments concerning this proposed rule must be received by REA or bear a postmark or its equivalent no later than November
28, 1994. 



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Submit written comments to Matthew P. Link, Director, Rural Telephone Bank Management Staff, U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Rural Electrification Administration, 14th  Independence Avenue, SW., Room 2832S, Washington,
DC 202501500. REA requests an original and three copies of all comments (7 CFR part 1700). All comments received
will be made available for public inspection at Room 2238S, at the address listed above, between 8:30 a.m. and
5 p.m. (7 CFR 1.27(b)). 



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Robert Peters, Assistant Administrator, Telephone Program, at the address listed above, telephone number (202)
7209554. 


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 

Executive Order 12866 



This proposed rule has been determined to be significant and was reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
under Executive Order 12866. 



Executive Order 12778 



This proposed rule has been reviewed under Executive Order 12778, Civil Justice Reform. If adopted, this proposed
rule will not: (1) Preempt any State or local laws, regulations, or policies, unless they present an irreconcilable
conflict with this rule; (2) Have any retroactive effect; and (3) Require administrative proceedings before parties
may file suit challenging the provisions of this rule. 



Regulatory Flexibility Act Certification 



REA has determined that this proposed rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small
entities, as defined in the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 

et seq.

). The REA program provides loans to REA Borrowers at interest rates and terms that are more favorable than those generally
available from the private sector. REA Borrowers, as a result of obtaining federal financing, receive economic benefits
which ultimately offset any direct economic costs associated with complying with REA regulations and requirements.
Moreover, this action is in response to the Rural Electrification Loan Restructuring Act of 1993. 



Information Collection and Recordkeeping Requirements 



The reporting and recordkeeping requirements contained in the proposed rule have been submitted to OMB for approval
in accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501 

et seq.

). Send comments regarding this collection of information to: Department of Agriculture, Clearance Office, Office
of Information Resources Management, Room 404W, Washington, DC 20250, and Regulatory Affairs of OMB, Attention:
Desk Officer for USDA, Room 3201, New Executive Office Building, Washington, DC 20503. 



National Environmental Policy Act Certification 



REA has determined that this proposed rule will not significantly affect the quality of the human environment as defined
by the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321 

et seq.

). Therefore, this action does not require an environmental impact statement or assessment. 



Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance 



The program described by this proposed rule is listed in the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Programs under
10.851, Rural Telephone Loans and Loan Guarantees, and 10.852, Rural Telephone Bank Loans. This catalog is available
on a subscription basis from the Superintendent of Documents, the United States Government Printing Office, Washington,
DC 204029325. 



Executive Order 12372 



This proposed rule is excluded from the scope of Executive Order 12372, Intergovernmental Consultation. A Notice
of Final Rule entitled Department Programs and Activities Excluded from Executive Order 12372 (50 FR 47034) exempts
REA and RTB loans and loan guarantees to governmental and nongovernmental entities from coverage under this Order.




Background 



On December 20, 1993, REA published an interim rule (58 FR 66250) to incorporate changes to telephone loan policies
required by the Rural Electrification Loan Restructuring Act of 1993 (RELRA) (107 Stat. 1356). RELRA amended several
provisions of the Rural Electrification Act of 1936, as amended (7 U.S.C. 901 

et seq.

) (RE Act), and mandated a restructuring of the telephone loan program. 

On April 13, 1994, REA adopted its interim rule as a final rule (59 FR 17460) with one exception, 7 CFR Part 1751, Telecommunications
System Planning and Design Criteria, and Procedures. Because of the overwhelming response and concerns regarding
the requirements of the State Telecommunications Modernization Plan (Modernization Plan), REA is proposing to
amend 7 CFR part 1751, subpart B. 

As revised, this Rule would require that Modernization Plans, at a minimum, apply to all REA borrowers. If a Modernization
Plan is developed by the PUC or the State Legislature, REA encourages, but does not require, that the Modernization
Plan's requirements apply to the rural service areas of all Telecommunications Providers. A State's decision not
to include non-REA borrowers will not prejudice REA approval of their Plan. The PUC or the State Legislature may also,
at its option, extend coverage of the Modernization Plan to all service areas of all Telecommunications Providers
in the State. In addition, while requirements contained in 1751.106 apply only to wireline services, the State
Legislature or PUC, at its discretion, may extend coverage of Modernization Plans to wireless or other communications
services in a State as it deems appropriate.

It is REA's policy that every State have a Modernization Plan which provides for the improvement of the State's Public
Switched Network. If the Plan Developer is either the State Legislature or the PUC, such entity must submit for REA
approval its Modernization Plan by a date one year from issuance of the Final Rule. After this date, if a State or its
PUC declines or fails to submit for REA approval its Modernization Plan, eligibility to develop the Plan passes to
a numeric majority of the Borrowers within the State. While there is no time limit requiring States to have an approved
plan in place, REA, as required by RELRA, will not approve any direct loans in States without such a plan. 

During the comment period, REA received 81 comments regarding the interim rule, and these comments were taken into
consideration in preparing the proposed amendments. Comments were received from the following: 

(1) Alaska Public Utilities Commission. 

</SUPPLEM>
