 

1.2. Purpose of This Report 



The purpose of this document is to: (1) articulate a view of neurotoxicity that 
scientists generally hold in common today and (2) draw upon this understanding to compose, 
as was done here by senior scientists from a number of Federal agencies, a series of general 
principles that can be used to establish general guidelines for assessing neurotoxicity risk. It 
is not the intent of this report to provide specific directives to agencies with respect to their 
own approach for neurotoxicity risk assessment. This document is intended to provide the 
scientific basis for the development of a cogent strategy for neurotoxicology risk assessment 
as needed by each agency. 

Because of present gaps in understanding, the principles contained in this document 
are based on the best judgment of those involved in writing this document, as well as 
statements of what is generally accepted as fact. There has been, however, an attempt to 
distinguish where possible between the different types of information presented. 

The principles contained in this document can serve as the basis for consistent 
regulatory neurotoxicology guidelines that the Federal agencies can tailor to meet the 
requirements of the legislative acts they are charged to implement. This document should be 
viewed broadly as part of an ongoing process within the Federal Government to periodically 
update and review the current scientific understanding and regulatory utility of neurotoxicity 
risk assessment. 

This document is the result of the combined efforts of senior scientists from the 
following Federal health-related units, operating under the direction of the Office of Science 
and Technology Policy (OSTP): 



Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) 

Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER), FDA 

Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER), FDA 

Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (CFSAN), FDA 

Consumer Product Safety Commission 

Department of Agriculture (USDA) 

Department of Defense (DoD) 

Environmental Protection Agency 

National Center for Toxicological Research (NCTR), FDA 

National Institutes of Health (NIH) 

National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 

National Toxicology Program (NTP) 


1.3. Context of This Report 



This document was prepared in light of a decision-making process used by many 
regulatory agencies pertaining to the assessment of neurotoxicity risks posed by chemical 
agents. The scientific basis for such assessment can be best understood by examining the 
decision-making process in some detail. 

Risk can be thought of as being composed of two aspects, each of which can be 
addressed by science, i.e., hazard and exposure assessment. Although other definitions have 
been used historically, this document conforms to present usage. Hazard generally refers to 
the toxicity of a substance and is deduced from a wide array of data, including those from 
epidemiological studies or controlled clinical trials in humans, short- and long-term 
toxicological studies in animals, and studies of mechanistic information and structure-activity 
relationships. Exposure generally refers to the amount of a substance with which people 
come in contact. The risk in a quantitative risk assessment is estimated by considering the 
results of the exposure and hazard assessments. As either the hazard or exposure approaches 
zero, the risk also approaches zero. 

As a first step in assessing the neurotoxic risk associated with the use of a particular 
chemical substance, the qualitative evidence that a given chemical substance is likely to be a 
human neurotoxicant must be evaluated. In this step, as in the whole process, a number of 
assumptions and approximations must be made in order to deal with inherent limitations 
found in the existing data bases. Then, estimates of human exposure and distribution of 
exposures likely to be encountered in the population are made. In the absence of dose-
response relationships in humans, one or more methods for estimating the dose-response 
relationship including doses below those generally used experimentally must also be 
evaluated. Finally, the exposure assessment is combined with the dose-response relationship 
to generate an estimate of risk. The various ways in which these steps are conducted and 
combined and their attendant uncertainties constitute what is generally referred to as 
``neurotoxicity risk assessment.'' 

Some legislation calls for action in the presence of any risk. Other forms of 
legislation use the concept of unreasonable risk, defined in some acts as a condition in which 
the risks outweigh the benefits. A spectrum of regulatory responses, from simply informing 
the public of a risk through restricted use to a complete ban, may be available to bring the 
risks and benefits into appropriate balance. 

This document does not perform a risk assessment nor does it suggest that one 
method of neurotoxicology risk assessment is better than another. Rather, it attempts to 
review the science of chemical neurotoxicology and develops from this review a set of 
general principles. It is not a comprehensive review nor a document written for the lay 
public; this document is a semitechnical review that evaluates the impact of scientific findings 
of the last decade on general assumptions or principles important to risk assessment. This is 
based on the belief that elucidation of the basic mechanisms underlying neurotoxicity and the 
identification of neurotoxic agents and conditions, when coupled to research aimed at 
identifying and characterizing the problems caused by such agents, should provide the best 
scientific bases for making sound and reasonable judgments. These overlapping approaches 
to evaluating the problems of neurotoxicology should form a strong foundation for decision-making. 


1.4. Content of This Report 



Including the Introduction (chapter 1), this document contains six chapters. Chapter 2 
provides an overview of the discipline of neurotoxicology. It is important to understand the 
scope of the problem as it relates to neurotoxicology, including: (1) Definitions of 
neurotoxicity and adverse effect, (2) examples of neurotoxicity and incidents of exposure, 
and (3) Federal response to neurotoxicology. Chapter 2 also discusses the basic principles of 
toxicology that apply generally to the evaluation of neurotoxicity. Issues such as dose, 
exposure, target site, and the intended use of the chemical are discussed, as are principles of 
pharmacodynamics, chemical interactions, and the concept of threshold. Chapter 2 also lays 
the neurobiological basis for understanding how and where chemicals can affect the nervous 
system and provides examples of such chemical types. Finally, chapter 2 discusses special 
considerations for neurotoxicology including the issue of susceptible populations, the blood 
brain barrier, and the limited capability of the nervous system to repair following chemical 
insult. 

Chapter 3 examines methods for assessing human neurotoxicity. Neurologic 
evaluations, neuropsychological testing, and applicability of methods used in clinical 
evaluations and case studies are discussed in this chapter. Epidemiologic study designs, 
endpoints, and methods are also discussed, as well as problems of causal inference and 
applications and limitations of epidemiologic and field study methods for risk assessment. 
Chapter 3 also describes human laboratory exposure studies, including methods for assessing 
neurobehavioral function, self-report methods for assessing subjective states, and a number of 
other methodological issues. This chapter also discusses the comparability of human and 
animal laboratory methods and special considerations in human neurotoxicity assessments. 

Chapter 4 assesses methods for evaluating animal neurotoxicity. Discussed in this 
chapter is the role that animal models play in the assessment of chemicals for neurotoxicity, 
the validity of animal models, and experimental design considerations in animal 
neurotoxicological studies. Also included in this chapter is a discussion of tier-testing 
approaches in chemical evaluations. Specific endpoints used in animal neurotoxicological 
studies are also discussed, including methods for neurobehavioral, neurophysiological, 
neuroanatomical, and neurochemical assessments. Developmental neurotoxicology and in 
vitro neurotoxicology are also described in this chapter. 

Chapter 5 of this document discusses principles of neurotoxicity risk assessment. 
This chapter evaluates the generic assumptions in neurotoxicity risk assessment, ending with 
a discussion of uncertainty reduction and identification of knowledge gaps. 

Chapter 6 is a general summary of the material presented in the first five chapters.





