 



Issue 2:

 The amendment to section 10(j) of the Act states that experimental populations may only be designated when there is
geographical separation between the experimental population and other existing populations of the species. The
occasional occurrence of lone wolves in the areas of central Idaho and the Park would prohibit the use of the experimental
population designation since there would be no geographic separation between natural occurring and experimental
wolves. Comments also stated that the boundaries of the experimental areas should be adjusted or the reintroduction
program should be delayed, particularly, in central Idaho due to the presence of naturally occurring wolves. 


Service Response:

 For many years, the Service and other agencies have tried to document wolf activity in Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming
(Service 1994a, Appendix 12). Since the 1970's, wolf observations particularly from Montana, Wyoming, and Idaho,
have been reported. However, to date the only documented breeding groups of wolves are in northwestern Montana. Based
on scientific inquiry, the Service defines a wolf population as at least two breeding pairs of wild wolves each successfully
raising at least two young each year, for 2 consecutive years, and that a population is composed of breeding groups
of wolves (Service 1994a, Appendix 9). Presently, there are no known breeding pairs of wolves within the experimental
population area. Nor does the experimental area contain any portions of home ranges of any breeding pairs of wolves.
The Service finds that there is no geographic overlap between any Montana wolf population home range and the experimental
area. The northern boundary of the Idaho experimental population area was moved further south because, in 1990 and
1992, there were a few instances when an active breeding group of wolves from Montana were located south of the experimental
boundary recommended in the proposed rule. The rulemaking language now allows revocation of the experimental population
rule and removal of all reintroduced wolves, if within 90 days after the initial reintroduction a naturally occurring
wolf population is discovered in the experimental area. Any naturally occurring wolves will be managed as endangered
species under the Act and afforded the same terms and conditions as wolves in Montana. The Service has had a wolf monitoring
program in place in Idaho, Montana and Wyoming for over two years. This system is designed to accept reports from anyone,
and when a report focuses on a particular area a wolf biologist investigates to verify the presence or absence of wolves.
Through this method the Service has identified newly formed packs in northwest Montana. Within the experimental
area, there has been no confirmation of wolves from any provided reports. 





