 







<USDEPT>NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD</USDEPT>



<CFRNO>29 CFR Part 102 </CFRNO>

 

Modifications to Role of National Labor Relations Board's Administrative Law Judges Including: Assignment of Administrative
Law Judges as Settlement Judges; Discretion of Administrative Law Judges to Dispense With Briefs, To Hear Oral Argument
in Lieu of Briefs, and To Issue Bench Decisions 

 

<AGENCY>
agency:

 National Labor Relations Board.

 

 </AGENCY>
<ACTION>
action:

 Experimental modification of rules. 

 



 
</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
summary:

 The National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) issues a document that it will begin a one-year experimental modification
of its rules with respect to the role that its Administrative Law Judges (ALJs) play in facilitating the expeditious
resolution of unfair labor practice proceedings. During the experimental period, the NLRB will amend its rules to
give the Chief Administrative Law Judge discretion to assign a judge other than the trial judge to conduct settlement
negotiations with the parties, and to give the settlement judge certain powers necessary to engage effectively in
those settlement efforts. The NLRB will also, during the experimental period, modify its rules to give ALJs assigned
to hear a case the discretion to dispense with briefs, to hear oral argument in lieu of briefs, and to issue bench decisions.
The rule changes will expire at the end of the one-year experimental period absent renewal by the Board.

 

 </SUMMARY>
<DATE>
effective dates:

 February 1, 1995 through January 31, 1996. The rule changes will be effective on February 1, 1995 and apply to all unfair
labor practice cases pending on or after that date. The changes will expire, however, and be of no further force or effect
with respect to any pending or future cases, on January 31, 1996, absent renewal by the Board.



 </DATE>
<FURTHER>
for further information contact:

 John C. Truesdale, Executive Secretary, National Labor Relations Board, 1099 14th Street, NW., Room 11602, Washington,
DC 20570. Telephone: (202) 2731934.



 </FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
supplementary information:

 On September 8, 1994, the Board issued a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPR) which proposed certain modifications
to the Board's rules to permit the assignment of ALJs to serve as settlement judges, and to provide ALJs with the discretion
to dispense with briefs, to hear oral argument in lieu of briefs, and to issue bench decisions (59 FR 46375). The NPR
provided for a comment period ending October 7, 1994. 

 

The Board received eight written comments on the NPR. The comments were received from a variety of sources, including
unions, employer associations, practitioners, and the academic community. The comments were mixed, with some supporting
some of the proposals but not others, and others supporting none of the proposals. Having carefully considered these
comments, for the reasons discussed below, the Board has decided to implement the proposed changes with certain modifications
for a one-year experimental period. 

 

I. Settlement Judges 

 

The proposal on the use of settlement judges proposed to amend 102.35 of the Board's rules to include provisions
for the assignment of ALJs to serve as settlement judges. The comments on this proposal were mixed, with two comments
opposing the proposal, two comments supporting the proposal, and two comments suggesting that the proposal be modified
to require the agreement of the parties. (The other two comments made no comment on the proposal.) 

 The comments opposing the proposal generally expressed the view that the proposal was unneeded and unlikely to yield
significant benefits given the Agency's already high settlement rate. The comment submitted by the AFLCIO
also expressed the concern that the proposal would diminish the availability of trial judges, cause the postponement
of hearing dates, and have a negative effect on settlement discussion at the Regional level. 

 The Board acknowledges that there are potential problems which could arise with the use of settlement judges. The
proposed rules, however, were drafted to minimize any such problems by requiring the assigning judge to consider,
among other factors, the likelihood that a settlement may occur, the good faith of any person making a request for assignment
of a settlement judge, and whether the assignment is otherwise feasible. The Board indicated in the NPR that among
the factors which the assigning judge could consider would be the effect of an assignment upon agency resources, whether
the assignment is being sought for, or would have the effect of, delaying the proceeding, and whether the assignment
might tend to undermine other pending settlement efforts. 

 As suggested by some of the comments, a further safeguard against abuse of the procedure would be to condition the use
of settlement judges on the agreement of all parties. The proposed rule did not include such a condition or otherwise
permit a party to veto the use of the procedure, but indicated that a party's opposition was a factor for the assigning
judge to consider in assessing whether to appoint a settlement judge. Having considered the comments, however, the
Board agrees that the rule should state clearly that the procedure should not be used unless the parties agree to it.
This should further minimize the potential for problems of the kind discussed by the AFLCIO. 

 In view of the Agency's lack of experience with settlement judges, however, the Board has decided to implement the
procedure at this time for a one-year trial period. If significant problems arise with the procedure during that period,
those problems may be considered by the Board in considering whether to implement the changes permanently.
</SUPPLEM>
