 

B. The ease of use of, or lack of effort required by, any such product or program intended for weight or fat loss if achieving
the advertised results depends on adhering to a special diet or exercising.



VII





It is further ordered

 That respondents, LS Research Corporation, a corporation, its successors and assigns, and Scott Chinery,
individually and as an officer of said corporation, and respondents' agents, representatives, and employees, directly
or through any corporation, subsidiary, division, or other device, in connection with the manufacturing, labeling,
advertising, promotion, offering for sale, sale, or distribution of any product or program in or affecting commerce,
as ``commerce'' is defined in the Federal Trade Commission Act, do forthwith cease and desist from misrepresenting,
in any manner, directly or by implication, the contents, validity, results, conclusions, or interpretations of
any test or study.



VIII





It is further ordered

 That within five (5) business days of the date of service of this Order, respondent LS Research Corporation,
or its successors and assigns, shall pay the sum of one million four hundred fifty thousand dollars ($1,450,000.00)
to the United States Treasury. Such payment shall be by cashier's check or certified check made payable to the United
States Treasury. In the event of default of payment, which default continues for more than ten (10) days beyond the
due date of payment, and without any notice required to be given to the respondents:

A. Respondent shall also pay interest as computed under 28 U.S.C. 1961, which shall accrue on the unpaid balance
from the date of default until the date the balance is fully paid;

B. Individual respondent Scott Chinery shall become liable for the full unpaid balance and interest; and

C. The Commission may draw the balance of the payment due on the Irrevocable Standby Letter of Credit, which has been
provided by respondent as security for the payment provided for herein.

No portion of the payment herein described shall be deemed a payment of any fine, penalty, or punitive assessment against
respondents with respect to the acts and practices which are the subject of the Complaint and which occurred prior
to issuance of the Order.



IX





It is further ordered

 That the corporate respondent LS Research Corporation shall for five (5) years following the service of this
Order, notify the Commission at least thirty (30) days prior to any change in the corporate respondent such as dissolution,
assignment, or sale resulting in the emergence of a successor corporation, the creation or dissolution of subsidiaries,
or any other change in the corporation that may affect compliance obligations arising out of the Order, or of any change
in the position and responsibilities of the individual respondent Scott Chinery in regard to LS Research Corporation
or any subsidiary of which he is an officer. The expiration of the notice provisions of this part shall not affect any
other obligation arising out of this Order. In addition, respondents shall require, as a condition precedent to the
closing of the sale or other disposition of LS Research Corporation or the right to the use of the name Cybergenics
or to market any of the products in its product line, that the acquiring party file with the Commission, prior to the
closing of such sale or other disposition, a written agreement to be bound by the provisions of this Order.



X





It is further ordered

 That the individual respondent Scott Chinery promptly notify the Commission of the discontinuance of his present
business or employment and of his affiliation with a new business or employment. In addition, for a period of five (5)
years from the date of service of this Order, the individual respondent shall promptly notify the Commission of each
affiliation with a new business or employment. Each such notice shall include the individual respondent's new business
address and a statement of the business or employment in which the respondent is newly engaged as well as a description
of respondent's duties and responsibilities in connection with the business or employment. The expiration of the
notice provisions of this part shall not affect any other obligation arising under this Order.



XI





It is further ordered

 That for five (5) years after the last date of dissemination of any representation covered by this Order, respondents,
or their successors or assigns, shall maintain and upon request make available to the Federal Trade Commission for
inspection and copying:

A. All materials that were relied upon in disseminating such representation; and

B. All tests, reports, studies, surveys, demonstrations, or other evidence in their possession or control that contradict,
qualify, or call into question such representation, or the basis relied upon for such representation, including
complaints from consumers.



XII





It is further ordered

 That respondent LS Research Corporation shall:

A. Within thirty (30) days after service of this Order, provide a copy of this Order to each of respondent's current
principals, officers, directors and managers, and to all personnel, agents, and representatives having sales,
advertising, or policy responsibility with respect to the subject matter of this Order;

B. For a period of five (5) years from the date of entry of this Order, provide a copy of this Order to each of respondent's
principals, officers, directors, and managers, and to all personnel, agents, and representatives having sales,
advertising, or policy responsibility with respect to the subject matter of this Order who are associated with respondent
or any subsidiary, successor, or assign, within three (3) days after the person assumes his or her position; and that
respondent secure from each such person a signed statement acknowledging receipt of said Order.



XIII





It is further ordered

 That the respondents herein shall within sixty (60) days after service upon them of this Order, and at such other times
as the Commission may require, file with the Commission a report, in writing, setting forth in detail the manner and
form in which they have complied with this Order.



