 

Smoke-Free Workplace
 


The Public Health Service strongly encourages all cooperative agreement recipients to provide a smoke-free workplace
and promote the non-use of all tobacco products. This is consistent with the PHS mission to protect and advance the
physical and mental health of the American people. 



Eligible Applicants
 


Eligible applicants include all nonprofit and for-profit organizations. Thus, universities, colleges, research
institutes, hospitals, and other public and private organizations, including State and local health departments,
are eligible for these cooperative agreements. 



Availability of Funds
 


Approximately $250,000 will be available in FY 1994 to fund approximately two awards. It is expected that the average
award will be approximately $125,000. Awards will begin on or about September 1, 1994, and will be made for 12-month
budget periods within a project period of up to 3 years. Funding estimates may vary and are subject to change. Continuation
awards within the project period will be made on the basis of satisfactory programmatic progress and the availability
of funds. 



Purpose
 


The purpose of these awards is to help support researchers in the study of important HIV-related epidemiologic issues
and specifically to evaluate the impact of HIV program services on the psychological adjustment and transition to
new living situations among children (ages 512) whose mothers are in the terminal stage of AIDS or have died
of AIDS. Programs which examine this research issue as it affects minority populations are of special interest. 



Program Requirements 



Research Issues 



One research issue of programmatic interest to the health care community and to CDC for FY 1994 is described below and
is considered to be of significant importance in gaining a greater understanding of the epidemiology of AIDS and HIV
infection. However, applications submitted by organizations that examine other important HIV-related epidemiologic
research issues will also be accepted and considered for funding. 

Study proposals are solicited that address issues related to the impact of the terminal illness and death of the HIV-infected
mother upon the child by evaluating services available to families before, during, and after the mother's death.
Specifically, proposals are sought which will describe methods to identify and evaluate those interventions which
are necessary and effective in promoting the child's healthy, psychological adjustment as well as transition to
their new living situation. The transition period of specific interest includes the periods immediately prior to
and after the mother's death. The evaluation component must include both process and outcome evaluations and descriptions
of how the researchers will access children with HIV-infected mothers and follow them after the mother's death. Preference
will be given to proposals that evaluate two or more existing transitional programs sponsored by State or local governmental
agencies or community-based organizations and include a minimum of 125 children (ages 512) per program. Applicants
are also encouraged to submit proposals that compare different types of transitional programs. 

Examples of worthwhile proposals include: Limited, longitudinal studies of children enrolled in foster care or
other transitional programs specifically for families of HIV-infected mothers. Research strategies may include,
but need not be limited to, record reviews to document numbers and types of foster or other caretaking arrangements
of the child, placement of siblings, quantitative interviews with caretakers, and psychological measures including
measures of bereavement, anxiety and depression, etc. Applicants must document specific behavioral research and
evaluation expertise among the proposed staff. Applicants must also be willing to participate collaboratively
with CDC and other researchers in the development, implementation, and analysis of data from the proposed study.




Cooperative Agreements 



A cooperative agreement indicates that CDC will assist the collaborator in conducting the epidemiologic research
of AIDS and HIV infection described in the PURPOSE section of this announcement. The application should be presented
in a manner that demonstrates the applicant's ability to address the research problem in a collaborative manner with
CDC. 

In conducting activities to achieve the purpose of this program, the recipient shall be responsible for the activities
under A., below, and CDC shall be responsible for conducting activities under B., below: 



A. Recipient Activities 



1. Develop the research study protocol and the interview instrument; 

2. Identify, recruit, obtain informed consent, and enroll an adequate number of study participants as determined
by the study protocol; 

3. Continue to follow study participants as determined by the study protocol; 

4. Establish procedures to maintain the rights and confidentiality of all study participants; 

5. Perform laboratory tests (when appropriate) and data analysis as determined in the study protocol; 

6. Collaborate and share data and specimens (when appropriate) with CDC and other collaborators to answer specific
research questions; and 

7. Conduct data analysis with CDC and other collaborators as well as present research findings. 


