 

Section 4150.3Settlement 


This section would be amended to provide guidelines for considering nonmonetary settlement that waives fees for
unintentional incidental trespasses in a fair manner while preventing needless expense in the best interest of the
public. Key provisions of determination would be: the operator is not at fault, an insignificant amount of forage
is consumed, no damage occurred, and nonmonetary settlement is in the best interest of the United States. The method
for determining the settlement amounts would be amended to base the value of forage on the monthly rate per AUM for pasturing
livestock on private, nonirrigated land in the 17 western States. This section includes changes made in addition
to those presented in the advance notice of proposed rulemaking to reduce the potential for abuse of discretion by
clarifying when a nonmonetary settlement for nonwillful violations may be made. 


Subpart 4160_Administrative remedies 


Section 4160Administrative Remedies 


The proposed rule would amend this section to improve organization, clarify the process and requirements, and to
provide for application of the Departmental rule located at section 4.21 of this title regarding full force and effect
decisions and petitions for staying the effect of a decision pending determination on appeal. 


Section 4160.1Proposed Decisions 


This section would be amended to provide clarification that a final decision may be issued without first issuing a
proposed decision when action under paragraph 4110.33(b) of this part is necessary to stop resource damage,
or when action is taken under paragraph 4150.2(d) to close an area to unauthorized grazing use. This proposed amendment
does not limit appeal rights provided in 4160.3. It would serve to expedite the decision process where immediate
action is necessary. 
This section includes changes made in addition to those presented in the advance notice of proposed rulemaking to
clarify, primarily, what information must be contained in a proposed decision. 


Section 4160.3Final Decisions 


This section would be amended to clarify the process for filing an appeal and a petition for a stay of the decision. Under
the proposed rule, decisions would be implemented at the end of the 30-day appeal period except where a petition for
stay has been filed with the Office of Hearings and Appeals, in which case the Office of Hearings and Appeals has, under
4.21 of this title, a period of 45 days from the end of the appeal period in which to decide on the petition for stay.
This process would temporarily stay the decision up to 75 days if a stay is not granted. A stay, if granted, would suspend
the effect of the decision pending final disposition of the appeal. Under the present grazing administration appeals
process, decisions other than those pertaining to emergency action are automatically stayed upon the timely filing
of an appeal. This has resulted in delays of up to two years before necessary corrective action can be taken. 
This proposal would protect the public's rights to an appeal and would provide a method for staying decisions where
the Office of Hearings and Appeals determines it would be appropriate to do so. At the same time this section would prevent
unnecessary delays in action. The advance notice stated that when no protest is received on a proposed decision it
shall become the final decision and will be appealable for a period of 30 days. Clarification of the wording relating
to this point in the advance notice of proposed rulemaking has been made in this proposed rule. 
The proposed revisions would make 43 CFR part 4100 more consistent with the Department's 4.21 of this title.
Several changes were made in addition to those presented in the advance notice of proposed rulemaking to make clear
how the Departmental rule would apply. 
The proposed rule also clarifies the amount of grazing use that would be allowable when a decision has been stayed by
the Office of Hearings and Appeals or by order of a Federal Court. Where an appellant had no authorized grazing use the
preceding year, the authorized grazing use would be required to be consistent with the decision pending a final determination
on appeal. Appellants affected by this provision would include persons that are applicants for permit or lease transfers.
Where a decision proposes to change the amount of authorized grazing use, the permitted grazing use would remain at
no more than the appellant's previously determined permitted use during the time an appeal is pending. Reference
to ephemeral use has been added to the amendments included in the advance notice of proposed rulemaking which pertain
to levels of use pending determination on appeal. This amendment would provide for making decisions immediately
effective when it is necessary to protect the rangeland resources or to facilitate abatement of unauthorized use
by closing an area to grazing use under sections 4110.33 and 4150.2 of this part. 


Section 4160.4Appeals 




