 

The Bidder agrees that if it has 100 or more employees and has not submitted a report on Standard Form 100 for the current
reporting year and that if this Contract will amount to more than $10,000, the Bidder will file such report, as required
by law, and notify the owner in writing of such filing prior to the Owner's acceptance of this Proposal. 
b. Equal Opportunity Clause. During the performance of this Contract, the Bidder agrees as follows: 
(1) The Bidder will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, religion,
sex or national origin. The Bidder will take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees
are treated during employment without regard to their race, color, religion, sex or national origin. Such action
shall include, but not be limited to, the following: Employment, upgrading, demotions or transfer; recruitment
or recruitment advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selection of
training, including apprenticeship. The Bidder agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to employees and
applicants for employment, notices to be provided setting forth the provisions of this Equal Opportunity Clause.

(2) The Bidder will, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the Bidder, state
that all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion,
sex or national origin. 
(3) The Bidder will send to each labor union or representative of workers, with which it has a collective bargaining
agreement or other contract or understanding, a notice to be provided advising the said labor union or workers' representative
of the Bidder's commitments under this section, and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous places available
to employees and applicants for employment. 
(4) The Bidder will comply with all provisions of Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, and the rules, regulations
and relevant orders of the Secretary of Labor. 
(5) The Bidder will furnish all information and reports required by Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, and
by rules, regulations, and orders of the Secretary of Labor, or pursuant thereto, and will permit access to its books,
records, and accounts by the administering agency and the Secretary of Labor for purposes of investigation to ascertain
compliance with such rules, regulations, and orders. 
(6) In the event of the Bidder's noncompliance with the Equal Opportunity Clause of this Contract or with any of the
said rules, regulations, or orders, this Contract may be canceled, terminated, or suspended in whole or in part, and
the Bidder may be declared ineligible for further Government contracts or federally assisted construction contracts
in accordance with procedures authorized in Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, and such other sanctions
may be imposed and remedies invoked as provided in Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, or by rule, regulation,
or order of the Secretary of Labor, or as provided by law. 
(7) The Bidder will include this Equal Opportunity Clause in every subcontract or purchase order unless exempted
by the rules, regulations, or order of the Secretary of Labor issued pursuant to section 204 of Executive Order 11246
of September 24, 1965, so that such provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor. The Bidder will take
such action with respect to any subcontract or purchase order as the administering agency may direct as a means of enforcing
such provisions, including sanctions for noncompliance; Provided, however, that in the event Bidder becomes involved
in, or is threatened with, litigation with a subcontractor or vendor as a result of such direction by the administering
agency, the Bidder may request the United States to enter into such litigation to protect the interests of the United
States. 
c. Certificate of Nonsegregated Facilities. The Bidder certifies that it does not maintain or provide for its employees
any segregated facilities at any of its establishments, and that it does not permit its employees to perform their
services at any location, under its control, where segregated facilities are maintained. The Bidder certifies further
that it will not maintain or provide for its employees any segregated facilities at any of its establishments, and
that it will not permit its employees to perform their services at any location, under its control, where segregated
facilities are maintained. The Bidder agrees that a breach of this certification is a violation of the Equal Opportunity
Clause in this Contract. As used in this certification, the term ``segregated facilities'' means any waiting rooms,
work areas, restrooms and washrooms, restaurants and other eating areas, timeclocks, locker rooms and other storage
or dressing areas, parking lots, drinking fountains, recreation or entertainment areas, transportation, and housing
facilities provided for employees which are segregated by explicit directive or are in fact segregated on the basis
of race, color, religion, or national origin, because of habit, local custom, or otherwise. The Bidder agrees that
(except where it has obtained identical certifications from proposed subcontractors for specific time periods)
it will obtain identical certifications from proposed subcontractors prior to the award of subcontracts exceeding
$10,000 which are not exempt from the provisions of the Equal Opportunity Clause, and that it will retain such certifications
in its files. 
Section 7. Franchises and Rights-of-Way. The Bidder shall be under no obligation to obtain or assist in obtaining:
Any franchises, authorizations, permits or approvals required to be obtained by the Owner from Federal, State, County,
Municipal or other authorities; any rights-of-way over private lands; or any agreements between the Owner and third
parties with respect to the joint use of poles, crossings, or other matter incident to the construction and operation
of the Project. 


