 

This rule is a vital component of DOT's Rail-Highway Grade Crossing Action Plan which details six major Departmental
initiatives addressing highway-rail grade crossing safety and trespass prevention. These initiatives include:
enhanced enforcement of traffic laws at crossings; enhanced rail corridor crossing reviews and improvements; expanded
public education and Operation Lifesaver activities; increased safety at private crossings; improved data and
research efforts; and prevention of rail trespassing. These initiatives are comprised of fifty-five separate actions
the Department proposes to take. 
Part 234 was issued in 1991 (56 FR 33728, July 23, 1991) primarily as a reporting rule by which FRA received data pertaining
to malfunctions of highway-rail grade crossing warning systems. Part 234 is being amended by restructuring the existing
Part 234 into two new subparts, ``Subpart A_General'' and ``Subpart B_Reports'' and by adding two subparts, ``Subpart
C_Response to Reports of Warning System Malfunction'' and ``Subpart D_Maintenance, Inspection, and Testing.''

Additionally, 49 CFR Part 212 is being amended to provide for the participation of qualified state highway-rail grade
crossing inspectors and apprentices within the State Participation Program. 
As we stated in the preamble to the early NPRM, we believe the risks to the travelling public and railroad employees
from grade crossing accidents resulting from system failures can be reduced. The active grade crossing warning systems
in place at the nation's highway-rail grade crossings are designed to fail in a ``fail-safe'' mode. If a component
or circuitry fails, the device fails in such a manner that the warning is activated, thus in theory preventing a highway
user from entering onto the tracks in front of a train. This system has worked successfully for many years. FRA does
not take issue with the basic design theory of ``fail-safe'' warning devices_they are true lifesaving devices. However,
the fail-safe feature loses its effectiveness as time goes by without repair of the warning system and its return to
fully functioning status. 
Failure of a device to activate when a train is approaching creates an obvious and acute risk. Indeed, an otherwise
cautious highway user could be entrapped by the failure to warn. Although activation failures are rare events and
railroads typically respond with appropriate dispatch, adding further impetus to appropriate diagnosis and response
is warranted by the critical nature of the risk. 
Therefore, FRA is issuing these amendments to 49 CFR part 234 in which railroads are required to take certain steps
when they are notified of either activation failures or false activations. These steps, designed to assure the safety
of the travelling public and railroad employees, are not unknown to the railroad industry. They require the railroad
to take the following three series of steps after learning of a malfunctioning warning system: (1) Notify trains and
law enforcement authorities of the malfunction; (2) take appropriate actions to warn and control highway traffic
pending inspection and repair of the system; and (3) repair the system. 
The rules do not establish a specific time frame for repair of malfunctioning warning systems. Setting a specific
repair time would necessitate establishing a schedule of various defects together with approved repair periods.
Not only is a system of this type very cumbersome to establish and monitor, it would not take into consideration the
operating environments of various railroads. Rather, safety is being maintained while the warning system is out
of service by requiring an equivalent level of warning and protection. That safety level will be ensured by the flagging
and speed restrictions contained in this rule. 
Safety at active grade crossings will be further ensured by the maintenance, inspection, and testing requirements
contained in this rule. 


Section-by-Section Analysis 


49 CFR Part 212 


FRA proposed revisions to 49 CFR Part 212, ``State Safety Participation Program'' in order to provide for qualified
state railroad safety inspectors to enforce the grade crossing safety rules issued today. 


Section 212.231Highway-rail Grade Crossing Inspector 


As proposed, this section amends 49 CFR Part 212, ``State Safety Participation Program'' to create a new category
of ``Highway-rail grade crossing inspector'' within the State Participation Program. The proposal established
minimum qualification standards enabling state inspectors to enforce grade crossing signal system safety regulations
at 49 CFR Part 234. Additionally, this section as proposed provided that all state signal and train control inspectors
qualified under 212.207 are also thereby fully qualified under new 212.231. California Department
of Transportation, Division of Rail (CA DOT) commented that this proposed section was ``worrisome in its flagrant
approval of substituting schooling or related technical specialization, or completion of an apprentice training
program, in lieu of having four years of specific experience***.'' FRA appreciates CA DOT's
concerns, however, FRA has not found the qualification requirements, which mirror the requirements for state inspectors
in other disciplines, to be a problem. However, if any state regulatory agency deems it appropriate to impose more
stringent requirements for its inspectors, it is entirely free to do so. General qualifications of state inspection
personnel under the state participation program are governed by 49 C.F.R. part 212.201 which, in subsection (a) states
that ``this subpart [subpart C_State Inspection Personnel] prescribes the minimum qualification requirements
for State railroad safety inspectors, compliance inspectors and inspector apprentices. A State agency may establish
more stringent or additional requirements for its employees.'' Consequently, FRA has not modified this section
as suggested by CA DOT. 



