 

Moreover, in litigation relating to 778.14, 773.15(b)(1), and related matters before the U.S. District
Court of the District of Columbia, the Secretary advised the court that he had decided to reconsider 778.14(c).
The Secretary stated that he intended to propose a regulation ``which considers the extent to which violation information
should be reported concerning owners and controllers of applicants as well as entities owned or controlled by the
applicant.'' See 

National Wildlife Fed'n 

v. 

Lujan, 

No. 883117AER (D.D.C.), Memorandum of Points and Authorities in Support of the Federal Defendants'
Cross-Motion for Summary Judgment and in Opposition to Plaintiffs' Motions for Summary Judgment, footnote 33, at
page 90.
Consistent with the representation made to the court, the proposed amendment to paragraph (c) of 778.14 would
have required an applicant to disclose all outstanding violation notices received by any surface coal mining operation
that was deemed or presumed to be owned or controlled by either the applicant or any person who was deemed or presumed
to own or control the applicant.
Commenters representing members of the coal industry expressed concern over the proposed amendment to 30 CFR 778.14(c)
for essentially three reasons. They asserted that the proposed amendment impermissibly expanded the types of violations
which must be reported by an applicant by incorporating the newly amended definition of ``violation notice'' as the
basis for reporting; that the proposal inappropriately expanded the definition of ``owners or controllers'' which
must be reported; and that the proposal inappropriately expanded the type of information required for operations
linked through ownership or control.
OSM disagrees with the commenters' assertions. First, the proposed regulation does incorporate the new definition
of the term ``violation notice'' which had been proposed, and has now been adopted, in 773.5. The new definition
of violation notice, however, is not overly broad. In this preamble, OSM has already responded to similar comments
made with respect to this definition in the section of this preamble captioned ``Section 773.5_Definitions.''
By incorporating the amended definition of ``violation notice,'' the proposed amendment to paragraph (c) of 778.14
would have incorporated the list and types of violations which are relevant to a regulatory authority's decision
whether to issue a permit under section 510(c) of the Act and under the provisions of 30 CFR 773.15(b)(1). In contrast
to this, the unamended version of the regulation did not require that an applicant list unpaid penalties or fees incurred
by any surface coal mining operation owned or controlled by the applicant or by any person who owns or controls the applicant.
Accordingly, the proposed amendment would expand what has to be reported to enable the regulatory authority to have
necessary information to make its decision. It is entirely appropriate to require that a permit applicant report
such information to the regulatory authority so that the regulatory authority can make an informed decision.
As indicated above, commenters further asserted that the proposal inappropriately expanded the definition of ``owners
or controllers'' by requiring the reporting of all outstanding violations received prior to the date of permit applications
by surface coal mining operations deemed or presumed to be owned or controlled by the applicant or by any person who
owns or controls the applicant. The commenters asserted that this placed the applicant in an untenable position.
OSM disagrees with this assertion.
Even if 30 CFR 778.14(c) would not be amended by the proposal, the regulation already required the reporting of violations
of surface coal mining operations which the applicant is deemed or presumed to own or control under the provisions
of 30 CFR 773.5. Such reporting is required even if the applicant believes that he or she can rebut the presumption of
ownership or control. The permit application is not forced to admit ownership or control. On the contrary, such reporting
can be done by an applicant who, at the same time, reserves his or her rights to deny ownership or control. Even under
current law, the applicant must disclose violations incident to the presumed ownership or control relationship
so that the regulatory authority can evaluate this information. Thus, the amendment would just clarify what the regulation
already does. Therefore, the amendment has not inappropriately expanded the definition of what constitutes surface
coal mining operations owned or controlled by the applicant.


