 

The major advantages of FOB tests are that they can be administered within the 
context of other ongoing toxicological tests and provide some indication of the possible 
neurological alterations produced by exposure. Potential problems include insufficient 
interobserver reliability, difficulty in defining certain endpoints, and the tendency toward 
observer bias. The latter can be controlled by using observers unaware of the actual 
treatment of the subjects. Some FOB tests may not be very sensitive to agent-induced 
sensory loss (i.e., vision, audition) or alterations in cognitive or integrative processes such as 
learning and memory. FOB data may be used to trigger experiments performed at the next 
tier of testing. 
FOB data may be interval, ordinal, or continuous (Creason, 1989). The relevance of 
statistically significant test results from an FOB is judged according to the number of signs 
affected, the dose(s) at which neurotoxic signs are observed, and the nature, severity, and 
persistence of the effects. Data from the FOB may provide presumptive evidence of adverse 
effects and neurotoxicity. If only a few unrelated measures in the FOB are affected or the 
effects are unrelated to dose, there is less concern about neurotoxic potentials of a chemical. 
If dose is associated with other overt signs of toxicity, including systemic toxicity, large 
decreases in body weight, or debilitation, the data must be interpreted carefully. In cases 
where several related measures in a battery of tests are affected and the effects appear to be 
dose dependent, the level of concern about the potential of a chemical is higher. 


4.3.2.2. Motor activity. 


Movement within a defined environment is a naturally occurring 
response and can be affected by environmental agents. Motor activity represents a broad 
class of behaviors involving coordinated participation of sensory, motor, and integrative 
processes. Motor activity measurements are noninvasive and can be used to evaluate the 
effects of acute and repeated exposure to chemicals (MacPhail et al., 1989). Motor activity 
measurements have also been used in humans to evaluate disease states, including disorders 
of the nervous system (Goldstein and Stein, 1985). The assessment of motor activity is often 
included in first-tier evaluations, either as part of the FOB or as a separate quantitated 
measurement. 
There are many different types of activity measurement devices, differing in size, 
shape, and method of movement detection (MacPhail et al., 1989). Because of the accuracy 
and ease of calibration, devices with photocells are widely used. In general, situating the 
apparatus to minimize extraneous noise, movements, or lights usually requires that the 
recording devices be placed in light- and sound-attenuating chambers during the testing 
period. A number of different factors, including age, gender, and time of day, can affect 
motor activity, and should be controlled or counterbalanced. Different strains of animals 
may have significantly different basal levels of activity, making comparisons across studies 
difficult. A major factor in activity studies is the duration of the testing session. Motor 
activity levels are generally highest at the beginning of the session and decrease to a low 
level throughout the session. The rate of decline during the test session is frequently termed 
``habituation.'' 
Motor activity measurements are typically included as part of a battery of tests to 
detect or characterize neurotoxicity. Agent-induced alterations in motor activity associated 
with overt signs of toxicity (e.g., loss of body weight, systemic toxicity) or occurring in non-dose-related fashion
are of less concern than changes that are dose dependent, related to 
structural or other functional changes in the nervous system, or occur in the absence of life-threatening toxicity
and are generally convincing evidence of neurotoxicity. 


4.3.2.3. Neuromotor function. 


Motor dysfunction is a common neurotoxic effect, and 
many different types of tests have been devised to measure time- and dose-dependent effects. 
Anger (1984) reported 14 motor effects of 89 substances, which could be classified into four 
categories: weakness, incoordination, tremor, and myoclonia or spasms. Chemical-induced 
changes in motor function can be determined with relatively simple techniques such as the 
FOB. More specialized tests to assess weakness include measures of grip strength, 
swimming endurance, suspension from a hanging rod, discriminitive motor function, and 
hindlimb splay. Rotarod and gait assessments measure incoordination, while rating scales 
and spectral analysis techniques quantify tremor and other abnormal movements (Tilson and 
Mitchell, 1984). 
An example of a second-tier procedure to assess motor function has been described by 
Newland (1988), who trained squirrel monkeys to hold a bar within specified limits (i.e., 
displacement) to receive positive reinforcement. The bar was also attached to a rotary 
device, which allowed measurement of chemical-induced tremor. Spectral analysis was used 
to characterize the tremor, which was found to be similar to that seen in humans exposed to 
neurotoxicants or with such neurologic diseases as Parkinson's disease. 
Incoordination and performance changes can be assessed with procedures that measure 
chemical-induced alterations in force (Fowler, 1987). The accuracy of performance may 
reflect neuromotor function and is sensitive to the debilitating effects of many psychoactive 
drugs (Walker et al., 1981; Newland, 1988). Gait, an index of coordination, has been 
measured in rats under standardized conditions and can be a sensitive indication of specific 
damage to the basal ganglia and motor cortex (Hruska et al., 1979) as well as damage to the 
spinal cord and peripheral nervous system. 
Procedures to characterize chemical-induced motor dysfunction have been used 
extensively in neurotoxicology. Most require preexposure training (including alterations of 
motivational state) of experimental animals, but such tests might be useful, in as much as 
similar procedures are often used in assessing humans. 


4.3.2.4. Sensory function. 


Alterations in sensory processes (e.g., paresthesias and visual or 
auditory impairments) are frequently reported signs or symptoms in humans exposed to 
toxicants (Anger, 1984). Several approaches have been devised to measure sensory deficits. 
Data from tests of sensory function must be interpreted within the context of changes in body 
weight, body temperature, and other physiological endpoints. Furthermore, many tests 
assess the behavioral response of an animal to a specific sensory stimulus; such responses are 
usually motor movements that could be directly affected by chemical exposure. Thus, care 
must be taken to determine whether proper controls were included to eliminate the possibility 
that changes in response to a sensory stimulus may have been related to agent-induced motor 
dysfunction. 




