 

<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

Title X of the Public Health Service Act, 42 U.S.C. 300, 

et seq

., authorizes the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) to award grants to public or private nonprofit entities
to assist in the establishment and operation of voluntary family planning projects to provide a broad range of acceptable
and effective family planning methods and services (including natural family planning methods, infertility services,
and services for adolescents). The statute requires that, to the extent practicable, entities shall encourage family
participation. Also, Title X funds may not be used in programs where abortion is a method of family planning. Implementing
regulations appear at 42 CFR part 59 subpart A.




On February 5, 1993, HHS published at 58 FR 7462 an interim rule that suspends the 1988 Title X rules (popularly known
as the ``Gag Rule''), pending the promulgation of new regulations. The principle effect of this action was to suspend
the definitions of ``family planning,'' ``grantees,'' ``prenatal care,'' ``Title X,'' ``Title X Program,'' and
``Title X Project'' presently found at 42 CFR 59.2 and 42 CFR 59.759.10. Proposed rules were also published
at 58 FR 7464 on the same date. During the pendency of rulemaking, the compliance standards that were in effect prior
to the issuance of the 1988 rule, including those set out in the 1981 Family Planning Guidelines, will be used to administer
the program. Copies of the pre-1988 compliance standards are available from the Regional Program Consultants listed
above.

The Title X program has established these five priorities:

(1) Expansion of current clinic sites and development of new clinics in high-need areas;

(2) Outreach to low-income women, adolescents and persons at high risk of unintended pregnancy or infection with
STD (including HIV) not now receiving family planning services;

(3) Increased emphasis on services to adolescents, including enhanced counseling as well as new service arrangements
for providing services to teens;

(4) Increased focus on quality and comprehensiveness of services, including treatment of STDs, screening for cervical
and breast cancer, substance abuse counseling, and counseling on avoidance of high risk behavior which may place
clients at risk for STD and HIV; and

(5) Increased emphasis on training and retention of family planning nurse practitioners, particularly minority
nurse practitioners and those working in clincis serving high-need populations.

These program priorities represent overriding goals which are being pursued to the extent that funding increases
or increases in program efficiency allow. Some funding may be available to Title X grantees to improve and expand services.

The Administration's FY 1995 budget request for this program is $199 million. This amount represents a 10 percent
increase over the appropriation for FY 1994 of $181 million, of which $168 million will be made available to Title X
service grantees. Approximately 16 percent of the funds appropriated for FY 1995 and made available to Title X service
grantees will be used for competing grants. The remaining funds will be used for non-competing continuation grants.
This program announcement is subject to the appropriation of funds and is a contingency action being taken to ensure
that, should funds become available for this purpose, they can be awarded in a timely fashion consistent with the needs
of the program as well as to provide for the distribution of funds throughout the fiscal year. Since the precise funding
levels for FY 1995 are uncertain at this point, the funding levels set out below are based on the FY 1993 appropriation
level. However, it is expected that funding levels will be increased if the appropriation for FY 1995 increases.
</SUPPLEM>
