 

With respect to recordkeeping, the State has adopted those items recommended in the EPA's guidance and specifies
that 
sources subject to Stage II must make the following documents 
available upon request: (1) Application approval records and station operating license; (2) system installation
and testing results; (3) equipment maintenance and compliance records; (4) training certification files; and (5)
inspection records. In addition, the State has committed in its SIP supplement to maintain general station and enforcement
files, including information such as facility name, address, phone number, owner/operator names, a State assigned
reference number, date of initial compliance with the regulations, number of pumps, monthly gasoline throughput,
and State enforcement actions. The State has also established an inspection function consistent with that described
in the EPA's guidance. The State commits to conducting inspections of facilities including a visual inspection of
the Stage II equipment and of the required records and a functional test of the Stage II equipment. According to the
Supplement, the State shall inspect each facility at least one time per year. Finally, the State has established procedures
for enforcing violations of the Stage II requirements. Civil penalties may be assessed of up to $25,000 per day per
violation. The EPA finds the State's program for implementation and enforcement of the Stage II program to be consistent
with the EPA guidelines. 



Rulemaking Action



Since the EPA finds that the State has adopted a Stage II SIP in accordance with section 182(b)(3) of the CAAA, as interpreted
in the EPA's guidance, the EPA is giving notice of its intent to approve the submittal as a direct final action meeting
the requirements of section 182(b)(3). 

The EPA is publishing this action without prior proposal because the EPA views this as a noncontroversial revision
and anticipates no adverse comments. This action will become effective May 24, 1994, unless by April 25, 1994 notice
is received that adverse or critical comments will be submitted. If such notice is received, this action will be withdrawn
before the effective date by publishing two subsequent documents. One document will withdraw the final action, and
another will begin a new rulemaking by announcing a proposal of the action and establishing a comment period. If no
such comments are received, the public is advised that this action will be effective May 24, 1994. 

Nothing in this action should be construed as permitting or allowing or establishing a precedent for any future request
for revision to any SIP. Each request for revision to a SIP shall be considered in light of specific technical, economical,
and environmental factors and in relation to relevant statutory and regulatory requirements. 



Regulatory Process 



Under the Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 600 

et seq.

, the EPA must prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis assessing the impact of any proposed or final rule on small
entities (5 U.S.C. 603 and 604). Alternatively, the EPA may certify that the rule will not have a significant impact
on a substantial number of small entities. Small entities include small businesses, small not-for-profit enterprises,
and government entities with jurisdiction over populations of less than 50,000. 

SIP approvals under section 110 and subchapter I, part D of the CAAA do not create any new requirements, but simply approve
requirements that the State is already imposing. Therefore, because the Federal SIP approval does not impose any
new requirements, I certify that it does not have a significant impact on any small entities affected. Moreover, due
to the nature of the Federal-State relationship under the CAAA, preparation of a regulatory flexibility analysis
would constitute Federal inquiry into the economic reasonableness of State action. The CAAA forbids the EPA to base
its actions concerning SIPs on such grounds (

Union Electric Co. 

v. 

U.S. E.P.A.

, 427 U.S. 246, 25666 (S.Ct. 1976); 42 U.S.C. 7410(a)(2)). 

This action has been classified as a table two action by the Regional Administrator under the procedures published
in the FR on January 19, 1989 (54 FR 22142225). On January 6, 1989, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) waived
table two and table three SIP revisions from the requirements of section three of Executive Order 12291 for a period
of two years (54 FR 2222). The EPA has submitted a request for a permanent waiver for table two and table three SIP revisions.
The OMB has agreed to continue the waiver until such time as it rules on the EPA's request. This request is still applicable
under Executive Order 12866. 



List of Subjects in 40 CFR Part 52 



Environmental protection, Air pollution control, Hydrocarbons, Incorporation by reference, Intergovernmental
relations, Ozone, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Volatile organic compounds.






Note

_Incorporation by reference of the SIP for the State of Louisiana was approved by the Director of the Federal Register
on July 1, 1982.




Dated: February 4, 1994. 



<SIGNER>
Jane N. Saginaw, 


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Regional Administrator. 



</SIGNJOB>
