 

37. Interests in the Partnership will be non-transferable except with the prior written consent of the General Partner,
which consent may be withheld in its sole discretion, and in any event, will not be transferable to persons other than
(a) other Partners; (b) trusts established by the transferor Limited Partner for the benefit of such Limited Partner
or such Limited Partner's immediate family; or (c) by succession or testamentary disposition upon the death of the
transferor Limited Partner. A Limited Partner's interest will not be redeemable upon, and will not be affected by,
such Limited Partner's termination of employment from the Morgan Stanley Group.
38. During the existence of the Partnership, books of account will be kept, in which the General Partner will enter,
or cause to be entered, all business transacted by the Partnership, all moneys and other things received, advanced,
paid out, or delivered on behalf of the Partnership, the results of the Partnership's operations, and each Partner's
capital. Such books will at all times be accessible to all Partners. In addition, for each fiscal year of the Partnership,
the General Partner will cause an examination of the financial statements of the Partnership to be made in accordance
with generally accepted auditing standards by a nationally recognized firm of certified public accountants. A copy
of the accountants' report with respect to each fiscal year will be furnished to each Partner within a specified period
after the end of such fiscal year. The General Partner will also furnish certain information to the Partners on a quarterly
basis. The scope and nature of the information furnished to the Limited Partners is the same as that furnished to the
third party investors of the MS Venture Capital Funds.


Applicant's Legal Analysis


1. Applicant requests an exemption under sections 6(b) and 6(e) of the Act from all provisions of the Act, and the rules
and regulations thereunder, except section 9, sections 17 and 30 (except as described below), sections 36 through
53, and the rules and regulations thereunder.
2. Applicant requests an exemption from section 17(a) of the Act to the extent necessary to (a) permit a member of the
Morgan Stanley Group, acting as principal, to engage in any transaction directly or indirectly with the Partnership
or any company controlled by the Partnership; (b) permit the Partnership to invest in or engage in any transaction
with any entity, acting as principal, (i) in which the Partnership, any company controlled by the Partnership, or
any member of the Morgan Stanley Group has invested or will invest, or (ii) with which the Partnership, any company
controlled by the Partnership, or any member of the Morgan Stanley Group is or will become otherwise affiliated; and
(c) permit a Non-MS Venture Fund Partner, acting as principal, to engage in any transaction directly or indirectly
with the Partnership or any company controlled by the Partnership. The transactions to which the Partnership is a
party will be effected only after a determination by the Board that the requirements of Condition 1 below have been
satisfied. In addition, these transactions will be effected only to the extent not prohibited by the limited partnership
agreements of the MS Venture Capital Funds and the Partnership.
3. The principal reason for the requested exemption is to ensure that the Partnership will be able to invest in companies,
properties, or vehicles in which a member of the Morgan Stanley Group (including without limitation an MS Venture
Capital Fund), or the member's employees, officers, directors, or advisory directors, or the partners of an MS Venture
Capital Fund, may make or have already made an investment. The relief is also requested to permit the Partnership the
flexibility to deal with its portfolio investments in the manner the General Partner deems most advantageous to all
Partners or as required by the MS Venture Capital Funds or the Partnership's other co-investors. Furthermore, the
requested exemption is sought to ensure that a Non-MS Venture Fund Partner will not directly or indirectly become
subject to a burden, restriction, or other adverse effect by virtue of the Partnership's participation in an investment
opportunity.
4. The Partners will have been fully informed of the possible extent of the partnership's dealings with an MS Venture
Capital Fund or another member of the Morgan Stanley Group or with a Non-MS Venture Partner and, as professionals employed
in the securities business, will be able to understand and evaluate the attendant risks. Applicant asserts that the
community of interest among the Partners, on the one hand, and an MS Venture Capital Fund or another member of the Morgan
Stanley Group or the Non-MS Venture Fund Partners, on the other hand, is the best insurance against any risk of abuse.


