 

The Lincoln County Air Pollution Control Program was established in accordance with the requirements of section
752301 of the Montana Clean Air Act, as amended (1991). A stipulation between the MDHES, the Lincoln
County Commission and the Libby City Council was signed on March 18, 1993, to delineate responsibilities and authorities
between the MDHES and the local authorities. On March 19, 1993, the MBHES held a public hearing and (a) approved the
PM

10

 emission control plan for the Libby PM

10

 nonattainment area, and (b) incorporated the Lincoln County local air pollution control program and the PM

10

 emission control plan for the Libby area into the Montana SIP, and (c) issued a board order effectuating the program.
The ordinances, stipulation, and board order were submitted to EPA with the Libby PM

10

 SIP. 

The State also submitted a State Assistant Attorney General's opinion interpreting the authority of the MDHES to
enforce any state and local air quality provisions if a local air quality program fails to do so. In practice, the MBHES
issues a board order when it approves a local program or amendments to a program. Since the Montana Clean Air Act authorizes
the MDHES to enforce board orders issued by the MBHES, the MDHES has the authority to assume jurisdiction over, and
implement, a local program so approved. However, the Montana Clean Air Act also requires a hearing before the MBHES
before such an assumption of jurisdiction and authority can be made. 

The Lincoln County ordinances are in effect now, as is the State's permit modification for Stimson Lumber Company.
The State of Montana has a program that will ensure that the measures contained in the Libby PM

10

 SIP are adequately enforced. EPA believes that the State's and Libby's existing air enforcement program will be adequate.
The TSD for this action contains further information on enforceability requirements, responsibilities, and personnel
and funding intended to support effective implementation of the control measures. 



8. Contingency Measures 



As provided in section 172(c)(9) of the Act, all moderate nonattainment area SIPs that demonstrate attainment must
include contingency measures. See generally 57 FR 1351013512 and 57 FR 1354313544. These measures
were required to be submitted by November 15, 1993, for the initial moderate nonattainment areas. Contingency measures
should consist of other available measures that are not part of the area's control strategy. These measures must take
effect without further action by the State or EPA, upon EPA's determination that the area has failed to make RFP or attain
the PM

10

 NAAQS by the applicable statutory deadline. 

The Libby nonattainment area SIP contains contingency measures that address re-entrained road dust (use of liquid
de-icer and expansion of sanding and sweeping area to Air Pollution Control District boundaries) and residential
wood combustion (prohibiting burning except under specified permits for the entire period between October 1 and
March 31 each year). In a May 27, 1994, letter from Doug Skie, EPA, to Jeff Chaffee, MAQB, EPA advised the State that additional
language was needed in the triggering mechanism for the contingency measures. The State is working with the local
governments and health department to adopt the necessary changes. EPA will take separate action on the Libby PM

10

 contingency measures. See the TSD for this action for a more detailed discussion of the contingency measure deficiencies.




III. Final Action 



EPA is approving the PM

10

 SIP submitted to EPA on May 24, 1993, with final technical corrections dated June 3, 1994, for the Libby, Montana nonattainment
area, with the exception of the contingency measures. Among other things, the State of Montana has demonstrated that
the Libby moderate PM

10

 nonattainment area will attain the PM

10

 NAAQS by December 31, 1994. EPA is also approving the Lincoln County Air Pollution Control Program, which was included
in the Libby SIP submittal. 

Because EPA considers this action noncontroversial and anticipates no adverse comments, this final approval is
made without prior proposal. However, in a separate document in this 

Federal Register

 publication, the EPA is proposing to approve the SIP revision should adverse or critical comments be filed. This action
will be effective October 31, 1994 unless, by September 29, 1994, adverse or critical comments are received. 

If EPA receives such comments, this action will be withdrawn before the effective date by publishing a subsequent
document that will withdraw the final action. All public comments received will then be addressed in a subsequent
final rule based on this action serving as a proposed rule. The EPA will not institute a second comment period on this
action. Any parties interested in commenting on this action should do so at this time. If no such comments are received,
the public is advised that this action will be effective October 31, 1994.

As noted, additional submittals for the initial moderate PM

10

 nonattainment areas (

i.e.

, nonattainment new source review program requirements) are due independent of the SIP requirements addressed in
this action. EPA will determine the adequacy of any such submittal as appropriate. 

Nothing in this action should be construed as permitting, allowing or establishing a precedent for any future request
for revision to any SIP. Each request for revision to any SIP shall be considered separately in light of specific technical,
economic, and environmental factors, and in relation to relevant statutory and regulatory requirements. 

The OMB has exempted this action from review under Executive Order 12866. 



