 

Classification of an agreement as ``Class A'' or ``Class B'' for purposes of its reporting obligations under this
subpart shall be done by the Bureau of Trade Monitoring and Analysis, based in the first instance on the market share
data reported on the agreement's Information Form pursuant to 572.503, or on similar data otherwise obtained.
Thereafter, at the beginning of each calendar year, the Bureau of Trade Monitoring and Analysis shall determine whether
the agreement should be classified as ``Class A'' or ``Class B'' for that year, based on the market share data reported
on the agreement's most recent quarterly Monitoring Report. 

(c) 

Class C agreement

 means an agreement that is subject to the definition set forth in 572.502(b). 

25. A new section 572.703 is added, as follows: 



572.703 



Monitoring report for Class A agreements. 



This section sets forth the Monitoring Report form for Class A agreements, with accompanying instructions that are
intended to facilitate the completion of the Report. The instructions should be read in conjunction with the Shipping
Act of 1984 and with this part 572. 



Monitoring Report for Class A Agreements 



Instructions 



A complete response must be supplied to each part of the Report. Where the party answering a particular part is unable
to supply a complete response, that party shall provide either estimated data (with an explanation of why precise
data are not available) or a detailed statement of reasons for noncompliance and the efforts made to obtain the required
information. All sources must be identified. 



Part by Part Explanation




Part I 



Part I requires the filing party to state the full name of the agreement, and the assigned FMC number. 



Part II 



Part II requires the filing party to indicate any change occurring during the calendar quarter to the list of other
agreements set forth in Part II of the Information Form. 



Part III(A) 



Part III(A) requires the filing party to indicate whether the agreement authorizes the parties to operate as a conference.




Part III(B) 



Part III(B) requires the filing party to indicate whether the agreement authorizes the parties to establish capacity
management or capacity regulation programs, as defined in 572.104(e), whereby some part of the capacity of
the parties' vessels is withheld from a specified transportation market. 



Part IV 



Part IV requires the filing party to provide the market shares of all liner operators within the entire geographic
scope of the agreement and in each sub-trade within the scope of the agreement during the most recent calendar quarter.
Sub-trade is defined as the scope of all liner movements between each U.S. port range and each foreign country within
the scope of the agreement. Where the agreement covers both U.S. inbound and outbound liner movements, inbound and
outbound market shares should be shown separately. 

U.S. port ranges are defined as follows: 



Atlantic_

Includes ports along the eastern seaboard from the northern boundary of Maine to, but not including, Key West, Florida.
Also includes all ports bordering upon the Great Lakes and their connecting waterways as well as all ports in the State
of New York on the St. Lawrence River. 



Gulf_

Includes all ports along the Gulf of Mexico from Key West, Florida, to Brownsville, Texas, inclusive. Also includes
all ports in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. 



Pacific_

Includes all ports in the States of Alaska, Hawaii, California, Oregon and Washington. Also includes all ports in
Guam, American Samoa and Saipan. 

The 

formula for calculating market share 

(in either the entire agreement scope or in a sub-trade) is as follows: 

The total amount of cargo carried on each liner operator's liner vessels (in either the entire agreement scope or in
the particular sub-trade) during the calendar quarter, divided by the total amount of cargo carried on all liner vessels
(in either the entire agreement scope or in the particular sub-trade) during the calendar quarter, which quotient
is multiplied by 100. The market shares held by non-agreement lines as well as by agreement lines must be provided,
stated separately in the format indicated. 

The 

amount of cargo

 is to be measured in TEUs. 

Liner movements

 is the carriage of liner cargo by liner operators. 

Liner cargoes

 are cargoes carried on liner vessels in a liner service. A 

liner operator

 is a vessel-operating common carrier engaged in liner service. 

Liner vessels

 are those vessels used in a liner service. 

Liner service 

refers to a definite, advertised schedule of sailings at regular intervals. All these definitions, terms and descriptions
apply only for purposes of the Monitoring Report. 



Part V 



Part V requires the filing party to state each agreement member line's total cargo carryings (measured in TEUs) during
the calendar quarter within the entire geographic area covered by the agreement, each line's total revenues within
the geographic area during the calendar quarter, and average revenue per TEU. The Monitoring Report specifies the
format in which the information is to be reported. Where the agreement covers both U.S. inbound and outbound liner
movements, inbound and outbound data should be stated separately. 


Part VI 


Part VI requires the filing party to identify, for each sub-trade within the scope of the agreement, the top 10 commodities
by cumulative TEUs carried by all the parties during the calendar quarter, or the commodities accounting for 50 percent
of the cumulative TEUs carried by all the parties during the calendar quarter, whichever is greater. Where the agreement
covers both U.S. inbound and outbound liner movements, inbound and outbound sub-trades should be stated separately.


