 

These two configurations represent the limiting cases for the numbers of pits held in a single Modified-Richmond
or Steel Arch Construction magazine. In the vertical configuration, individual pit containers may rest on casters
rather than on the concrete floor of magazines. This will facilitate inventory operations and worker safety, and
accommodate operational needs. In addition, some Steel Arch Construction magazines will be reserved for assembled
weapons and component staging activities that have taken place in the past, and will continue in these facilities.


Each pit is clamped in a holding fixture and inserted in a storage container comprised of a carbon or stainless steel
drum lined with a nominal three inches of insulating and cushioning material. The pallets for the horizontal multiple
stacking configuration are designed to ensure structural integrity and stability. An electric forklift with shielding
for radiation protection will be used for storage, retrieval, and inventory operations for the horizontal palletized
stacking configuration. The shielded forklift has a passive guidance system (e.g., rail guides, wire guides, etc.,),
which prevents the forklift from veering from the aisle, and is equipped with a lateral motion, turret-type fork assembly,
which allows palletized pit containers to be stacked and retrieved. 



Alternatives: 

The Environmental Assessment considers the alternatives of No Action, Combination of the Proposed Action Storage
at Pantex with Storage at Other Department of Energy Sites (Savannah River Site, Los Alamos National Laboratory,
and the Hanford Site), Supplement No-Action Alternative Storage Capacity with Storage at Other Department of Energy
Sites, and Interim Storage at a Department of Defense Facility. Based on the analysis in the Environmental Assessment,
none of the alternatives would provide sufficient increased interim storage capacity for pits while continuing
disassembly operations at the anticipated rate, and none would meet other programmatic objectives, i.e., to provide
an approach that is timely and cost effective and utilizes to the maximum extent practicable existing facilities
and infrastructures. 



Environmental Impacts: Routine Operating Conditions: 

Under normal operating conditions, the storage of up to 12,000 pits would result in only minor releases of air pollutants
associated with equipment engines and a minor increase in particulates (dust) associated with forklift operations
in moving security blocks and pit containers to the magazines. There would be no impact to water resources, flood plains,
wetlands, cultural resources, or other site features. No new facilities are required to increase storage capacity.
Consequently, there would be no environmental impact due to the need for construction or significant modification
of facilities. 

The primary impact of routine operations is occupational radiation exposure to workers involved in placement of
pits into storage and periodic inspections and inventories of pits stored on an interim basis. Increasing the number
of pits from 6,000 to 12,000 will increase the estimated cumulative personnel exposure by approximately 14 percent
(from 67.8 person-rem per year as reflected in Appendix F of the Environmental Assessment to approximately 80.4 person-rem
per year). For all operations at the Pantex Plant, worker radiation doses are maintained below the annually established
Pantex operating limit of 1 rem per year. This limit is well below the federally mandated limit of 5 rem per year. Limiting
the number of pits stored at Pantex on an interim basis to a maximum of 12,000 pits would reduce the cumulative Personnel
Exposure (person-rem/yr) estimated to occur from the proposed action in Appendix F of the Environmental Assessment
from 92.4 person-rem per year to 80.4 person-rem per year. The reduction would result from reducing the total number
of magazines inventoried on an annual basis from 40 magazines per year to 24 magazines per year. The handling procedures
and rate of fill of the magazines described in the Environmental Assessment remain unchanged. Individual exposures
would be maintained well within Federal and Department guidelines. Emphasis will be placed on ensuring that doses
to workers will be minimized through implementation of ``As Low As Reasonably Achievable'' practices. 

Additionally, the level of penetrating radiation expected to result from storage of up to 12,000 pits would result
in no measurable effect on exposure to an individual occupying a position for an entire year at the nearest Pantex site
boundary. Such a level would be indistinguishable from natural background radiation. No adverse health effects
would be expected among the general public as a result of routine operations from this action. 



Abnormal Events/Accidents: 

The Department of Energy analyzed a series of potential accidents in the Environmental Assessment. By using conservative
assumptions (i.e., those that tend to overestimate potential impacts), the Department of Energy attempted to bound
all reasonably foreseeable adverse impacts. The Department of Energy analyzed impacts from abnormal events 
having a probability of occurrence of greater than one in a million (1 x 10

^6

). 


