 

These conditions and limits are discussed more fully below. 

Under the final rule, individual baselines are used to certify reformulated gasoline and demonstrate compliance
with the reformulated gasoline standards only during 1995 through 1997. Beginning January 1, 1998 all reformulated
gasoline compliance must be certified using the statutory baseline. See 80.41(h)(j). This
constraint also would apply to importers of reformulated gasoline who under today's proposal had previously used
individual foreign refinery baselines. 

Importers would be able to use an individual foreign refinery baseline for reformulated gasoline for 1995 through
1997 only if all of these conditions and limits are fully met. If any condition is not met with regard to a specific foreign
refinery, then importers would not be allowed to use the foreign refinery's individual baseline. If any such conditions
are not met subsequent to the time the importer uses the individual foreign refinery baseline, then the importer would
be required to recalculate its compliance using the statutory baseline, even if the failure to meet the conditions
occurs during a subsequent averaging period. This potentially could expose the importer to substantial penalties
if subsequent use of the statutory baseline causes the importer to be in non-compliance with the reformulated gasoline
requirements.

4

 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


4

</FOOTNAME>
Under section 211(d) of the Clean Air Act, violators of the reformulated gasoline requirements and standards are
subject to a maximum penalty of $25,000 per violation per day, plus economic benefit. Violations of multi-day (averaging)
standards constitute a separate day of violation for each day in the averaging period. 

</FOOTNOTE>


EPA is proposing that importers who use a foreign refinery's individual baseline would use that baseline, and the
volume of the foreign refinery's reformulated gasoline involved, to calculate a new importer baseline for use during
that year. The total of the reformulated gasoline imported by the importer during the relevant averaging period would
then be evaluated against this new importer baseline to determine compliance by the importer with the reformulated
gasoline standards. This proposed method for using foreign refinery baselines is illustrated by the following example.


A hypothetical importer has been assigned the statutory baseline. During 1996 he imports reformulated gasoline
totalling 900,000 barrels of gasoline produced at hypothetical foreign refinery A, and 800,000 barrels of gasoline
produced at hypothetical foreign refinery B. Foreign refiner A has an individual refinery baseline, and the sulfur
baseline level is 400 ppm, and a baseline volume of 1,000,000 barrels.

5

 Foreign refiner B does not have an individual refinery baseline, and the importer would use the statutory baseline,
which for sulfur is 338 ppm, for the refinery B volume. The average sulfur content of the imported gasoline that was
produced at foreign refinery A was 375 ppm, and the average sulfur content of the imported gasoline that was produced
at foreign refinery B was 360 ppm. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


5

</FOOTNAME>
Because the 1990 baseline volume assigned to Refinery A is greater than 900,000 barrels, the importer may use Refinery
A's individual baseline for all 900,000 barrels imported from that refinery. 

</FOOTNOTE>


The hypothetical importer would calculate a new sulfur baseline of 370.80 ppm as follows: 





<IMPORT>



E:GRAPHICSEP03MY94.000


</IMPORT>



The hypothetical importer then would compute the average sulfur content of all gasoline imported during the year,
of 365.00 ppm, as follows: 





<IMPORT>



E:GRAPHICSEP03MY94.001


</IMPORT>



Because the 365.00 ppm overall average sulfur content of the gasoline imported is less than the 370.80 ppm calculated
baseline for the importer, the importer meets the sulfur standard applicable to the importer. Note that the imported
gasoline produced at foreign refinery A would not be required to separately meet the 400 ppm sulfur baseline applicable
to refinery A, and the imported gasoline produced at foreign refinery B would not be required to separately meet the
338 ppm sulfur baseline applicable to refinery B. 


