 

(3) 

Geographic regions for residual income guidelines: 

Northeast_Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island
and Vermont; Midwest_Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota,
Ohio, South Dakota and Wisconsin; South_Alabama, Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia,
Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Puerto Rico, South Carolina, Tennessee,
Texas, Virginia, West Virginia; West_Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada,
New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, Washington and Wyoming.

(4) 

Military adjustments: 

For loan applications involving an active-duty serviceperson or military retiree, the residual income figures
will be reduced by a minimum of 5 percent if there is a clear indication that the borrower or spouse will continue to receive
the benefits resulting from the use of facilities on a nearby military base. (This reduction applies to tables in paragraph
(e).)

(f) 

Stability and reliability of income. 

Only stable and reliable income of the veteran and spouse can be considered in determining ability to meet mortgage
payments. Income can be considered stable and reliable if it can be concluded that it will continue during the foreseeable
future.

(1) 

Verification. 

Income of the borrower and spouse which is derived from employment and which is considered in determining the family's
ability to meet the mortgage payments, payments on debts and other obligations, and other expenses, must be verified.
If the spouse is employed and will be contractually obligated on the loan, the combined income of both the veteran and
spouse is considered when the income of the veteran alone is not sufficient to qualify for the amount of the loan sought.
In other than community property States, if the spouse will not be contractually obligated on the loan, Regulation
B, promulgated by the Federal Reserve Board pursuant to the Equal Credit Opportunity Act prohibits any request for,
or consideration of information concerning the spouse (including income, employment, assets, or liabilities),
except that if the applicant is relying on alimony, child support, or maintenance payments from a spouse or former
spouse as a basis for repayment of the loan, information concerning such spouse or former spouse may be requested and
considered (see paragraph (f)(4) of this section). In community property States, information concerning a spouse
may be requested and considered in the same manner as that for the applicant. The standards applied to income of the
veteran are also applicable to that of the spouse. There can be no discounting of income on account of sex, marital status,
or any other basis prohibited by the Equal Credit Opportunity Act. Income claimed by an applicant that is not or cannot
be verified cannot be given considered when analyzing the loan. If the veteran or spouse has been employed by a present
employer for less than 2 years, a 2-year history covering prior employment, schooling or other training must be secured.
Any periods of unemployment must be explained. Employment verifications and pay stubs must be no more than 90 days
old to be considered valid. For loans closed automatically, this requirement will be considered satisfied if the
date of the employment verification is within 90 days of the date of the veteran's application to the lender.

(2) 

Active duty applicants. 

(i) In the case of an active duty applicant, a military Leave  Earnings Statement is required and will be used instead
of an employment verification. The statement must be no more than 90 days old and must be the original or a lender-certified
copy of the original. For loans closed automatically, this requirement is satisfied if the date of the Leave and Earnings
Statement is within 90 days of the date of the borrower's application to the lender.

(ii) For service members within 12 months of release from active duty one of the following is also required:

(A) Documentation that the service member has in fact already reenlisted or extended his/her period of active duty
to a date beyond the 12 month period following the projected closing of the loan.

(B) Verification of a valid offer of local civilian employment following release from active duty. All data pertinent
to sound underwriting procedures (date employment will begin, earnings, etc.) must be included.

(C) A statement from the service member that he/she intends to reenlist or extend his/her period of active duty to a
date beyond the 12 month period following the projected loan closing date, and a statement from the service member's
commanding officer confirming that the service member is eligible to reenlist or extend his/her active duty as indicated
and that the commanding officer has no reason to believe that such reenlistment or extension of active duty will not
be granted.

(D) Other unusually strong positive underwriting factors, such as a downpayment of at least 10 percent, significant
cash reserves, or clear evidence of strong ties to the community coupled with a nonmilitary spouse's income so high
that only minimal income from the active duty service member is needed to qualify.



