 

500.1 

Scope of the regulations of this part. 


The regulations in this part establish requirements for labeling of consumer commodities as hereinafter defined
with respect to identity of the commodity; the name and place of business of the manufacturer, packer, or distributor;
the net quantity of contents; and net quantity of servings, uses, or applications represented to be present. 


500.2 

Terms defined. 


As used in this part, unless the context otherwise specifically requires: 
(a) The term 

Act 

means the ``Fair Packaging and Labeling Act'' (Pub. L. 89755, approved Nov. 3, 1966; 80 Stat. 1296 

et seq.

; 15 U.S.C. 1451 

et seq

., as amended by Public Law 102329, August 3, 1992). 
(b) The term 

regulation 

or 

regulations 

means regulations promulgated by the Commission pursuant to sections 4, 5, and 6 of the Act (15 U.S.C. 1453, 1454, 1455).

(c) The term 

consumer commodity 

or 

commodity 

means any article, product, or commodity of any kind or class which is customarily produced or distributed for sale
through retail sales agencies or instrumentalities for consumption by individuals, or use by individuals for purposes
of personal care or in the performance of services ordinarily rendered within the household, and which usually is
consumed or expended in the course of such consumption or use. For purposes of the regulations in this part the term


consumer commodity 

does not include any food, drug, device or cosmetic as defined by section 201 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
Act (21 U.S.C. 321); any meat or meat product, poultry or poultry product, or tobacco or tobacco product; any commodity
subject to packaging or labeling requirements imposed by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
pursuant to the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. 136 

et seq

.); any commodity subject to the provisions of the eighth paragraph under the heading ``Bureau of Animal Industry''
of the Virus-Serum-Toxin Act (21 U.S.C. 151157); any beverage subject to or complying with packaging or labeling
requirements imposed under the Federal Alcohol Administration Act (27 U.S.C. 201 

et seq

.); any commodity subject to the provisions of the Federal Seed Act (7 U.S.C. 15511610). 
(d) The term 

package 

means any container or wrapping in which any consumer commodity is enclosed for use in the delivery or display of that
commodity to retail purchasers. For purposes of the regulations in this part the term 

package 

does not include shipping containers or wrappings used solely for the transportation of any consumer commodity in
bulk or in quantity to manufacturers, packers, or processors, or to wholesale or retail distributors thereof unless
used in retail display; shipping containers or outer wrappings used by retailers to ship or deliver any commodity
to retail customers if such containers and wrappings bear no printed matter pertaining to any particular commodity;
or containers subject to the provisions of the Act of August 3, 1912 (37 Stat. 250, as amended; 15 U.S.C. 231233),
the Act of March 4, 1915 (38 Stat. 1186, as amended; 15 U.S.C. 234236); or transparent wrappers or containers
which do not bear written, printed, or graphic matter obscuring any part of the label information required by this
part. 
(e) The term 

label 

means any written, printed, or graphic matter affixed to or appearing upon any consumer commodity or affixed to or
appearing upon a package containing any consumer commodity; except that: 
(1) An inspector's tag or other nonpromotional matter affixed to or appearing upon a consumer commodity shall not
be deemed to be a label requiring the repetition of label information required by this part, and 
(2) For the purposes of the regulations in this part the term 

label 

does not include written, printed, or graphic matter affixed to or appearing upon commodities, or affixed to or appearing
upon containers or wrappers for commodities sold or distributed to industrial or institutional users. 
(f) The term 

person 

includes any firm, corporation or associations. 
(g) The term 

commerce 

means: 
(1) Commerce between any State, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or any territory or 
possession of the United States, and any place outside thereof, and 
(2) Commerce within the District of Columbia or within any territory or possession of the United States, not organized
with a legislature, but shall not include exports to foreign countries. 





