 

For gas ovens, the Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers proposed 
separate product classes for standard and self-cleaning convection ovens and 
radiant burner gas ovens. As with electric convection ovens, the Association 
of Home Appliance Manufacturers said the unique operating characteristics of 
the convection oven warrant a separate class. (Association of Home Appliance 
Manufacturers, No. 61A at 53). For radiant burner gas ovens, the Association 
of Home Appliance Manufacturers made reference to its comments on radiant 
burners for gas cooktops. (Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers, No. 
61A at 53). 
As stated in the discussion of product classes, the Department has 
established two product classes for gas ovens (standard and self-cleaning). 
The Department believes that convection and radiant burner gas ovens should be 
analyzed as design options. A separate class would be warranted if lower 
efficient design options had consumer utility relative to convection and 
radiant burner gas ovens. The design options commented on by the Association 
of Home Appliance Manufacturers and others have all been considered for gas 
ovens. The bi-radiant oven concept referred to by the Natural Resources 
Defense Council was determined to be applicable to electric ovens only.
<FOOTCITE>32</FOOTCITE>
 
Data provided by the Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers, 
manufacturers, suppliers, and published reports
<FOOTCITE>33</FOOTCITE>
 were used in the analysis of gas ovens. Manufacturers' data supplied by the Association of Home 
Appliance Manufacturers were the only source of cost and efficiency data 
provided with which the Department could analyze oven separators. As with 
electric ovens, the improved insulation and reduced vent size design options 
were analyzed only for standard gas ovens. The Department did not receive any 
energy-use or cost data concerning the radiant burner gas oven, thus 
preventing it from being analyzed. 



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
32

</FOOTNAME>
D.P. DeWitt and M.V. Peart, ``Bi-Radiant Oven a Low-Energy Oven System,'' Purdue University, prepared for Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, April 1980, ORNL/Sub80/0082/1, ORNL/Sub80/0082/2, ORNL/Sub80/0082/3.


</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
33

</FOOTNAME>
``Costing Analysis of Design Options for Residential Appliances and Space Conditioning Equipment,'' Lawrence
Berkeley Laboratory, prepared by ADM Associates, Inc., Purchase No. 4541710, December 1987, ``Energy Efficient
Electrical Product Knowledge Base,'' Canadian Electrical Association, prepared by ORTECH International, C.E.A.
No. 821 U 678, October 1989, U.S. Department of Energy Engineering Analysis, DOE/CS0166, June 1980.

</FOOTNOTE>


For microwave ovens, the Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers 
stated that high-grade stainless steel (or reflective material steel coating) 
would be more efficient than painted cold-rolled steel by approximately one 
percent. (Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers No. 61A at 3033). The 
Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers stated that a small efficiency 
improvement may be available if fan air flow is increased or if motor energy 
consumption is decreased. (Id. at 32). The Association of Home Appliance 
Manufacturers said that magnetron efficiency has reached its maximum at 72 
percent. (Id. at 33). The Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers stated 
that solid-state power supplies are not more efficient, but cost more. At low 
power levels, improved performance is expected because they eliminate the 
on/off cycling used by other power supplies. (Id. at 34). The Association of 
Home Appliance Manufacturers stated that there are no data available to 
suggest that solid-state microwave generators would increase the generating 
efficiency over the 70+ percent efficiency available in today's magnetrons. 
(Id. at 34). The Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers said that a 
modified wave guide may decrease energy absorption by one percent. (Id. at 
35). The Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers stated that microwave 
oven models with fan-type stirrers use a cover over the fan to prevent 
inadvertent damage to the fan when inserting or removing food and to prevent 
degradation of the wave guide due to food splatter. While these ceramic 
stirrer covers may absorb some microwave energy, they are essential for 
protecting the stirrer and to prevent accumulation of food splatter inside the 
wave-guide. (Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers No. 61A at 35). 
The Department has utilized the Association of Home Appliance 
Manufacturers's estimates for energy savings from improved magnetrons, 
reflective surfaces, modified wave guides, and more efficient fans. After 
considering the Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers's comments, the 
Department has also excluded solid-state microwave generators and modified 
food stirrers from its cost/efficiency tables. The Department has generated 
data for, and included a more efficient power supply in, its cost/efficiency 
analysis for microwave ovens. 
Arkansas Western Gas said that maintenance and installation should be 
considered. (Arkansas Western Gas, No. 64 at 7). 


