 


For a more complete statement of the facts and representations supporting the Department's decision to grant this
exemption, refer to the notice of proposed exemption published on December 3, 1993 at 58 FR 64012. 




<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Ms. Jan D. Broady of the Department, telephone (202) 2198881. (This is not a toll-free number.) 





W.J. Casey Trucking  Rigging Co., Inc. 
Employees Profit Sharing Plan and Trust (the Plan) 
Located in Union, New Jersey 





[Prohibited Transaction Exemption 9411 ; 
Exemption Application No. D9506] 




Exemption 





The restrictions of sections 406(a), 406(b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resulting from the application
of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1)(A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to: (1) The seven-year
loan of $300,000 (the Loan) by the Plan to W. J. Casey Trucking  Rigging Co., Inc. (the Employer), a party in interest
with respect to the Plan; and (2) the personal guarantees of the Employer's obligations under the Loan by James P. and
Nicholas J. Biondi (the Biondis), parties in interest with respect to the Plan. 



This exemption is conditioned upon the following requirements: (a) All terms and conditions of the Loan are at least
as favorable to the Plan as those obtainable in an arm's-length transaction with an unrelated party; (b) the Loan will
not exceed twenty-five percent of the Plan's assets at any time during the transaction; (c) the Loan is secured by a
first lien 
interest on certain equipment (the Equipment), which has been appraised by a qualified, independent appraiser to
ensure that the fair market value of the Equipment is at least 200 percent of the amount of the Loan; (d) the Employer's
obligations under the Loan are personally guaranteed by the Biondis; (e) the fair market value of the Equipment remains
not less than 200 percent of the outstanding balance of the Loan throughout the duration of the Loan; (f) an independent,
qualified fiduciary determines on behalf of the Plan that the Loan is administratively feasible, in the best interests
of the Plan, and protective of the Plan and its participants and beneficiaries; and (g) the independent, qualified
fiduciary monitors compliance with the terms and conditions of the exemption and the Loan throughout the duration
of the transaction, taking any action necessary to safeguard the Plan's interest, including foreclosure on the Equipment
in the event of default. 



For a more complete statement of the facts and representations supporting the Department's decision to grant this
exemption, refer to the notice of proposed exemption published on December 10, 1993 at 58 FR 64983.





</FURTHER>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Kathryn Parr of the 
Department, telephone (202) 2198971. (This is not a toll-free number.) 




</FURTHER>
