 

It could be argued that the anticipated benefits from amending the Federal restriction on animal rabies vaccines
to require that they be distributed and used only by or under the direct supervision of a licensed veterinarian would
be: (1) more uniform regulation of the distribution and administration of animal rabies vaccines, (2) improved documentation
of animal rabies vaccinations to enable public health officials to make an informed choice concerning the therapy
for animal bite victims; (3) facilitation of the recall of any unsatisfactory serials of rabies vaccines, and (4)
assurance of the identification of animals receiving vaccines determined not to meet requirements for stability
or potency.
Currently, it is reported that 98.4 percent of the 25,000,000 doses of animal rabies vaccine that are distributed
in the United States each year are sold directly to veterinarians. It is not known, however, how many of these doses
are redistributed through catalogs and over the counter for administration by 
nonveterinarians.
An estimated 9,000 human beings are treated annually in the United States for potential exposure to rabid dogs and
cats. Post-exposure human rabies prophylaxis costs an estimated $1,000 per patient. In 1989, the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention recommended that the most effective methods for reducing human exposure to rabies are education
of the public to avoid unfamiliar, especially wild animals, and vaccination of pet dogs and cats.



Request for Comments


Since receiving the request from the NASPHV to amend the Federal restrictions on animal rabies vaccines, APHIS has
attempted to identify specific issues (enumerated below) that need to be addressed before the Agency can proceed
with a notice of proposed rulemaking. Some of these issues raise questions and identify competing interests that
are difficult to resolve. For example, a Federal restriction that animal rabies vaccines only be distributed to veterinarians
and administered by or under the direct supervision of a licensed veterinarian could have the benefit of ensuring
proper administration and could also enable public health officials to certify that a rabies vaccine was properly
administered. An unintended effect of such a restriction, however, could be a reduction in the number of animals vaccinated
with a corresponding reduction in the effectiveness of rabies prevention by making it more expensive or impractical
to vaccinate multiple animals in single households, animals in kennels, farm animals, or animals in metropolitan
animal shelters_animals which are often vaccinated by nonveterinarians. With regard to the issue of proper vaccine
administration, a 1989 study showed that only 5% of rabid cats and 14% of rabid dogs reported that year had been vaccinated
against rabies, suggesting that rabies incidence in dogs and cats is related more to the failure to vaccinate than
the failure of vaccination. After considering the various factors involved in rabies control, APHIS believes that
any amended Federal restriction that the Agency may promulgate should encourage the vaccination of pets while providing
the greatest benefit/cost value. Towards this end, the Agency seeks input on alternative approaches to the control
of animal rabies vaccines. The experience of States that have enacted their own State restrictions is sought on these
issues.
Public comment is requested to assist APHIS in its evaluation of the benefits and costs of a Federal restriction providing
that animal rabies vaccines be distributed and used only by or under the direct supervision of a licensed veterinarian.
In order to obtain a better understanding of the benefits versus the costs of such a Federal restriction, specific
comments, projections, or data are requested on the following issues:
1. The rate of vaccine misuse and failure when vaccine is administered by nonveterinarians versus veterinarians;


