 

6. Fruits, Vegetables, and Grain Products That Contain Fiber, Particularly Soluble Fiber, and Risk of Coronary Heart
Disease



On the basis of scientific evidence, including recent evidence, FDA finds support for a claim associating diets low
in saturated fat and cholesterol and high in fruits, vegetables (including legumes), and grain products, foods that
are low in saturated fat and cholesterol and are good sources of dietary fiber, to reduced risk of heart disease. In
authorizing this claim in 21 CFR 101.77, FDA permits the message about the value of these foods to include reference
to dietary fiber and specifies a qualifying criterion for soluble fiber content in the food product bearing the claim.
Other qualifying criteria limit fat, saturated fat, and cholesterol to low levels in the product. 



7. Fruits and Vegetables and Cancer 



FDA concludes that the evidence is not sufficient to attribute reduction in risk of some types of cancer specifically
to vitamin A as 

beta

-carotene, vitamin C, or vitamin E, alone or in combination, or to other components of diets low in fat and high in fruits
and vegetables. However, the evidence does indicate that diets rich in fruits and vegetables, which are generally
low in fat and high in vitamin A as 

beta

-carotene, vitamin C, and dietary fiber, are associated with decreased risk. Therefore, FDA authorizes a health
claim relating substances in diets low in fat and high in fruits and vegetables to a reduced risk of cancer. The message
must characterize fruits and vegetables as foods that are low in fat and contribute vitamins A and C and dietary fiber
to the diet. Any product displaying this claim must have a low fat content.



8. Folate and Neural Tube Defects 



After reviewing new scientific data, public comments, and recommendations provided by the Folic Acid Subcommittee
of its Food Advisory Committee, FDA has proposed to authorize a health claim for folate and neural tube defects. These
serious birth defects include anencephaly and spina bifida and, although rare, can result in infant mortality or
serious disability. According to proposed 21 CFR 101.79, the claim would specify that women who are capable of becoming
pregnant and who consume adequate amounts of folate daily during their childbearing years may reduce their risk of
having a pregnancy affected by neural tube defects. To bear this proposed claim, a food would need to be a good source
of folate.



FSIS Proposal



FSIS agrees with FDA that Congress enacted the health claims provisions of the NLEA to help U.S. consumers maintain
healthy dietary practices and to protect these consumers from unfounded health claims. As mentioned previously,
FSIS regulates the labeling of meat and poultry products, and has statutory authority to determine that an article
is misbranded if it is false or misleading in any particular. FSIS is proposing regulatory health claims because of
the potential that health claims may be false or misleading to consumers.

FSIS has evaluated FDA's proposed and final regulations for health claims, and has concluded to propose parallel
regulations for meat and poultry products. Based on review of the scientific evidence, FSIS is proposing to authorize
the use of health claims relating to the association between: 

(1) Adequate calcium intake and reduced risk of osteoporosis; 

(2) Diets low in fat and reduced risk of cancer; 

(3) Sodium reduction and reduced risk of high blood pressure; 

(4) Reduction in dietary saturated fat and cholesterol and reduced risk of coronary heart disease; 

(5) Diets low in fat and high in fiber-containing grain products, fruits, and vegetables and reduced risk of cancer;


(6) Diets low in saturated fat and cholesterol and high in fruits, vegetables, and grain products that contain dietary
fiber and reduced risk of coronary heart disease; 

(7) Substances in diets low in fat and high in fruits and vegetables (foods that are low in fat and may contain dietary
fiber, vitamin A, or vitamin C) and reduced risk of cancer; and 

(8) Folate and reduced risk of neural tube birth defects.

The Administrator of FSIS believes that the use of these health claims on the labeling of meat and poultry products
would not be false or misleading. Although FSIS agrees with FDA that there is significant scientific agreement among
qualified experts to support the use of these health claims for the reasons cited in FDA's proposed regulations published
November 27, 1991 (56 FR 60537), final regulations published January 6, 1993 (58 FR 2478), and proposed regulations
published October 14, 1993 (58 FR 53254), FSIS is requesting comments on the use of these claims.

As noted previously, the NLEA establishes two distinct components to assure the validity of health claims_a body
of evidence component and a review component that there be significant scientific agreement about the support for
the claim. FDA chose not to define ``significant scientific agreement'' among experts because each situation may
differ with the nature of the claimed substance/disease relationship. The evaluation of scientific evidence and
opinions about that evidence may be somewhat subjective, and not every expert in the field would be expected to approve
or agree with a claim. In deciding whether significant agreement exists, it is necessary to consider both the extent
of agreement and nature of the disagreement on a case-by-case basis. If agreement were assessed under inflexible
criteria, some valid claims could be disallowed where disagreement is not persuasive. FSIS proposes to use the same
flexible approach adopted by FDA in assessing significant scientific agreement about the validity of health of health
claims.



Definition of Health Claim



FSIS concurs with FDA's definition of a health claim and, accordingly, is proposing to define a health claim as any
claim made on the label or in labeling of a meat or poultry product that expressly or by implication, including third
party references, written statements (e.g., a brand name including a term such as ``heart''), symbols (e.g., a heart
symbol), or vignettes, characterizes the relationship of any substance to a disease or health-related condition.
Implied health claims would include those statements, symbols, vignettes, or other forms of communication that
suggest, within the context in which they are presented, that a relationship exists between the presence or level
of a substance in the meat or poultry product and a disease or health-related condition. FSIS is proposing to permit
express or implied health claims on the labeling of meat or poultry products if the claim is specifically provided
for in proposed 9 CFR 317.371 and 381.471 for meat and poultry products, respectively.


