 




Issue 25: 

Nearly every one of the 39 issues addressed in the public scoping process and review of the draft EIS were again discussed,
questioned, or disagreed with during public comment about the proposed rule. 




Service Response:

 The Service has reviewed public concern about the accuracy of its early responses to issues raised in the draft and
final EIS and which were also raised by persons commenting on the proposed rule. At this time, the information provided
during the public comment period on the proposed rule does not provide sufficient data or cause for the Service to significantly
change any of its earlier findings which were published in the final EIS regarding the issues of: Amending the Endangered
Species Act, wolves as a missing component of the ecosystem, humane treatment of wolves, enjoying wolves, regulated
public take, cost of the program, state, tribal, and federal authority, viable population, travel corridors, range
requirements, control strategies, illegal killing, compensation, delisting, need for public education, spiritual
and cultural significance, social and cultural environment, recovery areas, ungulate populations, hunter harvest,
domestic livestock, land use, visitor use, economics, wolves not native to Yellowstone, wolf rights, federal subsides,
human health and safety, predators and scavengers, other endangered species, other plants, invertebrates, fish,
reptiles, amphibians, birds, and mammals, diseases and parasites, private property rights, wolf recovery in other
areas, existing wolves in Idaho and Yellowstone, existing wolves in northwestern Montana, wolf subspecies, wolf/dog/coyote
hybridization, and the need for research (Service 1994a). 



The Service adjusted the experimental population boundaries to exclude any portion of known wolf pack territories
in an effort to reduce the likelihood that any naturally dispersing breeding groups of wolves would fall under the
proposed experimental rule regulations. 



Based on the above, and using the best scientific and commercial data available, in accordance with 50 CFR 17.81, the
Service finds that releasing wolves into Yellowstone National Park constitutes reintroduction into a high-priority
site and will further advance conservation and recovery of this species. 




National Environmental Policy Act 





A Final Environmental Impact Statement under the National Environmental Policy Act is available to the public (see


ADDRESSES

). This rule is an implementation of the proposed action and does not require revision of the EIS statement on the reintroduction
of gray wolves to Yellowstone National Park and central Idaho. 




Required Determinations 





This rule was reviewed under Executive Order 12866. The rule will not have a significant economic effect on a substantial
number of small entities under the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 

et seq.

). Based on the information discussed in this rule concerning public projects and private activities within the experimental
population area, significant economic impacts will not result from this action. Also, no direct costs, enforcement
costs, information collection, or recordkeeping requirements are imposed on small entities by this action and the
rule contains no recordkeeping requirements, as defined in the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501 

et seq.

). This rule does not require federalism assessment under Executive Order 12612 because it would not have any significant
federalism effects as described in the order.


