 

Schwebke-Shiskin  Associates, Inc. Profit Sharing Plan and Trust (the Plan) Located in Miramar, Florida 


[Prohibited Transaction Exemption 9412; Exemption Application No. D9520] 


Exemption 


The restrictions of sections 406(a), 406(b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resulting from the application
of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1)(A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the proposed
sale by the Plan to Schwebke-Shiskin  Associates, Inc. (SSA), the Plan's sponsor and a party in interest with
respect to the Plan, of certain real property (the Property), for cash, provided the following conditions are satisfied:
(a) The Plan pays no fees or commissions in connection with the transaction; (b) the sales price of the Property will
be the greater of $1,068,000 or the fair market value of the Property on the date of the sale as determined by a qualified,
independent appraiser; (c) SSA will pay to the Internal Revenue Service in timely fashion all excise taxes due in connection
with the past leasing of the Property by the Plan to SSA; and (d) to the extent that the Plan received less than fair market
rental value from SSA in connection with the past leasing of the Property, SSA will make the Plan whole, with appropriate
interest, for any such shortfall, within 60 days of the granting of this exemption. 
For a more complete statement of the facts and representations supporting the Department's decision to grant this
exemption, refer to the notice of proposed exemption published on December 3, 1993 at 58 FR 64015.




<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Gary H. Lefkowitz of the Department, telephone (202) 2198881. (This is not a toll-free number.) 


NCR Corporation Savings Plan (the Plan) Located in Dayton, Ohio 


[Prohibited Transaction Exemption 9413; Exemption Application No. D9536] 


Exemption 


The restrictions of sections 406(a), 406(b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resulting from the application
of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1)(A) of through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to (1) An interest-free
loan to the Plan (the Loan) by NCR Corporation, the sponsor of the Plan, with respect to guaranteed investment contract
number GAGIC01226 (the GIC) issued by Executive Life Insurance Company of California (Executive Life);
and (2) the Plan's potential repayment of the Loan (the Repayment); provided that the following conditions are satisfied:




(A) No interest and/or expenses are paid by the Plan; 
(B) The Loan is made to reimburse the Plan for amounts invested with Executive Life under the terms of the GIC; 
(C) The Repayment is restricted to cash proceeds paid to the Plan (the GIC Proceeds) by Executive Life and/or any other
responsible third party with respect to the GIC, and no other Plan assets are used to make the Repayments; and 
(D) The Repayments will be waived to the extent the Loan exceeds the GIC Proceeds. 


</FURTHER>
