 

(B) Implementation of means to assure that HVAC systems continue to function effectively during remodeling and renovation
activities.

(C) Isolation or containment of work areas and appropriate negative pressure containment.
(D) Air contaminant suppression controls or auxiliary air filtration/cleaning.

(E) Controls to prevent air contaminant entry into the HVAC air distribution system.

(3) 

Prior notification of employees who work in the building.

(i) The employer shall notify employees at least 24 hours in advance, or promptly in emergency situations, of work
to be performed on the building that may introduce air contaminants into their work area; 
(ii) Notification shall include anticipated adverse impacts on indoor air quality or workplace conditions.

(g) Employee information and training.

(1) The employer shall provide training for maintenance workers and workers involved in building system operation
and maintenance which shall include at least the following: 

(i) Training in the use of personal protective equipment (PPE) needed in operating and maintaining building systems;

(ii) Training on how to maintain adequate ventilation of air contaminants generated during building cleaning and
maintenance; and 
(iii) Training of maintenance personnel on how to minimize adverse effects on indoor air quality during the use and
disposal of chemicals and other agents.

(2) All employees shall be informed of: 
(i) The contents of the standard in this section and its appendices; and 
(ii) Signs and symptoms associated with building-related illness and the requirement under paragraphs (d)(12)
and (d)(13) of this section directing the employer to evaluate the effectiveness of the HVAC system and to take remedial
measures to the HVAC system if necessary, upon receipt of complaints from employees of building-related illness.

(3) Availability of training material. 

The employer shall make training materials developed in response to paragraph (g), including the standard in this
section and its appendices, available for inspection and copying by employees, designated employee representatives,
the Director, and the Assistant Secretary.

(h) 

Recordkeeping.
(1) Maintenance records. 

The employer shall maintain inspection and maintenance records required to be established under paragraph (d) of
this section, which shall include the specific remedial or maintenance actions taken, the name and affiliation of
the individual performing the work, and the date of the inspection or maintenance activity.

(2) 

Written IAQ compliance program. 

The employer shall maintain the written compliance program and plan required to be established under paragraph (c)
of this section.

(3) 

Employee complaints. 

The employer shall maintain a record of employee complaints of signs or symptoms that may be associated with building-related
illness required to be established under paragraph (c)(5) of this section. These complaints shall be promptly transmitted
to the designated person for resolution.

(4) 

Retention of records. 

The employer shall retain records required to be maintained under this section for at least the previous three years,
except that records required to be maintained under paragraphs (h)(1) and (h)(2) of this section need not be retained
for three years if rendered obsolete by the establishment and replacement of more recent records, or rendered irrelevant
due to HVAC system replacement or redesign.

(5) 

Availability. 

The records required to be maintained by this paragraph shall be available on request to employees and their designated
representative and the Assistant Secretary for examination and copying.

(6) 

Transfer of records. 

Whenever the employer ceases to do business, records that are required to be maintained by paragraph (h) of this section
shall be provided to and retained by the successor employer.

(i) 

Dates. 

(1) 

Effective date. 

This section is effective [DATE 60 DAYS FROM PUBLICATION OF THE FINAL RULE] 
(2) 

Start-up dates.




