 

1. What measurable changes have occurred as a result of the combination of intervention strategies regarding the
number of new users in the target population, compared to the control/comparison group, for each of the following
substances:

&bull;Alcoholic beverages;

&bull;All types of tobacco products; and

&bull;Other drugs such as marijuana, cocaine, crack/cocaine, inhalants, steroids, heroin, etc.?

2. What measurable changes have occurred as a result of the combination of intervention strategies regarding the
number of users in the target population, compared to the control/comparison group, who have used each of the following
substances in the past month:

&bull;Alcoholic beverages; 
&bull;All types of tobacco products; and 
&bull;Other drugs such as marijuana, cocaine, crack/cocaine, steroids, inhalants, heroin, etc.?

3. What measurable changes have occurred as a result of the combination of intervention strategies regarding the
amount of regular use of alcoholic beverages, all types of tobacco products, and other drugs such as marijuana, cocaine,
crack/cocaine, steroids, inhalants, heroin, etc., by the users in the target population, as compared to the control/comparison
group?

4. What measurable changes have occurred as a result of the combination of intervention strategies regarding the
numbers of the target population compared to the control/comparison group, who disapprove of the use of alcoholic
beverages, tobacco products, and other drug use? 

5. What measurable changes have occurred as a result of the combination of intervention strategies regarding participants'
and control/comparison groups' perceptions of harm associated with ATOD use? 

6. What measurable changes have occurred as a result of the combination of intervention strategies regarding the
target population's, compared to the control/comparison group's, self-reported involvement in physical fighting,
victimization, assault injuries, aggressive behavior, carrying and usage of weapons, and activities that bring
youth in contact with the juvenile/criminal justice system? 

Grantees will be required to collect uniform baseline and yearly data on some indicators using standardized instruments
common to all grantees. Details regarding the specific instruments, data collection and analysis, aggregation
to group, and procedures for transmitting the results to CSAP will be provided at the first grantee meeting following
award. OMB clearance will be obtained for these instruments. 

Substance abuse and related problems have frequently been measured through surveys and archival indicator data.
CSAP encourages applicants to make use of such available data in their communities, such as crime statistics and Drug
Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) data. 



CSAP Cross-Site Evaluation: 

In addition to the requirement for individual project evaluation, CSAP is planning to conduct a cross-site evaluation
of the High Risk Youth Demonstration Grant Program. All applicants must provide written assurance that they will
cooperate fully in the conduct of the cross-site evaluation. 



Review Process: 

Applications accepted for review will be assigned, at the central receipt point (Division of Research Grants, NIH),
to an Initial Review Group (IRG) composed primarily of non-Federal experts. Applications will be reviewed by the
IRG for technical merit in accordance with established PHS/SAMHSA peer review procedures for grants. Notification
of the IRG's recommendation will be sent to the applicant upon completion of the initial review. In addition, the IRG
recommendations on the technical merit of applications will undergo a second level of review by the appropriate advisory
council, whose review may be based on policy considerations as well as technical merit. Applications may be considered
for funding only if the advisory council concurs with the IRG's recommendation for approval. 




