 

2400.44

Commencement of graduate study.



(a) Fellows may commence study under their fellowships as early as the summer following the announcement of their
award. Fellows are normally expected to commence study under their fellowships in the fall term of the academic year
following the date on which their award is announced. However, as indicated in 2400.62 below, they may seek
to postpone the commencement of fellowship study under extenuating circumstances.

(b) In determining the two- and five-year fellowship periods of Junior and Senior Fellows respectively, the Foundation
will consider the commencement of the fellowship period to be the date on which each Fellow commences study under a
fellowship.



2400.45

Special consideration: Junior Fellows' courses of study.



Applicants for junior fellowships who seek or hold baccalaureate degrees in education are strongly encouraged to
pursue master's degrees in history or political science. Those applicants who hold undergraduate degrees in history,
political science, government, or any other subjects may take some teaching methods and related courses, although
the Foundation will not pay for them unless they are required for the degree for which the Fellow is matriculated. The
Foundation will review each proposed course of study for an appropriate balance of subject matter and other courses
based on the Fellow's goals, background, and degree requirements.





2400.46

Special consideration: second master's degree.



The Foundation may award senior fellowships to applicants who are seeking their second master's degrees providing
that the applicants' first master's degrees were obtained at least five years prior to the year in which the applicants
would normally commence study under a fellowship. In evaluating applications from those intending to pursue a second
master's degree, the Fellow Selection Committee will favor those applicants who are planning to become American
history and social studies teachers after having taught another subject and those whose initial master's degree
was in a subject different from that sought under the second master's degree.



Subpart F_Fellowship Stipends



2400.50

Amount of stipends.



Junior and senior fellowships carry a stipend of up to a maximum of $24,000 prorated over the period of Fellows' graduate
study. In no case shall the stipend for a fellowship exceed $12,000 per academic year. Within this limit, stipends
will be prorated over the period of Fellows' graduate study as follows: A maximum of $6,000 per academic semester or
trimester of full-time study, and a maximum of $4,000 per academic quarter of full-time study. Stipends for part-time
study will be pro rata shares of those allowable for full-time study.



2400.51

Duration of stipends.



Stipends for junior fellowships may be payable over a period up to two calendar years of full-time graduate study,
and those for senior fellowships may be payable over a period of not more than five calendar years of part-time graduate
study, commencing with the dates under which Fellows commence their graduate study under their fellowships. However,
the duration of stipend payments will be subject to limitations indicated in 2400.61.



2400.52

Use of stipends.



Stipends shall be used only to offset the costs of tuition, fees, books, room, and board associated with graduate study
under a fellowship. The costs allowed for a Fellow's room and board will be the amount the Fellow's university reports
to the Foundation as the cost of room and board for a graduate student if that student were to share a room at the student's
university. If no graduate housing exists, then costs for regular shared student housing will be used. If no campus
housing exists, the equivalent room and board costs at neighboring universities will be used. Stipends for room,
board, and books will be prorated for Fellows enrolled in programs less than full time. The Foundation will not reimburse
Fellows for any portion of their master's degree study, if any, that Fellows may have completed prior to the commencement
of their fellowships. Nor will the Foundation reimburse Fellows for any credits acquired above the minimum number
of credits required for the degree. If a Fellow already taken and paid for courses that can be credited toward the Fellow's
graduate degree under a fellowship, those must be credited to the degree; the remaining required courses will be paid
for by the Foundation.



