 

Infant restraints are designed to meet infants' particular physical needs. An infant cannot be seated in a completely
upright position since its neck muscles are not strong enough to enable the infant to hold its head upright. An infant
restraint must be designed, therefore, so that it supports the infant's spine and head in a partially inclined position.
At the same time, an infant must be positioned sufficiently upright and rear-facing so that in a crash, the forces are
spread evenly across the infant's back and shoulders, the strongest part of an infant's body. Further, an infant restraint
positions the back of the child's head against the restraint's seating surface in a crash. This helps to prevent severe
neck injuries. 



Century's Petition 



Century submitted its petition because it wishes to produce an infant restraint that, under normal driving conditions,
would allow the infant to lie on its back in a more reclined position than is possible in current infant restraints,
with the infant's head nearest the front of the vehicle and its feet nearest the rear of the vehicle. To provide proper
protection in a frontal crash, a portion of the infant seat, including the surface on which the infant is resting, would
change position by rotating upwards and toward the front of the vehicle so that the child would be rear-facing and almost
upright. As a result, the crash forces would be applied to and spread across the infant's neck and shoulders. In the
almost upright mode, the restraint would provide occupant protection similar to that provided by infant seats lacking
the capability of dynamic readjustment. 

The petitioner described three ways in which safety could be improved if infant seats were allowed to change adjustment
positions in a crash. First, the petitioner believes designing an infant seat so that it changes adjustment positions
during a frontal crash could reduce the crash forces imposed on the child. The movement due to the change in position
could help dissipate the stored kinetic energy during the initial stage of a frontal crash (i.e., when the momentum
of the child and rear-facing seat are causing them to attempt to move toward the front of the vehicle). 

The second improvement in safety relates to what Century stated was the primary advantage of the new seat. The petitioner
believed the seat would enable a child to travel in a more reclined position than is possible with current infant seats.
The petitioner said that this would benefit premature, apnea-prone infants, and infants with other breathing problems.
Included in Century's petition was the petitioner's public service message on ``positional apnea.'' It explains
the problems that infants with positional apnea have when riding in current infant restraints: 




Positional Apnea is a breathing difficulty that could occur when very small infants are positioned in an upright angle
in infant products such as car seats, car beds, strollers, carriers, swings, etc. Because of their tiny bodies and
weak necks, small infants are in danger of Positional Apnea. If the angle of the child in the infant product is too steep,
the infant's head may fall forward far enough to choke off his/her air supply. Depending on the positioning of the child
in an infant product, the risk to the child may be increased. 



* * * * * 



To explain its reasons for believing a change to S5.1.1(b) would help children with apnea, Century submitted articles
and statements from members of the medical community on positional apnea. These materials are fully discussed in
the NPRM. They include a July 1990 policy statement from the American Academy of Pediatrics on the safe transportation
of premature infants, which states that some infants, particularly premature, low-weight infants, may be subject
to oxygen desaturation when placed in an upright position in infant restraints. Century argued that the articles
indicate a need for new infant restraint designs that are specially designed, such as the infant seat the petitioner
wishes to produce. 

The third advantage of the seat relates to improved positioning of all infants in infant restraints. Infant restraints
are tested by NHTSA for compliance with FMVSS No. 213 on a ``standard seat assembly,'' which is an essentially horizontal
vehicle seat cushion. The ``standard seat assembly'' is specified in S7.3 of the standard. If the vehicle seat cushions
actually being installed in vehicles are not horizontal, but slant downward to the rear, as they do in some newer model
cars, an infant restraint placed on that vehicle seat cushion would be tilted rearward. Thus, an infant riding in the
infant restraint would likely sit more upright than if the infant restraint were placed on a horizontal vehicle seat
cushion. A restraint's back support surface that is too upright might not be able to provide adequate support to the
infant's head and neck. Century said that its new infant restraint would compensate for the effect that a slanting
vehicle seat cushion may have on infant restraints. 




