 

The 14 commenters who did not support the NPRM include Great American Airways, RAA, SCA, and nine commenters who identified
themselves as flight attendants. Several of the commenters who identified themselves as flight attendants stated
that the provisions in the NPRM would limit a flight attendant's opportunities to work extra trips and that flight
attendants are capable of handling safety procedures and emergencies even when working longer duty periods.



Specific Issues



Apply Flight Crewmember Flight, Duty, and Rest Requirements to Flight Attendants



In the NPRM, the FAA invited comments on the possibility of modifying the proposed rule, as presented in the NPRM, to
add an option for operators to either follow the proposed duty limitations and rest requirements or apply flight crewmember
flight, duty, and rest requirements to flight attendants.

Eleven commenters responded to the FAA's request for comments. Seven of the commenters supported the option to permit
operators to either follow the proposed duty limitations and rest requirements or apply flight crewmember requirements
to flight attendants. Three commenters opposed the option. Although Delta Air Lines did not oppose the option, it
expressed no interest in exercising the option.

ATA, Great American Airways, NACA, RAA, and Southwest Airlines agreed that operators should be permitted to apply
flight crewmember requirements to flight attendants. ATA specified that applying flight crewmember requirements
should remain an option at the operator's discretion. Great American Airways, Horizon Air, NACA, RAA, and Southwest
Airlines noted that there are scheduling and economic advantages to using the same set of rules of flight crewmembers
and flight attendants.

The Coalition of Flight Attendant Unions and SCA opposed establishing the option to permit operators to apply flight
crewmember flight, duty, and rest requirements to flight attendants. The Coalition of Flight Attendants Unions
stated that flight crewmember rules do not provide adequate protection from fatigue. SCA noted that, if this option
had been a requirement in 1992, SCA would have had to hire an additional 20 flight attendants. According to SCA, the
cost burden of hiring 20 flight attendants would have increased SCA domestic operating costs by $1.75 million.



FAA Response



The FAA recognizes that giving operators the option to apply flight crewmember flight, duty, and rest requirements
to flight attendants provides additional scheduling flexibility and eliminates the need for an operator to have
two sets of scheduling requirements for its flight crewmembers and flight attendants. This provision also will permit
flight attendants on such operations to be scheduled with the same limitations as the flight crewmembers. Therefore,
the FAA has adopted this option, which appears in 121.467(c) and 135.273(c) of this final rule.

If an operator chooses to apply flight crewmember flight, duty, and rest requirements to flight attendants, the operator
must establish written procedures for applying the requirements and the procedures must be approved by the Administrator
and referenced in the certificate holder's operations specifications. The written procedures must apply to all
flight attendants used in the certificate holders operation. In addition, written procedures must be applied to
the certificate holder's entire operation. Certificate holders may obtain approval by submitting their procedures
for preliminary review and approval to the principal operations inspectors assigned to them at the FAA Flight Standards
District Offices that are charged with the overall inspection of their operations. This approval process is similar
to those used for exit seating and passenger carry-on baggage requirements. Because flight crewmember regulations
were designed specifically for pilots, FAA approval is required to ensure that flight crewmember rules are adequately
applied to flight attendants. In addition, the written procedures for domestic, flag, and supplemental air carriers
and for commercial operators must apply the flight crewmember limitations contained in subparts Q, R, or S of part
121, except for the provisions for on-board rest facilities, as appropriate to the operation being conducted. Therefore,
operators must consider the type of operation being conducted for each flight segment when scheduling flight attendants
according to the option.

