 


In this investigation, there are four different taxes levied on sales of the subject merchandise in the home market.
The ICMS tax is a regional tax, which varies depending upon the state in which the purchase originates. The IPI tax is
a fixed percentage rate tax of four percent. Finally, the PIS and FINSOCIAL taxes are a fixed percentage rate tax equalling
2.65 percent combined. CBCC used both a unit and a gross basis to calculate the combined PIS and FINSOCIAL taxes within
various months of the POI. We recalculated these taxes on a unit basis, where appropriate, which is the way CBCC calculated
them. Because these taxes are calculated on the same base price, we find them not to be cascading. Thus, for each sale,
we made only one tax adjustment which equals the sum of the actual tax rates. 




B. Minasligas 





We based USP on purchase price, in accordance with section 772(b) of the Act, because the subject merchandise was sold
to unrelated purchasers in the United States prior to importation and exporter's sales price was not indicated by
other circumstances. 



We calculated purchase price based on packed FOB port of embarkation prices to unrelated customers. We made deductions
where appropriate for foreign inland freight (which also included foreign inland insurance) and foreign brokerage
and handling. 



We made an adjustment to USP for the taxes paid on the comparison sale in Brazil. (See above description under ``A. CBCC

'' for an explanation of our new tax methodology as well as a description of the specific taxes in this investigation.)





Foreign Market Value 





In order to determine whether there were sufficient sales of FeSi in the home market to serve as a viable basis for calculating
FMV, we compared the volume of home market sales of FeSi to the aggregate volume of third country sales in accordance
with section 773(a)(1)(B) of the Act. For both CBCC and Minasligas, the volume of home market sales was greater than
five percent of the aggregate volume of third country sales. Therefore, for both CBCC and Minasligas, we determined
that home market sales of FeSi constituted a viable basis for calculating FMV, in accordance with 19 CFR 353.48(a).




In the petition and in subsequent filings, petitioners alleged that home market sales were made at less than the cost
of production (COP) and that constructed value (CV) should be used to compute FMV. Based on petitioners' allegations,
which provided a reasonable basis to ``believe or suspect'' below cost sales (see section 773(b) of the ACT), we initiated
COP investigations. We examined respondents' cost data at verification and analyzed this information for purposes
of this final determination. 



We determine Brazil's economy to be hyperinflationary. Therefore, in order to eliminate the distortive effects
of inflation, consistent with past practice (see, 

e.g., Final Determination of Sales at Less Than Fair Value and Amended Antidumping Duty Order, Tubeless Steel Disc
Wheels from Brazil, 

53 FR 34566, September 7, 1988), we calculated separate weighted-average FMVs, COPs, and CVs for each month. 




A. CBCC 





In order to determine whether home market sales were above the COP, we calculated the monthly COPs on the basis of CBCC's
cost of materials, fabrication, general expenses, and packing. We relied on the COP data submitted by CBCC except
in the following instances where the costs were not appropriately quantified or valued. Specifically, we: 



1. Revised general and administrative (GA) expenses by calculating them as a percentage of cost of goods sold
as reported on CBCC's 1992 financial statements (see Comment 4); 



2. Added an amount for the GA expenses of CBCC's parent company (see Comment 4); 



3. Revised the interest expense computation using the financial statements of CBCC's parent, Solvay do Brasil (see
Comment 3); 



4. Included IPI and ICMS taxes as part of reported material costs in COP (see Comment 5); 



5. Recalculated the cost of CBCC's own production of charcoal based upon BIA (see Comment 6); 



6. Recalculated depreciation costs for Furnace 8 based upon a 10 year useful life (see Comment 7); 



7. Corrected an error in the October 1992 calculation of electricity cost (see Comment 9); 



8. Added packing expenses in COP for the home market and United States, respectively. 



We compared individual home market prices with the monthly COPs. We tested the home market prices on a sieve-size-specific
basis and found, for all sieve sizes, that between 10 and 90 percent of sales in the home market were made at prices above
the COP. Therefore, we disregarded the below-cost sales, if those sales were made over an extended period of time.
CBCC did not provide any information in its responses to indicate that its below cost sales were made at prices which
would permit recovery of all costs within a reasonable period of time in the normal course of trade. In order to determine
whether below-cost sales were made over an extended period of time, we performed the following analysis on a product-specific
basis: (1) If respondent sold a product in only one month of the POI and there were sales in that month below the COP, or
(2) if respondent sold a product during two months or more of the POI and there were sales below the COP during two or more
of those months, then below-cost sales were considered to have been made over an extended period of time. All of CBCC's
sales were made over an extended period of time. 



For CBCC, we based FMV on home market prices. However, for one U.S. sale, although there were comparable home market
sales in the same month, we were unable to make a difference-in-merchandise (DIFMER) adjustment. This is because
the U.S. product was produced in a month different than the home market products and in hyperinflationary economies,
we limit such adjustments to products produced and sold in the same month. In that instance, we used CV as FMV. 




