 

The public should be aware that FSIS continues to have interest in investigations of protein quality which include
among their objectives the identification of improved methods for determining protein quality. In evaluating the
possible use of alternative approaches to assuring protein quality, FSIS will consider data and other comments submitted
by the public.

c. 

Qualify control.

 FSIS is proposing to require that meat derived from advanced meat/bone separation machinery and recovery systems
be produced under an approved quality control program. FSIS believes quality control is necessary to assure that
establishments manufacture meat from advanced meat/bone separation machinery and recovery systems that complies
with the provisions of the proposed amendment of the definition of meat. Utilization of such a quality control program
in producing this product would be prerequisite for the approval of labels for products consisting of or containing
meat from advanced recovery systems. In other words, an approved quality control program would be necessary prior
to the production of meat using advanced meat/bone separation machinery and recovery systems.

The function of a quality control program would be to restrict potential deviations from the prescribed definition
of meat by controlling the factors that can affect conformance with the definition. Thus, it is proposed to require
that the quality control program provide the controls and information necessary to assure that the meat from advanced
meat/bone separation and recovery systems will meet each of the requirements of the regulations and will enable establishment
personnel and FSIS to monitor it for effectiveness. FSIS is focusing on methods that will maintain the uniformity
of starting materials and control the handling and processing of starting materials and resulting product. The methods
of analysis for calcium and protein quality that are permitted and are intended to be used should be identified in the
quality control system.

Under the proposal, the owner or operator of an establishment that intends to manufacture meat from advanced meat/bone
separation machinery and recovery systems would request the Administrator of FSIS to approve the establishment's
quality control program. The procedures and criteria for receiving such requests and assessing the adequacy of programs
for quality control, as well as for terminating approval, would be those set forth in 9 CFR 318.4. These provisions
provide guidance on the development and maintenance of appropriate quality control programs.

FSIS believes that with a quality control approach to preventing noncompliance from occurring, the need for testing
the resulting product to assure compliance can be reduced and, consequently, the costs of production kept down. Moreover,
the proposed quality control requirement builds on the control and information programs that processors use to predict
and minimize the likelihood of manufacturing products that are inconsistent and of varying quality, and do not comply
with regulatory requirements. Proposing to rely on a approved quality control program, rather than continual testing
by processors, is a means for assuring that operations achieve compliance with the applicable proposed requirements
and, thereby, prevents misbranding and adulteration of the resulting meat.

The goal of preventing misbranding and adulteration are key issues with regard to meat products produced by mechanical
meat/bone separation, and can be achieved effectively and efficiently where a program for quality control incorporates
appropriate methods and monitoring techniques, and adheres to good manufacturing practices. FSIS believes that
product exceeding the calcium limit should not be classified as meat because if it exceeds the proposed calcium limits,
it would reflect unacceptable incorporation of bone in the product during processing. To ensure that product satisfies
the calcium requirement, FSIS is proposing that a sample of at least one pound from each lot of production would be taken
and analyzed for calcium. A lot would consist of the meat derived from advanced meat/bone separation machinery and
recovery systems, designated as such by the operator of the establishment or his or her agent, from the product produced
from a single species of livestock in no more than one continuous shift of up to 12 hours. The results from chemical analyses
would be compared to the requirement of 150 mg/100 gm of product within a tolerance of 0.03 percent or 30 mg. If statistical
evidence exists that product may not be in compliance, then further sampling of the product will be required to demonstrate
that the product is in compliance with requirements for meat derived from meat/bone separation and recovery systems.

It is proposed that statistical evidence of non-compliance exists when an individual analytical result is more than
0.03 percent (i.e., 30 mg) above the requirement, i.e., greater than 0.18 percent (i.e., 180 mg). (This tolerance
is derived by equating it to three times the expected standard deviation (i.e., 0.1 percent) of the analytical procedure
used by FSIS to measure the calcium contents in samples.)
<FOOTCITE>9</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
9

</FOOTNAME>
Data from a FSIS study are available for public inspection in the FSIS Hearing Clerk's office.

</FOOTNOTE>


If any single analytical result is more than 0.18 percent, FSIS proposes that, before product from a production lot
that is still at the establishment or one subsequently produced can be considered to be in compliance, at least three
samples
<FOOTCITE>10</FOOTCITE>
 from that lot must be taken and analyzed for calcium, either separately or as a composite (i.e., combining the three
samples for analysis), at the option of the establishment. The average of the results or the composite result must
comply with the requirement for calcium (i.e., less than or equal to 0.15 percent). Taking three samples from each
lost would continue until five consecutive lots
<FOOTCITE>11</FOOTCITE>
 have mean or composite results less than or equal to 0.15 percent. Individual results or an average of results would
be rounded to the nearest 0.01 percent based on the precision of the methodology for measuring calcium. If the FSIS
program official detects any results out of compliance, the program official may undertake normal compliance procedures.




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
10

</FOOTNAME>
Three samples, either analyzed as individual samples or as a composite sample (i.e., combining the three samples),
are statistically representative for measuring calcium in a production lot.


</FOOTNOTE>

<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
11

</FOOTNAME>
The provision for sampling five consecutive production lots is based on statistical sampling principles that ensure
the process is in control and that mean or composite calcium results are less than or equal to the calcium requirement.

</FOOTNOTE>

