 

It is poultry meat, particularly muscle(s), that characterizes parts and cuts of poultry. The characteristics associated
with a cut can be retained when trimmings removed during processing are reincorporated; and the association with
the cut remains when there is chunking, chopping, or grinding of the muscle as in versions of turkey ham product (9 CFR
381.171). FSIS regards these processes as different than using product made by the mechanical separation of bones
with attached poultry tissue. MS(K) does not, in FSIS' view, retain the characteristics of the cuts themselves. It
appears inconsistent with the basic characteristics expected of products represented as having been made from a
particular part or cut of the poultry carcass, to include this finely comminuted ingredient, except as discussed
above, especially when the muscle from that part is essentially intact or has been processed only to the extent of cutting
or grinding. 

FSIS is proposing no restrictions on the amount of MS(K) that can be used in poultry products, or meat food products,
in which it is a permitted ingredient. However, prevailing standards for particular products may contain quantitative
limits (e.g., the limit on the amount of poultry product ingredients permitted in cooked sausages such as frankfurters
and bologna (9 CFR 319.180)) or other restrictions on the quantity of various poultry product ingredients. 



C. 

Labeling



FSIS is proposing special provisions for the labels of MS(K). If adopted, these provisions would supplement other,
more general requirements for such labels (see 9 CFR Parts 317 and 381, Subpart N). The provisions are discussed below.


1. The product.

 FSIS is proposing the following labeling provisions for MS(K): (1) the name of the product (e.g., ``Mechanically
Separated (Kind)'' must be followed immediately by the phrase(s) ``made from fowl'' unless it is not made, in whole
or part, from mature female chickens, and ``with excess skin'' unless it is made from poultry product that does not
include skin in excess of the natural proportion present on the whole carcass; and (2) there must be appropriate descriptive
terminology in the labeling of MS(K) if heat treatment has been used in the preparation of such product, e.g., ``cooked.''
Because the characteristics described in (1) and (2) above are ones which would affect the use of MS(K), FSIS is proposing
that, in order to assure compliance with regulatory requirements and thereby prevent the adulteration and misbranding
of finished poultry products and meat food products, such characteristics must be clearly identified on the label
when MS(K) leaves the establishment at which it is manufactured. 

As indicated previously, the regulations already require that information on use, including deviations from the
natural whole carcass proportion of skin as well as the fact of cooking, appear on the label of boneless poultry products
produced by mechanical separation (9 CFR 381.117(d)). The presence of skin or its presence in excess of the natural
whole carcass proportion would, as discussed previously, continue to affect product use if the regulations are amended.
The use of heat treatment in the preparation of the product also would be of continuing relevance (9 CFR 381.157(a)).
In addition, since the presence of poultry kidneys or sex glands can affect use (9 CFR 319.180(b)), a number of manufacturers
of MS(K) not containing these parts currently choose to note this fact on the label. The other information that would
be required is identification of product made from fowl. 

2. 

Finished poultry products and meat food products.

 As indicated above in the discussion of FSIS' proposed definition and standard for MS(K), FSIS is proposing that in
view of the differences between MS(K) and poultry products produced by traditional hand-deboning techniques, MS(K)
should be regulated as a distinctive ingredient with standardized characteristics. Therefore, FSIS is proposing
to define such product by its own name, e.g., ``Mechanically Separated (Kind),'' that would be declared in the ingredients
statements on finished product labels by the name specified in its definition and standard. 

FSIS recognizes the importance of the identification of the calcium and cholesterol content of MS(K) to consumers
who, according to the comments received on the June 15, 1993, ANPR (58 FR 33040), indicated a desire to know of the presence
of calcium and cholesterol. The nutrition labeling regulations, effective July 6, 1994, require mandatory declaration
of calcium and cholesterol content on most processed meat and poultry products which addresses this particular labeling
concern. FSIS believes that nutrition labeling is the most appropriate vehicle for conveying a product's nutrient
content, which includes calcium and cholesterol, as well as other nutrient information. 




