 

b. Where the construction of a Section as hereinbefore defined in Article II, Section 1c and Article III, Section 1c
shall have been completed by the Bidder, the Owner agrees, after receipt of a written request from the Bidder, to accept
delivery of possession and control of such Section upon the issuance by the Engineer of a written statement that the
Section has been inspected and found acceptable by the Engineer. Upon such delivery of the possession and control
of any such Section to the Owner, the risk and obligations of the Bidder as set forth in Article IV, Section 1f hereof
with respect to such Section so delivered to the Owner shall be terminated: Provided, however, that nothing herein
contained shall relieve the Bidder of any liability with respect to defective materials or workmanship as contained
in Article II, Section 6 hereof. 
Section 4. Energizing the Project. 
a. Prior to Completion of the Project the Owner, upon written notice to the Bidder, may test the construction thereof
by temporarily energizing any portion or portions thereof. During the period of such test the portion or portions
of the Project so energized shall be considered as within the possession and control of the Owner and governed by the
provisions of Section 3 of this Article. Upon written notice to the Bidder by the Owner of the completion of such test
and upon deenergizing the lines involved therein said portion, or portions of the Project shall be considered as returned
to the possession and control of the Bidder unless the Owner shall elect to continue possession and control in the manner
provided in Section 3 of this Article. 
b. The Owner shall have the right to energize permanently any portion or portions of the Project delivered to its possession
and control pursuant to the provisions of Section 3 of this Article. 
Section 5. Assignment of Guarantees. All guarantees of materials and workmanship running in favor of the Bidder shall
be transferred and assigned to the Owner prior to the time the Bidder receives final payment. 


ARTICLE V_REMEDIES 


Section 1. Completion on Bidder's Default. If default shall be made by the Bidder or by any subcontractor in the performance
of any of the terms of this Proposal, the Owner, without in any manner limiting its legal and equitable remedies in the
circumstances, may serve upon the Bidder and the Surety or Sureties, if any, upon the Contractor's Bond or Bonds a written
notice requiring the Bidder to cause such default to be corrected forthwith. Unless within twenty (20) days after
the service of such notice upon the Bidder such default shall be corrected or arrangements for the correction thereof
satisfactory to both the Owner and the Administrator shall be made by the Bidder or its Surety or Sureties, if any, the
Owner may take over the construction of the Project and prosecute the same to completion by Contract or otherwise for
the account and at the expense of the Bidder, and the Bidder and its Surety or Sureties, if any, shall be liable to the
Owner for any cost or expense in excess of the Contract price occasioned thereby. In such event the Owner may take possession
of and utilize, in completing the construction of the Project, any materials, tools, supplies, equipment, appliances,
and plant belonging to the Bidder or any of its subcontractors, which may be situated at the site of the Project. The
Owner in such contingency may exercise any rights, claims or demands which the Bidder may have against third persons
in connection with this Contract and for such purpose the Bidder does hereby assign, transfer and set over unto the
Owner all such rights, claims and demands. 
Section 2. Liquidated Damages. The time of the Completion of Construction of the Project is of the essence of the Contract.
Should the Bidder neglect, refuse or fail to complete the construction within the time herein agreed upon, after giving
effect to extensions of time, if any, herein provided, then, in that event and in view of the difficulty of estimating
with exactness damages caused by such delay, the Owner shall have the right to deduct from and retain out of such moneys
which may be then due, or which may become due and payable to the Bidder the sum of 

XXXX

 dollars (

XXXX

) per day for each and every day that such construction is delayed in its completion beyond the specified time, as liquidated
damages and not as a penalty; if the amount due and to become due from the Owner to the Bidder is insufficient to pay in
full any such liquidated damages, the Bidder shall pay to the Owner the amount necessary to effect such payment in full;
Provided, however, that the Owner shall promptly notify the Bidder in writing of the manner in which the amount retained,
deducted or claimed as liquidated damages was computed. 
Section 3. Cumulative Remedies. Every right or remedy herein conferred upon or reserved to the Owner or the Government
or the Administrator shall be cumulative, shall be in addition to every right and remedy now or hereafter existing
at law or in equity or by statute and the pursuit of any right or remedy shall not be construed as an election: Provided,
however, that the provisions of Section 2 of this Article shall be the exclusive measure of damages for failure by the
Bidder to complete the construction of the Project within the time herein agreed upon. 


ARTICLE VI_MISCELLANEOUS 


Section 1. Definitions. 
a. The term 

Administrator

 shall mean the Administrator of the Rural Electrification Administration of the United States of America and his
duly authorized representatives or any other person in whom or authority in which may be vested the duties and functions
which the Administrator is now authorized by law to perform. 


