 

Based upon our analysis of the petition and the responses to our questionnaires, we preliminarily determine the following:



I. Program Preliminarily Determined Not To Be Countervailable 


Preferential Pricing of Orthoxylene Feedstock 


Petitioners alleged that the government-owned petrochemical company, Petroquimica de Venezuela, C.A. (``Pequiven''),
is selling orthoxylene (an input product to PA) to Venezuelan producers of PA at preferential prices. 
In its response, the GOV stated that, within Venezuela, Pequiven sells orthoxylene to only two customers, both of
which produce PA. Furthermore, it stated that the prices that Pequiven charges these companies are tied to international
prices for orthoxylene. 
In order to determine whether the GOV, through the state-owned company, Pequiven, provided orthoxylene to PA producers
at preferential prices, we followed the hierarchy for determining benchmark prices as found in 355.44(f)
of the Department's Proposed Regulations (54 FR 23381, May 31, 1989). The Department's preferred benchmark is the
non-specific price that the government charges to the same or other users of the same good within the political jurisdiction.
As noted above, within Venezuela, Pequiven sells orthoxylene only to the two PA producers. Both PA producers are charged
the same price by Pequiven. As a result, we do not have a non-specific price to use as a benchmark. 
In the absence of a non-specific price, the Department normally looks to the alternative benchmarks listed in 355.44(f)(2)
of the Proposed Regulations. The first alternative listed in the Proposed Regulations is the price charged by the
same seller for a similar or related good adjusted for any cost differences. The petition identified paraxylene and
mixed-xylene as two similar products. While Pequiven agrees that these two products, in addition to metaxylene,
are similar products to orthoxylene, it does not produce or sell those products. Pequiven did not identify any other
similar products. Therefore, we were unable to use this approach to calculate a benchmark. 
The second alternative listed in the Proposed Regulations is the price charged within the jurisdiction by other sellers
for an identical good or service. As stated in Carbon Black from Mexico; Preliminary Results of Countervailing Duty
Administrative Review (51 FR 13269, April 18, 1986), ``[t]hese other sellers may include private sellers within
the jurisdiction or foreign sellers selling into the jurisdiction ***'' Pequiven is the only domestic
producer/seller of orthoxylene in Venezuela. However, orthoxylene was imported into Venezuela during the POI.

The GOV provided U.S. export statistics on shipments of orthoxylene to Venezuela during the period 19921993.
From these statistics, we used the information on the one entry that occurred during the POI to calculate a benchmark
price since this price reflects ``a price charged within the jurisdiction by other sellers for an identical good.''
This import into Venezuela from the United States was reported on a FAS basis. Therefore, we added an amount for ocean
freight and insurance from the United States to Venezuela. The amount for ocean freight and insurance was obtained
from an independent shipping company (see memorandum from case analyst to the file, January 13, 1994). 
We then compared the adjusted import price to the price Pequiven charged for orthoxylene in the month that orthoxylene
was exported from the United States. Based on this comparison, we found that Pequiven's price was greater than the
price of imported orthoxylene. 
For the purposes of this preliminary determination, we find the use of a single import price to be a sufficient basis
for our analysis. We examined prices in the largest international markets for orthoxylene and found minimal price
fluctuations during the POI. In addition, the import price approximated the prices in these markets. 
Furthermore, as stated above, Pequiven ties its domestic prices to international prices. Therefore, we would expect
to find only negligible differences between the price Pequiven charges domestically and the price of imports into
Venezuela. To test this assumption, we averaged U.S. import prices for the three months in which we had data (one within
the POI and two within two months of the POI on either side). We compared this average to the average price Pequiven charged
in the same three months and found that Pequiven's average price was greater than the average price of the imports from
the United States. Therefore, we find that the GOV, through Pequiven, did not provide orthoxylene to PA producers
at preferential rates during the POI. 


II. Programs Preliminarily Determined Not To Be Used 


We preliminarily determine that producers or exporters in Venezuela of the subject merchandise did not receive benefits
during the POI for exports of the subject merchandise to the United States under the following programs: 


A. FINEXPO Preferential Short-Term Export Loans 
B. FINEXPO Preferential Long-Term Export Loans 
C. Excessive Tariff Drawback 
D. Preferential Tax Exemptions Under the 1966 Income Tax Law 


Because we find that the GOV did not provide orthoxylene at preferential rates and all other programs were not used,
we preliminarily determine that no benefits which constitute bounties or grants within the meaning of the countervailing
duty law are being provided to manufacturers, producers, or exporters of PA from Venezuela. 




