 

FDA tentatively concludes that the objectives of the 
proposed regulation regarding the packaging and labeling of iron-containing products will be best met if the agency
requires that 
the proposed warnings appear on the immediate container. In case 
the strip packaging or individual unit-dose packages are removed 
from the box in which they are sold to the consumer, or in case a 
strip of unit-dose packages is transferred by a pharmacist to a 
vial, each unit-dose package, or strip of unit dose packages, 
would bear the warning that FDA considers essential to the safe 
use of these products. The warning would remind adults not to 
remove the iron-containing products from the unit-dose package. In addition, it would ensure that each time an adult
takes one of 
these products, he or she is reminded of the danger that the 
product poses to children. 




In addition, if the warning accompanies each tablet or group 
of tablets, an adult who finds a child eating the product will 
know to call for help immediately and will know, when asked by a 
health care professional, that the ingested tablets contain iron. 




FDA is not proposing specific requirements for the graphics 
(e.g., type size, bold type) of the warning statement but is 
proposing to require that the label warning appear prominently 
and conspicuously on the immediate container of the product and on the principal display panel of the retail package,
so that 
consumers are given adequate notice of the information contained 
in the warning. These proposed requirements for the warning 
statement are consistent with the requirement FDA established for 
protein products. FDA tentatively concludes that they will 
effectively achieve, through placement rather than graphical 
requirements, the objective sought by the AG petition of reaching 
consumers who have no knowledge of iron's hazards. 




If FDA adopts the regulations that it is proposing, 
manufacturers will have the flexibility, as requested in the NDMA 
petition, to design their own label and warning notice formats. 
The agency is requesting comments on the most efficient way to 
ensure that warnings on the immediate container will accompany 
every tablet until the time it is used. Suggestions about the 
placement and design of unit-dose packaging that can best 
accommodate the required warnings are invited. 




FDA also specifically solicits comments on whether the 
general requirement that the label warning appear prominently and 
conspicuously on the label is adequate. Should the agency more 
explicitly define in its regulation the level of prominence and 
conspicuousness that it expects? If so, what should the agency 
require? The agency notes, for example, that in a final rule 
that required a new warning on Reye syndrome for aspirin, it 
specifically stated that the requirement of ``prominence'' in its 
regulations meant that manufacturers of aspirin and aspirin-containing drug products had to use an attention-getting

statement, such as ``see new warning'' on the label for at least 1 
year (53 FR 21633, 21635, June 9, 1988). Similarly, in the final 
rule on nutrition labeling that FDA adopted in response to the 
Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990, FDA specified a 
number of format elements to ensure that the nutrition facts 
label would be readily observable and comprehensible (see 58 FR 
2079, January 6, 1993). FDA requests comments on whether, to 
ensure that the warning statement will have its intended effect, 
the agency should specify more completely how the warning should 
be presented on iron-containing products. 


3. Proposed Labeling Requirements 


Having tentatively concluded that label warning statements 
should be required on iron-containing products, and having 
evaluated the information that the warning statement should 
include, FDA is proposing to amend its regulations by 
adding new 101.17(e) for foods, and new 310.55 for drugs, to 
require label warning statements for iron-containing 
products offered in solid oral dosage form. As noted above, 
under these proposed regulations, the warning 
statement that must be used will depend upon how the product 
is packaged. For products that are packaged in unit-dose packaging (e.g., blister packs) the agency is proposing
to 
require the following warning: 



WARNING_Keep away from children. Keep in 
original package until each use. Contains 
iron, which can harm or cause death to a 
child. If a child accidentally swallows this 
product, call a doctor or poison control 
center immediately.

 

Under this proposal, this warning statement will be required 
for all iron-containing products packaged in unit-dose packaging. 
Therefore, it would be required to appear: (1) On the labeling 
of products containing 30 mg or more iron per dosage unit, which 
are subject to the proposed requirement for unit-dose packaging 
described below (see section III.B. of this document); and (2) 
on the labeling of products that contain less than 30 mg iron per 
dosage unit but that are packaged voluntarily in unit-dose 
packaging. 
For products that contain less than 30 mg iron per dosage 
unit and that are packaged in any form of packaging other than 
unit-dose packaging, e.g., containers with child-resistant 
closures, the agency is proposing to require the following 
warning:

 

WARNING_Close tightly and keep away from 
children. Contains iron, which can harm or 
cause death to a child. If a child 
accidentally swallows this product, call a 
doctor or poison control center immediately.

 



