 







Organic vapor 

means the gaseous phase of an organic compound or a mixture of organic compounds present in the atmosphere.



Owner or operator 

means any person who owns, operates, leases, controls, or supervises an emissions source or air pollution control
equipment.



Person

 means any individual, corporation, copartnership, firm, company, partnership, joint stock company, trust, association,
State, municipality, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal representative, agent, or
assigns.



Process

 means any stationary emission source other than a fuel combustion emission source or an incinerator.



Source

 means emission source.



Standard conditions 

means a temperature of 20 
&cir;C (68 
&cir;F) and a pressure of 760 mm Hg (29.92 in. Hg).



Stationary emission source 

and

 Stationary source

 mean an emission source which is not self-propelled.

(4) 

Test Methods and Procedures.

(i) Coatings, Inks, and Fountain Solutions. 

The following test methods and procedures shall be used to determine the VOC content of as applied coatings, inks,
and fountain solutions to determine compliance with the limitations set forth in this section.

(A) 

Sampling.

 Samples collected for analyses shall be one-liter taken into a one-liter container at a location and time such that
the sample will be representative of the coating as applied (i.e., the sample shall include any dilution solvent or
other VOC added during the manufacturing process). The container must be tightly sealed immediately after the sample
is taken. Any solvent or other VOC added after the sample is taken must be measured and accounted for in the calculations
in paragraph (a)(4)(i)(C) of this section. For multiple package coatings, separate samples of each component shall
be obtained. A mixed sample shall not be obtained as it will cure in the container. Sampling procedures shall follow
the guidelines presented in:



(1)

 ASTM D392581 (1985) Standard Practice for Sampling Liquid Paints and Related Pigment Coating. This practice
is incorporated by reference in paragraph (c) of this section.



(2)

 ASTM E300 Standard Practice for Sampling Industrial Chemicals. This practice is incorporated by reference in paragraph
(c) of this section.

(B) 

Analyses. 

The applicable analytical methods specified below shall be used to determine the composition of coatings, inks,
or fountain solutions as applied.



(1)

 Method 24 of 40 CFR part 60, appendix A shall be used to determine the VOC content and density of coatings.



(2)

 Method 24A of 40 CFR part 60, appendix A, shall be used to determine the VOC content and density of publication rotogravure
printing inks and related coatings.



(3)

 The following ASTM methods and practices are the analytical procedures for determining VOC:



(i)

 ASTM D147585: Standard Test Method for Density of Paint, Varnish, Lacquer and Related Products. This test
method is incorporated by reference in paragraph (c) of this section.



(ii)

 ASTM D236987: Standard Test Method for Volatile Content of a Coating. This test method is incorporated by reference
in paragraph (c) of this section. The following minor modifications should be used for multicomponent coatings.
All components of the coating are to be weighed in the proper proportion into the analysis container and mixed together
just prior to analysis and the mixture is allowed to stand for at least one hour but no more than 24 hours prior to being
oven dried at 110 degrees celsius for one hour.



(iii)

 ASTM D379286: Standard Test Method for Water Content of Water-Reducible Paints by Direct Injection into a
Gas Chromatograph. This test method is incorporated by reference in paragraph (c) of this section.



(iv)

 ASTM D401781 (1987): Standard Test Method for Water Content in Paints and Paint Materials by the Karl Fischer
Method. This test method is incorporated by reference in paragraph (c) of this section.



(v)

 ASTM D445785: Standard Test Method for Determination of Dichloromethane and 1,1,1-Trichloroethane in Paints
and Coatings by Direct Injection into a Gas Chromatograph. (The procedure delineated above can be used to develop
protocols for any compounds specifically exempted from the definition of VOC.) This test method is incorporated
by reference in paragraph (c) of this section.



(vi)

 ASTM D269786: Standard Test Method for Volume Non-volatile Matter in Clear or Pigmented Coatings. This test
method is incorporated by reference in paragraph (c) of this section.



(vii)

 ASTM E18085: Standard Practice for Determining the Precision Data of ASTM Methods for Analysis and Testing
of Industrial Chemicals. This practice is incorporated by reference in paragraph (c) of this section.



(4)

 Use of an adaptation to any of the analytical methods specified in paragraphs (a)(4)(i)(B)

(1)

, 

(2)

, and 

(3)

 of this section may be approved by the Administrator on a case-by-case basis. An owner or operator must submit sufficient
documentation for the Administrator to find that the analytical methods specified in paragraphs (a)(4)(i)(B)

(1)

, 

(2)

, and 

(3)

 of this section will yield inaccurate results and that the proposed adaptation is appropriate.

(C) 

Calculations.

 Calculations for determining the VOC content, water content, and the content of any compounds which are specifically
exempted from the definition of VOC of coatings, inks, and fountain solutions as applied shall follow the guidance
provided in the following documents.



(1)

 ``A Guide for Surface Coating Calculation'' EPA340/186016 (which is available from the National
Technical Information Services, 5285 Port Royal Road, Springfield, Virginia, 22161) 

