 

In response to public comments the following changes have been made:



_The work assignment certification requirement under the proposed rule has been reduced from applying to all Superfund
contracts to only Superfund contracts that are not required to submit annual certifications in accordance with EPAAR
1552.21080. This change was made in response to comments that the certification requirements were overly
burdensome and duplicative. 
_The final rule's prescription to the work assignment clause, paragraph (b) of EPAAR 1512.104, Contract clauses,
reflects the reduction in certification requirement by stating that the work assignment certification provision
is not used for contracts which require annual conflict of interest certifications (e.g., Site Specific contracts
and the Contract Laboratory Program (CLP) and the Sample Management Office (SMO) contracts). 
_The number of work assignment certifications required has also been reduced to minimize contractor burden. Where
contracts include site work, the final clause only requires contractors to provide a conflict of interest certification
for the first work assignment under the contract issued for that site. For all subsequent work for that site, under
the contract, the contractor has a continuing obligation to search and report any actual or potential conflicts but
no additional conflict of interest certifications are required. To reflect this obligation, the certification
includes a statement that the contractor recognizes its continuing obligation to identify and report any actual
or potential conflict of interest arising during performance of this work assignment or other work related to this
site. 
_The time of work assignment certification has been extended to 20 days after receipt of work assignment. This change
was made in response to comments that five days is insufficient time to search and certify. 
_Alternate I affirmatively provides that a contractor must, as a minimum requirement, search through its immediate
past three years of records prior to submitting its certification. Language has been added to the clause to minimize
any misunderstandings about how far back contractors must search. Although contractors are only required to affirmatively
search back through the past three years of records, contractors are always required to report any conflicts of which
they are aware.
_The requirement that a contractor certify that all personal conflicts of interest have been reported has been removed.
The final clause requires a contractor to certify only that it has informed its personnel who perform work under this
work assignment or relating to this work assignment of their obligation to report personal and organizational conflicts
of interest to the contractor. This change was made in response to public comments that it is unfair and too burdensome
to require contractors to certify that personal conflicts have been reported since contractors have to rely on their
personnel to report such conflicts and all that should be required is a good faith effort to obtain such information.

_The term ``apparent'' has been removed from this clause in response to comments that the term is vague and difficult
to define. 
_Alternate II to the Work Assignment clause provides for a transition period for contractors who do not have three
years of records to search. The contractor will be required to search any records that it has, until over time, three
years of records are accumulated. The contractor is still always required to report any conflicts of which it is aware.







