 

Background and Purpose



Normally, foreign vessels and U.S. vessels operating on registry endorsement are under State pilotage authority,
and U.S. vessels operating on coastwise endorsement are under Federal pilotage authority. The regulations addressed
in this rulemaking deal only with Federal pilotage.

A notice of proposed rulemaking (NPRM) was published June 24, 1985 (50 FR 26117), addressing unresolved pilotage
issues. The comment period was originally scheduled to end on September 23, 1985, however, a notice of extension of
comment period (50 FR 38557), published in the 

Federal Register

 on September 23, 1985, extended the comment period to December 22, 1985. In response to this notice, the Coast Guard
received 172 written comments, and held two public meetings. One public meeting was held in New York, hosted by the
Maritime Association of New York, on November 12, 1985. The second was a meeting of the Towing Safety Advisory Committee
Subcommittee on Personnel Manning and Licensing, which was held at Coast Guard Headquarters in Washington, DC, on
December 12, 1985. On June 6, 1988, the Coast Guard published a supplemental notice of proposed rulemaking (SNPRM)
(53 FR 20654) addressing the comments received in response to the NPRM and public meetings. The comment period for
the SNPRM ended September 6, 1988. Sixteen written comments were received regarding the 1988 SNPRM. These comments
included several recommendations by the Towing Safety Advisory Committee (TSAC).

The length of time between the publication of the SNPRM and this rule has been unusually long because of developments
associated with the grounding of the M/V EXXON VALDEZ and the subsequent enactment of the Oil Pollution Act of 1990.

Therefore, the Coast Guard is publishing this rule as an interim final rule as opposed to a final rule in order to provide
the public another opportunity to comment.

As a result of the derailment of the Amtrak Sunset Limited passenger train at Big Bayou Canot, Alabama on September
22, 1993, the Coast Guard established a task force to review, among other issues, the adequacy and effectiveness of
the licensing requirements for operators of uninspected towing vessels. There is no statutory or regulatory pilotage
requirement for the particular tug and barge combination that may have collided with the bridge prior to the derailment,
and neither the proposed rules nor this interim rule have any applicability to these vessels. The proximate cause
of the incident is yet undetermined and is being investigated by the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB).
The NTSB is expected to make recommendations as a result of their investigation but these recommendations are not
expected to have any impact on this rule.



Discussion of Comments and Changes



The vast majority of the comments received in response to the 1988 SNPRM dealt with two issues: (1) The grandfathering
provision for individuals with prior towing experience; and (2) the definition of a ``coastwise seagoing vessel.''

Regarding the grandfathering provision, the 1988 SNPRM proposed permitting individuals ``with 5 years service
on towing vessel combinations of at least 5,000 gross tons while acting under the authority of a license as master,
mate, or operator of uninspected towing vessels, with a minimum of 2 of the 5 years having been on towing vessel combinations
of at least 10,000 gross tons, to obtain without a written examination, an endorsement as first class pilot, restricted
to tug and barge combinations, for those routes over which they have made the required number of round trips.'' The
intent of this proposal was to allow those who have demonstrated their abilities to pilot tug and barge combinations
to obtain a restricted endorsement as first class pilot without completing a written examination.






