 

A. Comments



A number of comments were received on the various proposed changes to NCUA's select group addition policy. They are
best discussed as a group.



1. ``Public Interest'' Addition Comments



The Board requested comment on a limited ``public interest'' procedure by which NCUA might approve a federal credit
union expansion to include a group outside the operational area of a home or branch office, if such action was in the
interest of making quality credit union service available to all eligible groups who wish to have it, and if doing so
would not have a significant adverse effect on the safe and sound operations of credit unions. Any federal credit union
seeking such an expansion would need to provide certain documentation, including a summary of the views of each credit
union with a home or branch office within a 25 mile radius as to whether each has agreed to inclusion of the group in the
applying credit union's field of membership, and if the credit union refused, the reasons for the refusal.

Thirty commenters supported the concept of the ``public interest'' proposal. 

These commenters generally believed that the proposal would provide more people with credit union service. However,
most of these commenters believed the proposal's operational area requirement was unnecessary. Furthermore, sixteen
commenters stated that the proposal's documentation requirements were so onerous that it would discourage most
credit unions from trying to use the procedure. Six commenters opposed this proposal.

One commenter believed that the only use for the ``public interest'' procedure should be to provide an exception to
the rules for credit unions experiencing a loss of members due to some extraordinary circumstances, such as a base
closing or a corporate restructuring. This commenter believed the test for a ``public interest'' procedure should
be based on: (1) The demand for credit union service; (2) the capability of the credit union to provide services; and
(3) the level of membership necessary to sustain the affected credit union.



2. ``Operational Area'' Comments



NCUA has traditionally focused multiple group field of membership additions around the ``operational area'' of
a home or branch office. This policy was designed to ensure a satisfactory level of commitment and service to the groups
included in the field of membership, while also minimizing instances of overlap and deterring territorial stakeouts
by overly aggressive credit unions. However, in response to new technologies and innovations, the proposal clarified
operational area requirements. The first clarification was that for purposes of a field of membership expansion
the ``standard'' operational area will be considered an area within a 25 mile radius of a home or branch office, but
that this standard may be extended for rural areas. Six commenters believed the proposed operational area was reasonable
and approve of it. Four other commenters agreed in general with the definition but believed that there should be more
leeway for rural areas.

Forty-one commenters objected to the 25 mile operational area as outdated in light of current technology. Thirty-seven
commenters stated there should not be any operational area. They believed that direct deposit, automated teller
service, and service-by-phone, in many cases, has eliminated the need for physical access to a branch. Five commenters
believed operational area should just be one of many factors to be considered in a field of membership expansion.

A few of the commenters stated that a progressive approach to the expansion of services is one based on functionality,
not geography. They believed a functional approach should be based on the capacity and willingness to serve matched
with a demand for those services. One commenter suggested that the determination of the operational area of a credit
union should be based on whether the credit union can reasonably be expected to deliver adequate credit union service
to the area. This commenter suggested that NCUA approve a field of membership expansion request if: (1) There is a clear
demand for the credit union's services; (2) the credit union is capable of providing the services; and (3) other credit
unions in the area are not already providing the service. Twelve commenters stated that any credit union should have
the option to add select employee groups to its field of membership (without regard to operational area) if it has the
financial resources to do so and there is no overlap.



3. ``Shared Facilities'' Comments



The proposal stated that ``shared facilities'' and ``shared service centers'' were specifically to be excluded
from consideration as either a ``home'' or ``branch'' office for purposes of meeting NCUA's operational area requirement,
except in unusual circumstances_e.g., where a credit union is converting an existing home or branch office to a ``shared
facility.'' Nine commenters believed this to be a reasonable position and agreed with the clarification. One commenter
stated that this position would ultimately help service centers prosper and control predatory concerns from credit
unions not participating in shared service center programs.

Seven commenters opposed the clarification. Several commenters believed the proposal would force some credit unions
into unnecessary expenditures for ``brick and mortar'' facilities. Some commenters suggested that field of membership
expansions be allowed around a shared branch if the credit union has a material (20%) stake in the facility. They believed
shared branches were tantamount to a credit union's own property.



4. ``Branch'' Comments



