 

The Secretary proposes to add a new paragraph (a)(7) to state the principle that any claim by a guaranty agency to recover
funds and assets for the reserve fund from a third party is also Federal property. 

The guaranty agencies requested the addition of proposed paragraph (a)(8), which would apply one of the traditional
fiduciary standards for non-arm's length transactions to guaranty agencies' use of reserve funds and assets. 

Finally, the guaranty agency negotiators also requested the addition of the first sentence of paragraph (a)(9) to
clarify the applicability of the definition of reserve funds and assets in this section throughout sections 422 and
428 of the HEA. The departmental negotiators, in response, added the second sentence to reference the Secretary's
authority under section 428(c)(9)(F)(vi) of the HEA to use all funds and assets of the guaranty agency under the circumstances
specified in that section. 



Section 682.417Determination of reserve funds or assets to be returned 



The Secretary proposes to add a new section to establish the substantive standard for orders to guaranty agencies
to return unnecessary reserves. The section would also establish a process by which a guaranty agency may challenge
an order that it return reserves or an order that it require the return to itself or to the Secretary of reserve funds
or assets that are held by, or under the control of, another party. Since the Secretary is not aware of any circumstances
under which all of those funds and assets would not be required for the orderly termination of the agency's operations
or the orderly liquidation of its assets, no further substantive standard has been proposed for orders for the return
of property not in the hands of the guaranty agencies. 

Proposed paragraph (a) would simply restate the statutory provisions. 

In paragraph (b) the Secretary proposes the substantive standard for ``unnecessary'' reserves. Under this paragraph
the Secretary would not initiate a proceeding for the recovery of unnecessary reserves unless the guaranty agency's
reserve fund ratio exceeded a specified level for each of the two preceding Federal fiscal years. In exercising discretion
whether to initiate such a proceeding during the first two years that this rule is effective, the Secretary will consider
that the effects of OBRA on guaranty agencies were not reflected at all in the 1993 fiscal year and will probably not
have been fully reflected in the 1994 fiscal year, either. If the Secretary does initiate a proceeding, projections
of the agency's future financial condition would be used as the basis for the decision. As soon as possible, the Secretary
intends to propose a system of uniform financial projections for guaranty agencies that could not only be used in these
proceedings, but would also give the Secretary better general information on the current and future financial health
of the guaranty agency industry. In the meantime, the Secretary would be able to require a guaranty agency to submit
special projections for the proceeding. If the Secretary determined to recover reserves from an agency, the agency
would be entitled to retain sufficient reserves at least to satisfy the ``trigger'' level specified in the regulation
and to maintain a sufficient cushion over the statutorily-mandated reserve requirements to perform its responsibilities
as a guaranty agency over a specified future period. The Secretary proposes to use a higher standard than the statutory
minimum in order to enable agencies to continue to guarantee new loans and perform their other obligations as guaranty
agencies, not simply to satisfy their existing guarantees and service out their existing portfolios. 

Proposed paragraph (c) would set forth the contents and procedural requirements for the notice by which the Secretary
or an authorized Departmental official would initiate a proceeding under this section. The proposed notice is designed
to provide the agency with the information that it needs to respond to the officer's initial determination. The notice
would also include a description of any actions that the guaranty agency would be required to take to assure the safety
of the reserve funds or assets that are the subject of the proceeding while the proceeding was pending. 

In paragraph (d) the Secretary proposes to provide the procedural and substantive requirements for the appeal of
an initial determination under paragraph (c). The appeal would be decided by a different Departmental official who
was not a subordinate of the one who made the initial determination. The guaranty agency would have the burden of production
and persuasion in such an appeal. It would be entitled to an oral argument to the deciding official promptly after submitting
all material that is required for the appeal but not to a formal hearing. The record would be closed to evidence before
this oral argument unless the deciding official determined otherwise. 

Under section 428(c)(9)(J) of the HEA, the Secretary is required to protect the confidentiality of financial information
collected by the Secretary under that section. In light of this requirement, only the guaranty agency and the Department
would be considered parties to a proceeding under this section with any formal rights of participation. The Department,
however, always appreciates receiving information from all persons having relevant information about matters
within its jurisdiction, and it particularly solicits input from students and schools in these proceedings. Accordingly,
in paragraph (e) the Secretary proposes to provide an opportunity for public input by publishing a notice of the initial
determination of funds or assets to be returned in the 

Federal Register

. In the interest of fairness, the guaranty agency would be given a reasonable opportunity to respond to any public
input if the deciding official considered the information adverse to the agency. 



