 

State agencies have indicated that the legislative conflict between the desire to avoid reducing a household's food
stamp allotment when it receives energy assistance and the principle that the heating or cooling standard should
be allowed only when a household actually incurs an out-of-pocket heating or cooling expense has resulted in regulations
that are error-prone and difficult to administer. Numerous policy memoranda and clarifications have been issued
to assist State agencies in determining the circumstances under which a household is entitled to a heating or cooling
standard. However, State agencies continue to raise questions concerning use of the standard. 
Within the constraints of the Food Stamp Act and legislation governing the LIHEA program, we are proposing to revise
7 CFR 273.9(d)(6) to assist State agencies in using a heating or cooling standard and to provide greater flexibility
in developing other standards. Under this proposal, provisions relating to standard utility allowances would be
organized into the following areas: (a) Developing and updating standard utility allowances, (b) entitlement to
a heating or cooling standard, (c) household option, and (d) sharing utility costs. We are also proposing to add the
last sentence of current 7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(i) regarding allowable cooling costs to the list of allowable utility
costs in 7 CFR 273.9(d)(5)(ii)(C) so that all allowable utility costs are listed in one paragraph. The proposed changes
are discussed below. 
a. Developing and updating standard utility allowances. Current regulations at 7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(i), (iii), (iv),
(v), and (vi) set forth the requirements for developing standard utility allowances. They allow State agencies to
use seasonal standards; annual standards that do not have to be adjusted seasonally; separate standards for each
utility expense; or single utility standards that include the cost of heating or cooking fuel, cooling, electricity,
water, sewerage, garbage or trash collection, and the basic service fee for one telephone. 
In an effort to ease confusion and clarify the rules regarding the establishment of utility standards, we are proposing
to consolidate the current rules into a single, revised paragraph, 
7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(i). At the same time, we are proposing several changes in existing policy. The changes in policy
are described below. 
Several State agencies have requested and have been granted waivers to use a combined standard for all nonheating
or noncooling expenses. As justification for their waiver requests, State agencies cite difficulty in obtaining
verification for utility expenses and, consequently, increased errors relating to shelter costs when certifying
households. To provide greater State agency flexibility without the need for waivers and to reduce the error-prone
use of actual utility expenses, we are proposing in 7 CFR 273.9(d)(6)(i) to allow State agencies to develop standard
utility allowances for individual utilities and a combination of utilities. As provided in current regulations,
the allowances may be seasonal or annualized to include costs for all seasons and may be varied by household size or
geographic location. Although the proposal for a combined standard is not as broad as some standards currently in
use, we believe it would provide some additional flexibility to State agencies and would reduce the number of cases
in which workers must verify actual expenses without greatly increasing Program costs. 




