 

<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

Proposed Action 



The proposed action is to use the existing TFTR systems and accessory facilities in the construction and operation
of TPX, which would be primarily located inside the existing TFTR Test Cell. The TPX would require dismantlement and
removal of all TFTR activated systems within the TFTR Test Cell Complex. Dismantlement and removal of nonradioactive
and low activation components in areas such as the Test Cell Basement and the Hot Cell, would start immediately after
the conclusion of the TFTR deuterium-tritium experiment, which is expected to conclude in Fiscal Year 1995. Cool-down
of the Tokamak in the test cell will commence at that time. 

The TPX is being proposed as a national facility for fusion energy research to be built at the Princeton Plasma Physics
Laboratory (PPPL). Its primary mission is to develop the scientific basis for an economical, more compact, and continuously
operating Tokamak in support of the design of an attractive demonstration fusion power plant. 

Waste from decontamination and decommissioning would include stainless steel and aluminum structures, piping,
copper coils, graphite tiles, solidified radioactive liquids, anti-contamination materials, and concrete rubble.
Waste would be packaged into Department of Transportation (DOT) approved containers and transported to the DOE Hanford
site in Richland, Washington, as are current PPPL wastes. Approximately 950 m

3

 (33,500 ft

3

) of waste weighing approximately 2270 metric tonnes (2500 tons) would also be disposed. Construction of a radioactive
waste storage building for temporary storage of radioactive waste and final preparation of some radioactive waste
shipments would be required. This facility would be approximately 560 m

2

 (6000 ft

2

) in size, and would be constructed within the existing TFTR facility fence. A second storm water detention basin similar
to and west of the existing detention basin would also be constructed. 

Decontamination and decom
mis
sion
ing of the TFTR Test Cell could be completed in approximately 1.5 years, after a 2-year cool-down period. TPX construction
would minimally overlap decontamination and decommissioning of 
TFTR facilities. The TFTR Test Cell Complex would then be available for the TPX approximately 3.5 years after termination
of TFTR deuterium-tritium experiments. The total cost for the decontamination and decommissioning of the TFTR is
estimated to be $86 million. 

The construction and operation of the TPX would take place within the existing TFTR facility at Princeton Plasma Physics
Laboratory (PPPL), with construction scheduled to begin in early FY1998. The TPX conceptual design is based
on the use of deuterium fuel, but does not preclude the potential upgrade and use of tritium fuel in the final year of
operation. Existing TFTR facilities would be adapted and used by the TPX, including TFTR Test Cell Complex; ventilation
exhaust vent and intake shafts; mockup building; tritium cleanup/waste handling area; field coil power conversion
building; neutral beam power conversion building; radioactive waste systems space; office and technical support
space; and miscellaneous PPPL support facilities. In addition to providing space for the TPX, the TFTR Test Cell Complex
would provide shielding (via concrete walls, roof, and floor), and provide for confinement and handling of tritium-contaminated
and/or radioactive components. 

The cost for construction of the TPX is estimated at $500M (FY93), with the construction period 1997 to 2000.
New facilities to be constructed include TFTR Test Cell building modifications, a new Cryogenic Equipment building,
tank yards for water cooling and cryogenic tanks, and a new electrical substation. The Test Cell building modifications
would be internal and would not increase the existing external dimensions of the building. The Cryogenic Equipment
building would be constructed as a standard industrial single-story building, totaling about 1000 m

2

 (10,800 ft

2

) in area. The tank yard construction would include approximately 2,130 m

2

 (22,950 ft

2

) of new tank yard areas for new gaseous helium tanks, liquid nitrogen storage tanks, water storage tanks, and truck-trailer
access. This construction would take place on existing open space. The electrical substation construction would
involve installation of a new 138 kV transmission line between the existing substation and the new substation. The
new substation would be for transforming 138 kV power to 13.8 kV. A new electric power line would be constructed entirely
on PPPL property. 

Machine assembly would be scheduled for 1998, with the first operations during 2000. The TPX would be fueled with hydrogen
and deuterium plasmas for 10 years; radiation generation would not be significant in terms of neutron activation
of components or radiological doses. In deuterium operation, the peak fusion power would not exceed 140 kW. During
long pulse deuterium operation, neutrons with energies of 2.45 mega electron volts (MeV) would be the primary neutrons
produced, and annual production of these neutrons would be limited to 6.0 &times; 10

21

 neutrons. A smaller number of 14.1 MeV neutrons would be produced from deuterium-tritium fusion reactions with tritium
produced from the deuterium-deuterium fusion reactions. The number of 14.1 MeV neutrons produced during deuterium
operations would be approximately 2% of the number of 2.45 MeV neutrons produced. 

The TPX facility would be capable of operating with deuterium-tritium plasmas during the last year of TPX operation.
During deuterium-tritium operation, a fully-formed deuterium plasma would be developed (requiring up to roughly
1,000 seconds), into which tritium would be injected. Once tritium has been injected, the device would operate for
2 seconds with a peak fusion power of 15 MW, after which the plasma would be terminated. During the 2 seconds of deuterium-tritium
operation, both 2.45 MeV neutrons and 14.1 MeV neutrons would be produced, from deuterium-deuterium and deuterium-tritium
fusion reactions, respectively. Production of 2.45 MeV neutrons during deuterium-tritium operation would be approximately
1% of the 14.1 MeV neutron production rate. Operation of the Tokamak would be controlled to limit annual neutron production
so that the site boundary dose restriction adopted by the project would not be exceeded. The deuterium-tritium phase
(if used) would be limited to the last year of TPX operation. Small amounts of tritium, and air activation products
would be released, and minor amounts of direct radiation would result from fusion neutrons and activated structural
components of TPX. 

Low-level solid radioactive wastes generated during TPX operations would consist of contaminated items (e.g.,
protective clothing) and solidified liquid wastes (tritiated water absorbed on desiccant and solidified liquid
waste from the decontamination area). The volume of waste would be similar to that generated by TFTR operations, which
was appropriated 7.4 m

3

 per year for deuterium-deuterium operations, and is projected to increase during deuterium-tritium operations
to 28.3 m

3

 per year (1000 ft

3

 per year). Wastes generated during TPX operations would be packaged to comply with applicable DOE and DOT requirements
and is expected to be shipped to the DOE Hanford Reservation in Washington for disposal, as are current PPPL wastes.




Alternatives 



Three alternatives were considered: (1) The proposed action, use of the TFTR facilities for the proposed construction
and operation of the TPX at PPPL, (2) proposed construction and operation of the TPX at the Oak Ridge Reservation in
Tennessee, and (3) no action. Location of the TPX at the Oak Ridge Gaseous Diffusion Plant, near Knoxville, Tennessee,
would require construction of new support facilities including a new test cell, hot cell, waste handling and storage
areas, field coil power conversion building, and cryogenic facilities. The additional cost and time would jeopardize
the U.S. fusion program and make the TPX project infeasible. Under the no action alternative, decontamination and
decommission of TFTR facilities would occur under current management practices, but may involve a longer delay between
safe shutdown activities and commencement of decontamination and decommissioning activities. The longer delay
would not fit within the current schedule to meet the construction of the TPX. This delay may in turn be followed by a
23 year period of delay, during which the TFTR facility would be in a state of protective custody. The TPX would
not proceed under the no action alternative. 



Environmental Impacts 



The Environmental Assessment analyzed the impacts of the TFTR decontamination and decomissioning and TPX construction
and operation on the environment and on the health and safety of workers and the public. Both routine operations and
off-normal or accident scenarios were assessed. The Environmental Assessment considered impacts to air quality,
noise, water quality and quantity, aquatic and terrestrial ecology, threatened and endangered species, the visual
environment, land use, historical and archaeological resources, socioeconomic environment, radiological conditions,
and impacts of potential accidents. No significant environmental impacts associated with the proposed action are
anticipated. 

Activities associated with decontamination and decommissioning of the TFTR would not present any long-term or adverse
nonradiological impacts to the public or the environment. It would result in minor impacts, consisting primarily
of commitment of a small area of onsite land for the radioactive waste storage building and the second storm water detention
basin. Construction of the radioactive waste storage building and storm water detention basin may result in a temporary
small increase of effluent to Bee Brook, but would not exceed PPPL New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
permit or other State or federal regulatory requirements. 

</SUPPLEM>
