 

VII





It is further ordered

 that respondent shall, within sixty (60) days after service of this Order, and at such other times as the Federal Trade
Commission may require, file with the Commission a report, in writing, setting forth in detail the manner and form
in which it has complied with this Order.



Analysis of Proposed Consent Order To Aid Public Comment



The Federal Trade Commission has accepted an agreement to a proposed consent order from The American Tobacco Company
(``American Tobacco'').

The proposed consent order has been placed on the public record for sixty (60) days for reception of comments by interested
persons. Comments received during this period will become part of the public record. After sixty (60) days, the Commission
will again review the agreement and the comments received and will decide whether it should withdraw from the agreement
or make final the agreement's proposed order.

This matter concerns claims made by American Tobacco in its advertising for cigarettes.

The Commission's complaint in this matter charges American Tobacco with engaging in unfair or deceptive practices
in connection with the advertising of its Carlton brand cigarettes. According to the complaint, American Tobacco
falsely represented, through the presentation of the tar of its Carlton product as a numerical multiple, fraction
or ratio of the tar of other brands of cigarettes, and/or the visual depiction of ten packs or a carton of Carlton cigarettes
versus one pack of the other brands: (1) That consumers will get less tar by smoking ten packs of Carlton brand cigarettes
than by smoking a single pack of the other brands of cigarettes depicted in the ads, which are rated as having more than
10 mg. of tar; and (2) that it had a reasonable basis for claims that consumers will get less tar by smoking ten packs of
Carlton brand cigarettes than by smoking a single pack of the other brands of cigarettes depicted in the ads.

The consent order contains provisions designed to remedy the violations charged and to prevent American Tobacco
from engaging in similar deceptive and unfair acts and practices in the future.

Part I of the order prohibits American Tobacco from representing, through certain means specified in the order, that
consumers will get less tar by smoking ten packs of any cigarette rated as having 1 mg. of tar than by smoking a single
pack of any other brand of cigarettes that is rated as having more than 10 mg. of tar.

Part II of the order prohibits American Tobacco from representing, through those same means, that consumers will
get less tar or nicotine by smoking any number of cigarettes (or packs or cartons of cigarettes) of any of respondent's
brands than by smoking one or more cigarettes (or packs or cartons of cigarettes) of any other brand, unless, the representation
is true and, at the time it makes such claims, American Tobacco has competent and reliable scientific evidence to substantiate
the claims.

Part III of the order provides a limited ``safe harbor'' for advertising that complies with certain specific requirements
in its use of official tar and nicotine ratings. Specifically, presentation of the tar and/or nicotine ratings of
any of American Tobacco's brands of cigarettes and the tar and/or nicotine ratings of any other brand shall not, in
and of itself, be deemed to violate Part I or Part II of the order where no more than a single cigarette or pack or American
Tobacco's brand is visually depicted versus a single cigarette or pack of any other brand.

Part IV of the order requires American Tobacco to maintain copies of all materials relied upon in making any representations
covered by the order, as well as all materials that contradict or call into question those representations.

Part V of the order requires American Tobacco to distribute copies of the order to each of its operating divisions and
to various officers, agents, representatives or employees of American Tobacco.

Part VI of the order requires American Tobacco to notify the Commission of any changes in corporate structure that
might affect compliance with the order.

Part VII of the order requires American Tobacco to file with the Commission one or more reports detailing compliance
with the order.

The purpose of this analysis is to facilitate public comment on the proposed order, and it is not intended to constitute
an official interpretation of the agreement and proposed order, or to modify any of their terms.



<SIGNER>
Donald S. Clark,


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Secretary.


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9425333 Filed 101294; 8:45 am]


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 675001M
</BILLING>

