 

For purposes of these initiations we are considering the subject merchandise to be one class or kind of merchandise.
We invite interested parties to comment on this issue by March 25, 1994. 



United States Price and Foreign Market Value 



Brazil 



Petitioners based United States price (USP) on JanuaryMarch 1993 invoices issued by the U.S. subsidiary of
Acos Villares SA (Villares), a Brazilian producer of stainless steel bar, to an unrelated U.S. customer. Since USP
was based on CF terms of sale, petitioners deducted from USP amounts for U.S. duty, ocean freight, marine insurance,
and harbor maintenance and U.S. merchandise processing fees. 

Petitioners used Villares' delivered home market prices as the basis for FMV. These prices and related expenses were
contained in a market research report. FMV was based on actual tax-exclusive, MayJune 1993 delivered sales
prices of Villares to unrelated customers in Brazil. Petitioners deducted from FMV an amount for inland freight.


Petitioners indicate that the home market price used for FMV was reported in U.S. dollars, thus taking into account
Brazil's hyperinflationary economy. 

Based on a comparison of USP to FMV, the dumping margin alleged by petitioners for stainless steel bar from Brazil is
19.43 percent. 



India 



Petitioners calculated USP based on two different methodologies. First, petitioners obtained a July 1993 U.S. price
quote for stainless steel bar from India to an unrelated U.S. customer. Since the prices were quoted CF for delivery
to the east or west coast of the United States, petitioners deducted from USP amounts for import duties, ocean freight,
marine insurance, and harbor maintenance and U.S. merchandise processing fees. 

Petitioners calculated a second weighted-average USP using the average import values of stainless steel bar from
India for August and September 1993. The unit values were derived from U.S. Department of Commerce import statistics.


Petitioners used Indian home market prices for stainless steel bar from Mukand Ltd., the largest stainless steel
bar producer in India, as the basis for FMV. These prices were contained in a market research report. Petitioners deducted
from these prices taxes, insurance, freight, and a distributor's margin based on information in the market research
report. Because the comparison of USP and FMV involved non-identical merchandise, petitioners made an adjustment
for differences in merchandise based on information contained in the market research report. 

For purposes of this initiation, we have accepted petitioners' calculation of USP based on the first methodology.
Accordingly, the range of dumping margins of stainless steel bar from India based on a comparison of USP to FMV alleged
by petitioners under this methodology is 11.26 to 21.02 percent. 



Italy 



Petitioners based USP on price quotations for U.S. sales made by Cogne, an Italian producer of stainless steel bar,
to an unrelated U.S. customer. Since these USPs were quoted FOB duty paid, petitioners deducted the applicable import
duties. 

Petitioners calculated FMV using two methodologies. First, petitioners used Cogne's delivered home market prices
as the basis for FMV. These prices were contained in a market research report. Petitioners deducted from these prices
inland freight and insurance based on information contained in the same report. 

Second, petitioners based FMV on constructed value (CV). Petitioners used CV because they alleged that Cogne's home
market sales are being made at prices below the cost of production (COP). Petitioners also allege that another Italian
company, Bolzano, is making home market sales of stainless steel bar at prices below the COP. These allegations are
based on a comparison of home market prices for Cogne and Bolzano, obtained from the market research report, with COP.
COP was based on the COP of an efficient U.S. producer of stainless steel bar, adjusted for known differences in costs
between the United States and Italy. Where petitioners calculated CV, they used the COP derived from this U.S. producer
and added the statutory minimum of eight percent for profit. 




