 

By examination of the logarithmic-probability plot of long-term personal exposure levels of Mn, it is estimated
that half of 
the population would be exposed to PM

4

 Mn levels of more than 
approximately 0.045 to 0.050 

m

g/m3. Also, based on the two 
projection estimates, approximately 5 to 10% of the population 
would have personal exposure levels around 0.1 

m

g/m3 PM

4

 Mn or higher. The highest 1% would be predicted to have PM

4

 Mn 
exposure levels above 0.15 

m

g/m3. It should be noted that these 
projections refer specifically to Riverside, CA, with a 
population of more than 139,000 persons. However, in many 
significant respects (e.g., meteorology and traffic volume), 
Riverside is reasonably representative of the greater 
metropolitan area of Los Angeles, which has a total population of 
over 14.5 million persons. The exposure projection estimates for 
Riverside imply the possibility that hundreds of thousands of 
persons in the Los Angeles area alone could be exposed to PM

4

 Mn 
levels exceeding 0.1 

m

g/m3. To the extent that any other U.S. 
cities (e.g., in the Southwest) share some degree of resemblance 
in meteorology, vehicle miles traveled (VMT), and possibly other 
characteristics of relevance to automotive Mn levels, the 
estimated exposure levels for Riverside could be pertinent, at 
least qualitatively, to other locales or portions of locales as 
well. Similarities and differences in point-source contributions 
to Mn exposure would also figure into comparisons with other 
communities. The presence of a major point source or sources of 
Mn in a community (which was not a factor in Riverside) would add 
some increment to the level of Mn exposure experienced by the 
persons in that community. Although these Riverside estimates 
cannot be applied quantitatively to any other U.S. metropolitan 
areas, the total population of the U.S. counties with VMT levels 
greater than that of Riverside (apart from the four counties Los 
Angeles comprises) is approximately 15 million persons. 
Possibly, then, several hundreds of thousands of persons could be 
exposed to PM

4

 Mn levels of approximately 0.1 

m

g/m3 or higher if MMT were used in 100% of the unleaded gasoline in all of these 
areas. However, it must be emphasized that because of the 
limited available data, a great deal of uncertainty surrounds 
such estimates. The actual exposure levels could be much higher 
or lower.






<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050P
</BILLING>








<IMPORT>



E:GRAPHICSEN17AU94.000




</IMPORT>



<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050C
</BILLING>









