 

National Network_California 


This final rule will also amend appendix A to 23 CFR part 658, National Network_Federally-Designated Routes, to reflect
the inclusion of the I580 Richmond-San Rafael Bridge (toll) in the NN. Under the STAA, all Interstate System
routes are part of the NN unless deletion is authorized by law. The I580 Richmond-San Rafael Bridge was withheld
from the NN until a direct connection to I80 from the east end of the bridge could be completed. This condition
was reflected in Note 1 to the California listing of NN routes in appendix A. Now that this connection has been completed,
the FHWA is amending appendix A by removing Note 1 and redesignating Note 2 as ``Note.'' 
This amendment will merely reflect the fact that the I580 Richmond-San Rafael Bridge is now included in the
NN pursuant to the provisions of the STAA. For this reason, and the others set forth above, the FHWA has determined that
prior notice and opportunity for public comment on this action are unnecessary. Furthermore, due to the technical
nature of this amendment, the FHWA has determined that prior notice and opportunity for comment are not required under
the U.S. Department of Transportation's Regulatory Policies and Procedures, as it is not anticipated that such action
will result in receipt of useful information. 


National Network_Virginia 


The ISTEA freeze applies to the operation of specified CMV's on the Interstate and other portions of the NN. The identification
of NN routes in Virginia contained in appendix A to 23 CFR part 658 utilizes Interstate System exit numbers to identify
the beginning or end of some NN routes. During 1992, the State converted all Interstate System exit numbers from a consecutive
number system to a milepost numbering system. In response to this portion of the SNPRM, the State indicated that there
appeared to be a discrepancy between what was published in the SNPRM and what the State was considering to be its NN.

The State list not only includes those highway sections designated by the Secretary which comprise appendix A to part
658, but also additional segments which the State has also decided to open to STAA vehicles. Each State retains the
authority to open additional mileage, beyond what is listed in appendix A of part 658, to STAA vehicles without the
approval of the Secretary. In order to identify NN routes in Virginia which have been federally designated, we are
reissuing the State's NN routes in appendix A, 23 CFR part 658, to reflect the new milepost-based exit numbers. 


Definition Of Maxi-Cube 


Among the vehicles specifically excluded from listing in appendix C, and therefore not subject to the restrictions
described in section 4006 of the ISTEA, is the maxi-cube vehicle. ``Maxi-Cube'' is a registered trademark of LHT Industries,
which designed the vehicle, but the maxi-cube regulations adopted in this rule apply to any vehicles that meet their
terms. 
In 1987, Congress amended the STAA by adopting a definition of a maxi-cube and authorizing the vehicle to operate on
the same terms as other STAA vehicles (49 U.S.C. app. 2311(f)(2) and 2311(c), respectively). It soon became apparent
that the definition, reproduced below, was flawed: 



(2) For purposes of this section, 

maxi-cube vehicle

 means a truck tractor combined with a semi-trailer and a separable cargo-carrying unit which is designed to be loaded
and unloaded through the semi-trailer, except that the entire combination shall not exceed 65 feet in length and the
separable cargo-carrying unit shall not exceed 34 feet in length. 



49 U.S.C. app. 2311(f)(2). 



Although the term maxi-cube was intended to apply to a specific combination of straight truck and trailing unit, the
1987 language described the power unit as a ``truck tractor,'' which the STAA elsewhere defines as ``the noncargo
carrying power unit that operates in combination with a semitrailer or trailer *** `` (49 U.S.C. app.
2311(f)(1)). 
Theoretically, therefore, the maxi-cube is a noncargo-carrying power unit combined with a semitrailer and a separable
cargo-carrying unit which is designed to be loaded and unloaded through the semi-trailer. Unfortunately, this vehicle
is a chimera. The separable cargo-carrying unit cannot be placed on the ``noncargo carrying'' power unit, and if it
were placed on the semitrailer, the result would seem to be a truck tractor-chassis-intermodal container combination.
Container vehicles had long been legal, however, so the 1987 language certainly was not directed at them. In some sense
all containers and semitrailers are designed to be loaded and unloaded ``through'' themselves, but the description
does not really fit a combination with only one cargo-carrying unit. The fact is that the definition of the vehicle
to be authorized did not correspond to the actual vehicle. 
Recognizing the problem, Congress amended the STAA again in 1990 to make maxi-cubes ``specialized equipment'' and
thus eligible for the special regulatory treatment authorized by 49 U.S.C. app. 2311(d). The accompanying report
of the House Appropriations Committee said the following: 



The bill includes language (Sec. 327) amending section 411(d) of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act of 1982
regarding maxi-cube vehicles. A maxi-cube vehicle is a truck combination consisting of a power unit capable of carrying
cargo that pulls a semitrailer. The power unit is a single or tandem axle truck that carries either a detachable or a
permanently attached cargo box or platform. The trailing unit is a semitrailer attached to the front unit by a specially
built draw bar which gives the entire combination a single point of articulation. The front of the rear unit is specially
designed so cargo may be loaded through the rear unit to the front unit. The length of the trailing cargo unit can be no
more than 34 feet excluding the draw bar. The distance from the front of the cargo box on the power unit to the rear of the
trailing unit can be no more than 60 feet. 



(H.R. Rep. No. 584, 101st Cong. 2d Sess. at 7879 (1990).)

 

Although this is an accurate description of a maxi-cube, the flawed definition of the same vehicle in 49 U.S.C. app.
2311(f)(2) was not repealed. In the SNPRM, the FHWA therefore exercised its broad discretionary authority over specialized
equipment to propose a definition of the maxi-cube that largely codified the policy guidance of the Committee Report
while omitting or modifying the erroneous parts of the statutory definition. We believe this is consistent with the
principle that ambiguous or confusing statutes must be interpreted and implemented in a manner that minimizes difficulties
and produces the most sensible result. 



