 

85.2304 

Definition of production period. 



The ``annual production period'' for any specific model within an engine family of light-duty motor vehicle or heavy-duty
motor vehicles and engines begins either: When such vehicle or engine is first produced; or on January 2 of the calendar
year preceding the year for which the model year is designated, whichever date is later. The annual production period
ends either: When the last such vehicle or engine is produced; or on December 31 of the calendar year for which the model
year is named, whichever date is sooner. 



85.2305 

Duration and applicability of certificates of conformity.

1 





<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


1

</FOOTNAME>
The extended coverage period described here for a certificate of conformity (i.e., up to one year plus 364 days) is
primarily intended to allow flexibility in the introduction of new models. Under no circumstances should it be interpreted
that existing models may ``skip'' yearly certification by pulling ahead the production of every other model year.
While this situation, to the Agency's knowledge, has not occurred in the past, a practice of producing vehicles for
a two year period would violate Congress's intent of annual certification based upon an annual production period.
The Agency is not currently setting forth rules for how to determine when abuse has occurred, since this has not been
a problem to date. However, the Agency is requiring that manufacturers shall continue to use normal yearly production
periods for existing models. 

</FOOTNOTE>


(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, a certificate of conformity is deemed to be effective and cover
the vehicles or engines named in such certificate and produced during the annual production period, as defined in
85.2304. 

(b) Section 203 of the Clean Air Act prohibits the sale, offering for sale, delivery for introduction into commerce,
and introduction into commerce of any new vehicle or engine not covered by a certificate of conformity unless it is
an imported vehicle exempted by the Administrator or otherwise authorized jointly by EPA and U.S. Customs service
regulations. However, the Act does not prohibit the production of vehicles or engines without a certificate of conformity.
Vehicles or engines produced prior to the effective date of a certificate of conformity, as defined in paragraph (a)
of this section, may also be covered by the certificate if the following conditions are met: 

(1) The vehicles or engines conform in all respects to the vehicle or engines described in the application for the certificate
of conformity; 

(2) The vehicles or engines are not sold, offered for sale, introduced into commerce, or delivered for introduction
into commerce prior to the effective date of the certificate of conformity; 

(3) The Agency is notified prior to the beginning of production when such production will start, and the Agency is provided
full opportunity to inspect and/or test the vehicles during and after their production; for example, the Agency must
have the opportunity to conduct selective enforcement auditing production line testing as if the vehicles had been
produced after the effective date of the certificate.

(c) Vehicles or engines imported by an original equipment manufacturer after December 31 of the calendar year for
which the model year is named are still covered by the certificate of conformity as long as the production of the vehicle
or engine was completed before December 31 of that year. This paragraph does not apply to vehicles that may be covered
by certificates held by independent commercial importers unless specifically approved by EPA. 

(d) Vehicles or engines produced after December 31 of the calendar year for which the model year is named are not covered
by the certificate of conformity for that model year. A new certificate of conformity demonstrating compliance with
currently applicable standards must be obtained for these vehicles or engines, even if they are identical to vehicles
or engines built before December 31. 





<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9423112 Filed 92194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050P
</BILLING>


