 

3.4.2.1. Methodologic aspects.



From a methodologic standpoint, human laboratory studies 
can be divided into two categories_between-subjects and within-subjects designs. In the 
former, the neurobehavioral performance of exposed volunteers is compared with that of 
nonexposed participants. In the latter, preexposure performance is compared with 
neurobehavioral function under the influence of the chemical or drug. Within-subjects 
designs have the advantage of requiring fewer participants, eliminating individual differences 
as a source of variability, and controlling for chronic mediating variables, such as caffeine 
use and educational achievement. A disadvantage of the within-subjects design is that 
neurobehavioral tests must be administered more than once. Practice on many 
neurobehavioral tests often leads to improved performance that may confound the effect of 
the chemical/drug. It is important to allow a sufficient number of test sessions in the 
preexposure phase of the study to allow performance on all tests to achieve a relatively stable 
baseline level. 



3.4.2.2. Human subject selection factors.



Participants in laboratory exposure studies may 
be recruited from populations of persons already exposed to the chemical/drug or from naive 
populations. Although the use of exposed volunteers has ethical advantages, can militate 
against novelty effects, and allows evaluation of tolerance/sensitization, finding an accessible 
exposed population in reasonable proximity to the laboratory is difficult. Naive participants 
are more easily recruited, but may differ significantly in important characteristics from a 
representative sample of exposed persons. Naive volunteers are often younger, healthier, 
and better educated than the populations exposed environmentally, in the workplace, or 
pharmacotherapeutically. For example, phase I drug trial data from relatively young and 
healthy volunteers may not adequately predict the incidence of neurotoxic side effects in 
older persons with chronic health problems. 



3.4.2.3. Exposure conditions and chemical classes.



Compared with workplace and 
environmental exposures, laboratory exposure conditions can be controlled more precisely, 
but exposure periods are much shorter. Generally only one or two relatively pure chemicals 
are studied for several hours while the population of interest may be exposed to multiple 
chemicals containing impurities for months or years. Laboratory studies are therefore better 
at identifying and characterizing effects with acute onset and the selective effects of pure 
agents. 

Most laboratory studies of neurobehavioral function have employed individual 
solvents, combinations of two solvents, or very low concentrations of chemicals released 
from household and office materials (volatile organic compounds). This selection is 
primarily because solvent effects are reversible, because there are wide margins of safety for 
acute effects of solvents, because solvents can be administered via inhalation methods that 
allow calculation of body concentrations by breath sampling methods that do not require 
needle sticks, because over 1 million workers may have occupational solvent exposure, and 
because of the extensive use of solvents in household products. Chemicals studied in the 
laboratory over the past 40 years have included ozone, NO

2

, CO, styrene, lead, anesthetic 
gases, pesticides, irritants, chlorofluorocarbon compounds, and propylene glycol dinitrite. 
Caffeine, diazepam, and ethanol have been used in laboratory studies as positive control 
substances. 



3.4.2.4. Test methods.



Neurobehavioral test methods may be selected according to several 
strategies. A test battery that examines multiple neurobehavioral functions may be more 
useful for screening and the initial characterization of acute effects. Selected neurobehavioral 
tests that measure a more limited number of functions in multiple ways may be more useful 
for elucidating mechanisms or validating specific effects. 



3.4.2.5. Controls.



Both chemical and behavioral control procedures are valuable for 
examining the specificity of the effects. A concordant effect among different measures of the 
same neurobehavioral function (e.g., reaction time) and a lack of effect on some other 
measures of psychomotor function (e.g., untimed manual dexterity) would increase the 
confidence in a selective effect on motor speed and not on attention or on nonspecific motor 
function. Likewise, finding concordant effects among similar chemical or drug classes along 
with different effects from dissimilar classes would support the specificity of chemical effect. 
For example, finding that the effects of a solvent were similar to those of ethanol but not 
caffeine would support the specificity of solvent effects on a given measure of neurotoxicity. 



3.4.2.6. Ethical issues.



Most human exposure studies in the laboratory have been justified 
on the basis of data indicating that the chemical or drug exposure produces only temporary 
and reversible functional effects. The use of occupationally, environmentally, or 
therapeutically exposed populations as a source of participants also makes the risks from 
research exposure small relative to nonlaboratory sources of risk. Protection of human 
subjects is also provided by the informed consent process; the health risks (known and 
unknown) and benefits of the research are thoroughly explained to each participant, who may 
terminate participation in the study at any time. 

Despite safeguards, several chemicals and drugs thought at the time of the exposure 
study to produce only temporary neurobehavioral effects are now (20 years later) suspected 
of being potential human carcinogens on the basis of animal and human data (e.g., methylene 
chloride, perchloroethylene). Other chemicals, however, are now thought to be less 
carcinogenic or otherwise less toxic in humans than once believed. Rapid advances in all 
areas of toxicology make it difficult to communicate, to potential subjects, reliable 
information about the likelihood of long-term, latent, or delayed adverse effects on health 
subsequent to the study. The communication of uncertainty about potential long-term effects 
to research participants is essential if human exposure studies are to be conducted ethically 
and are to continue their contributions to neurotoxicology and risk assessment. 



3.5. Assessment of Developmental Neurotoxicity 



3.5.1. Developmental Deficits 



While adult neurotoxicology evaluates the effects of chemical exposure on relatively 
stable nervous system structure and function, developmental neurotoxicology addresses the 
special vulnerabilities of the young and the old. Neurobehavioral assessment of chemical 
neurotoxicity is complicated by having to measure functional impairment within a sequential 
progression of emergence, maturation, and gradual decline of nervous system capabilities. 
Methods in developmental neurotoxicity assessment must reflect the diversity of 
neurobehavioral functions, from neonates to the elderly. 

Exposure of pregnant women to alcohol, drugs of abuse, therapeutic drugs, nicotine, 
and environmental chemicals may result in the immediate or delayed appearance of 
neurobehavioral impairment in children (Kimmel, 1988; Nelson, 1991a). Postnatal exposure 
of children to chemical agents in the environment, such as lead, also may impair IQ and 
other indices of neurobehavioral function (Needleman et al., 1979). Neurotoxic effects may 
impair speech and language, attention, general intelligence, ``state'' regulation and 
responsiveness to external stimulation, learning and memory, sensory and motor skills, 
visuospatial processing, affect and temperament, and responsiveness to nonverbal social 
stimuli. Chemical neurotoxicity may be manifested as decreases in functional capabilities or 
delays in normative developmental progression. 

Neurotoxic effects are not limited to direct exposure of the fetus or child to the 
chemical. Animal studies suggest that altered neurobehavioral development in offspring may 
result from exposure of males (Joffe and Soyka, 1981) and females to chemical substances 
prior to conception. In this case, altered postnatal development may reflect chemical 
influences on mechanisms of inheritance, copulatory behavior, nutritional status, hormonal 
status, or the uterine environment. In animals and humans, chemical exposure of parents 
may indirectly impair postnatal development through changes in milk composition, parenting 
behaviors, and other aspects of the environment. 






