 

<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Interested persons are invited to submit comments regarding this proposed rule to the Rules Docket Clerk, Office
of General Counsel, room 10276, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street, SW., Washington,
DC 204100500. Communications should refer to the above docket number and title. Facsimile (FAX) comments
are not acceptable. A copy of each communication submitted will be available for public inspection and copying between
7:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. weekdays at the above address. 


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Arthur S. Newburg, Director, Office of Lead-Based Paint Abatement and Poisoning Prevention, room B133, Department
of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC. 20410, telephone (202) 7551785
or (202) 7089300 (TDD) or 18008778339 (Federal Information Relay Service TDD). (Other
than the ``800'' number, these are not toll-free numbers.) 

</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 
Background 


The existing lead-based paint regulations pertaining to the Department's programs were written pursuant to the
passage of the Lead-Based Paint Poisoning Prevention Act (42 U.S.C. 48014846) in the early 1970s. This legislation
required the Secretary to ``establish procedures to eliminate as far as practicable the hazards of lead-based paint
poisoning with respect to any existing housing which may present such hazards and which is covered by an application
for mortgage insurance or housing assistance payments under a program administered by the Secretary.'' HUD implemented
that requirement by promulgating 24 CFR part 35 in 1976 (41 FR 28878, July 13, 1976). Part 35 includes the general procedures
for the testing and abatement of lead-based paint hazards in HUD-associated housing and applies to all programs.
Section 35.5(c), however, allows each Assistant Secretary to develop regulations pertaining to specific HUD programs.
It is the Department's intent that program-specific regulations define the conditions that require action, but
reference part 35 for specification of how the action should be conducted. 

Since part 35 was first written, amendments to it and to the program-specific regulations have been issued from time
to time in response to changes in the law and increased knowledge about the hazards and treatment of lead-based paint.
The most recent Department-wide regulatory revisions pertaining to lead-based paint were made in 1986, 1987, and
1988. Some additional revisions specific to the public and Indian housing programs were issued in 1991. However,
new legislation_specifically the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992 (title X, Pub. L. 102550;
approved October 28, 1992) (Title X)_and recent advances in knowledge have again made some of the information in the
existing regulations obsolete. Therefore, the Department is undertaking a comprehensive revision of its lead-based
paint regulations. 


The changes in this proposed rule would represent the first phase in the revision process. In the first phase, HUD would
correct certain provisions in the regulations that are clearly out of date and should be corrected as soon as possible.
Subsequent revisions will implement Title X, which establishes new requirements effective January 1, 1995. The
Department intends to issue proposed regulations implementing the new Act as soon as possible, to allow the maximum
amount of time for comment and for preparation by State and local agencies and the private sector. 
HUD welcomes comments on the regulatory revisions that are described in this proposed rule. 



Revising the Definition of an Elevated Blood-Lead Level 



Current regulations require special procedures if a child has an ``elevated blood-lead level.'' This proposed rule
would change the definition of an elevated blood-lead level (EBL) to conform to the new recommendations of the Department
of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control (CDC), regarding blood lead levels that require environmental
intervention. Existing regulations define an EBL as equal to or exceeding 25 micrograms per deciliter (&mu;g/dl).
The Department's new standard for environmental intervention would be equal to or exceeding 20 &mu;g/dl for a single
test or 1519 &mu;g/dl in two consecutive tests several months apart. 


Many people are under the impression that the CDC, in its Statement, Preventing Lead Poisoning in Young Children (October
1991), effectively lowered the definition of an EBL to 10 &mu;g/dl. It is true that the Statement indicates that ``the
overall goal is to reduce children's blood lead levels below 10 &mu;g/dl. However, the Statement does not recommend
medical or environmental intervention at levels of 1014 &mu;g/dl. Three reasons are given: 





First, particularly at low blood lead levels, laboratory measurements may have some inaccuracy and imprecision,
so a blood lead level in this range (1014 &mu;g/dl) may, in fact, be below 10 &mu;g/dl. Second, effective environmental
and medical interventions for children with blood lead levels in this range have not yet been identified and evaluated.
Finally, the sheer numbers of children in this range would preclude effective case management and would detract from
individualized follow-up required by children who have higher blood lead levels. 






(See, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control, Preventing
Lead Poisoning in Young Children, A Statement by the Centers for Disease Control_October 1991, page 2.) 




The definition currently used by HUD of an EBL first appears in 24 CFR 200.805. The revised definition would be included
in 24 CFR 35.3, because the definition affects all residential HUD programs. Specific program regulations could
then reference the definition in part 35 as appropriate, although some program regulations might continue to repeat
the definition. 




</SUPPLEM>
