 

Section 1902(f) provides for the deduction of ``incurred expenses for medical care as recognized under State law''
in determining eligibility of certain individuals. As a consequence, that deduction process must allow for consideration
of expenses recognized under State law. Section 1902(a)(17), on which these medically needy regulations are largely
based, provides for taking into account ``except to the extent prescribed by the Secretary, the costs * * * incurred
for medical care or for any type of remedial care recognized under State law'' (emphasis supplied). Thus, while eligibility
of the medically needy generally can be determined using the provisions of these regulations, the eligibility of
those medically needy in the States that use the more restrictive eligibility criteria permitted by section 1902(f)
must be determined using expenses for medical care recognized under State law (including any limitations enacted
under State law on the deductible amount of such expenses from income). However, there is nothing in section 1902(f)
that precludes consideration of medical costs in chronological order for purposes of the spenddown specified in
section 1902(f). Therefore, we are extending this option to States that determine eligibility under the criteria
in section 1902(f). 



Comment

: Some commenters objected to this provision because insurance premiums, copayments, and deductibles and other
cost sharing amounts deducted in chronological order may not count toward spenddown if there are a large number of
other medical bills incurred early in the budget period. The commenters believe that these items should be deducted
no matter when they are incurred. 



Response

: Many States find it administratively difficult to deduct incurred expenses out of the sequence in which the expenses
are submitted to the agency or the sequence in which the services are provided. Because one of the objectives of the
Medicaid program is the use of efficient methods of administration and since the sequential deduction of incurred
expenses is one such method, we consider it appropriate to permit States to deduct expenses from income in chronological
order. 



Comment

: Some commenters suggested that the proposal is inequitable because individuals with identical medical bills during
a budget period, when deducted in chronological order, can have different eligibility determinations. 



Response

: First, we point out that two individuals in truly identical situations, meaning that the individuals have the same
medical bills incurred in the same order, would be treated identically under the rule. In other cases, the individuals
are not identical. They may have the same amount of medical expenses but the bills are not identical. In these cases,
assuming other eligibility factors are met and the bills are sufficient to meet spenddown liability, both individuals
will be eligible for Medicaid under this provision. The difference is in which bills are paid once eligibility begins.
For example, if one individual incurs mostly covered services early in the spenddown period, any remaining bills
for noncovered services left over after the spenddown liability is met would not be paid by the State because they are
not covered in the State plan. Conversely, if a second individual incurring mostly noncovered medical expenses early
in the spenddown period is determined eligible, any bills for covered services remaining after meeting the spenddown
liability would be paid by the State. We acknowledge that this result may disadvantage the first individual. However,
we believe that in the interest of efficient operation of the programs, States should be allowed to deduct expenses
in chronological order if they wish to do so. 





