 

a. 

The AAPCC petition.

 The AAPCC petition was submitted on 
April 30, 1991, and was supplemented by an additional submission 
by AAPCC on February 28, 1992. It was based upon pediatric 
poisoning data collected by the AAPCC National Data Collection 
System from 1983 through 1991. The petition stated that iron 
products are the leading cause of poisoning deaths in children 
under age six. A letter was submitted to the agency in support 
of the AAPCC petition by the American Academy of Pediatrics on 
February 17, 1993. The AAPCC petition requested that the agency 
take the following actions concerning the labeling and 
formulation of iron-containing products: 

(1) 

Labeling.

 The petition requested that FDA declare 
labels on drug products and food supplements containing 30 mg or 
more of iron per dosage unit as misleading if the label does not 
clearly state that accidental pediatric ingestion of these 
products can be lethal. 

(2) 

Formulation.

 The petition requested that the agency 
urge the industry to voluntarily reformulate iron-containing 
products containing 30 mg or more of iron per dosage unit in less 
attractive dosage units, specifically avoiding resemblance to 
popular candies. 

The AAPCC petition also requested that the agency initiate 
an educational effort to alert the public and health 
professionals to the dangers of accidental pediatric ingestion of 
iron-containing products. The AAPCC stated that efforts need to be directed especially to parents, babysitters,
daycare 
providers, and other consumers; to pediatricians, urging these 
health professionals to target parents at the 6-month visit; to 
obstetricians, urging these health professionals to educate 
mothers at the final postpartum visit; to other health 
professionals who prescribe iron-containing products; and to 
pharmacists who dispense them. 

b. 

The AG petition.

 The AG petition, submitted on August 
16, 1993, cited data on injuries and deaths attributable to 
accidental iron poisoning in children reported to the AAPCC 
National Data Collection System and reported to CPSC through 
1992. It requested that the agency take the following actions 
concerning the labeling, formulation, and packaging of iron- 
containing products: 

(1) 

Labeling.

 For iron-containing products containing 30 
mg iron or more per tablet or capsule, the petition requested 
that the agency promulgate a regulation requiring that the label 
bear a conspicuous boxed warning that states: 

 




Warning

_Keep away from children. 
Contains iron which can be harmful or fatal 
if swallowed by a child. 

 


The petition recommended that this warning be in bold face type 
and in a color that contrasts with the background and with other 
printed material on the label and labeling. 



The petition also recommended that immediately following the 
above boxed warning, the following information appear: 

 


Acute overdosage of iron may cause nausea and 
vomiting and, in severe cases, cardiovascular 
collapse and death. 

 


For iron-containing products containing less than 30 mg iron 
per tablet or capsule, the petition recommended that the agency 
promulgate a regulation requiring that the label contain a 
conspicuous boxed warning that states: 

 




Warning

_Keep away from children. Contains 
iron which can be harmful or fatal in large 
doses if swallowed by a child. 

 


The petition recommended that this warning also be in boldface 
type and in a color that contrasts with the background and with 
other printed material on the label and labeling. 



(2) 

Packaging

_The petition recommended that FDA require 
that iron-containing products containing 30 mg or more of iron 
per tablet or capsule be packaged in child-resistant individual 
blister packs. 

(3) 

Formulation

_The petition recommended that FDA prohibit 
the manufacture and sale of adult formulations of iron-containing 
products that look like candy or contain a sweet outer coating. 



c. Nonprescription Drug Manufacturers Association petition. 



The Nonprescription Drug Manufacturers Association (NDMA), a 
trade association that represents U.S. manufacturers and 
distributors of nonprescription medicines and vitamin and mineral 
products, submitted a citizen petition to FDA on October 15, 
1993, in response to the AG petition. The NDMA petition 
requested that FDA adopt into regulation the newly initiated voluntary NDMA program on the labeling, packaging,
and 
formulation of iron-containing products. NDMA stated that it 
submitted a similar petition to CPSC requesting that CPSC adopt 
into regulation the elements of the voluntary industry program 
that are under the regulatory jurisdiction of CPSC. The petition 
also requested that FDA deny the other citizen petitions 
submitted on iron-containing products and pediatric poisoning 
insofar as they would contradict, add to, or subtract from the 
NDMA program. 

The NDMA petition requested that FDA adopt the following 
labeling, formulation, and packaging provisions: 

(1) 

Labeling.

 Iron-containing products must bear on the 
primary container (or box for blister packaging, glassine 
envelope, etc.), conspicuously, prominently, and clearly 
distinguished from other labeling by type, color, or contrast, 
the following warning statement: 

 




Warning: 

Close tightly and keep out of reach 
of children. Contains iron, which can be 
harmful or fatal to children in large doses. 
In case of accidental overdose, seek 
professional assistance or contact a Poison 
Control Center immediately. 

 


The petition stated that in circumstances in which the packaging 
did not involve a reclosable CRP element (e.g., cap to a bottle), 
the term ``close tightly'' would not need to appear in the warning 
statement. 





