 

(i) The owner or operator determines that inspection 
or monitoring the cover requires elevating a worker to a 
height greater than 2 meters above a support surface; and 
(ii) The owner and operator develops and implements a 
written plan and schedule to inspect the cover using the 
procedure specified in paragraph (f)(3) of this section, and 
to monitor the cover using the procedure specified in 
paragraph (f)(4) of this section at least once per calendar 
year. 
(7) When a leak is detected by either of the methods 
specified in paragraph (f)(3) or (f)(4) of this section, 
the owner or operator shall repair the leak in the following 
manner: 
(i) The owner or operator shall make a first attempt 
at repairing the leak no later than 5 calendar days after 
the leak is detected. Repair of the leak shall be completed 
as soon as practicable, but no later than 15 calendar days 
after the leak is detected. If repair of the leak cannot be 
completed within the 15-day period, except as provided in 
paragraph (f)(7)(ii) of this section, then the owner or 
operator shall not add hazardous waste to the tank, surface 
impoundment, or container on which the cover is installed 
until the repair of the leak is completed. 
(ii) Repair of a leak detected on a cover installed on 
a tank or surface impoundment may be delayed beyond 
15 calendar days if the owner or operator determines that 
both of the following conditions occur: 

(A) Repair of the leak requires first emptying the 
contents of the tank or surface impoundment; and 
(B) Temporary removal of the tank or surface 
impoundment from service will result in the unscheduled 
cessation of production from the process unit or operation 
of the waste management unit that is generating the 
hazardous waste managed in the tank or surface impoundment. 
(iii) Repair of a leak determined by the owner or 
operator to meet the conditions specified in paragraph 
(f)(7)(ii) of this section shall be performed at the next 
time the process, system, or waste management unit that is 
generating the hazardous waste managed in the tank or 
surface impoundment stops operation for any reason. 


265.1090 

Recordkeeping requirements. 



(a) Each owner or operator of a facility subject to 
requirements in this subpart shall record and maintain the 
following information as applicable: 
(1) Documentation for each cover installed on a tank 
in accordance with the requirements of 265.1085(b)(2) or 
265.1085(b)(3) of this subpart that includes information 
prepared by the owner or operator or provided by the cover 
manufacturer or vendor describing the cover design, and 
certification by the owner or operator that the cover meets 
the applicable design specifications as listed in 
265.1091(c) of this subpart. 

(2) Documentation for each floating membrane cover 
installed on a surface impoundment in accordance with the 
requirements of 265.1086(c) of this subpart that includes 
information prepared by the owner or operator or provided by 
the cover manufacturer or vendor describing the cover 
design, and certification by the owner or operator that the 
cover meets the specifications listed in 265.1086(e) of 
this subpart. 

(3) Documentation for each enclosure used to control 
air emissions from containers in accordance with the 
requirements of 265.1087(b)(2)(i) of this subpart that 
includes information prepared by the owner or operator or 
provided by the manufacturer or vendor describing the 
enclosure design, and certification by the owner or operator 
that the enclosure meets the specifications listed in 
265.1087(b)(2)(ii) of this subpart. 

(4) Documentation for each closed-vent system and 
control device installed in accordance with the requirements 
of 265.1088 of this subpart that includes: 

(i) Certification that is signed and dated by the 
owner or operator stating that the control device is 
designed to operate at the performance level documented by a 
design analysis as specified in paragraph (a)(4)(ii) of this 
section or by performance tests as specified in 
paragraph (a)(4)(iii) of this section when the tank, surface 
impoundment, or container is or would be operating at 
capacity or the highest level reasonably expected to occur. 

(ii) If a design analysis is used, then design 
documentation as specified in 265.1035(b)(4). 
The documentation shall include information prepared by the 
owner or operator or provided by the control device 
manufacturer or vendor that describes the control device 
design in accordance with 265.1035(b)(4)(iii) and certification by the owner or operator that the control

equipment meets the applicable specifications. 

(iii) If performance tests are used, then a 
performance test plan as specified in 265.1035(b)(3) and all test results. 

(iv) Information as required by 265.1035(c)(1) 
and 265.1035(c)(2). 

(5) Records for all Method 27 tests performed by the 
owner or operator for each container used to meet the 
requirements of 265.1087(b)(1)(iii) of this subpart. 

(6) Records for all visual inspections conducted in 
accordance with the requirements of 265.1089 of this 
subpart. 

(7) Records for all monitoring for detectable organic 
emissions conducted in accordance with the requirements of 
265.1089 of this subpart. 

(8) Records of the date of each attempt to repair a 
leak, repair methods applied, and the date of successful 
repair. 



