 

The automobile industry generally felt that new NCAP activities, such as different test speeds, injury criteria,
or crash modes, should be preceded by rulemaking notices to amend existing or add new safety standards regulating
the same aspect of performance. However, Advocates argued that NCAP-type consumer information programs should
precede formal rulemaking.

Toyota and AAMA suggested that NCAP should consider using tests harmonized with those being conducted in the international
community.

In comments on the new ``star'' rating system, Toyota questioned the validity of combining head and chest dummy injury
readings into a single measure. VW stated that it found the new rating system more acceptable than the previous format.
IIHS has reservations over the new star system because it believes that consumers may not fully understand that it
can only be used to compare vehicles in the same weight class. CFAS stated that the system could be improved and should
also reflect femur loads.

Several comments were provided on using additional or different injury criteria. Toyota and VW stated that the biofidelity
of additional injury levels has not been established. IIHS said NHTSA needs to reassess its current NCAP injury criteria,
given the widespread use of air bags. CFAS suggested using the additional injury-predicting capability of the Hybrid
III test dummy.

CFAS also suggested that NHTSA publish make/model Fatal Accident Reporting System data and consider providing consumer
information on window stickers. They also suggested that NHTSA define the audience for NCAP data.

VW urged NHTSA to address test repeatability and variability and the potential increase in vehicle aggressiveness
if test speeds are raised.



Public Meeting



The agency has reviewed the public comments to its January 3, 1994, notice and, in response to the commenters, has decided
to conduct a public meeting on the future of NCAP. However, NHTSA wishes to expand the discussion to include other vehicle
safety consumer information activities. In particular, NHTSA points to CFAS' suggestion that the agency provide
point-of-sale safety information via vehicle stickers. This is the same approach the agency itself proposed for
NCAP frontal crash information (see 46 FR 7025, January 22, 1981) and in a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking for rollover
stability information published on June 28, 1994 (59 FR 33254). The agency recognizes that window stickers, or other
types of pre- or actual point-of-sale informaiton (such as consumer brochures) are the most effective means of reaching
prospective vehicle purchasers, but that significant issues, such as the necessity of providing information on
the limitations and use of the data, remain. The agency also wishes to point out that it may not need to continue to conduct
NCAP activities, if point-of-sale information is provided. NHTSA wishes to focus public attention on this issue,
which will be part of the discussion at the public meeting. However, not wishing to pre-judge the issue, the agency
wishes to conduct the majority of the public meeting as if its NCAP activities will continue.

The agency wishes the public meeting to have the maximum possible level of participation. Thus, it will conduct the
meeting using such informal means as follow-up questions from attendees to formal presenters, as well as having panel
discussions of some issues.

To focus attention, NHTSA has prepared the attached agenda for the meeting. Agency staff will make presentations
regarding items I (Introduction) and II (Background of NCAP) to set the format of, and stage for, the meeting. Agency
staff will summarize the recent ``real world'' evaluation of NCAP (Agenda item III_Relevance of NCAP Data). NHTSA
invites commenters to make presentations on the validity of that report. NHTSA staff will respond and ask questions
of those making presentations.


