 

The CBOE also proposes several amendments to revise the procedures applicable to the appeal and review of fines imposed
under CBOE Rule 17.50. First, the Exchange notes that all fines imposed under CBOE Rule 17.50 are appealable to the
CBOE's BCC, except for fines imposed for trading conduct and decorum violations not exceeding $2,500, which are appealable
to the Exchange's Appeals Committee and are governed by CBOE Chapter 19, ``Hearings and Review.'' The CBOE proposes
to amend Exchange Rule 17.50 to clarify the procedures applicable to appeals from fines imposed for trading conduct
and decorum violations by adding paragraph (d)(1), which notes that, among other things, a person fined for such violations
may contest the Exchange's determination by filing a written application with the Secretary of the Exchange pursuant
to CBOE 19.2, ``Submission of Application to Exchange,'' and stating that a hearing, if requested, will be conducted
in accordance with the provisions of CBOE Rules 19.3, ``Procedure Following Applications for Hearing,'' and 19.4,
``Hearing.'' Under paragraph (d)(2), the Appeals Committee may waive the forum fee if the Appeals Committee finds
that the person charged is guilty of one or more of the rule violations alleged and the sole disciplinary sanction imposed
by the Appeals Committee is a fine which is less than the total fine initially imposed by the Exchange.
In addition, after a hearing or review in which the BCC determines that a person is guilty of a rule violation, CBOE Rule
17.50(c) currently requires the BCC to impose a forum fee of $100 against the person if the determination was reached
without a hearing, or $300 if a hearing was conducted. The CBOE proposes to amend the rule to provide the BCC with the
discretion to waive the forum fee if the BCC finds that the person charged is guilty of one or more of the rule violations
alleged and the sole disciplinary sanction imposed by the BCC is a fine which is less than the total fine initially imposed
by the Exchange. The CBOE believes that this amendment will lead to a more equitable resolution of certain appeals
under CBOE Rule 17.50 in situations where the BCC believes that a waiver of the forum fee is warranted, for example,
when a fine is reduced on appeal.
The CBOE also proposes to amend CBOE Rule 17.50 to make the procedures applicable to requests by the Board for review
by the Board of determinations of the BCC and Appeals Committee under CBOE Rule 17.50 consistent with the procedures
applicable to requests by the Board for Board review of other decisions of those committees as provided in CBOE Rules
17.10(c) and 19.5(a).
Finally, the CBOE proposes a nonsubstantive change to clarify CBOE Rule 17.50(g)(1), ``Violation of position limit
rules,'' by deleting a potentially confusing reference to CBOE Rule 24.4, ``Position Limits for Broad-Based Index
Options.'' Currently, CBOE Rule 17.50(g)(1), which applies to violations of all of the Exchange's position limit
rules, only specifically references CBOE Rules 4.11, ``Position Limits,'' and 24.4(a), and does not specifically
reference the other CBOE rules which determine compliance with CBOE Rule 4.11, the Exchange's general rule governing
position limits.
<FOOTCITE>3</FOOTCITE>
 Although the CBOE states that this is not technically incorrect_because all position limit violations, no matter
what type of option they relate to, are violations of CBOE Rule 4.11_the current references are potentially confusing.
Therefore, to eliminate potential confusion, the CBOE proposes to delete the reference to CBOE Rule 24.4(a), so that
CBOE Rule 17.50(g)(1), as amended, will refer only to CBOE Rule 4.11.


<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
3

</FOOTNAME>
Other CBOE position limit rules which establish ways to determine compliance with CBOE Rule 4.11 with respect to particular
types of options include CBOE Rule 24.A, ``Position Limits for Industry Options,'' CBOE Rule A.7, ``Position Limits';'
(Flexible Exchange Options), CBOE Rule 21.3, ``Position Limits'' (Treasury Bonds and Notes), and CBOE Rule 23.3,
``Position Limits'' (interest rate options).
</FOOTNOTE>


The CBOE believes that the proposed rule change is consistent with Section 6(b) of the Act, in general, and furthers
the objectives of Sections 6(b)(1) and 6(b)(7), in particular, in that it enhances the effectiveness and fairness
of the Exchange's disciplinary procedures.


(B) Self-Regulatory Organization's Statement on Burden on Competition


The CBOE does not believe that the proposed rule change will impose any inappropriate burden on competition.


(C) Self-Regulatory Organization's Statement on Comments on the Proposed Rule Change Received from Members, Participants
or Others


No written comments were solicited or received with respect to the proposed rule change.


