 

Procedural and Legal Issues 




Comment 27: 

One commenter was concerned that efforts by the Federal 
agencies to manage the Bay/Delta were uncoordinated. On the other hand, 
one commenter presumed that the Service adopted EPA's water quality 
standards wholesale, and thought the Service had no authority to do so 
because the Service designates critical habitat under the narrow 
purposes of the Act, while the EPA promulgates water quality standards 
under the framework of the Clean Water Act. Similarly, another 
commenter thought the Service would, in effect, be interposing or 
substituting EPA's regulatory judgment for its own if the Service 
incorporated EPA's water quality standards in its designation of 
critical habitat. 


Service Response: 

This final rule does not incorporate EPA's water 
quality standards 

per se

, although implementation of these standards may 
be a means to promote recovery of the delta smelt. The January 6, 1994, 
revised critical habitat proposal for the delta smelt included a list of 
habitat conditions and a description of water quality primary 
constituent elements. These elements were developed in accordance with 
the requirements of the Act and its regulations. The Service's proposal 
also reflects the coordinated approach provided by the Club Fed process. 
The Service participated with the Bureau, NMFS, and EPA in guaranteeing 
that the January 6, 1994, critical habitat and water quality proposals 
were based on the best available scientific and technical information. 
Another priority was for the proposals to take into account the goals 
and concerns of the agencies and public and private interests affected 
by the agencies' programs and activities. 
The preservation of rare and endangered species is a substantive 
link between the proposals of the Service and the EPA. The EPA 
promulgated the Bay/Delta standards because they disapproved provisions 
of the 1991 Bay/Delta plan developed by the State Board. The EPA 
determined that the State had not adopted criteria sufficient to protect 
designated uses of the Estuary, including the ``Preserv[ing] Rare and 
Endangered Species'' designated use. Similarly, in discussing the 
``Relationship Between Fish and Wildlife Service and EPA Actions,'' the 
Service wrote_``*** [T]he Clean Water Act requires protection of the 
most sensitive use within each category of designated uses. `Protection 
of Endangered and Threatened Species' is considered a designated use 
within the meaning of the Clean Water Act; therefore, a species listing 
under the Endangered Species Act provides one method to identify the 
most sensitive use within the designated uses of a water body.'' (59 FR 
854). 
Biologically, the proposed critical habitat for the delta smelt and 
the salinity criteria that constituted EPA's proposed water quality 
standards are directly related. ``*** EPA's proposed water quality 
standards address the location of 2 ppt salinities from February to June 
and, therefore, address both critical habitat requirements for delta 
smelt and a range of interrelated parameters that affect other species 
that rely on estuarine habitat.'' (59 FR 854) Based on the common legal 
and biological underpinnings of the critical habitat designation and the 
proposed water quality standards, the Service's treatment of salinity as 
a primary constituent element and the textual references to the proposed 
salinity standards were appropriate and fully consistent with the goal 
of assuring substantive consistency between the two proposals.

Because the designation of critical habitat and EPA's proposed 
Bay/Delta standards have common elements, the critical habitat 
designation must address the standards, and, at a minimum, must not be 
inconsistent with them, and vice versa. The January 6, 1994, critical 
habitat proposal did not incorporate specific salinity standards into 
the regulatory designation of habitat, as was the case with the initial 
critical habitat proposal published in 1991. Rather, the 1994 proposal 
designated water quality as a primary constituent element, stating_``salinity concentrations [as] required to
maintain delta smelt habitat 
for spawning, larval and juvenile transport, rearing, and adult 
migration.''
The coordinated Federal effort and the substantive consistency of 
the EPA and Service proposals are a direct reflection of the agencies' 
intent to address Bay/Delta issues in an effective and responsible 
manner. The coordinated Club Fed process is intended to address 
concerns expressed by the State of California of a perceived lack of 
coordination among the Federal agencies. 




