 

As noted, we believe electronic filing will promote efficiencies for both the Commission and insurers, resulting
in benefits to the public. To help gauge the full effect of our proposal, we seek comments on the number of insurers that
envision filing electronically and the extent to which they will avail themselves of the opportunity to file their
forms electronically. Given the potential for significant public benefits from electronic filing of insurance
and substantial voluntary use of such a system by insurers, we also seek comments on the alternative of making electronic
filing mandatory, either initially or at some point in the future. Such comments should include a discussion of the
impact of such a mandatory system on insurers and an assessment of the type of system that would be necessary to handle
the resulting volume of use. 
After receiving comments on the proposal, our Systems Services Branch will build and test the electronic filing system,
as well as prepare and maintain systems documentation and a User Manual. Each participating insurer will receive
a unique account and password for login purposes on the timesharing system. We also envision that the insurer could
register branch offices or other authorized filers under its account and password. We contemplate access being available
24 hours a day, 7 days a week (except scheduled maintenance) by way of dial-up at either 1200 or 2400 baud to a local telephone
number in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area (although we recognize that 9600 baud may be more desirable). Any
long distance telephone charges required to reach such number will be the responsibility of the filer, and even at
1200 baud should be minimal. Once connected, the insurance company will be presented with a variety of menu options.

After an authorized insurer logs in on the system and selects the menu option to upload insurance filings, the ICC computer
will initiate the communications protocol, KERMIT, to receive filings. Upon completion of the transmission of the
insurance filings, the ICC computer system will append the filings to a transaction file for subsequent batch processing.
The insurance company will be returned to the main menu. One of the menu options contemplated is the insurer's ability
to generate a report showing the number and type of transactions transmitted and received by the ICC. This transaction
report will not be available to the home office of the insurance company at the time the transactions are filed. The
home office will receive a comprehensive list of filings accepted at the time it receives its monthly billing statement.

However, mere transmission of the filings does not guarantee acceptance by the Commission. Any record not containing
a valid field or containing fields with incomplete or invalid data will be flagged with an error code. Each of these
records will generate a rejection notice to be sent back to the insurance company. Records passing the initial validity
checks will then be edited field by field against the ICC carrier and insurance data base. When all transmitted fields
have been edited and verified, the filing will be applied against the insurance master file, either adding a new filing
or applying a cancellation against an existing filing. All records that do not pass the automated edits will be flagged
for manual processing. After manual review, those records accepted will be applied against the insurance master
file, and those rejected will generate a rejection letter. A follow-up ``hard copy'' of an accepted filing will not
be required. However, we do propose that insurers agree to furnish the Commission a duplicate original of any policy
(or policies) and all endorsements, surety bond, trust fund agreement, or other filing. 


