 




<USBUREAU>Federal Railroad Administration</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Petition for a Waiver of Compliance </DOCTITLE>



In accordance with 49 CFR 211.41, notice is hereby given that the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) has received
a request for a waiver of compliance with certain requirements of Federal railroad safety regulations. The individual
petitions are described below, including the party seeking relief, the regulatory provisions involved, the nature
of the relief being requested and the petitioner's arguments in favor of relief. 

Interested parties are invited to participate in these proceedings by submitting written views, data, or comments.
FRA does not anticipate scheduling a public hearing in connection with these proceedings since the facts do not appear
to warrant a hearing. If any interested party desires an opportunity for comment, they should notify FRA, in writing,
before the end of the comment period and specify the basis for their request. 

All communications concerning these proceedings should identify the appropriate docket number (e.g., Waiver Petition
Docket No. RSEQ941) and must be submitted in triplicate to the Docket Clerk, Office of Chief Counsel,
Federal Railroad Administration, Nassif Building, 400 Seventh Street, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20590. Communications
received before November 23, 1994, will be considered by FRA before final action is taken. Comments received after
that date will be considered as far as practicable. All written communications concerning these proceedings are
available for examination during regular business hours (9 a.m.5 p.m.) in Room 8201, Nassif Building, 400
Seventh Street, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20590. 

The waiver petitions are as follows: 



Chicago and NorthWestern Transportation Company 



(Waiver Petition Docket No. RSEQ941) 



The Chicago and Northwestern Transportation Company (CNW) seeks a permanent waiver of compliance from a provision
of 49 CFR Part 240, ``Qualification Standards for Locomotive Engineers.'' CNW specifically asks for a waiver from
compliance with 49 CFR 240.201(d) for locomotive engineers operating at a specific location. 



