 

2. In 672.7, paragraph (n) is added to read as follows: 


672.7

Prohibitions. 


* * * * * 


(n) Discard any salmon taken as bycatch in a directed fishery for Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands Area groundfish by
vessels using trawl gear until notified by a NMFS-certified observer that all salmon have been counted and the collection
of any scientific data or biological samples has been completed as provided at 50 CFR 675.20(c)(6). 
3. In 672.27, a new paragraph (g) is added to read as follows: 


672.27

Observers. 


* * * * * 


(g) 

Disclosure of observer data to the public. 

(1) The following information collected by observers for each catcher processor and catcher vessel may be made available
to the public: 
(i) Vessel name and Federal permit number; 
(ii) Number of chinook salmon and ``other salmon'' observed during a weekly reporting period; 
(iii) The ratio of total round weight of halibut or Pacific herring to the total round weight of groundfish in sampled
hauls during a weekly reporting period; and 
(iv) The ratio of number of king crab or 

C. bairdi 

Tanner crab to the total round weight of groundfish in sampled hauls during a weekly reporting period. 
(2) The following information for observed hauls collected by observers onboard vessels using trawl gear to participate
in a directed fishery for groundfish other than rockfish, Greenland turbot, or Atka mackerel may be made available
to the public: 
(i) Date; 
(ii) Time of day gear is deployed; 
(iii) Latitude and longitude at beginning of haul; 
(iv) Bottom depth; 
(v) Fishing depth of trawl; 
(vi) Rate chinook salmon (number of salmon/mt groundfish); 
(vii) Rate other salmon (number of salmon/mt groundfish); 
(viii) Rate Pacific halibut (kilograms halibut/mt groundfish); 
(ix) Rate Pacific herring (kg herring/mt groundfish); 
(x) Rate king crab (number of crab/mt groundfish); 
(xi) Rate C. 

bairdi 

Tanner crab (number of crab/mt groundfish); 
(xii) Sea surface temperature (where available); and 
(xiii) Sea temperature at fishing depth of trawl (where available). 
(3) In exceptional circumstances, the owners and operators of vessels may provide to the Regional Director written
justification at the time observer data are submitted or within a reasonable time thereafter, that disclosure of
the information listed in paragraphs (g)(1) or (g)(2) of this section could reasonably be expected to cause substantial
competitive harm. The determination whether to disclose the information will be made pursuant to 15 CFR 4.7. 


PART 675_GROUNDFISH OF THE BERING SEA AND ALEUTIAN ISLANDS AREA 


4. The authority citation for 50 CFR part 675 continues to read as follows:

 



Authority:

 16 U.S.C. 1801 

et seq. 


675.2

[Amended] 


5. In 675.2, the definition of Bycatch Limitation Zone 2H 

is removed. 
6. In 675.7, paragraph (o) is added to read as follows: 


675.7

General prohibitions. 


* * * * * 


(o) Discard any salmon taken as bycatch in a directed fishery for groundfish by vessels using trawl gear until notified
by a NMFS-certified observer that all salmon have been counted and the collection of any scientific data or biological
samples has been completed as provided at 675.20(c)(6) of this part. 
7. In 675.20, paragraphs (c)(3) and (c)(4) are revised and new paragraph (c)(6) is added to read as follows:



675.20

General limitations. 


* * * * * 


(c) *** 
(3) The operator of each vessel regulated under this part must sort its catch as soon as possible after retrieval of
the gear and, except as provided under paragraph (c)(6) of this section, must return all prohibited species or parts
thereof to the sea immediately with a minimum of injury, regardless of its condition, after allowing for sampling
by an observer if an observer is onboard. 
(4) Except as provided under paragraph (c)(6) of this section, it will be a rebuttable presumption that any prohibited
species retained onboard a fishing vessel regulated under this part was caught and retained in violation of this section.

