 

With respect to the comment regarding long-term care facilities, the Department has not created a special criterion
for such facilities. If such facilities meet the eligibility criteria below, they may be certified under the new compliance
alternative. We note, moreover, that the proposed change in eligibility criteria for nursing homes may well relieve
some of the particular difficulties of nursing homes in complying with the general compliance standards.



2. Documentation



A number of comments expressed support for minimizing the reporting and recordkeeping required of qualifying facilities
under the proposed compliance alternative. One hospital, however, opposed the proposed rules on the grounds that
they simply created an additional layer of reporting and recordkeeping requirements, stating that the existing
requirements work well. It should be emphasized that the compliance alternative is not meant to create an additional
set of requirements for facilities already complying with the general compliance requirements at 124.501124.512;
rather, the compliance alternative below is designed to relieve facilities which qualify for it from the burden of
complying with the general compliance requirements. Consistent with this approach, the reporting and recordkeeping
required for qualifying facilities is different from that required of most facilities and should generally be considerably
less than that under the general compliance standards. In any event, a facility that is not certified under the compliance
alternative does not have to comply with the reporting and recordkeeping requirements applicable to those facilities
which are certified; concommitantly, a facility that is certified under the compliance alternative is not required
to comply with reporting and recordkeeping requirements other than those that apply to certified facilities. A facility
always has the option of continuing to comply with the general compliance requirements; it can thus ignore the compliance
alternative completely if it decides that compliance with the general compliance requirements makes more sense
for it. Thus, we do not think that this particular concern is justified.

A couple of commenters pointed out that the proposed means of demonstrating that a facility meets the eligibility
criteria_through audited financial statements_would not necessarily suffice, depending on the criterion involved.
They pointed out that, for example, audited financial statements do not necessarily set forth philanthropic sources
in the level of detail required, or establish a facility's charging policies. They suggested that the rule be amended
to require facilities to contract for such information as part of their audits. The Department agrees with the observation
made about the limitations of audited financial statements, but does not agree with the remedy proposed. Rather,
it is our view that documentation sufficient to establish sources of philanthropy, charging practices and so on can
be provided by other means, and we are reluctant to put facilities to the added expense of contracting for audit services
that they would not otherwise need. Thus, 124.516(c)(1) below has been revised to add a requirement for ``other
documents'' to cover the concern raised by the commenters. The Department will issue program instructions clarifying
what other documents may be required in specific instances.



3. Deficits



One commenter suggested that the proposed rules be revised to permit facilities to treat deficits resulting from
Medicaid underpayments as justifiable deficits. However, we are not accepting this comment, as it is not pertinent
to the compliance alternative. The rules below do not distinguish between types of deficits for purposes of deficit
make-up under the alternative, unlike the general compliance requirements, which do draw such a distinction. Compare
124.516(d)(2) below with 124.503(b). Thus, under the compliance alternative, a certified facility
with a noncompliance deficit may make up the deficit in precisely the same manner as a certified facility with a justifiable
deficit.



4. Other Comments



Several comments questioned whether vocational services could be counted as uncompensated services under the compliance
alternative; the facilities concerned stated that they have difficulty meeting the ACL since they do not receive
credit for vocational services they provide. The compliance alternative below should relieve this problem for facilities
that are certified, however. Certified facilities will not have to provide a set amount of uncompensated services,
unlike facilities operating under the general compliance requirements. Thus, so long as certified facilities provide
some medical services and otherwise remain in compliance with the requirements for certification, they will be considered
to be in compliance with their uncompensated services assurance.

In view of the fact that the rules below relieve restrictions on facilities that apply and are certified for the compliance
alternative and impose no additional duties or obligations on other facilities, delay in the effective date of these
rules is not required under 5 U.S.C. 553. For the same reasons, the Secretary hereby finds that good cause exists for
not delaying the effective date of the rules below. The rules are accordingly effective upon publication.


