 

(1) Wounded livestock or the partial remains of a livestock carcass must be presented with clear evidence (Roy and
Dorrance 1976; Fritts 1982) that the livestock injury or death was directly caused by a wolf or wolves. Such evidence
is essential for justifying any control action because wolves may feed on carrion they did not kill. Additionally,
there must be an indication that additional livestock losses may occur if the problem wolf or wolves are not controlled.

(2) No evidence of artificial or intentional feeding of wolves can be present. Improperly disposed livestock carcasses
located in the area of depredation will be considered attractants. On Federal lands, removal or a decision on the use
of such attractants must accompany any control action. If livestock carrion or carcasses are not being used as bait
for an authorized control action on Federal lands, it must be removed or otherwise disposed of so that they do not attract
wolves. 
(3) On Federal lands, animal husbandry practices previously identified in existing approved allotment plans and
annual operating plans for allotments must have been followed. 

Federal responsibility for protecting gray wolves under the experimental population provisions of the Act would
continue until formal delisting rulemaking procedures are completed. In accordance with the Act, delisting may
occur when analysis of the best available scientific and commercial information shows that gray wolves are no longer
threatened with extinction due to: (1) loss of habitat, (2) overutilization, (3) disease or predation, (4) inadequacy
of existing regulatory mechanisms, and (5) other natural or manmade factors. In addition to the above, the following
criteria must be met: (1) for 3 consecutive years, a minimum of 10 breeding pairs are documented in each of the 3 recovery
areas described in the revised wolf recovery plan (Service 1987); (2) protective legal mechanisms are in place; and
(3) the EIS evaluation has been completed (Service 1994). After delisting, the Act specifies a species population
must be monitored for a 5-year period. After delisting, if in any 1 of the 3 recovery areas the wolf population fell below
the minimum of 10 breeding pairs for 2 consecutive years, then wolves in that recovery area would be considered for
protective status under the Act. 

All reintroduced wolves designated as nonessential experimental will be removed from the wild and the experimental
population status and regulations revoked when (1) legal actions or lawsuits change the wolves status to endangered
under the Act or (2) within 90 days of the initial release date, naturally occurring wolves, consisting of two breeding
pairs that for 2 consecutive years have each successfully raised two offspring, are discovered in the experimental
population area. The naturally occurring wolves would be managed and protected as endangered species under the Act.




Summary of Comments and Recommendations 






