 

(c) 

Community-Based Nonprofit Housing Developer.

 (CBD) For an applicant to be considered a CBD it must submit evidence that it: 

(i) Is classified as tax exempt under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; 

(ii) Has been in existence for at least two years, and has at least two years of housing and community development experience,
prior to the date of grant application; 

(iii) Has a record of service to low- and moderate-income people in the community in which the project is located; 

(iv) Is organized at the neighborhood, city, county or a multi-county level; 

(v) In the case of an organization seeking to acquire eligible housing under LIHPRHA, agrees to form a purchasing entity
that conforms to the definition of a community-based nonprofit organization (CBO) in 248.101; 

(vi) Agrees to use its best efforts to secure majority tenant consent to the acquisition of the project for which grant
assistance is requested. Evidence of ``best efforts'' shall include a plan in the application which details method
for securing such support. In addition, continued evidence of ``best efforts,'' such as additional resident meetings
and notices, is required as a grantee moves towards a purchase. 

(2) 

Resident Capacity Grant Applicants.

 Applicants for Resident Capacity grants must meet the eligibility criteria listed in paragraph A of this Appendix.
In addition, these grants may be made only with respect to eligible low-income housing, as defined in 248.101,
for which the owner has filed a Notice of Intent under ELIHPA, an Initial Notice of Intent under LIHPRHA, or a Notice
of Election to Proceed under section 604 of NAHA and is proceeding under the LIHPRHA appraisal process. 

(3) 

Predevelopment Grant Applicants.

 Predevelopment grant applicants must be RCs or CBDs meeting the criteria listed in paragraph A of this Appendix. These
grants may be made only to organizations seeking to purchase the property with a majority of resident support for the
purchase. These grants may be made only with respect to eligible low-income housing projects for which: (i) the owner
has filed an initial or second Notice of Intent to transfer the housing to a qualified purchaser under LIHPRHA, or has
filed any Notice of Intent under LIHPRHA or ELIHPA and the owner has entered into a binding agreement to sell the housing
to the applicant organization, or (ii) the owner has filed a Notice of Election to Proceed under section 604 of NAHA
and is proceeding under the LIHPRHA appraisal process and has entered into a binding agreement to sell the housing
to the applicant organization. This binding agreement shall not necessarily be a formal sales contract; rather,
it may state that the owner will neither work with nor accept a purchase offer from any other entity during the term of
the grant, as long as the grantee is progressing towards a purchase offer, plan of action or resident homeownership
plan, and acquisition in a reasonable period of time. 

(4) 

Conflict of Interest.

 Each applicant must certify that its organization is not a ``Related Party'', as set forth in 24 CFR 248.101, and that
no individual that has, or has had within the last five years, a personal or professional relationship with the owner
entity will receive financial benefit from the grant funds. This certification shall prohibit using mutual consultants,
attorneys, etc. It shall not explicitly prohibit using architects or engineers that have worked with the owner or
in the property in the past, as long as there is no ongoing professional relationship with the owner that could be perceived
as a conflict of interest. A nonprofit general partner of an eligible property that is attempting to buy out its limited
distribution partners is exempt from this part of the conflict of interest requirement. A certification shall also
require disclosure, to the intermediary and the tenants of any relationship with ownership, management, or any other
parties to a sale, and will state that the applicant will not seek any financial benefit from project ownership or operations
other than those disclosed. 



B. Resident Notification 



Each applicant will be required to notify residents of the property of its application prior to submitting the application
package to the intermediary. That notification shall be in writing, be distributed to each resident of the property,
and include a summary of the applicant's plan for the property. The notification shall also include a statement that
residents can themselves become eligible applicants under the Preservation Technical Assistance grant program.
In addition, the applicant must meet with the residents of the property at least two weeks prior to application submission,
and give the residents at least two weeks notification of such meeting. In the meeting the applicant must provide the
following information to the residents: 

&bull;A summary of the grant proposal; 
&bull;A list of members of the board of directors, if known; 
&bull;A list of the proposed development team and management company, if known; 
&bull;A list of all proposed consultants and attorneys; 
&bull;Disclosure of any relationship with ownership, management, or any other parties related to the owner or, if
applicable, related to the sale; and 
&bull;Information on how the residents may comment to the intermediary on the applicant's proposal and that residents
shall have 14 days to submit comments to the applicant and to the intermediary on the proposal. This information shall
include a name and contact number for the intermediary and a name and phone number for a contact person in the applicant
organization. 

If the applicant is unable to make this notification due to lack of access to the property or lack of resident addresses,
the applicant may contact the intermediary for assistance. The intermediary may contact the owner to request access
or resident addresses for the applicant. If the owner is uncooperative, the intermediary may contact the HUD field
office for assistance. If residents make substantive comments to the intermediary, the applicant will be required
to address these comments prior to any grant award from the intermediary. 



C. Ineligible Technical Assistance Applicants 



(1) Entities that have applications pending for funds under the HOPE 2 program are not eligible to apply for funding
under this NOFA (because the owner would have already elected to proceed under the distinct requirements applicable
to HOPE 2 grants and is precluded from concurrently filing the prerequisite Notice of Intent under LIHPRHA or ELIHPA).
An entity that is receiving HOPE 2 funding for preservation-eligible property is ineligible to apply under this NOFA
for a grant for that property until the HOPE 2 grant has been terminated due to HUD's acceptance of the owner's filing
of a Notice of Intent under ELIHPA or LIHPRHA. 

(2) Entities that have been awarded grants under the Preservation NOFA (entitled ``Technical Assistance Planning
Grants for Resident Groups, Community Groups, and Community-Based Nonprofit Organizations and Resident Councils'')
issued September 3, 1992 (57 FR 40570), may not receive funds under this NOFA for any properties for which those grants
were funded either until all funds awarded to the grantee under the 1992 NOFA have been expended, or until the grant
under the September 3, 1992, NOFA has been terminated as a result of a new grant approval under this NOFA. The total funds
received from the September 3, 1992, NOFA plus the total grant award for this NOFA may not exceed the funding limits
of this NOFA. A grantee under the September 3, 1992, NOFA is eligible for funds under this NOFA only if it also meets the
eligibility criteria of this NOFA and meets the notification requirements of Paragraph B above. 






