 

The Exchange considers claims submitted to the arbitration department on a case-by-case basis and examines the policy
described above in determining whether a claim will be accepted. Under the Exchange's policy, the only discretion
on whether the Exchange will accept a claim for arbitration occurs when the Exchange is not the DEA for the Respondent
member and the enforcement of a particular rule has not been ceded to another SRO pursuant to Rule 17d2. In this
event, as stated above, the Exchange may reject the claim for arbitration if the nexus between the dispute and the Exchange
is minimal. This can be demonstrated by the following example. Suppose a Respondent member firm was a member of the
New York Stock Exchange, Inc. (``NYSE``), National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. (``NASD''), and the
CHX, and the NYSE was the firm's DEA. Suppose that the dispute involved alleged NASD sales practice violations covering
150 transactions. Suppose further that out of those 150 transactions, only two were executed on the CHX. In that event,
the Exchange would most likely decline the use of its arbitration facilities based on minimal contacts that the dispute
had with the Exchange.

The Exchange believes that the policy places fair limitations upon the responsibility of the Exchange to make its
arbitration facilities available by requiring that the underlying dispute have some minimal nexus (or contacts)
to the Exchange.

Rule 24, Section 1 also adds interpretation and policy .02 which extends jurisdiction over former members and member
organizations for controversies which had their genesis during the period in which the former member was an Exchange
member.
<FOOTCITE>7</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
7

</FOOTNAME>
Proposed Interpretation and Policy .02 to Rule 24, Section 1 states that for purposes of this Rule and Rule 23 under
Article VIII, the terms ``member,'' ``member organization,'' ``associated person'' and an ``employee of a member,''
shall be deemed to encompass those persons and entities who were Exchange members or persons associated with a member
at the time the circumstances occurred which gave rise to the controversy.

</FOOTNOTE>


Rule 24, Section 2(c) (Simplified Arbitration) amends the fee requirements for simplified arbitrations (cases
not exceeding a dollar amount of $10,000).
<FOOTCITE>8</FOOTCITE>
 The proposed fee schedule for simplified arbitrations and regular arbitrations is set out in Section 32 (redesignated
as Section 30).




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
8

</FOOTNAME>
Rule 24, Section 2(c) is proposed to state that the Claimant shall pay a filing fee and remit a hearing deposit as specified
in Section 30 of this Rule upon filing the Submission Agreement. The final disposition of the sum shall be determined
by the arbitrator. The proposal would also amend Section 2(d) to state that the costs to the Claimant under either proceeding
shall in no event exceed the total amount specified in Section 30 of this Rule.

</FOOTNOTE>


Rule 24, Section 2(h) provides a mechanism, for resolving pre-hearing matters in a simplified proceeding. This change
codifies the applicability of the discovery procedures set forth in Section 14 (redesignated as Section 20) to simplified
arbitrations.

Rule 24, Section 8(a)(2)(v) will classify individuals who are registered under the Commodities Exchange Act or are
members of a registered futures association or any commodities exchange as being from these securities industry
for purposes of classification of arbitrators.

Rule 24, Section 10 is amended to clarify the time limitations applicable to a party wishing to utilize a peremptory
challenge.

Rule 24, Section 13(c)(5) is proposed to be amended to state that the Director of Arbitration may extend any time period
in this section (whether such be denominated as a Claim, Answer, Counterclaim, Cross-Claim, Reply, or Third-Party
pleading).

Rule 24, Section 13(d) is proposed to be amended to clarify the rule with respect to joinder and consolidation. It also
authorizes the Director of Arbitration to make preliminary determinations in cases where issues concerning joinder
and consolidation are in dispute. However, all further determinations with respect to joinder and consolidation
will remain with the arbitration panel.
<FOOTCITE>9</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>
9

</FOOTNAME>
In addition, the Exchange proposes to amend Section 13(d) to state that in arbitrations where there are multiple Claimants,
Respondents or Third party Respondents, the Director of Arbitrations shall be authorized to determine preliminarily
whether such parties should proceed in the same or separate arbitrations. Such determinations will be considered
subsequent to the filing of all responsive pleadings. The Director of Arbitration shall be authorized to determine
preliminarily whether claims filed separately are related and shall be authorized to consolidate such claims for
hearing and award purposes.

Section 13(d)(1) is proposed to state that all persons may join in one action as Claimants if they assert any right to
relief jointly, severally, or arising out of the same transaction, occurrence, or series or transactions or occurrences
and if any questions of law or fact common to all these Claimants will arise in the action. All persons may be joined in
one action as respondents if there is asserted against them jointly or severally any right to relief arising out of
the same transaction, occurrence, or series of transactions or occurrences and if any questions of law or fact common
to all respondents will arise in the action. A Claimant or respondent need not assert rights to or defend against all
the relief demanded. Judgment may be given for one or more of the claimants according to their respective rights to
relief, and against one or more respondents according to their respective liabilities.

Rule 24, Section 14 is proposed to be amended to state that the time and place for the initial hearing shall be determined
by the Director of Arbitration and each hearing thereafter by the arbitrators. Notice of the time and place for the
initial hearing shall be given at least eight business days prior to the date fixed for the hearing by personal service,
registered, or certified mail to each of the parties unless the parties shall, by their mutual consent, waive the notice
provisions under this section. Notice for each hearing, thereafter, shall be given as the arbitrators may determine.
Attendance at a hearing waives notice thereof.


</FOOTNOTE>

