

2. Factors to Consider
 


In deciding whether to authorize the release of official DoD information or the testimony of DoD personnel concerning
official information (hereinafter referred to as ``the disclosure'') pursuant to paragraph F.1., DoD officials
should consider the following types of factors: 
a. Whether the request or demand is unduly burdensome or otherwise inappropriate under the applicable court rules;

b. Whether the disclosure, including release in camera, is appropriate under the rules of procedure governing the
case or matter in which the request or demand arose; 
c. Whether the disclosure would violate a statute, executive order, regulation, or directive; 
d. Whether the disclosure, including release in camera, is appropriate or necessary under the relevant substantive
law concerning privilege; 
e. Whether the disclosure, except when in camera and necessary to assert a claim of privilege, would reveal information
properly classified pursuant to the DoD Information Security Program under DoD 5200.1R (reference (d)),
unclassified technical data withheld from public release pursuant to DoD Directive 5230.25 (reference (e)), or
other matters exempt from unrestricted disclosure; and

f. Whether disclosure would interfere with ongoing enforcement proceedings, compromise constitutional rights,
reveal the identity of an intelligence source or confidential informant, disclose trade secrets or similarly confidential
commercial or financial information, or otherwise be inappropriate under the circumstances. 


3. Decisions on Litigation Requests and Demands 


a. Subject to paragraph F.3.e., DoD personnel shall not, in response to a litigation request or demand, produce, disclose,
release, comment upon, or testify concerning any official DoD information without the prior written approval of
the appropriate DoD official designated in paragraph F.1. Oral approval may be granted, but a record of such approval
shall be made and retained in accordance with the applicable implementing regulations. 
b. If official DoD information is sought, through testimony or otherwise, by a litigation request or demand, the individual
seeking such release or testimony must set forth, in writing and with as much specificity as possible, the nature and
relevance of the official information sought. Subject to paragraph F.3.e., DoD personnel may only produce, disclose,
release, comment upon, or testify concerning those matters that were specified in writing and properly approved
by the appropriate DoD official designated in paragraph F.1. See United States ex rel. Touhy v. Ragen, 340 U.S. 462
(1951). 
c. Whenever a litigation request or demand is made upon DoD personnel for official DoD information or for testimony
concerning such information, the personnel upon whom the request or demand was made shall immediately notify the
DoD official designated in paragraph F.1. for the Component to which the individual contacted is or, for former personnel,
was last assigned. In appropriate cases, the responsible DoD official shall thereupon notify the Department of Justice
of the request or demands. After due consultation and coordination with the Department of Justice, as required, the
DoD official shall determine whether the individual is required to comply with the request or demand and shall notify
the requestor or the court or other authority of the determination reached. 
d. If, after DoD personnel have received a litigation request or demand and have in turn notified the appropriate DoD
official in accordance with paragraph F.3.c., a response to the request or demand is required before instructions
from the responsible official are received, the responsible official designated in paragraph F.1. shall furnish
the requestor or the court or other authority with a copy of this Directive and applicable implementing regulations,
inform the requestor or the court or other authority that the request or demand is being reviewed, and seek a stay of
the request or demand pending a final determination by the Component concerned. 
e. If a court of competent jurisdiction or other appropriate authority declines to stay the effect of the request or
demand in response to action taken pursuant to paragraph F.3.d., or if such court or other authority orders that the
request or demand must be complied with notwithstanding the final decision of the appropriate DoD official, the DoD
personnel upon whom the request or demand was made shall notify the responsible DoD official of such ruling or order.
If the DoD official determines that no further legal review of or challenge to the court's ruling or order will be sought,
the affected DoD personnel shall comply with the request, demand, or order. If directed by the appropriate DoD official,
however, the affected DoD personnel shall respectfully decline to comply with the demand. See United States ex rel.


Touhy 

v. 

Ragen, 

340 U.S. 462 (1951). 


4. Fees
 


Consistent with the guidelines in DoD Instruction 7230.7 (reference (f)), the appropriate officials designated
in paragraph F.1. are authorized to charge reasonable fees, as established by regulation and to the extent not prohibited
by law, to parties seeking, by request or demand, official DoD information not otherwise available under the DoD Freedom
of Information Act Program (reference (g)). Such fees, in amounts calculated to reimburse the Government for the
expense of providing such information, may include the costs of time expended by DoD employees to process and respond
to the request or demand; attorney time for reviewing the request or demand and any information located in response
thereto and for related legal work in connection with the request or demand; and expenses generated by materials and
equipment used to search for, produce, and copy the responsive information. See Oppenheimer Fund, Inc. v. Sanders,
437 U.S. 340 (1978). 


5. Expert or Opinion Testimony 


DoD personnel shall not provide, with or without compensation, opinion or expert testimony concerning official
DoD information, subjects, or activities, except on behalf of the United States or a party represented by the Department
of Justice. Upon a showing by the requestor of exceptional need or unique circumstances and that the anticipated testimony
will not be adverse to the interests of the Department of Defense or the United States, the appropriate DoD official
designated in paragraph F.1. may, in writing, grant special authorization for DoD personnel to appear and testify
at no expense to the United States. If, despite the final determination of the responsible DoD official, a court of
competent jurisdiction, or other appropriate authority, orders the appearance and expert or opinion testimony
of DoD personnel, the personnel shall notify the responsible DoD official of such order. If the DoD official determines
that no further legal review of or challenge to the court's order will be sought, the affected DoD personnel shall comply
with the order. If directed by the appropriate DoD official, however, the affected DoD personnel shall respectfully
decline to comply with the demand. See United States ex rel. Touhy v. Ragen, 340 U.S. 462 (1951). 


G. Effective Date and Implementation 


This Directive is effective immediately. Forward two copies of implementing documents to the General Counsel, DoD,
within 120 days. 


<SIGNER>
Signed by William H. Taft, IV 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Secretary of Defense. 

</SIGNJOB>
