 

Its decline is attributed primarily to development and succession of its habitat, and these threats to the species'
survival persist. Sandy pineland communities where the species exists have proven to be especially vulnerable to
development because soils are level, deep, and suitable for building sites. Remaining American chaffseed sites
are threatened primarily by activities or management practices that result in restriction or suppression of fire,
which is apparently needed to maintain the open subclimax ecosystem inhabited by the species. Other continuing threats
to American chaffseed include inadvertent disturbance to plants, discontinuation of game management and the consequent
cessation of burning, conversion of the fire-maintained flatwoods and savannas to commercial pine plantations,
commercial pine straw raking, and the increasing restrictions on prescribed burning of forest tracts.
Reclassification of the American chaffseed is the primary objective of the draft Recovery Plan. Reclassification
to threatened status will be considered when at least 50 geographically distinct American chaffseed populations
are permanently protected and managed as needed to ensure long-range viability, and the species is established or
found at four additional sites in the northern portion of its range. A delisting objective is not being defined at this
time.
Recovery of the American chaffseed will be achieved through a combination of habitat protection and management,
reintroduction of the species in portions of its former range, research aimed at better understanding the species'
biology in order to predict viability of populations, and research to determine the best techniques to maintain the
species and its habitat.
The draft Recovery Plan is being submitted for agency review. After consideration of comments received during the
review period, the Plan will be submitted for final approval.


Public Comments Solicited


The Service solicits written comments on the Recovery Plan described. All comments received by the date specified
above will be considered prior to approval of the Plan.


Authority


The authority for this action is Section 4(f) of the Endangered Species Act, 16 U.S.C. 1533(f).



Dated: September 20, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Ronald E. Lambertson,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Regional Director.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9423809 Filed 92694; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 431055M
</BILLING>

