 

An affected source may choose to use only one of the 
options for all coatings at the facility or a combination of 
options. Each option is discussed in more detail below. 


 

E. Test Methods and Procedures 


 

The proposed rule would require Method 24 be used as 
the reference method to determine compliance if the VOC 
content is used as a surrogate for VOHAP. Manufacturers 
whose coatings do not release reaction by-products may 
request an alternative or equivalent method to be approved 
by the Administrator. If it is demonstrated to the 
satisfaction of the Administrator that a specific coating 
does not release VOC by-products from the cure reaction (all 
VOC emissions are evaporated solvent), then she may approve 
use of batch solvent formulation data to certify the as-supplied VOC content of that paint. In the event of any 
inconsistency between the VOC content as measured by 
Method 24 and formulation data, however, the Method 24 test 
shall govern. 


 A few coatings may contain HAP which are (or through 
subsequent formal action may become) excluded from EPA's 
definition of VOC because these HAP have negligible 
photochemical reactivity and do not contribute to 
tropospheric ozone formation. These non-VOC HAP are 
nonetheless of regulatory concern as toxic chemicals. 
Therefore, for the purposes of this rule the mass of VOHAP 
determined by Method 24 would be the mass of VOC plus exempt 
compounds; hence, unlike for a VOC determination, the total 
mass loss of these organic volatiles must be used in 
subsequent calculations. However, the volume of exempt 
compounds should be subtracted (from the total coating 
volume) just as water, as indicated by the units for VOHAP 
presented in Method 24. Manufacturers and affected sources 
would be required to certify the VOHAP of paints using a 
form similar to that published in the EPA's ``Procedures for 
Certifying Quantity of Volatile Organic Compounds Emitted by 
Paint, Ink, and Other Coatings'' (Revised June 1986) 
EPA450/384019 [Docket A9211, IIB27]. If the shipyard 
chooses to demonstrate compliance using the VOHAP content of 
the coating(s), the manufacturer or affected source would 
need to provide details on how the VOHAP values were 
determined. 


 

F. Monitoring Requirements 


 

Section 114(a)(3) of the amended CAA requires enhanced 
monitoring and compliance certifications of all major 
stationary sources. The annual compliance certifications 
certify whether compliance has been continuous or 
intermittent. Enhanced monitoring shall be capable of 
detecting deviations from each applicable emission 
limitation or standard with sufficient representativeness, 
accuracy, precision, reliability, frequency and timeliness 
to determine if compliance is continuous during a reporting 
period. The monitoring in this regulation satisfies the 
requirements of enhanced monitoring.



