 

The full provisions of section 7 apply to nonessential experimental populations in a national park or national wildlife
refuge. Consequently, the Service, National Park Service, Forest Service, or any other Federal agency is prohibited
from authorizing, funding, or carrying out an action within a national park or national wildlife refuge that is likely
to jeopardize the continued existence of the gray wolf. Pursuant to 50 CFR 17.83(b), section 7 determinations must
consider all experimental and nonexperimental wolves as a listed species for analysis purposes in national parks
and wildlife refuges. The Service has reviewed all ongoing and proposed uses of the parks and refuges and determined
that none are likely to jeopardize the continued existence of the gray wolf, nor will they adversely affect the success
of the reintroduction program. 

Most of the reintroduction area is remote and sparsely inhabited wild lands. However, there are some risks to wolf
recovery associated with take of wolves in regard to other land uses and various recreational activities. Potential
threats are hunting, trapping, animal damage control activities, and high speed vehicular traffic. Hunting, trapping,
and USDA Animal Damage Control programs are prohibited or strictly regulated in national parks, as well as closely
regulated by State and Federal law and policy. There are very few paved or unpaved roads in the proposed reintroduction
area or immediately outside of it. The unpaved roads typically have low vehicle traffic, are constructed for low speeds
and used only seasonally. Thus, wolves should encounter vehicles infrequently. In accordance with existing labeling,
the use of toxicants lethal to wolves in areas occupied by wolves is prohibited. Overall, the possible risks and threats
that could impact the success of the reintroduction effort are thought to be minimal. 


Location of Experimental Population 


The release site for reintroducing wolves into central Idaho will be on or near National Forest lands. The experimental
population area includes that portion of Idaho west of Interstate 15 and south of Interstate 90, and that part of Montana
south of Interstate 90, Highway 93 and 12 near Missoula, Montana, and west of Interstate 15. 


Management 


The experimental population area currently does not support any reproducing pairs of wolves. It is also unlikely
that wolves from the natural southern expansion from northwestern Montana have arrived in central Idaho. Except
for the gray wolves in northwestern Montana, only an occasional, isolated wolf has been reported, killed, or otherwise
documented in Idaho, Wyoming, Montana, or other Western States. Single packs have been reported throughout the northern
Rocky Mountains. However, these reported wolves or groups of wolves, if factual, apparently disappeared for unknown
reasons and did not establish recoverable ``populations'' as defined by wolf experts. A wolf population is defined
as at least two breeding pairs of gray wolves that each successfully raise at least two young to December 31 of their
birth year for 2 consecutive years (Service 1994). Thus, the Service has determined that the central Idaho reintroduction
is consistent with provisions of section 10(j) of the Act; specifically, that experimental wolves must be geographically
separate from other nonexperimental populations. It is possible that prior to 2002, other wolves may appear in the
wild and be attracted to the experimental population area by the reintroduced wolves or by other factors. Any ``new''
arrivals would be classified as part of the experimental population. Such wolves could assist in the recovery and
expansion of the experimental population to the point where wolves could disperse into other parts of Idaho and Montana.


Wolves dispersing into areas in Idaho or Montana outside of the experimental area, would receive all the protections
of an endangered species under the Act, as did the wolves that recolonized an area near Glacier National Park in 1982.
It is possible, but not probable, that during the next 3 years wolves could move between recovery areas and enhance
the genetic diversity between natural recovery areas and reintroduction sites. However, it is not anticipated that
such exchange will significantly alter the recovery rate in the experimental population area. 







