 

The final policy discontinues the discounting procedure implemented on a forest-wide, test basis on some National
Forests in western Washington, Oregon and Northern California initiated in 1982 (47 FR 16181). The final policy provides
for Service-wide use of discounting upon an individual sale basis when specific situations justify the need for immediate
harvesting and on an area-wide basis only when warranted by market conditions and upon request of the Regional Forester
and approval by the Chief.


Regulatory Impact


This action has been reviewed under USDA procedures and Executive Order 12291 on Federal Regulations. It has been
determined that this policy is not a major rule. The procedures implemented by this policy will not have an effect of
$100 million or more on the economy, substantially increase prices or costs for consumers, industry, State, or local
governments, nor adversely affect competition, employment, investment, productivity, innovation, or the ability
of United States-based enterprises to compete in foreign markets. In short, little or no effect on the National economy
will result from this notice of policy change. This action consists of administrative changes to policy for timber
sale contract financial security. With regard to the removal of the bond maximum, very few sales are over $5 million
in value; therefore, few sales or purchasers are involved. The largest of sales are more likely to affect large businesses
than small. The change in liability for repudiation of contract (by failing to provide the necessary bond; execute
the contract; or make the required cash deposit) will only have an effect on purchasers who do not consummate their
contracts. These purchasers are expected to be few in number. All prospective purchasers must submit a bid guarantee
with their bids. The guarantee is returned to the unsuccessful bidders after completion of the bid opening procedures.
Only the high bidder is required to maintain the bid guarantee until the contract is consummated. Under existing procedures,
the successful purchaser would have to provide a performance bond equal to 10 percent of the bid value and, in addition,
make a minimum cash deposit equal to 10 percent of the bid value within 30 days after notification of award. In view of
existing requirements, increasing the bid guarantee to 10 percent of the advertised value should have minimal effects
on purchasers.
This final policy has been analyzed in accordance with the principles and criteria contained in Executive Order 12630,
and it has been determined that the final policy does not pose the risk of a taking of constitutionally protected private
property.
Moreover, this policy has been considered in light of the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 et. seq.), and it
has been determined that this policy will not have a significant effect on a substantial number of small entities as
defined by the Act. Additional financial security measures do have some economic impact on all classes of businesses,
and the majority of the agency's timber sales are purchased by small businesses. However, the adopted measures have
the intended effect of preventing speculative bids, defaults, and repudiation of timber sales. Therefore, they
will benefit the majority of small businesses dependent on the agency's timber sales as a source of raw material, by
helping ensure that small businesses are not competing for the limited timber resource that is offered for sale against
businesses that speculatively bid or make a high bid and then lack the financial means to operate the sales. Moreover,
these measures will preserve the long-range revenues to affected counties and will reduce the adverse economic impacts
these entities would experience in the event of sale defaults.
Further, this policy has been reviewed under Executive Order 12778, Civil Justice Reform. Adoption of this policy
will have the following effect: (1) All state and local laws and regulations that are in conflict with this policy or
which would impede its full implementation are preempted; (2) the policy expressly repeals or modifies previous
policies; (3) the policy is not to be applied retroactively; (4) and no administrative procedures are necessary before
a party may file suit in court challenging this policy.
This policy will not result in additional paperwork not already required by law or not already approved for use. Therefore,
the review provisions of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3507) and implementing regulations at 5 CFR
part 1320 do not apply.
This policy deals with business practices related to timber sale contracts and, as such, has no direct effect on the
amount, location, or manner of timber offered for purchase. Section 31.1b, paragraph 2, of Forest Service Handbook
1909.15 (57 FR 43180; September 18, 1992) excludes from documentation in an environmental assessment or impact statement
``rules, regulations, or policies to establish Service-wide administrative procedures, program processes, or
instructions.'' Based on consideration of the comments received and the nature and scope of this policy, the Forest
Service has determined that this rule falls within this category of actions and that no extraordinary circumstances
exist which would require preparation of an environmental assessment or environmental impact statement (40 CFR
1508.4).
The text of the final policy as it will be issued in the Forest Service Manual and Timber Sale Preparation Handbook is
set out at the end of this notice.



Dated: December 28, 1993.


<SIGNER>
David M. Unger,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Associate Chief.

</SIGNJOB>
