 

In response to the questions which were raised, NASPHV made the following replies. The local needs of rural areas within
the United States have changed since 1979, and the lack of adequate veterinary services in rural States is no longer
a problem. The veterinary profession stands ready to accommodate owners of multiple pets. NASPHV also indicated
that in many cases, the cost of a rabies vaccination from a veterinarian had not kept up with the rising consumer price
index. In addition, the Association stated that the inconvenience of traveling to and from a veterinary clinic during
business hours for rabies vaccinations was no different than the inconvenience of pet ownership in general, and that
improper vaccination by nonveterinarians was worse than no vaccination at all because such vaccination gave a false
sense of security.

The NASPHV argued that proper handling of animal rabies vaccines, including cold storage, physical examination
of the animal receiving vaccine to ensure the health status of the animal, proper timing and route of administration
according to label instructions, and knowledge of rabies control were essential for effective rabies vaccination.

The NASPHV further argued that in a mobile society such as the United States, it was unfair and unsafe for the public
to rely on so many different State rabies laws and regulations to protect the public. The restriction of rabies vaccines
at the Federal level would reduce confusion, unnecessary revaccination, and the necessity for human post-exposure
treatment. Further, as endemic reservoirs of wildlife rabies continue to spread and put more areas of the United States
at risk, the standardization of rabies control becomes more important. The Association concluded that the need for
proper administration and improved documentation of animal rabies vaccinations are the most important issues concerning
national rabies prevention in man and animals.

A case arose in 1986, in which a rabies vaccine manufacturer needed to follow documentation of rabies vaccinations
in order to trace recipients of its vaccine after a change had been made in the instructions for administration. Since
the particular manufacturer's vaccine was sold to and administered by veterinarians or State authorized recipients,
in large part, the appropriate records were available for the tracking and revaccination of thousands of animals.

Public health officials have expressed concern regarding the uncertainties of vaccine administration and certification
when animals are vaccinated by nonveterinarians or without adequate veterinary supervision. There is reason to
believe that some distributors, in States without restrictions on vaccine sale or administration, are distributing
rabies vaccines to unauthorized individuals in other States that currently have such restrictions. This practice
destroys the effectiveness of State programs designed to monitor and verify vaccine sale and administration in such
States and is contrary to their law. Such practice also creates significant safety concerns since any failure associated
with vaccine administration and documentation increases the risk of rabies exposure to both animals and man.

Dogs and cats that have properly documented rabies vaccinations and that are involved in bite cases involving a human
being are isolated and observed for 10 days at a veterinary quarantine facility to confirm the absence of rabies. When
the vaccination record of a dog or cat that has bitten someone cannot be verified, the animal may be euthanized to determine
if rabies virus is present in brain tissue. In these cases, the individual who has been bitten and the physician are
placed in the position of weighing the risks and costs of post-exposure prophylactic treatment against the odds of
having been exposed to rabies. Because the verification of animal rabies vaccination is important in decisions relating
to both animals and man, the Association argued that the issue of proper documentation of vaccination is a major concern.
The fact that 618 cases of rabies among domestic animals in the United States (including 155 dogs and 189 cats) were
reported to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in 1991 makes an informed choice important. Because of
questions concerning proper vaccine handling, storage, administration, documentation of vaccination and revaccination,
and recordkeeping, many State public health departments disregard rabies vaccination claims by owners and only
rely on documentation from a veterinarian as proof of vaccination.

After reviewing NASPHV's request to amend the Federal restriction on the distribution and use of animal rabies vaccines,
APHIS has determined that it needs additional information to determine the appropriate course of action with respect
to this matter. Before proceeding with a proposal to amend the Federal restriction on animal rabies vaccines, the
Agency must determine whether such an amendment would in fact be beneficial, whether rabies control programs and
rabies vaccination could not be better managed by the States and local jurisdictions, and whether the benefit of Federal
control would outweigh the cost of such a program.

