 

Part I. Introduction


Title III of the Child Abuse Amendments of 1984, (Pub. L. 98457, 42 U.S.C. 10401, 

et seq.

) is entitled the Family Violence Prevention and Services Act (the Act). It was first implemented in FY 1986 and reauthorized
and amended for fiscal years 1993 through 1995 by Congress on May 28, 1992 by Public Law 102295. Funds under the
Act are awarded to States and Indian Tribes to assist in supporting programs and projects to prevent incidents of family
violence and to provide immediate shelter and related assistance for victims of family violence and their dependents.
Family violence prevention funds have served to supplement many already established community-based family violence
prevention and service activities. These funds also have allowed States and Tribes to expand current service programs
and establish additional new centers in rural and underserved areas, on Native American Reservations, and in Alaskan
Native Villages and Regional Corporation areas. In most areas, there is private sector as well as State and local funding
for these emergency shelters.
The Department, through the Family Violence Prevention and Services Act, has provided technical assistance grants
to several State Coalitions Against Domestic Violence, and to several nonprofit organizations to assist shelter
operators and service providers to improve their service delivery, and also to support better planning, coordination
and information exchange.
In addition to the grants that were initially made available in FY 1986, the Department also has supported: The operation
of the Clearinghouse on Family Violence Information; research activities with the Department of Justice; regionally
based training and technical assistance for State and local law enforcement personnel through the Department of
Justice; and grants for technical assistance and training for State and local public and private nonprofit agencies
administering the family violence program.
During FY 1993, the Department continued to make grant awards that enhanced public information and community awareness
strategies and activities. Twenty-one grant awards for public information and community awareness were made during
FY 1993 to private non-profit organizations representing Native Americans, Haitian Americans, Asian Americans,
and community coalitions. These grant awards provided support to various organizations in their efforts to prevent
family violence and to make their communities aware of the nature and prevalence of domestic violence as well as the
services available for prevention activities.
Six grant awards were made during FY 1993 to demonstrate model training for domestic violence prosecutors that would
provide improved access and legal representation for domestic violence victims. A national resource center for
domestic violence and three special issue resource centers also were established during FY 1993. The national resource
center and the special-issue resource centers will provide resource and service information, training, and technical
assistance to Federal, State, and Indian tribal agencies, as well as to local domestic violence programs and to professionals
and other individuals who provide services to victims of domestic violence.


Part II. Fiscal Year 1994 Family Violence Projects


1. Priority Area Number FV0194:


Public Information/Community Awareness Campaign Projects for the Prevention of Family Violence





Purpose:

 To assist in the development of public information and community awareness campaign projects and activities that
will serve as information models for the prevention of family violence. These projects should provide information
on resources, facilities, and service alternatives available to family violence victims and their dependents,
community organizations, local school districts, and other individuals seeking assistance.


