 

Even though EPA determined that the baseline was protective of public health with an ample margin of safety, EPA still
found it was necessary to promulgate subpart T. This was because the baseline assumed compliance with the UMTRCA regulations
even though those regulations did not require that compliance occur in the foreseeable future and, in fact, many sites
were not proceeding towards the baseline level at the time subpart T was promulgated. In other words, EPA promulgated
subpart T to address the timing issue, which was not addressed in the UMTRCA regulations. 
The primary subpart T standard is the requirement that radon-222 emissions not exceed a flux of 20 pCi/m2-s. 40 CFR
61.222(a). Additionally, it requires that, once a uranium mill tailings pile or impoundment ceases to be operational,
it must be disposed of and brought into compliance with the emission limit within two years of the effective date of
the standard (by December 15, 1991) or within two years of the day it ceases to be operational, whichever is later. Lastly,
it requires monitoring of the disposed pile to demonstrate compliance with the radon emission limit. See 40 CFR 61.223
and 61.224. In its 1989 action, EPA recognized that even though NRC implements general EPA standards (promulgated
under UMTRCA) which also regulate these sites and call for compliance with a 20 pCi/m2-s flux standard (see 40 CFR part
192, subpart D), the UMTRCA regulatory program did not answer the critical timing concern addressed by subpart T.







The existing UMTRCA regulations set no time limits for disposal of the piles. Some piles have remained uncovered for
decades emitting radon. Although recent action has been taken to move toward disposal of these piles, some of them
may still remain uncovered for years. 






54 FR at 51683. However, due to then-existing CAA section 112(c)(1)(B)(ii), EPA was constrained to requiring compliance
with the 20 pCi/m2-s baseline within two years, a date the Agency recognized many sites might find impossible to meet.
EPA announced that those situations could be dealt with through site-specific enforcement agreements under CAA
section 113. 


Subpart T requires compliance by owners and operators of uranium mill tailings disposal sites within two years of
becoming non-operational. 40 CFR 61.22(b). Pursuant to its authority under then-existing CAA section 112(c)(1)(B)(ii)
EPA waived compliance for two years for sites that were non-operational at the time of promulgation. 

Id. 

Thus, the earliest date by which sites were required to comply with the subpart T standards was December 15, 1991. Even
so, EPA recognized at the time of promulgation that many sources subject to subpart T might not be able to achieve compliance
by December 15, 1991. Because EPA felt constrained by the CAA as it existed at that time, EPA stated that for those sites
the Agency would negotiate expeditious compliance schedules pursuant to its enforcement authority under CAA section
113. See 54 FR 51683. By so doing, subpart T in effect mandates that the cover to meet that emissions level be installed
as expeditiously as practicable considering technological feasibility. 
The numerical radon emission limit of subpart T, is the same as the UMTRCA standard at 40 CFR part 192, subpart D (subpart
D) (although under UMTRCA, the limit is to be met through proper design of the disposal impoundment, and is to be implemented
by DOE and NRC for the individual sites, while under the CAA, the standard is an emissions limit with compliance established
by EPA through monitoring). However, the two year disposal requirement and the radon monitoring requirement were
not separately required by the existing UMTRCA regulations. 
EPA amended 40 CFR part 192, subpart D on November 15, 1993, 58 FR 60340 to fill a specific regulatory gap with respect
to timing and monitoring that existed in that subpart. Under subpart D, sites are now required to construct a permanent
radon barrier pursuant to a design to achieve compliance with the 20 pCi/m2-s flux standard as expeditiously as practicable
considering technological feasibility (including factors beyond the control of the licensee) with a goal that this
occur by December 31, 1997, for those non-operational uranium mill tailings piles listed in the MOU between EPA, NRC
and the affected Agreement States (at 56 FR 67568), or seven years after the date on which the impoundments cease operation
for all other piles. The new requirement for verifying the flux with monitoring is meant to assure the efficacy of the
design of the permanent radon barrier following construction. 




