 

(F) Statement of the extent to which the literature search 
has produced adequate information comparable to that which would 
otherwise be obtained through the performance of applicable 
emission characterization requirements under 79.52(b) and/or 
health effects testing requirements under 79.53, including 
justifications and specific references. 
(ii) 

Emission Characterization. 

Pursuant to 79.52(b), 
the emission characterization shall include: 
(A) Name, address, and telephone number of the laboratory 
performing the characterization, 
(B) Name and description of analytic methods used for 
characterization. 
(iii) 

Exposure Analysis. 

Pursuant to 79.52(c), the 
exposure analysis shall include: 
(A) A qualitative discussion of the potential exposure(s) 
of the general and any special at-risk populations to the 
emission products, based on annual and projected production 
volume, and market distribution data. For group submittals, this 
discussion shall address the characteristics of the cumulative 
exposure from the potential use of all fuel or additive products 
in the group. 
(B) Identification of person(s) preparing the analysis. 
(5) 

Summary of Tier 2. 

For each health effects test 
performed pursuant to the provisions of 79.53, the Tier 2 
summary shall contain the following information: 
(i) Name, address, and telephone number of the testing 
facility, 
(ii) Summary of procedures (including quality assurance, 
quality control and compliance with Good Laboratory Practice 
Standards as specified in 79.60), findings, and conclusions, 
including references if used to support such results and 
conclusions, 
(iii) Description of any problems and their resolution. 
(6) 

Conclusions. 

The conclusions shall identify the need 
for further testing, if that need exists, or justify that current 
testing and/or available information is adequate for the tier(s) 
included in the report. 
(7) 

Appendices. 

The appendices shall contain detailed 
documentation related to the summary information described in 
this section, including, at a minimum, the following five 
appendices: 
(i) Literature search appendices shall contain: 

(A) Copies of literature source outputs, including 
reference lists and associated abstracts from database searches, 
printed or on 31/2 inch IBM-compatible computer diskettes; 

(B) Summary tables organized by health or welfare endpoint 
and type of emission (e.g., combustion, evaporation, individual 
emission product), presenting in tabular form the following 
information at a minimum: number and species of test subjects, 
exposure concentrations/duration, positive (

i.e., 

abnormal) 
findings including numbers of test subjects involved, and 
bibliographic references; 
(C) Complete documentation and/or reprints of articles for 
any previous study relied upon for satisfying emission 
characterization and/or Tier 2 test requirements; and 
(D) Full reports for unpublished/in-house studies. 
(ii) Emissions characterization appendices shall contain: 
(A) Complete laboratory reports, including documentation of 
calibration and verification procedures; 
(B) Documentation of the emissions generation procedures 
used; and 
(C) Lists of speciated emission products and their emission 
rates reported in units of grams/mile. 




