 

Directly observed therapy (DOT): An adherence-enhancing strategy in which an HCW or other designated person watches
the patient swallow each does of medication.

DNA probe: A technique that allows rapid and precise identification of mycobacteria (e.g., M. tuberculosis

 and 

M. bovis

) that are grown in culture. The identification can often be completed in 2 hours.

Droplet nuclei: Microscopic particles (i.e., 15 &mu;m in diameter) produced when a person coughs, sneezes,
shouts, or sings. The droplets produced by an infectious TB patient can carry tubercle bacilli and can remain suspended
in the air for prolonged periods of time and be carried on normal air currents in the room.

Drug resistance, acquired: A resistance to one or more anti-TB drugs that develops while a patient is receiving therapy
and which usually results from the patient's nonadherence to therapy or the prescription of an inadequate regimen
by a health-care provider.

Drug resistance, primary: A resistance to one or more anti-TB drugs the exists before a patient is treated with the
drug(s). Primary resistance occurs in persons exposed to and infected with a drug-resistant strain of 

M. tuberculosis

.

Drug-susceptibility pattern: The anti-TB drugs to which the tubercle bacilli cultured from a TB patient are susceptible
or resistant based on drug-susceptibility tests.

Drug-susceptibility tests: Laboratory tests that determine whether tubercle bacilli cultured from a patient are
susceptible or resistant to various anti-TB drugs.

Ethambutol: A first-line, oral anti-TB drug sometimes used concomitantly with INH, rifampin, and pyrazinamide.

Ethionamide: A second-line, oral anti-TB drug used primarily for treating drug-resistant TB.

Exposure: The condition of being subjected to something (e.g., infectious agents) that could have a harmful effect.
A person exposed to 

M. tuberculosis

 does not necessarily become infected (see Transmission).

First-line drugs: The most often used anti-TB drugs (i.e., INH, rifampin, pyrazinamide, ethambutol, and streptomycin).

Fixed room-air HEPA recirculation systems: Nonmobile devices or systems that remove airborne contaminants by recirculating
air through a HEPA filter. These may be built into the room and permanently ducted or may be mounted to the wall or ceiling
within the room. In either situation, they are fixed in place and are not easily movable.

Fluorochrome stain: A technique for staining a clinical specimen with fluorescent dyes to perform a microscopic
examination (smear) for mycobacteria. This technique is preferable to other staining techniques because the mycobacteria
can be seen easily and the slides can be read quickly.

Fomites: Linens, books, dishes, or other objects used or touched by a patient. These objects are not involved in the
transmission of 

M. tuberculosis

.

Gastric aspirate: A procedure sometimes used to obtain a specimen for culture when a patient cannot cough up adequate
sputum. A tube is inserted through the mouth or nose and into the stomach to recover sputum that was coughed into the
throat and then swallowed. This procedure is particularly useful for diagnosis in children, who are often unable
to cough up sputum.

High-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter: A specialized filter that is capable of removing 99.97% of particles
"0.3 &mu;m in diameter and that may assist in controlling the transmission of 

M. tuberculosis.

 Filters may be used in ventilation systems to remove particles from the air or in personal respirators to filter air
before it is inhaled by the person wearing the respirator. The use of HEPA filters in ventilation systems requires
expertise in installation and maintenance.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection: Infection with the virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS). HIV infection is the most important risk factor for the progression of latent TB infection to active
TB.

Immunosuppressed: A condition in which the immune system is not functioning normally (e.g., severe cellular immunosuppression
resulting from HIV infection or immunosuppressive therapy). Immunosuppressed persons are at greatly increased
risk for developing active TB after they have been infected with 

M. tuberculosis

. No data are available regarding whether these persons are also at increased risk for infection with 

M. tuberculosis

 after they have been exposed to the organism.

Induration: An area of swelling produced by an immune response to an antigen. In tuberculin skin testing or anergy
testing, the diameter of the indurated area is measured 4872 hours after the injection, and the result is recorded
in millimeters.

Infection: The condition in which organisms capable of causing disease (e.g., 

M. tuberculosis

) enter the body and elicit a response from the host's immune defenses. TB infection may or may not lead to clinical disease.

Infectious: Capable of transmitting infection. When persons who have clinically active pulmonary or laryngeal
TB disease cough or sneeze, they can expel droplets containing 

M. tuberculosis

 into the air. Persons whose sputum smears are positive for AFB are probably infectious.

Injectable: A medication that is usually administered by injection into the muscle (intramuscular [IM]) or the bloodstream
(intravenous [IV]).

Intermittent therapy: Therapy administered either two or three times per week, rather than daily. Intermittent
therapy should be administered only under the direct supervision of an HCW or other designated person (see Directly
observed therapy [DOT]).

Intradermal: Within the layers of the skin.

Isoniazid (INH): A first-line, oral drug used either done as preventive therapy or in combination with several other
drugs to treat TB disease.

