 

Deadlines for Permit Applications and Processing of Applications. 40 CFR 70.5(a) requires the owner or operator
of Part 70 sources to submit applications within 12 months of becoming subject to the program. 40 CFR 70.7(a)(2) requires
the permitting authority to act on an application within 18 months of receipt. To ensure that permits are expeditiously
submitted and reviewed, these deadlines will apply with equal force to Tribal programs, to the extent that Tribes
elect to develop and implement such programs. 
40 CFR 70.4(b)(11) requires States to have a transition plan for acting on applications received within the first
12 months after approval, such that the State will act on one-third of the applications in each of the first three years
of its program. This requirement overrides the 18-month requirement for acting on applications during the first
3 years. As discussed in Part III.B.2.e above, the 3-year implementation requirement in section 503(c) is among the
provisions of the CAA for which EPA is not proposing to treat Tribes in the same manner as States. For Tribal programs,
this initial program phase-in will be based on a schedule developed by the Regional Office in conjunction with each
Tribe. This case-by-case approach will ensure that any transition adequately accounts for the scope of Tribal program
coverage, the universe of Part 70 sources and the extent of Tribal expertise and resources. However, EPA is also proposing
to provide that in no case shall such a transitional schedule exceed 5 years from the date of EPA's approval of the Tribal
program. 
Enforcement. Required enforcement authority is set out in 40 CFR 70.11. As stated above, Federal law prohibits Indian
Tribes from holding criminal trials of or imposing criminal penalties on non-Indians, in the absence of a treaty or
other agreement to the contrary. 

Oliphant,

 at 435 U.S. 191. In addition, Federal law prohibits Indian Tribes from imposing for conviction of any one offense a
criminal fine greater than $500. 25 U.S.C. section 1302(7). Tribes requesting Title V program approval will be required
to enter into formal Memorandum of Agreement with EPA, through which it would agree to provide for the timely referral
of criminal enforcement matters to the appropriate EPA Regional Administrator. 
Operational Flexibility. The three operational flexibility provisions at 40 CFR 70.4(b)(12) will be optional for
Tribes as will 40 CFR 70.6(a)(8), (10) (emissions trading in the permit) and 40 CFR 70.6(a)(9) which requires States
to include alternative operating scenarios, if requested, in their permits. 
Permit Issuance, Revisions Procedures. Generally, for the procedures governing permit issuance and revision,
EPA will treat Tribes in the same manner as it treats States. While Tribes will have some flexibility regarding the
form and manner of public notice requirements under 40 CFR 70.7(h), the minimum period for public notice will be 30
days for Tribes as with States. 
Tribes, like States, must have authority to reopen permits for cause, as required by 40 CFR 70.7(f). 
Application content requirements. These requirements are set out in 40 CFR 70.5. These requirements will apply with
equal force to sources within Tribal jurisdiction, since EPA believes that the information specified in this provision
constitutes the minimum information that is essential to the issuance of an effective permit. 
Permit content requirements. These are found in 40 CFR 70.6(a), (c). The permit content requirements will generally
apply to Tribes in the same manner in which they apply to States. These remaining requirements are necessary to an effective
permit. These requirements include 40 CFR 70.6(a)(3), which requires the State and, under today's proposal, the
Tribal permitting authority to insert monitoring requirements into the permit where the underlying monitoring
requirement is deficient. 
Judicial Review. 40 CFR 70.4(b)(3)(x)-(xii) requires States to provide an opportunity for judicial review of a final
permit action and for the State's failure to take such final action. Tribes will have to meet the same requirements.

EPA Veto and Citizen Petition Process. 40 CFR 70.8 requires States to provide EPA with a 45-day review period and opportunity
for veto. The provision further specifies that no permit may issue prior to the expiration of that period or at all over
an EPA veto. It also provides citizens the right to petition EPA to veto a State-issued permit. These provisions will
apply with equal force to Tribal programs. 
40 CFR 70.8(b) also requires that State programs provide that the permitting authority notify any affected States
of each draft permit. This requirement to provide notice will apply with equal force to Tribal programs. Further,
any State or Tribal permitting authority will provide notice to any affected Tribe in the same manner as the regulations
require notification to affected States. See Part III.B.4 above. 
General Revisions. References to States and State officials will include Tribes and corresponding Tribal officials.



7. 40 CFR Part 81_Designation of Areas for Air Quality Planning Purposes. 

EPA is proposing conforming regulatory changes to part 81, in light of today's proposal to treat Indian Tribes in the
same manner in which it treats States under the air quality designation provisions set out at section 107 of the Act.




