 

ATA, on behalf of one of its members, requests that paragraphs (a) and (d) of the 
proposal be revised to provide an option for operators to lock out a thrust reverser that 
fails the tests required by those paragraphs in order to avoid unnecessary flight delays and 
cancellations. The commenter states that the Boeing 737 Master Minimum Equipment 
List (MMEL) presently grants this relief, provided that the thrust reverser in question is 
properly locked out. 

The FAA concurs partially. The FAA agrees that an option for dispatch relief 
should be allowed in accordance with the existing provisions and limitations specified in 
the MMEL. Paragraph (a) of the final rule has been revised accordingly. However, for 
airplanes on which a sync-lock is installed, the FAA, in conjunction with the Model 
757/767 Thrust Reverser Working Group, finds that a thrust reverser may be locked out, 
but the sync-lock must be operational at all times in order to ensure safe flight. Paragraph 
(d) of the final rule has been revised accordingly. 

The FAA also has revised paragraph (a) of the final rule to specify that only 
airplanes on which the sync-lock installation, the sync-lock wiring modification, or 
Production Revision Record (PRR) 35105 has not been accomplished are subject to the 
requirements of that paragraph. 

Two commenters suggest that the work hour estimates for accomplishment of the 
adjustments and tests [specified in paragraph (a) of the proposal] and operational tests 
[specified in paragraph (d) of the proposal] be increased. One commenter states that an 
estimate of 2 work hours is more realistic for accomplishment of the adjustments and 
tests. The second commenter states that the operational tests would actually take 
approximately 2.5 work hours. The FAA does not concur. The information provided by 
the manufacturer to the FAA indicates that the adjustments/tests and the operational tests 
each take approximately one hour to accomplish. The FAA established its work hour 
estimate based on that information. 


ATA requests that the FAA coordinate with Boeing a revision to the service 
bulletin to incorporate a change for routing certain wiring, since one ATA member had to 
deviate from the service bulletin instructions to route certain wire bundles. The 
commenter does not specify the service bulletin it recommends be revised. 

The FAA has coordinated with Boeing all requests from operators concerning 
wire bundle routing, and has ensured that any necessary changes to service bulletin 
instructions have been incorporated in subsequent revisions to the service bulletins cited 
in this final rule. A summary of service bulletin revisions reviewed and approved by the 
FAA since the issuance of the proposed rule follows: 


1. Boeing Service Bulletin 737781053, Revision 2, dated February 17, 1994, 
and Revision 3, dated June 30, 1994: Revision 2 of the service bulletin adds notes 
explaining that certain wire bundles were installed in production on some of the affected 
airplanes, that installation of these wire bundles is not necessary for those airplanes, and 
that wire bundle W084 is necessary on only some of the affected airplanes. Certain 
revised drawings also are included in Revision 2, one subkit number is corrected, a list of 
fasteners is added, and procedures for installation of splices is added. 

Revision 3 of the service bulletin provides procedures for replacement of different 
aluminum foil markers on a particular circuit breaker panel on some airplanes. 

Paragraph (b) of the final rule has been revised to reflect Revisions 2 and 3 of this 
service bulletin as additional sources of service information. 

2. Boeing Service Bulletin 737781058, Revision 1, dated February 17, 1994, 
and Revision 2, dated July 7, 1994: Revision 1 of the service bulletin includes a list of 
fasteners and provides procedures for removal of two panels for access to the J20 box 
assembly and related wiring. That revision also provides improved procedures for 
removal of the thrust reverser manual drive units and installation of the sync-locks. 



