 

In developing its position, the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) took note of the continuing question about
the sustainability of the take of narwhal, particularly noting the difficulties in obtaining data, such as population
levels, catch levels and loss rates, and in obtaining trade data for narwhals. Because of this uncertainty, NMFS decided
not to recommend that the United States propose this species for Appendix I. The Service assessed all information
available and concluded that there was no sufficient information to support listing this species in Appendix I. The
United States will continue to monitor information on this species as it becomes available in order to better assess
possible recommendations at a later date. 
2. Musk deer (

Moschus 

species). The EIA requested that the Service propose including all species in the genus 

Moschus 

in Appendix I. There are at least four species in the genus, which is widely distributed across eastern and central
Asia. Currently all 

Moschus 

species are included in Appendix II except those populations in Afghanistan, Bhutan, Burma, India, Nepal, and Pakistan,
which are included in Appendix I. Musk deer were listed in the Appendices due to the trade in musk, a substance taken
from the musk gland of the male and used in traditional medicines in Asia and in the manufacture of perfumes. 
Five comments were received in response to the January 27, 1994, 

Federal Register 

notice. Four commenters (including SAPL) favored the transfer of all Appendix II populations of musk deer to Appendix
I. TRAFFIC USA, while neither supporting nor opposing an Appendix I listing, relayed information from TRAFFIC France
that the French perfume industry is using a synthetic musk in some cases, but that France continues to import 5 to 15
kilograms of musk per year, primarily from the Russian Federation. The AHA suggested that musk deer ``farming'' operations
in China are inadequate to satisfy demands for musk, and that the existence of a legal musk trade creates a loophole
for illegal trade. Defenders and HSUS reiterated this claim. The AHA stated that current levels of exploitation of
musk deer in Russia, China and the Himalayas are reported to be unsustainable. Defenders reported that the price of
musk in Hong Kong can be as high as US$84,000 to US$119,000 per kilogram. They also indicated that there is not much information
available on population numbers of musk deer, but that it is known that illegal and undocumented trade in musk is occurring.
They state that, ``Estimates indicate that some populations have been halved during the past five years due to uncontrolled
hunting,'' but no specific information or documented reports were provided. The HSUS noted the high cost of musk,
and stated that this has led to wide-scale poaching of musk deer. They also reported that an 80 percent decline has occurred
in one population of musk deer in Russia. The HSUS claimed that in China musk deer populations are declining rapidly
due to over-exploitation. 
Comments received provided little additional or substantive information on the distribution and status of musk
deer, or on international trade in musk, aside from anecdotal reports of increased poaching and the high cost of musk.
The People's Republic of China claims that there are 500,000 to 1 million musk deer in China, and plans a comprehensive
survey. Russia indicated there are about 150,000 musk deer in Russia, and harvests are not allowed in areas where populations
are decreasing. In Russia, musk deer are protected in 18 reserves and other federal and local preserves, and the Sakhalin
musk deer is listed in the Red Data Book. Based on these protective measures, the Russian Management Authority felt
that it is premature to amend the listing of the musk deer to Appendix I. Mongolia provided conflicting remarks; they
indicated support for an Appendix I listing of the musk deer in their cover letter, but in their attached discussion
of the species they stated that the Mongolian musk deer should be kept in Appendix II. 
The Service does not believe that population or trend data are sufficient to support a proposal to transfer the Appendix
II populations of musk deer to Appendix I, and did not submit such a proposal. 
3. Copperbelly water snake (

Nerodia erythrogaster

). The Service has proposed to list the northern subspecies of the copperbelly water snake, 

N. e. neglecta

, as a threatened species under the Endangered Species Act, 58 FR 43860 (August 18, 1993). The species is restricted
to the lower Ohio River Valley and the lower Wabash River Valley in Indiana, Illinois and Kentucky, and in southern
Michigan, Indiana, and Ohio. There have been recent population declines and it now exists in isolated pockets of suitable
habitat. 
Only the HSUS provided comments, and supported the listing of the species in Appendix II. Although the proposed rule
suggested that removal from the wild by amateur collectors posed some threat to this species, no additional information
on trade in the species was received, and existing reports of international trade are several years old. Therefore,
on the basis of this record the Service is not persuaded that the available information on trade would warrant a proposal
to include this species in Appendix II. 
4. Bluefin tuna (

Thunnus thynnus

). The Service received a draft proposal from ICCAT Watch, a coalition consisting of the National Audubon Society
(NAS), the Center for Marine Conservation (CMC), and the World Wildlife Fund- US (WWF-US), to list the bluefin tuna
throughout the Atlantic Ocean on Appendix II and additionally, the western Atlantic population on Appendix I. Later,
ICCAT Watch withdrew its request to list the western Atlantic population in Appendix I.

