 

&bull;Household refrigerators;

&bull;Household freezers;

&bull;Residential dehumidifiers; and

&bull;Motor vehicle air conditioning.



It is also unacceptable as a substitute for HCFC22 in residential and packaged HCFC22 air conditioning.
Other substitutes for CFC12 exist which contain no class I substances. In addition, because this blend contains
CFC12 (which has an ODP 20 times that of HCFC22), it poses a greater risk to stratospheric ozone than the
use of HCFC22 alone.




(2) HCFC141b. HCFC141b is unacceptable as a substitute for CFC11 in new centrifugal chillers.
This substance has a high ozone depletion potential. At least one other substitute exists that presents lower overall
risk.

(3) Hydrocarbon Blend A. Hydrocarbon Blend A is unacceptable as a substitute for CFC12 in:

&bull;Commercial comfort air conditioning;

&bull;Ice skating rinks;

&bull;Cold storage warehouses;

&bull;Refrigerated transport;

&bull;Retail food refrigeration;

&bull;Vending machines;

&bull;Water coolers;

&bull;Commercial ice machines;

&bull;Household refrigerators;

&bull;Household freezers;

&bull;Residential dehumidifiers; and

&bull;Motor vehicle air conditioning.




Flammability is the primary concern. EPA believes the use of this substitute in very leaky uses like motor vehicle
air conditioning may pose a high risk of fire. EPA requires a risk assessment be conducted to demonstrate this blend
may be safely used in any CFC12 end-uses.



E. Foams



1. Overview



Foam plastics accounted for approximately 18 percent of all U.S. consumption of ozone-depleting chemicals on an
ODP-weighted basis in 1990. Five class I chemicals_CFC11, CFC12, CFC113, CFC114, and
methyl chloroform_are used as blowing agents in foam production. These five compounds are used in a wide variety of
applications.

Foam plastics manufactured with CFCs fall into four major categories: polyurethane, phenolic, extruded polystyrene,
and polyolefin. Historically, CFC11 and CFC113, which remain in a liquid state at room temperature,
have been used as blowing agents in polyurethane and phenolic foams. CFC12 and CFC114, which have lower
boiling points than CFC11 and CFC113 and are gases at room temperature, are used in polyolefin and polystyrene
foams. In addition to CFCs, methyl chloroform is used as a blowing agent in some flexible polyurethane foams.

Due to the wide variety of applications that foams represent, the Agency has divided its analysis of foam plastics
into the following ten distinct end-use sectors:

&bull;Rigid polyurethane and polyisocyanurate laminated boardstock;

&bull;Rigid polyurethane appliance;

&bull;Rigid polyurethane spray and commercial refrigeration, and sandwich panels;

&bull;Rigid polyurethane slabstock and other foams;

&bull;Polystyrene extruded insulation boardstock and billet;

&bull;Phenolic insulation board;

&bull;Flexible polyurethane;

&bull;Polyurethane integral skin;

&bull;Polystyrene extruded sheet; and

&bull;Polyolefin.




The SNAP determinations in this final rule distinguish between these ten end-use sectors because the mix of potential
alternatives to Class I blowing agents, and potential emission and exposure profiles, differ for each. Appendix
B at the end of this preamble lists in tabular form the Agency's determinations on substitutes in the foam sector. These
determinations are based on the risk screens described in the background document entitled, ``Risk Screen on the
Use of Substitutes for Class I Ozone-Depleting Substances: Foam-Blowing Agents'' and discussed in supporting memoranda.
The table also includes as ``pending'' substitutes for which the Agency has not yet issued determinations. Vendors
or users of substitutes not described in Appendix B should submit information on these uses, so that the Agency can
review them and issue a SNAP determination.



2. Alternative Blowing Agents



Under the SNAP program, the evaluation of alternatives for CFCs depends on a number of factors. These include toxicity,
flammability, environmental concerns, and, in the case of insulating foams, the insulating efficiency of alternatives.

Toxicity concerns associated with the use of alternative chemicals relate to the exposure of workers and consumers
to the chemicals or to the decomposition products these chemicals may form slowly over time in foam products. The likely
degree of human health risk associated with an alternative depends not only on the nature of a substitute chemical
but also on the chemical composition, manufacturing process, and product applications that characterize the foam
end-use sector into which that substitute will be introduced.

Flammability concerns, like toxicity concerns, have to do with possible danger to workers and consumers. Such danger
includes possible ignition of materials during manufacturing, storage, or transportation, and the fire hazard
posed by the final product. Alternatives to CFCs have varying degrees of flammability. As in the case of toxicity,
however, the composition, production processes, and end-use applications that characterize each foam type dictate
the potential risks associated with flammability.

In addition to posing toxicity and flammability risks, alternatives may have deleterious effects on the environment.
Such effects may include stratospheric ozone depletion, global warming, and contribution to smog or tropospheric
ozone formation. HCFCs have, in varying degrees, the potential to deplete ozone; both HCFCs and HFCs have global warming
potential; and various potential alternatives, especially hydrocarbons, are volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
that contribute to the formation of ozone, or smog, in the lower atmosphere.

The use of alternative blowing agents can have an adverse affect on the insulating capacity of foam products due to
higher thermal conductivity of the substitute. The overall risk screen for substitutes under SNAP takes into account
indirect contributions to global warming.

a. 

Hydrochlorofluorocarbons. 

Because of their relatively low thermal conductivity, hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) are considered necessary
transitional alternatives to CFC blowing agents in thermal insulating foams. Two HCFCs, HCFC123 and HCFC141b,
can serve as replacements for CFC11 in many end-use applications. Because of limited availability of HCFC123,
HCFC141b represents the more likely short-term possibility for replacing CFC11 in several of the insulating
foam sectors. As a result, the Agency has determined that HCFC141b, despite its relatively high ODP of 0.11,
is an acceptable transitional alternative to CFC11 for several foam end-uses. Other HCFC alternatives are
HCFC22 and HCFC142b. Although these compounds are commercially available and have lower ODPs than
HCFC141b, each has a boiling point significantly lower than CFC11. As a result, conversion to HCFC22
or HCFC142b from CFC11 generally entails significant investment in technical and process modification.
HCFC22 and HCFC142b do, however, present viable, near-term alternatives to CFC12 in extruded
polystyrene boardstock and billet foams. 

