 

If the statement is not disclosed on the principal display panel, the asterisk shall be followed by the following statement:





*See [Back, Top, Side] panel for details. 




(i) For purposes of this section of the Rule, the encircled capital letter ``E'' shall be clearly and conspicuously
disclosed in color-contrasting ink on the label of any covered product that is a general service fluorescent lamp
and will be deemed ``conspicuous,'' in terms of size, if it appears in typeface at least as large as either the manufacturer's
name or logo or another logo disclosed on the label, such as the ``UL'' or ``ETL'' logos, whichever is larger. 

(ii) Instead of labeling any covered product that is a general service fluorescent lamp with the encircled ``E'' and
with the statement described in paragraph (e)(2) of this section of the Rule, a manufacturer or private labeler who
would not otherwise put a label on such a lamp may meet the disclosure requirements of that paragraph by permanently
marking the lamp clearly and conspicuously with the encircled ``E.'' 

(3) Any manufacturer or private labeler who makes any representation on a label of any covered product that is a general
service fluorescent lamp, medium base compact fluorescent lamp, or general service incandescent lamp (including
an incandescent reflector lamp), regarding the cost of operation of such lamp shall clearly and conspicuously disclose
in close proximity to such representation the assumptions upon which it is based, including, 

e.g.,

 purchase price, unit cost of electricity, hours of use, patterns of use. 

(4) Any cartons in which any covered products that are general service fluorescent lamps, medium base compact fluorescent
lamps, or general service incandescent lamps (including incandescent reflector lamps), are shipped within the
United States or imported into the United States shall disclose clearly and conspicuously the following statement:





These lamps comply with Federal energy efficiency labeling requirements. 




(f) 

Plumbing fixtures_(1) Showerheads and faucets. 

Showerheads and faucets shall be marked and labeled as follows: 

(i) Each showerhead and flow restricting or controlling spout end device shall bear a permanent legible marking indicating
the flow rate, expressed in gallons per minute (gpm) or gallons per cycle (gpc), and the flow rate value shall be the
actual flow rate or the maximum flow rate specified by the standards established in subsection (j) of section 325 of
the Act, 42 U.S.C. 6295(j). Except where impractical due to the size of the fitting, each flow rate disclosure shall
also be given in liters per minute (Lpm) or liters per cycle (Lpc). For purposes of this section, the marking indicating
the flow rate will be deemed ``legible,'' in terms of placement, if it is located in close proximity to the manufacturer's
identification marking. 

(ii) Each showerhead and faucet shall bear a permanent legible marking to identify the manufacturer. This marking
shall be the trade name, trademark, or other mark known to identify the manufacturer. Such marking shall be located
where it can be seen after installation. 

(iii) Each showerhead and faucet shall be marked ``A112.18.1M'' to demonstrate compliance with the applicable ASME
standard. The marking shall be by means of either a permanent mark on the product, a label on the product, or a tag attached
to the product. 

(iv) The package for each showerhead and faucet shall disclose the manufacturer's name and the model number. 

(v) The package or any label attached to the package for each showerhead or faucet shall contain at least the following:
``A112.18.1M'' and the flow rate expressed in gallons per minute (gpm) or gallons per cycle (gpc), and the flow rate
value shall be the actual flow rate or the maximum flow rate specified by the standards established in subsection (j)
of section 325 of the Act, 42 U.S.C. 6295(j). Each flow rate disclosure shall also be given in liters per minute (Lpm)
or liters per cycle (Lpc). 




