 

Information Requirements Provision 


Under section 860(e)(2) of the Act, the Secretary may make an award under the Grants for Nurse Anesthetist Education
Programs only if the applicant for the award submits to the Secretary the following information: 
1. A description of rotations of preceptorships for students, or clinical training programs for residents, that
have the principal focus of providing health care to medically underserved communities. 
2. The number of faculty on admissions committees who have a clinical practice in community-based ambulatory settings
in medically underserved communities. 
3. With respect to individuals who are from disadvantaged backgrounds or from medically underserved communities,
the number of such individuals who are recruited for academic programs of the applicant, the number of such individuals
who are admitted to such programs, and the number of such individuals who graduate from such programs. 
4. If applicable, the number of recent graduates who have chosen careers in primary health care. 
5. The number of recent graduates whose practices are serving medically underserved communities. 
6. A description of whether and to what extent the applicant is able to operate without Federal assistance under this
title. 




Additional details concerning the implementation of this information requirement have been published in the 

Federal Register

 at 58 FR 43642, August 17, 1993 and will be provided in the application materials. 


Paperwork Reduction Act 


The standard application form PHS 60251, HRSA Competing Training Grant Application, General Instructions
and supplement for this program have been approved by the Office of Management and Budget under the Paperwork Reduction
Act. This approval includes the burden for collection of information for the statutory general preference and for
the information requirement provision. (OMB 

#

09150060, expiration date July 31, 1995) 


Additional Information 


Interested persons are invited to comment on the proposed minimum percentages for ``high rate'' and ``significant
increase in the rate'' for implementation of the general statutory funding preference. The comment period is 30 days.
All comments received on or before February 7, 1994 will be considered before the final minimum percentages for ``high
rate'' and ``significant increase in the rate'' for implementation of the general statutory funding preference
are established. Written comments should be addressed to: 
Marla Salmon, ScD, RN, FAAN, 
Director, 
Division of Nursing, 
Bureau of Health Professions, 
Health Resources and Services Administration, 
Parklawn Building, room 935, 
5600 Fishers Lane, 
Rockville, Maryland 20857. 
All comments received will be available for public inspection and copying at the Division of Nursing, Bureau of Health
Professions, at the above address, weekdays (Federal holidays excepted) between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5 p.m.



Application Requests 


Requests for application materials and questions regarding grants policy and business management issues should
be directed to: Jacquelyn Whitaker (A22), 
Grants Management Specialist, 
Bureau of Health Professions, 
Health Resources and Services Administration, 
Parklawn Building, room 8C26, 
5600 Fishers Lane, 
Rockville, Maryland 20857, 
Telephone: (301) 4436857, FAX: (301) 4436343. 
Completed applications should be returned to the Grants Management Branch at the above address. 





