 

<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Kitty M. Simonds, WPFMC, at 
(808) 5411974; Svein Fougner, Southwest Region, NMFS, at 
(310) 9804034; or Alvin Katekaru, Pacific Area Office, NMFS, at (808) 9558831.


 
</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 The FMP was prepared by the Western Pacific Fishery Management Council (Council) and approved and implemented by
the Secretary of Commerce (Secretary) at a time when there were few problems in the domestic fisheries for management
unit species (billfish and associated species). This is no longer the case. The longline fishery based in Hawaii targets
swordfish, tuna, and other management unit species, with vessels often traveling up to 2,000 miles (3,219 Km) from
port. Due to rapid growth of this fishery, prior to imposition of the 3-year moratorium on new participants, there
was concern about the potential and actual impact of the expanded fishery on the status of some fish stocks, the impact
of increased longline catches on other fisheries, and interactions between longline fishing and protected species
such as Hawaiian monk seals and sea turtles. 



The Council and Secretary have already taken several actions to address these concerns. They established a control
date for possible use in a limited entry program (56 FR 12891, March 28, 1991), issued an emergency rule establishing
a moratorium on new entry into the Hawaii-based longline fishery (56 FR 14866, April 12, 1991) and subsequently extended
the moratorium to midnight, April 22, 1994, by Amendment 4 to the FMP (56 FR 51849, October 16, 1991). Amendment 7 would
replace the moratorium and addresses a number of issues that are associated with the prospect of unregulated expansion
of the longline fishery. Increased level of longline fishing catches from the portion of the EEZ around Hawaii and
from adjacent high seas could result in overfishing of the stocks of Pacific pelagic management unit species throughout
their range, most notably swordfish. Even if stocks were not affected on a stock-wide basis, increased catches by
U.S. longline vessels could adversely affect other established fisheries, such as the commercial and recreational
handline and troll fisheries in the EEZ, as well as within the longline fishery. Further, even if direct catch competition
were not occurring, there would be considerable potential for market competition, both between the longline fleet
and the troll and handline fleets and within the longline fishery itself. Unregulated expansion of the longline fishery
could also increase the likelihood of adverse impacts on threatened and endangered species such as sea turtles, which
are known to be taken in the longline fishery. 

On the other hand, the restrictions (e.g., limitations on permit transfers and on vessel upgrading) under the moratorium,
in combination with area closures around the Northwestern and main Hawaiian Islands, which were imposed after the
moratorium went into effect, have been adversely affecting a number of people who had qualified for longline permits
under the moratorium. More than a quarter of the eligible fleet was inactive in 1992, due in many cases to the main Hawaiian
Island area closures that require vessels to travel 50 to 75 (81 to 121 Km) or more miles from shore to set their longline
gear. Some older and smaller vessels are unable to fish under these restrictions. Vessel owners have in some cases
been unable to sell or otherwise transfer their vessels or obtain financing for their fishing activity due to the ``one
transfer'' limit during the moratorium. In the Council's view, this has been an unintended negative effect of the
management program. Further, restrictions on the longline fishery outside the EEZ could have mixed effects on the
nation. The United States would benefit if the fishery could expand without adverse effects on fish stocks, other
fisheries, or protected resources and if foreign fleets were subject to similar restrictions. However, in the absence
of similar management of foreign fleets, restricting the U.S. fleet could disadvantage the United States in any future
negotiations leading to international regulation of longline fisheries and allocations of fish from the high seas.


In addition, Amendment 7 is intended to improve the administration of the existing longline fishery management program.
The FMP also could be improved administratively. Existing framework procedures for regulatory changes are limited
in scope, and new framework procedures are proposed to simplify and expedite the implementation of new regulations
in particular instances without an FMP amendment. This is especially important for rapid response to new information
indicating problems with respect to stock conservation or conservation of protected resources. 

</SUPPLEM>
