 

c. The Bidder shall provide and maintain all such guard lights and other protection for the public as may be required
by applicable statutes, ordinances and regulations or by local conditions. 
d. The Bidder shall do all things necessary or expedient to properly protect any and all parallel, converging and intersecting
lines, joint line poles, highways and any and all property of others from damage, and in the event that any such parallel,
converging and intersecting lines, joint line poles, highways or other property are damaged in the course of the construction
of the Project the Bidder shall at its own expense restore any or all of such damaged property immediately to as good
a state as before such damage occurred. 
e. Where the right-of-way of the Project traverses cultivated lands, the Bidder shall limit the movement of its crews
and equipment so as to cause as little damage as possible to crops, orchards or property and shall endeavor to avoid
marring the lands. All fences which are necessarily opened or moved during the construction of the Project shall be
replaced in as good condition as they were found and precautions shall be taken to prevent the escape of livestock.
Except as otherwise provided in the descriptions of underground plowing and trenching assembly units, the Bidder
shall not be responsible for loss of or damage to crops, orchards or property (other than livestock) on the right-of-way
necessarily incident to the construction of the Project and not caused by negligence or inefficient operation of
the Bidder. The Bidder shall be responsible for all other loss of or damage to crops, orchards, or property, whether
on or off the right-of-way, and for all loss of or damage to livestock caused by the construction of the Project. The
right-of-way for purposes of this said section shall consist of an area extending 

XXX

 feet on both sides of the center line of the poles along the route of the Project lines, plus such area reasonably required
by the Bidder for access to the route of the Project lines from Public roads to carry on construction activities. 

f. The Project, from the commencement of work to completion, or to such earlier date or dates when the Owner may take
possession and control in whole or in part as hereinafter provided shall be under the charge and control of the Bidder
and during such period of control by the Bidder all risks in connection with the construction of the Project and the
materials to be used therein shall be borne by the Bidder. The Bidder shall make good and fully repair all injuries and
damages to the Project or any portion thereof under the control of the Bidder by reason of any act of God or other casualty
or cause whether or not the same shall have occurred by reason of the Bidder's negligence. 

(i) To the maximum extent permitted by law, Bidder shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless Owner and Owner's directors,
officers, and employees from all claims, causes of action, losses, liabilities, and expenses (including reasonable
attorney's fees) for personal loss, injury, or death to persons (including but not limited to Bidder's employees)
and loss, damage to or destruction of Owner's property or the property of any other person or entity (including but
not limited to Bidder's property) in any manner arising out of or connected with the Contract, or the materials or equipment
supplied or services performed by Bidder, its subcontractors and suppliers of any tier. But nothing herein shall
be construed as making Bidder liable for any injury, death, loss, damage, or destruction caused by the sole negligence
of Owner. 

(ii) To the maximum extent permitted by law, Bidder shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless Owner and Owner's directors,
officers, and employees from all liens and claims filed or asserted against Owner, its directors, officers, and employees,
or Owner's property or facilities, for services performed or materials or equipment furnished by Bidder, its subcontractors
and suppliers of any tier, and from all losses, demands, and causes of action arising out of any such lien or claim. Bidder
shall promptly discharge or remove any such lien or claim by bonding, payment, or otherwise and shall notify Owner
promptly when it has done so. If Bidder does not cause such lien or claim to be discharged or released by payment, bonding,
or otherwise, Owner shall have the right (but shall not be obligated) to pay all sums necessary to obtain any such discharge
or release and to deduct all amounts so paid from the amount due Bidder. 

(iii) Bidder shall provide to Owner's satisfaction evidence of Bidder's ability to comply with the indemnification
provisions of subparagraphs i and ii above, which evidence may include but may not be limited to a bond or liability
insurance policy obtained for this purpose through a licensed surety or insurance company. 



