 

(8) The reintroduced wolves will be monitored during the life of the project, including by the use of radio telemetry
and other remote sensing devices as appropriate. All released animals will be vaccinated against diseases and parasites
prevalent in canids, as appropriate, prior to release and during subsequent handling. Any animal that is sick, injured,
or otherwise in need of special care may be captured by authorized personnel of the Service or Service-designated
agencies and given appropriate care. Such an animal will be released back into its respective reintroduction area
as soon as possible, unless physical or behavioral problems make it necessary to return the animal to captivity or
euthanize it. 
(9) The status of the experimental population will be reevaluated within the first 3 years, after the first year of
releases of wolves, to determine future management needs and if further reintroductions are required. This review
will take into account the reproductive success and movement patterns of the individuals released in the area, as
well as the overall health and fate of the experimental wolves. Once recovery goals are met for downlisting or delisting
the species, a rule will be proposed to address downlisting or delisting. 
(10) The Service does not intend to reevaluate the ``nonessential experimental'' designation. The Service does
not foresee any likely situation which would result in changing the nonessential experimental status until the gray
wolf is recovered and delisted in the northern Rocky Mountains according to provisions outlined in the Act. However,
if the wolf population does not demonstrate positive growth toward recovery goals for 2 consecutive years, the affected
States and tribes, in cooperation with the Service, would, within 1 year, identify and initiate wolf management strategies,
including appropriate public review and comment, to ensure continued wolf population growth toward recovery levels.
All reintroduced wolves designated as nonessential experimental will be removed from the wild and the experimental
population status and regulations revoked when (i) legal actions or lawsuits change the wolves status to endangered
under the Act or (ii) within 90 days of the initial release date, naturally occurring wolves, consisting of two breeding
pairs that for 2 consecutive years have each successfully raised two offspring, are discovered in the experimental
population area. The naturally occurring wolves would be managed and protected as endangered species under the Act.




Dated: November 15, 1994. 


<SIGNER>
George T. Frampton, Jr., 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks. 






</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9428747 Filed 111894; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 431055M
</BILLING>




