 

II

Facts Giving Rise to the Alleged Violation



At trail the Government would have contended the following:

1. Classic Care Network, Inc. (Classic Care) is a not-for-profit corporation organized and existing under the laws
of the State of New York. Its principal place of business is Nassau County, New York. Defendant Classic Care was formed
by the defendant hospitals and each is a member of Classic Care's and is represented with a seat on Classic Cares' board
of directors.

2. The defendant hospitals are each voluntary non-profit hospitals that provide both general acute care inpatient
services and outpatient medical services in connection with the diagnosis, care and treatment of patients. Each
has its principal place of business located in Long Island, New York, and each is independently owned and operated
with the exception of North Shore University Hospital at Glen Cove which is an affiliate of North Shore University
Hospital. Various of the defendant hospital members of Classic Care compete with each other and other hospitals in
Nassau and Suffolk Counties for patients who are members of HMOs and managed care plans.

3. Third-party payers provide health insurance coverage including coverage for inpatient hospitalization and
outpatient hospital services for patients who either individually, or through their employers, have subscribed
for that coverage and who pay a fixed rate or premium for that coverage. Third-party payers include both HMOs and managed
care payers. 

4. An HMO is an entity that, for a set premium, provides for comprehensive health care services including inpatient
and outpatient hospital services to its members. Employers contract with HMOs to provide health care services to
their employees and dependents.

5. An HMO in New York State must be licensed by the State in order to operate. In 1992, twelve licensed HMOs contracted
to deliver health care services to approximately 358,000 individuals in Nassau and Suffolk Counties who had enrolled
in those HMOs.

6. An HMO in New York must provide both inpatient and outpatient services to its members in order to be licensed by the
State. HMOs frequently provide these services by contracting directly with independent hospitals. HMOs provide
reimbursement payments for inpatient services to the defendant hospitals at rates that are either determined by
the State's diagnosis related group (DRG) reimbursement system or at a discounted rate determined by voluntary agreement
between the HMO and the hospital that is subject to the approval of the New York State Commissioner of Health pursuant
to N.Y. Ins. Law 2807a 3. and 2807c 2.(b)(i) (McKinney Supp. 1993).

7. Voluntary agreements between HMOs and hospitals for the delivery of hospital services can include the adoption
and utilization of per diem-based inpatient hospital rates. A per diem-based inpatient hospital rate rewards third-party
payers such as HMOs with lower overall hospital prices for their members who require hospitalization based on efficient
patient management and shorter lengths of stays at hospitals. 

8. Under New York State law, both HMOs and managed care payers may enter into contracts with the defendant hospitals
for discounted rates in connection with the provision of outpatient services to their subscribers or plan members.

9. HMOs and managed care payers compete with each other to obtain employer contracts and enrollees on the basis of price,
services, convenience and other factors including the reputations of contracted providers, such as hospitals.
They frequently seek to minimize their costs while also arranging for the participation of a sufficient number of
reputable hospitals and other providers to attract members. HMOs and managed care firms periodically direct their
members away from higher cost hospitals in favor of lower cost providers of hospital services in order to minimize
their costs.

10. General acute care hospitals compete for patients on the basis of price, quality, reputation and services. Defendant
hospitals endeavor to maintain or increase their patient occupancy rates, admissions and the utilization of their
outpatient services by seeking contracts with HMOs and managed care organizations pursuant to which those entities
influence or direct their enrollees to use the facilities of defendant hospitals.



