 

(i) The Contractor shall certify to the Contracting Officer the percentage of physical progress in the performance
of the contract as a whole as of the end of the calendar quarter. Such percentage of physical progress shall be expressed
as a decimal carried to four decimal places and shall be subject to the approval of the Supervisor. 
(ii) The revised billing price shall be the sum of a projected final cost, and a projected profit, computed as follows:

(A) A projected final cost shall be computed by (1) determining the cumulative sum of the base costs as of the end of the
calendar quarter, established in accordance with the ``COMPENSATION ADJUSTMENTS (LABOR AND MATERIAL)'' requirement,
and (2) dividing the sum thereof by the percentage of physical progress certified and approved as set forth in subparagraph
(i) above. 
(B) A projected profit shall be determined by applying, to the projected final cost, the incentive formula set forth
in paragraph (d)(2) of the ``INCENTIVE PRICE REVISION_FIRM TARGET'' requirement; 

provided,

 that in no event shall the revised billing price exceed the ceiling price of the contract. 
(iii) The revised billing price determined as stated above shall be set forth separately in a supplemental agreement
to this contract, which also shall set forth the computations upon which the revision of the billing price is based.

(iv) Any revision of the billing prices shall not affect the determination of the total final price under paragraph
(d) of the ``INCENTIVE PRICE REVISION_FIRM TARGET'' requirement. After execution of the contract modification
referred to in paragraph (d)(3) of said requirement, the total amount paid or to be paid on all invoices or vouchers
shall be adjusted to reflect the total final price, and any additional payments, refunds or credits resulting therefrom
shall be promptly made. 
(d) 

Invoices.

 Invoices may be submitted every two weeks, but not more frequently; 

provided, however,

 that if after contract award more frequent progress payments are approved by cognizant Government authority, this
provision shall be modified accordingly without additional consideration by the Contractor to the Government for
such modification. No payment will be required to be made upon invoices aggregating less than five thousand dollars
($5,000). The Contractor shall certify on each invoice: 
(1) the percentage of physical progress in the performance of work on the vessel as a decimal carried to four places;
and 
(2) the allowable costs incurred in the performance of the work on the vessel plus any unliquidated progress payments
paid to subcontractors as of the date the invoice is submitted. Such certification shall provide for cost category
reporting in accordance with the Contractor's normal accounting system and shall be broken down into direct material,
direct labor, and indirect costs. 
(e) 

Physical progress and weighting factors. 
(1) Within sixty (60) days after contract award, the Contractor shall submit a progressing system description for
review and approval by the Contracting Officer. Upon approval of such system, progress payments shall be in accordance
with the approved system. Subsequent revisions to the approved system shall be submitted to the Contracting Officer
for approval prior to implementation. 
(2) The mutually agreed upon weighting factors for the categories of labor and material for each vessel are set forth
in Attachment 

XXXX

 to this contract. The weighting factors shall be revised quarterly concurrent with the billing price revisions specified
in paragraph (c). Notwithstanding the above, revision of weighting factors may be requested by either party when
factual data indicate that the weighting factors then in use are no longer representative of the actual labor and material
distribution. Revisions of weighting factors shall be supported by detailed de-escalated (estimated final) direct
material, direct labor, and indirect costs and additional data concerning the cause of the change in the weighting
factors. In the event that the parties fail to agree on the establishment of, or a revision to the weighting factors,
the Contracting Officer may establish on a unilateral basis the weighting factors to be used in the administration
of this provision. Any change in the weighting factors shall be set forth in a Standard Form 30, ``Amendment of Solicitation/Modification
of Contract''. 
(f) 

Incurred costs.

 For the purpose of this requirement, ``incurred costs'' are those costs identified through the use of the accrual
method of accounting, as supported by the records maintained by the Contractor and which are allowable in accordance
with Part 31 of the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) and Part 231 of the Department of Defense FAR Supplement (DFARS)
in effect on the effective date of this contract and include only: 
(1) The costs of supplies and services purchased by the Contractor directly for this contract may be included only
after payment by cash, check, or other form of actual payment. 
(2) Costs for the following may be included when incurred even if before payment, when the Contractor is not delinquent
in payment of the costs of contract performance in the ordinary course of business: 
(i) Materials issued from the Contractor's stores inventory and placed in the production process for use on this contract;

(ii) Direct labor, direct travel, and other direct in-house costs; 
(iii) Properly allocable and allowable indirect costs. 
(3) Accrued costs of Contractor contributions under employee pension or other post-retirement benefit, profit
sharing, and stock ownership plans shall not be considered incurred until actually paid unless_
(i) the Contractor's practice is to contribute to the plans quarterly or more frequently; and 
(ii) the contribution does not remain unpaid 30 days after the end of the applicable quarter or shorter payment period.
(Any contributions remaining unpaid shall be excluded from the Contractor's total cost for progress payment limitations
until paid.)

