 



Director

 means the Director of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, or designated representative. 



Enter with Restrictions

 denotes a space where entry for work is permitted only if engineering controls, personal protective equipment, clothing,
and time limitations are as specified by the Marine Chemist, Certified Industrial Hygienist, or the shipyard competent
person. 



Entry

 means the action by which a person passes through an opening into a space. Entry includes ensuing work activities in
that space and is considered to have occurred as soon as any part of the entrant's body breaks the plane of an opening
into the space. 



Hot work

 means any activity involving riveting, welding, burning, the use of powder-actuated tools or similar fire-producing
operations. Grinding, drilling, abrasive blasting, or similar spark-producing operations are also considered
hot work except when such operations are isolated physically from any atmosphere containing more than 10 percent
of the lower explosive limit of a flammable or combustible substance. 



Immediately dangerous to life or health

 (IDLH) means an atmosphere that poses an immediate threat to life or that is likely to result in acute or immediate severe
health effects. 



Inert or inerted atmosphere

 means an atmospheric condition where: 

(1) The oxygen content of the atmosphere in the space is maintained at a level equal to or less than 8.0 percent by volume
or at a level at or below 50 percent of the amount required to support combustion, whichever is less; or 

(2) The space is flooded with water and the vapor concentration of flammable or combustible materials in the free space
atmosphere above the water line is less than 10 percent of the lower explosive limit for the flammable or combustible
material. 



Labeled

 means identified with a sign, placard, or other form of written communication, including pictograms, that provides
information on the status or condition of the work space to which it is attached. 



Lower explosive limit

 (LEL) means the minimum concentration of vapor in air below which propagation of a flame does not occur in the presence
of an ignition source. 



Marine Chemist

 means an individual who possesses a current Marine Chemist Certificate issued by the National Fire Protection Association.




Not Safe for Hot Work

 denotes a space where hot work may not be performed because the conditions do not meet the criteria for Safe for Hot Work.




Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory

 (NRTL) means an organization recognized by OSHA, in accordance with Appendix A of 29 CFR 1910.7, which tests for safety
and lists or labels or accepts equipment and materials that meet all the criteria found in 1910.7(b)(1) through
(b)(4)(ii). 



Not Safe for Workers

 denotes a space where an employee may not enter because the conditions do not meet the criteria for Safe for Workers.




Oxygen-deficient atmosphere

 means an atmosphere having an oxygen concentration of less than 19.5 percent by volume. 



Oxygen-enriched

 atmosphere means an atmosphere that contains 22.0 percent or more oxygen by volume. 



Safe for Hot Work

 denotes a space that meets all of the following criteria: 

(1) The oxygen content of the atmosphere does not exceed 22.0 percent by volume; 

(2) The concentration of flammable vapors in the atmosphere is less than 10 percent of the lower explosive limit; 

(3) The residues or materials in the space are not capable of producing a higher concentration than permitted in paragraph
(1) or (2) of the above, under existing atmospheric conditions in the presence of hot work and while maintained as directed
by the Marine Chemist or competent person, and 

(4) All adjacent spaces have been cleaned, or inerted, or treated sufficiently to prevent the spread of fire. 



Safe for Workers

 denotes a space that meets the following criteria: 

(1) The oxygen content of the atmosphere is at least 19.5 percent and below 22 percent by volume; 

(2) The concentration of flammable vapors is below 10 percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL); 









