 

We refer to the performance requirements we use to 
evaluate the performance of intermediaries and carriers in 
meeting their contractual obligations to HCFA in our 
regulations and program instructions as criteria and 
standards. When we developed our regulations, criteria were 
expected to be distinguished from standards; we intended to 
measure broad categorizations of performance using criteria 
(42 CFR 421.120) and to measure statistical and performance 
data using standards (421.122). As planned, a contractor 
had to be evaluated by and pass the requirements of the 
criteria before we evaluated contractor performance using 
statistical standards. However, in practice, the standards 
have been used to measure a contractor's compliance with the 
requirements of the criteria. The separate reliance on 
statistical standards diminished and we have developed a 
CPEP under which standards are used to measure the 
performance of specific activities in a defined criteria 
instead of ``statistical'' standards. 


II. Summary of the Proposed Rule 


On December 3, 1992, we published in the 

Federal 
Register 

(57 FR 57125) a proposed rule describing technical 
revisions we proposed to make to Medicare regulations in 
order to simplify and improve our system for evaluating the 
performances of fiscal intermediaries and carriers in the 
administration of the Medicare program. These technical 
revisions are necessary to bring our regulations up to date 
with our actual use of criteria and standards in performance 
evaluations. 
In the preamble to the proposed rule we described how 
the reliance on statistical standards diminished and that 
current ``standards'' are used to measure the performance of 
specific activities in a defined criterion. That is, 
measurement and evaluation using criteria and standards have 
evolved into a one-step process. In addition, we noted that 
certain functions that were included in the original planned 
evaluation structure have been transferred to more 
appropriate review activities. We, therefore, proposed to 
amend 421.3, 421.112(b), 421.118(b) and 421.122 to delete 
reference to statistical standards and to replace the 
general standards for the areas evaluated formerly by 
statistical standards with a general explanation of the 
areas evaluated by performance standards. 
We also mentioned in the proposed rule that our 
regulations do not contain requirements relating to 
measurement of carrier performance that are parallel to 
those for intermediaries. For consistency, we proposed to 
establish a new 421.201, ``Performance Criteria and 
Standards,'' that would measure and evaluate carrier 
performance of functional responsibilities, such as, 
accurate and timely processing of claims, responsiveness to 
beneficiaries', physicians' and suppliers' concerns, and 
proper management of administrative funds. 
We proposed to base performance criteria and standards 
on the experience of carriers nationwide, changes in carrier 
operations due to fiscal constraints, and our objectives in 
achieving better performance. Before the beginning of each 
CPEP evaluation period, we would publish the performance 
criteria and standards as a notice in the 

Federal Register

. 
We also announced that we would add a new 421.203, 
``Carrier's failure to perform efficiently and effectively,'' 
to explain the adverse action that may be taken by the 
Secretary if the carrier fails to meet criteria and 
standards specified at 421.201. The content is parallel 
to 421.124, which applies to intermediaries. This new 
421.203 does not add or change carrier obligations. It 
merely codifies in regulations a provision specific to 
carriers that has been in effect since Public Law 98369. 


III. Analysis of and Response to Public Comments 


We received 10 timely items of correspondence in 
response to the December 3, 1992 proposed rule. The 
comments were from intermediaries, carriers, contractor 
advocacy groups, and provider advocacy groups. A summary of 
the comments and the Department's responses follow: 


Comment: 

Several commenters suggested that a process 
be developed by HCFA for receiving comments, complaints, or 
problems with carrier performance by physicians or 
professional organizations and that the information 
generated by this process be included in the overall 
performance evaluation of a carrier. 


Response: 

Beginning in Fiscal Year 1994, HCFA will 
review both intermediaries' and carriers' efforts to enhance 
customer satisfaction through the use of customer 
satisfaction surveys, including the National Physician 
Survey. Results of the surveys will be used to establish 
performance data on customer satisfaction and to identify 
areas in need of improvement. The results will be 
summarized for publication in the report of contractor 
performance. 




