 

(ii) Another location that is not currently included in the 
institution's participation in the program, if_


(A) That location offers 100 percent of an educational 
program; or 
(B) The Secretary requires the institution to apply for 
certification under paragraph (c) of this section; 
(3) Reestablish participation in a Title IV, HEA program 
following a change in ownership that results in a change in 
control according to the provisions of 34 CFR part 600. 
(c) 

Notification and application requirements for 
additional locations. 

(1) A participating institution must 
notify the Secretary, in writing, if the institution wishes to_

(i) Include in its participation in a Title IV, HEA program 
a location that is not currently included in the institution's 
participation in the program and that offers at least 50 percent, 
but less than 100 percent, of an educational program; or 
(ii) Continue to include in its participation in a 
Title IV, HEA program a location that_

(A) Offers at least 50 percent, but less than 100 percent, 
of an educational program; and 
(B) Has changed its name, location, or address. 
(2) The Secretary considers the submission of the required 
notification under 34 CFR 600.30 with respect to that location to 
satisfy the notification requirement of this paragraph. 
(3) The Secretary may require the institution to apply for 
a certification that the institution continues to meet the 
requirements of this subpart. 
(d) 

Notification and application requirements for changes 
in name, location, or address. 

(1) A participating institution 
must notify the Secretary, in writing, if the institution wishes 
to continue to participate in a Title IV, HEA program following a 
change in name, location, or address of the institution or 
continue to include in the institution's participation_

(i) A branch campus that has changed its name, location, or 
address; or 
(ii) Another location that has changed its name, location, 
or address if that location offers 100 percent of an educational 
program. 
(2) The Secretary considers the submission of the required 
notification under 34 CFR 600.30 with respect to that location to 
satisfy the notification requirement of this paragraph. 
(e) 

Required forms and information. 

An institution that 
applies for participation under paragraph (a) or (b) of this 
section must_

(1) Apply on the form prescribed by the Secretary; and 
(2) Provide all the information and documentation requested 
by the Secretary to certify that the institution meets the 
standards of this subpart. 




(Authority: 20 U.S.C. 1099c) 



10. A new 668.13 is added to read as follows: 


668.13 

Certification procedures. 


(a) 

Requirements for certification. 

The Secretary 
certifies that an institution meets the standards of this subpart 
only if_


(1) The institution is an eligible institution; 
(2) The institution meets the standards of this subpart; 
(3) Each branch campus to be included in the institution's 
participation meets the applicable standards of this subpart; and 
(4)(i) Except as provided in paragraph (a)(4)(ii) of this 
section, in the case of an institution seeking to participate for 
the first time in the Federal Pell Grant Program, the 
campus-based programs, the FDSL Program, or the Federal Stafford 
Loan, Federal SLS, or Federal PLUS Program, the institution 
requires the following individuals to complete Title IV, HEA 
program training provided or approved by the Secretary: 
(A) The individual designated by the institution under 
668.16(b)(1). 
(B)(

1

) In the case of a for-profit institution, the chief 
administrator of the institution; or 
(

2

) In the case of an institution other than a for-profit 
institution, the chief administrator of the institution, or 
another administrative official of the institution designated by 
the chief administrator. 
(ii) If either one of the two individuals who is otherwise 
required to complete training under paragraph (a)(4)(i) of this 
section has previously completed Title IV, HEA program training 
provided or approved by the Secretary, the institution may elect 
to request an on-site Title IV, HEA program certification review 
by the Secretary instead of requiring that individual to complete 
again the Title IV, HEA program training provided or approved by 
the Secretary. 
(iii) An institution may not begin participation in the 
applicable Title IV, HEA program or programs_

(A) In the case of an institution that requires individuals 
to complete training in accordance with paragraph (a)(4)(i) of 
this section, until the individuals complete the required 
training; or 
(B) In the case of an institution that requests an on-site 
review in accordance with paragraph (a)(4)(ii) of this section, 
until the Secretary conducts the review and notifies the 
institution that it is in compliance with Title IV, HEA program 
requirements. 
(b) 

Period of participation. 

(1) If the Secretary 
certifies that an institution meets the standards of this 
subpart, the Secretary also specifies the period for which the 
institution may participate in a Title IV, HEA program. An 
institution's period of participation expires four years after 
the date that the Secretary certifies that the institution meets 
the standards of this subpart, except that the Secretary may 
specify a shorter period. 
(2) Provided that an institution has submitted an 
application for a renewal of certification that is materially 
complete at least 90 days prior to the expiration of its current 
period of participation, the institution's existing certification 
will be extended on a month to month basis following the 
expiration of the institution's period of participation until the 
end of the month in which the Secretary issues a decision on the 
application for recertification. 
(c) 

Provisional certification. 

(1) The Secretary may 
provisionally certify an institution if_


(i) The institution seeks initial participation in a 
Title IV, HEA program; 
(ii) The institution is an eligible institution that has 
undergone a change in ownership that results in a change in 
control according to the provisions of 34 CFR part 600; 
(iii) The institution is a participating institution_

(A) That is applying for a certification that the 
institution meets the standards of this subpart; 
(B) That the Secretary determines has jeopardized its 
ability to perform its financial responsibilities by not meeting 
the factors of financial responsibility under 668.15 or the 
standards of administrative capability under 668.16; and 
(C) Whose participation has been limited or suspended under 
subpart G of this part, or voluntarily enters into provisional 
certification; 
(iv) The institution seeks a renewal of participation in a 
Title IV, HEA program after the expiration of a prior period of 
participation in that program; or 






