 

Reasons for Emergency Determination 


Under section 4(b)(7) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1531 

et seq.

) and 50 CFR 424.20, the Secretary may determine a species to be endangered or threatened by an emergency rule that shall
cease 240 days following publication in the 

Federal Register

. The reasons why this rule is necessary are discussed below. If at any time after this rule has been published the Secretary
determines that substantial evidence does not exist to warrant such a rule, it shall be withdrawn. 
Of the eight known sites historically occupied by the species, all but two have been developed or significantly altered
through human activities. Suitable habitat remains in the Marina del Rey/El Segundo portion of Los Angeles County;
however, efforts to find the animal in this area have not been successful. One other site at San Onofre in San Diego County
still retains suitable habitat. However, the Pacific pocket mouse was never common at this site, and recent surveys
have not located any individuals. 
The only remaining population (containing no more than 39 animals) of the Pacific pocket mouse occurs on the Dana Point
Headlands of Dana Point, California. As discussed under factors A, C, and D in the Summary of Factors Affecting the
Species section above, an emergency posing a significant risk to the well-being and continued survival of the Pacific
pocket mouse exists as the result of the imminent, proposed destruction of 3.65 of the 3.75 acres of occupied habitat
(Brylski 1993; EDAW 1993a,b). The Pacific pocket mouse is also imminently threatened at this location by feral and/or
domestic cat depredation. 
For these reasons, the Service finds that the Pacific pocket mouse is in imminent danger of extinction throughout
all or a significant portion of its range and warrants immediate protection under the Act. 


Critical Habitat 



Critical habitat, as defined by section 3(5)(A) of the Act, means: (i) The specific areas within the geographical
area occupied by a species, at the time it is listed in accordance with the Act, on which are found those physical or biological
features (I) essential to the conservation of the species, and (II) that may require special management considerations
or protection, and (ii) specific areas outside the geographical area occupied by a species at the time it is listed,
upon a determination that such areas are essential for the conservation of the species. 
Section 4(a)(3) of the Act requires that critical habitat be designated to the maximum extent prudent and determinable
concurrently with the determination that a species is endangered or threatened. The Service's regulations (50 CFR
424.12(a)(1)) state that a designation of critical habitat is not prudent when one or both of the following situations
exist: (1) The species is threatened by taking or other human activity, and identification of critical habitat can
be expected to increase the degree of such threat to the species, or (2) such designation of critical habitat would
not be beneficial to the species. 
The Service finds that designation of critical habitat is not prudent at this time for the Pacific pocket mouse. The
only known population of this species is found on private lands where Federal jurisdiction or involvement in land-use
activities is not expected. Therefore, the designation of critical habitat within the existing range of the Pacific
pocket mouse would not appreciably benefit the species. 


Available Conservation Measures 


Conservation measures provided to species listed as endangered or threatened under the Endangered Species Act include
recognition, recovery actions, requirements for Federal protection, and prohibitions against certain activities.
Recognition through listing encourages and results in conservation actions by Federal, State, and private agencies,
groups, and individuals. The Act provides for possible land acquisition, cooperation with the States, and requires
that recovery actions be carried out for all listed species. The protection required of Federal agencies and the prohibitions
against certain activities are discussed, in part, below. 




