 

VI
Merged Entities




Nothing in this Final Judgment shall apply to agreements between hospitals that are parties to a lawful merger or acquisition
with each other or that are subject to common corporate control.



VII

First Amendment Rights



Nothing in this Final Judgment shall prohibit any defendant acting either alone or with others from exercising rights
permitted under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution to petition any federal or state government
executive agency concerning legislation, rules or procedures, or to participate in any federal or state administrative
judicial proceeding.



VIII

Compliance Program



Each defendant is required to maintain an antitrust compliance program which shall include:

A. Distributing within 60 days from the entry of this Final Judgment, a copy of this Final Judgment and Competitive
Impact Statement to all officers, directors,trustees and administrators;

B. Notifying within 60 days from the entry of this Final Judgment, all officers, directors, trustees and administrators
that the defendant will not be bound by any agreement that requires the approval of the defendant Classic Care or any
other defendant hospital in connection with any actual or possible agreement for the delivery of hospital services,
including any agreement relating to fees for hospital services, between the defendant and any third-party payer;

C. Distributing in a timely manner a copy of this Final Judgment and Competitive Impact Statement to any successor
corporation or person who succeeds to a position as officer, director, trustee, or administrator;

D. Holding a briefing annually for all operating offices, directors, and administrators on (1) the meaning and requirements
of this Final Judgment including the consequences of non-compliance with this Final Judgment; and (2) the application
of the federal antitrust laws to the defendant's activities including potential antitrust concerns raised by hospitals
(a) engaging in agreements or arrangements with competitors to set or maintain any fee or to limit discounts on any
fee, or (b) engaging in agreements with a competitor to refrain from dealing with a third-party payer;

E. Obtaining from each operating officer and administrator an annual written certification that he or she has: (1)
read, understands, and agrees to abide by this Final Judgment; (2) has been advised and understands that noncompliance
with this Final Judgment may result in his or her conviction for criminal contempt of court and/or fine; and (3) is not
aware of any violation of this Final Judgment;


F. maintaining for inspection by plaintiff a record of recipients to whom this Final Judgment and Competitive Impact
Statement have been distributed and from whom the certification required by Paragraph VIII. E. has been obtained;
and

G. conducting an audit of its activities within 60 days from the entry of this Final Judgment and annually to determine
compliance with this Final Judgment.



IX

Certifications



A. Within 75 days after the entry of this Final Judgment, each defendant shall certify to plaintiff whether it has made
the distribution of this Final Judgment in accordance with Paragraph VIII. A. above.

B. For five (5) years after the entry of this Final Judgment, on or before its anniversary date, each defendant shall
certify annually to plaintiff whether defendant has complied with the provisions of Paragraph VIII., Sections C.,
D., E., F., and G.


