 

II.E_Completion of the Conversion



II.E.1_Effective Date of Conversion



The date on which the regional director approves the Organization Certificate and the Application and Agreements
for Insurance of Accounts is the date on which the credit union becomes a federal credit union. The regional director
will notify the credit union and the state regulator of the date of the conversion.



II.E.2_Assumption of Assets and Liabilities



As of the effective date, the federal credit union will be the owner of all of the assets and will be responsible for all
of the liabilities and share accounts of the state credit union.



II.E.3_Board of Directors' Meeting



Upon receipt of its federal charter, the board will hold its first meeting as a federal credit union. At this meeting,
the board will transact such business as is necessary to complete the conversion as approved and to operate the credit
union in accordance with the requirements of the Federal Credit Union Act and NCUA Rules and Regulations. Actions
to be taken at this meeting include:

&bull;Change of the credit union's name on all records, accounts, investments and other documents evidencing assets
or liabilities of the credit union;

&bull;Changes to the credit union's books and records:

&bull;As of the commencement of business, the accounting system, records, and forms must conform to the standard
established by NCUA;

&bull;New journal and cash record and general ledger records should be set up. The general ledger accounts for the
state credit union will be posted through the effective date of the conversion, and the new balances will be transferred
to the new general ledger accounts of the federal credit union;

&bull;The income and expense accounts of the state credit union will not be closed unless the conversion is at the close
of an accounting period or is required by the state regulator; and 

&bull;The individual share and loan ledger accounts used by the state credit union may continue to be used.

The federal credit union's name will be properly reflected on these accounts.



II.E.4_Reports to NCUA



Within 10 business days after commencement of operations, the recently converted federal credit union must submit
to the regional director the following:

&bull;Report of Officials (NCUA 4501).

&bull;Financial and Statistical Reports, (Forms FCU 109A, 109B, and 109F, or their equivalent) as of the commencement
of business of the federal credit union.



III_Conversion of a Federal Credit Union to a State Credit Union



III.A_General Requirements



Any federal credit union may apply to convert to a state credit union. In order to do so, it must:

&bull;Notify NCUA prior to commencing the process to convert to a state charter and state the reason(s) for the conversion;

&bull;Comply with the requirements of Section 125 of the Federal Credit Union Act that enable it to convert to a state
credit union and to cease being a federal credit union; and

&bull;Comply with applicable state law and the requirements of the state regulator.

Particular attention should be given to answering the question on the reasons for conversion. These reasons should
be stated in specific terms, not as generalities.



III.B_Special Provisions Regarding Federal Share Insurance



If the federal credit union wants to continue federal share insurance after the conversion to a state credit union,
it must submit an Application for Insurance of Accounts (NCUA 9600) to the regional director at the time it requests
approval of the conversion proposal. The regional director has the authority to approve or disapprove the Application.

If the converting federal credit union does not want to continue federal share insurance or if its application for
continued insurance is denied, insurance will cease in accordance with the provisions of Section 206 of the Federal
Credit Union Act.

If, upon its conversion to a state credit union, the federal credit union will be terminating its federal share insurance
or converting from federal to non federal share insurance, it must comply with the membership notice and voting procedures
set forth in Section 206 of the Federal Credit Union Act and Part 708 of NCUA's Rules and Regulations.

Where the state credit union will be non federally insured, federal insurance ceases on the effective date of the charter
conversion. If it will be otherwise uninsured, then federal insurance will cease one year after the date of conversion
subject to the restrictions in Section 206(d)(1) of the Federal Credit Union Act. In either case, the state credit
union will be entitled to a refund of the federal credit union's NCUSIF capitalization deposit and any unused portion
of the federal insurance premium after the final date on which any of its shares are federally insured.

The NCUA Board reserves the right to delay the refund of the capitalization deposit for up to one year if it determines
that payment would jeopardize the NCUSIF.



III.C_Submission of Conversion Proposal to NCUA



Upon approval of a proposition for conversion by a majority vote of the board of directors at a meeting held in accordance
with the federal credit union's bylaws, the conversion proposal will be submitted to the regional director and will
include:

&bull;A current financial report;
&bull;A current delinquent loan schedule;
&bull;An explanation and appropriate documents relative to any changes in insurance of member accounts;
&bull;A resolution of the board of directors;
&bull;A proposed Notice of Special Meeting of the Members (NCUA 4221);
&bull;A copy of the ballot to be sent to members (NCUA 4506);
&bull;Evidence that the state regulator is in agreement with the conversion proposal; and
&bull;A statement of reasons supporting the request to convert.


III.D_Approval of Proposal to Convert


III.D.1_Review by the Regional Director


The proposal will be reviewed to determine that it is complete and is in compliance with Section 125 of the Federal Credit
Union Act. The regional director may make further investigations into the proposal and require the submission of
additional information to support the request.



III.D.2_Conditions to the Approval


The regional director will specify any special conditions that the credit union must meet in order to proceed with
the conversion.



III.D.3_Approval by the Regional Director



The proposal will be approved by the regional director if it is in compliance with Section 125 and, in the case where
the state credit union will no longer be federally insured, the notice and voting requirements of Section 206 of the
Federal Credit Union Act.



III.D.4_Notification



The regional director will notify both the credit union and the state regulator of the decision on the proposal.



III.E_Approval of Proposal by Members



Upon approval of the proposal by the regional director, the following actions will be taken by the board of directors:

&bull;The proposal must be submitted to the members for approval and a date set for a vote on the proposal. The proposal
may be acted on at the annual meeting, at a special meeting for that purpose, or by written ballot to be filed by the date
set for the vote.



