 

3. DOE requests from the public, industry, and other Government agencies, their suggestions and recommendations
on the following: 

 A. 

Uses or applications of products or materials that use any form of depleted uranium. 

Such uses or applications could be for the depleted uranium in its current chemical form, for any of its individual
components, for either the uranium or fluorine in some other chemical or physical form, or products made from any form
or compound of depleted UF

6

 including alloys, cements, or other materials. Suggested uses and applications should not be limited to those that
only DOE or another Government agency might pursue. The Department is interested in all possible uses or applications
for the depleted UF

6

, whether by the public or the private sector. With the suggestions, the Department requires as much of the following
information as possible: 

1. A description of the use or application, including a design description and/or flow sheet; material, fabrication,
product, and other specifications; and resulting wastes or effluents; 

2. The potential annual and total usage; 

3. The technical status of the use or application (that is, 

whether it is standard industrial practice; demonstrated on a 

bench or small scale, but not on an industrial scale; engineering, materials, or design development needed; etc.);


4. Facilities, equipment, other materials, and labor required; 

5. Environmental and health and safety approvals required; 

6. Any Government participation or funding required; 

7. Estimated cost, including research, development and demonstration; construction; operations; decontamination;
decommissioning; basis for estimates; and assumptions; product value, if any; and 

8. Proposed schedule including, research, development and demonstration; and operations. 

B. 

Technologies that could facilitate the long-term management of the depleted uranium. 

The Department requires as much of the following information as possible concerning the recommended technology:


1. The environmental, health and safety, and economic characteristics; 

2. A description of the technology and any processes or 

treatment, including a design description and/or flow sheet; material, fabrication, product, and other specifications;
and resulting wastes or effluents; 

3. The status of the technology and any required research, development or demonstration; 

4. Materials balance information and chemical composition of any wastes produced; 

5. Labor requirements for both construction and operation; 

6. Timing of research, development and demonstration; 

construction; and operation; 

7. Factors that might limit siting choices; 

8. Facilities, equipment, or materials required; and 

9. Estimated cost, including research, development and demonstration; construction; operations; product value,
if any; decontamination; decommissioning; basis for estimates; and assumptions. 

4. If any of the information supplied to the Department is proprietary, privileged and confidential commercial or
financial information, a trade secret, or otherwise exempt from public disclosure, it should be so designated and
the Department will protect this information in accordance with its standard procedures as prescribed in 10 CFR 1004.11
or other applicable law. The title page of the information should be marked with the restriction cited in the regulation.
Each page to be so restricted should be marked with the following legend: 

Use or disclosure of data contained on this sheet is subject to 

the restriction on the title page. 

5. A DOE Laboratory will prepare a report, based on evaluations by independent experts, on the responses to the request
for recommendations. After review of the laboratory report, responses DOE considers reasonable will be included
as alternatives for which environmental impacts will be assessed in the EIS. DOE will also initiate a study of the life
cycle costs of each EIS alternative. That study will also be considered, along with the final EIS, when DOE selects
a strategy from among these alternatives. 

6. This Request is solely for the information described above and is not for the purpose of obtaining recommendations
and/or proposals for research, development, and demonstration to be funded by the Government. 

7. Except as provided in paragraph 4, the written submissions from the public, industry, and other Government agencies
will be made available for public review at DOE Public Reading Room located in Room 1E190 at 1000 Independence
Avenue SW, Washington, DC 20585. 

8. Throughout this process, opportunities for public participation will be provided to discuss technologies submitted.
Comments will be requested on the criteria that the technical experts will use to evaluate responses to this Request
for Recommendations. 

9. In addition to the ANOI, DOE intends in the future to publish in the 

Federal Register

, a notice of intent to begin the scoping process for the preparation of the EIS on the selection of a strategy for the
long-term management of the depleted uranium hexafluoride. 

 


Issued in Washington, D.C. on this 26th day of October, 1994. 





<SIGNER>
Terry R. Lash, 


</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Director, Office of Nuclear Energy. 




</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9427781; Filed 11994; 8:45 am] 


</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 645001P 
</BILLING>





