 

3.4.1.4. Prospective (cohort, followup) studies.



In a prospective study design, a healthy 
group of people is assembled and followed forward in time and observed for the development 
of disease. Such studies are invaluable for determining the time course for development of 
disease (e.g., followup studies performed in various cities on the effects of lead on child 
development). This approach allows the direct estimate of risks attributed to a particular 
exposure since disease incidence rates in the cohort are determined and allows the study of 
chronic effects of exposure. One major strength of the cohort design is that it allows the 
calculation of rates to determine the excess risk associated with an exposure. Also, biases 
are reduced by obtaining information before the disease develops. This approach, however, 
can be very time-consuming and costly. 

In cohort studies information bias can be introduced when individuals provide 
distorted information about their health because they know their exposure status and may 
have been told of the expected health effects of the exposure under study. 

A special type of cohort study is the retrospective cohort study in which the 
investigator goes back in time to select the study groups and traces them over time, often to 
the present. The studies usually involve specially exposed groups and have provided much 
assistance in estimating risks due to occupational exposures. Occupational retrospective 
cohort studies rely on company records of past and current employees that include 
information on the dates of employment, age at employment, date of departure, and whether 
diseased (or dead in the case of mortality studies). Workers can then be classified by 
duration and degree of exposure. A retrospective cohort study was performed in which a 
cohort of 1,790 bricklayers and 2,601 men exposed to paint solvents was retrospectively 
identified and, if a disability pension had been awarded, the subjects were examined for 
evidence of presenile dementia. This study found a rate ratio of 3.4 for presenile dementia 
among the painters as compared with the bricklayers (Johnson, 1987). 



3.4.2. Human Laboratory Exposure Studies 



Neurotoxicity assessment has an advantage not afforded the evaluation of other toxic 
endpoints, such as cancer or reproductive toxicity, in that the effects of some chemicals are 
short in duration and reversible. Under certain circumstances, it is ethically possible to 
perform human laboratory exposure studies and obtain data relevant to the risk assessment 
process. Information from experimental human exposure studies has been used to set 
occupational exposure limits, mostly for organic solvents that can be inhaled. 

Laboratory exposure studies have contributed to risk assessment and the setting of 
exposure limits for several solvents and other chemicals with acute reversible effects. These 
chemicals include methylene chloride, perchloroethylene, trichloroethylene, and p-xylene 
(Dick and Johnson, 1986). 

Human exposure studies offer advantages over epidemiologic field studies. Combined 
with appropriate biological sampling (breath or blood), it is possible to calculate body 
concentrations, to examine toxicokinetics, and identify metabolites. Bioavailability, 
elimination, dose-related changes in metabolic pathways, individual variability, time course 
of effects, interactions between chemicals, interactions between chemical and 
environmental/biobehavioral factors (stressors, workload/respiratory rate) are some processes 
that can be evaluated in laboratory studies. 

Other goals of laboratory studies include the indepth characterization of effects, the 
development of new assessment methods, and the examination of the sensitivity, specificity, 
and reliability of neurobehavioral assessment methods across chemical classes. 

The laboratory is the most appropriate setting for the study of environmental and 
biobehavioral variables that affect the action of chemical agents. The effects of ambient 
temperature, task difficulty, the rate of ongoing behavior, conditioning variables, 
tolerance/sensitization, sleep deprivation, motivation, etc., can be studied. 





