 

 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY 




<CFRNO>40 CFR Part 52</CFRNO>



<RINDOCK>[IL2515289; FRL48876]</RINDOCK>



Approval and Promulgation of Implementation Plan; Illinois




<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Environmental Protection Agency.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Proposed rule.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) proposes conditional approval of the State Implementation
Plan (SIP) revision request submitted by the State of Illinois for the purpose of bringing about the attainment of
the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for particulate matter with an aerodynamic diameter less than
or equal to a nominal 10 micrometers (PM). The SIP revision request was submitted by the State to satisfy the Federal
requirement for an approvable nonattainment area PM SIP for the Lake Calumet, McCook, and Granite City nonattainment
areas. These areas were designated nonattainment for PM and classified as moderate by the Clean Air Act (Act), upon
enactment of the 1990 Amendments (amended Act). The Act requires that States submit plans by November 15, 1991 for
those areas designated nonattainment and classified as moderate for PM upon enactment (the ``initial moderate nonattainment
areas'').

</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES:

 Comments on this proposed rule must be received by June 24, 1994.



</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 Written comments should be addressed to:
J. Elmer Bortzer, Chief, Regulation Development Section, Regulation Development Branch (AR18J), United
States Environmental Protection Agency, 77 West Jackson Boulevard, Chicago, Illinois 60604.



</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 David Pohlman, Regulation Development Branch, Regulation Development Section (AR18J), U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, Region 5, Chicago, Illinois 60604, (312) 8863299. Reference file IL2515289.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 


I. Background 


The air quality planning requirements for moderate PM nonattainment areas are set out in title I of the Act
<FOOTCITE>

1

</FOOTCITE>
. The USEPA has issued a ``General Preamble'' describing USEPA's preliminary views on how USEPA intends to review
SIPs and SIP revisions submitted under title I of the Act, including those State submittals relating to moderate PM
nonattainment area SIP requirements (see generally 57 FR 13498 (April 16, 1992)). The reader should refer to the General
Preamble for a detailed discussion of the interpretations of title I and the supporting rationale.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


1

</FOOTNAME>
The 1990 Amendments to the Act made significant changes to the air quality planning requirements for areas that do
not meet (or that significantly contribute to ambient air quality in a nearby area that does not meet) the PM national
ambient air quality standards (see Pub. L. No. 101549, 104 Stat. 2399). References herein are to the Clean Air
Act, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 7401 

et seq.

 

</FOOTNOTE>


Part D of title I contains the provisions applicable to nonattainment areas. Moderate PM nonattainment areas must
meet the applicable requirements of subparts 1 and 4 of part D. Subpart 1 contains provisions generally applicable
to all nonattainment areas and subpart 4 contains provisions specifically applicable to PM nonattainment areas.
At times, Subparts 1 and 4 overlap or conflict. USEPA has attempted to clarify the relationship among these various
provisions in the General Preamble and, as appropriate, in this proposed rule.
Those States containing initial moderate PM nonattainment areas were required to submit, among other things, the
following provisions by November 15, 1991: 



1. Provisions to assure that reasonably available control measures (RACM) (including such reductions from existing
sources in the area as may be obtained through the adoption, at a minimum, of reasonably available control technology_RACT)
shall be implemented no later than December 10, 1993; 
2. Either a demonstration (including air quality modeling) that the plan will provide for attainment as expeditiously
as practicable but no later than December 31, 1994 or a demonstration that attainment by that date is impracticable;

3. Quantitative milestones which are to be achieved every 3 years and which demonstrate reasonable further progress
(RFP) toward attainment by December 31, 1994; and 
4. Control requirements applicable to major stationary sources of PM precursors except where the Administrator
determines that such sources do not contribute significantly to PM levels which exceed the NAAQS in the area. See sections
172(c), 188, and 189 of the Act.
Some additional provisions are due at a later date. States with initial moderate PM nonattainment areas were required
to submit a permit program for the construction and operation of new and modified stationary sources of PM by June 30,
1992 (see section 189(a) of the Act). Such States also were required to submit contingency measures by November 15,
1993 which become effective without further action by the State or USEPA, upon a determination by USEPA that the area
has failed to achieve RFP or to attain the PM NAAQS by the applicable statutory deadline (see section 172(c)(9) and
57 FR 1354313544).


II. This Action


Section 110(k) of the Act sets out provisions governing USEPA's review of SIP submittals (see 57 FR 1356513566).
USEPA proposes to conditionally approve the plan revision request submitted to USEPA on May 15, 1992, for the Lake
Calumet, McCook, and Granite City nonattainment areas because it strengthens the existing SIP. Public comments
are solicited on the requested SIP revision and on USEPA's proposed rulemaking action. The USEPA will consider any
comments received during the public comment period before taking final action on the requested SIP revision.


A. Analysis of State Submittal


1. Procedural Background


The Act requires States to observe certain procedural requirements in developing implementation plans for submission
to USEPA. Section 110(a)(2) of the Act provides that each implementation plan submitted by a State must be adopted
after reasonable notice and public hearing.
<FOOTCITE>

2

</FOOTCITE>
 Section 110(d) of the Act similarly provides that each revision to an implementation plan submitted by a State under
the Act must be adopted by such State after reasonable notice and public hearing.



<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


2

</FOOTNAME>
Also Section 172(c)(7) of the Act requires that plan provisions for nonattainment areas meet the applicable provisions
of section 110(a)(2).

</FOOTNOTE>


The State of Illinois held a public hearing on October 21, 1991, in Chicago, and on October 29, 1991, in Edwardsville,
Illinois to entertain public comment on the implementation plan for the Lake Calumet, McCook, and Granite City nonattainment
areas. Following the public hearing the plan was adopted by the Illinois Pollution Control Board on April 9, 1992.
The plan was submitted to USEPA on May 15, 1992, as a revision to the SIP, with a request that USEPA approve the revision.

 The USEPA must determine whether a submittal is complete and therefore warrants further USEPA review and action (see
section 110(k)(1) and 57 FR 13565). The USEPA's completeness criteria for SIP submittals are set out at 40 CFR part
51, appendix V (1991), as amended by 57 FR 42216 (August 26, 1991). The USEPA attempts to make completeness determinations
within 60 days of receiving a submittal. However, a submittal is deemed complete by operation of law if a completeness
determination is not made by USEPA 6 months after receipt of the submission.
The SIP revision was reviewed by USEPA to determine completeness shortly after its submittal, in accordance with
the completeness criteria set out at 40 CFR part 51, appendix V (1991), as amended by 57 FR 42216 (August 26, 1991). The
submittal was found to be complete and a letter dated June 25, 1992, was forwarded to the Manager, Division of Air Pollution
Control, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) indicating the completeness of the submittal and the
next steps to be taken in the review process.


2. Accurate Emissions Inventory


Section 172(c)(3) of the Act requires that nonattainment plan provisions include a comprehensive, accurate, current
inventory of actual emissions from all sources of relevant pollutants in the nonattainment area. Further, for the
attainment demonstration, the SIP must contain a comprehensive, accurate, and current inventory of allowable emissions
in the area. Because the submission of an emissions inventory is necessary to an area's attainment demonstration
(or demonstration that the area cannot practicably attain), the emissions inventory must be received with the submission
(see 57 FR 13539).
The emissions inventory for the three nonattainment areas contains emissions data for over 1000 process and fugitive
PM sources. The emissions inventory was received with the submittal of May 15, 1992. The base year for the emissions
inventory is 1991. A review of the emissions inventory has revealed that the emissions data for most emission units
are appropriate. However, USEPA has questioned the emission rates for several sources. The USEPA believes that Illinois
has underestimated emissions from the roof monitors for the Basic Oxygen Furnaces (BOFs) at Granite City Steel (GCS)
and Acme Steel; the quench towers at GCS, Acme Steel, and LTV Steel; the rotary kiln incinerator at CWM Chemical Services;
3 coal fired boilers at CPC International; and, 3 coal fired boilers at GM Electromotive Division. For further information
on the emissions rates, see the Technical Support Documents (TSDs) dated January 10, 1994, and April 25, 1994, available
at the above address.
A detailed description of the process and methodologies used by the IEPA to develop the emission inventory for the
three nonattainment areas was submitted in a report titled ``Emissions Inventory Report for McCook, Lake Calumet,
 Granite City PM Study Areas'' which is part of the docket for this requested SIP revision. The report indicates
that industrial facilities were the primary concern in the three nonattainment areas. These facilities include
metal manufacturers, mineral product manufacturers, food/agriculture facilities, and other PM emitters.


3. RACM (Including RACT)


As noted, states which contain initial moderate PM nonattainment areas must submit provisions to assure that RACM
(including RACT) are implemented no later than December 10, 1993 (see sections 172(c)(1) and 189(a)(1)(C)). The
General Preamble contains a detailed discussion of USEPA's interpretation of the RACM (including RACT) requirement
(see 57 FR 1353913545 and 1356013561). The USEPA's interpretation of this requirement is set out here
only in broad terms.
The State should first identify available control measures evaluating them for their reasonableness in light of
the feasibility of the controls and the attainment needs of the area. A State may reject an available control measure
if the measure is technologically infeasible or the cost of the control is unreasonable. The state must demonstrate
that its submitted provisions provide for attainment of the NAAQS as expeditiously as practicable but no later than
December 31, 1994 (unless the State demonstrates that attainment by that date is impracticable). Therefore, if a
State adopts less than all available measures but demonstrates, adequately and appropriately, that RFP and attainment
of the PM NAAQS is assured, and application of all such available measures would not result in attainment any faster,
then a plan which requires implementation of less than all available measures may be approved as meeting the RACM requirement.
As a suggested starting point, USEPA has identified reasonably available control measures for sources of fugitive
dust, residential wood combustion, and prescribed burning (see 57 FR 1807218074 (April 28, 1992)). The State
should add to the list of available measures in an area any measures that public commenters demonstrate may well be
reasonably available in a particular circumstance.
The RACT for a particular source is similarly determined. The USEPA's longstanding definition of RACT is the lowest
emission limitation that a particular source is capable of meeting by the application of control technology that
is reasonably available, considering technological and economic feasibility (see 57 FR 13541). Thus, USEPA recommends
that available control technology be applied to those existing sources in the area that are reasonable to control
in light of the attainment needs of the area and the feasibility of controls.
<FOOTCITE>

3

</FOOTCITE>




<FOOTNOTE>
<FOOTNAME>


3

</FOOTNAME>
USEPA has issued technological and economic parameters that should be considered in determining RACT for a particular
source (see 57 FR 1807318074).

</FOOTNOTE>


A State should submit a reasoned justification for partial or full rejection of any available control measure (including
any available control technology) that explains, with appropriate documentation, why each rejected control measure
is infeasible or otherwise unreasonable and, therefore, does not constitute RACM (or RACT) for the area. In those
PM nonattainment areas where mobile sources significantly contribute to the PM air quality problem, States also
must address the section 108(f) transportation control measures (see 57 FR 13561).
The submitted control measures for point sources in the Lake Calumet, McCook, and Granite City nonattainment areas
include a general grain loading limit of 0.03 grains per standard cubic foot (gr/scf), as well as control measures
for specific sources. The specific control measures consist of regulations that impose grain loading limits, pounds
per ton limits, and pounds per million british thermal units limits (lb/MMBTU). Other control measures for specific
sources are listed in sections 212.324, 212.362, 212.425, 212.458, and 212.464 of Title 35: Environmental Protection;
Subtitle B: Air Pollution; Chapter 1: Pollution Control Board, of the Illinois Administrative Code (35 IAC). The
new regulations impose tighter and more enforceable limits than the current SIP approved rules.
Compliance with the above mentioned point source limits will be determined by Method 201 or Method 201A of title 40
of the Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR part 51, appendix M or Method 5, 40 CFR part 60, appendix A. See 35 IAC 212.108.
The control measures for the area sources consist of opacity limits for roadways, crushing and screening operations,
storage piles, and some material handling operations such as truck loading. Rule 35 IAC 212.316(b) imposes a 10 percent
opacity limit on screening and crushing operations. There is a 10 percent or 5 percent opacity limit on roadways, depending
on the roadway's location. Rule 35 IAC 212.316(d) imposes a 10 percent opacity limit on storage piles. Rule 35 IAC 212.316(e)(2)
imposes additional opacity limits for marine terminals, including a 10 percent opacity limit on truck and railcar
loading. Rule 35 IAC 212.316(f) imposes a 20 percent opacity limit for all sources in the three nonattainment areas
except for certain metal manufacturing and agricultural sources. These regulations impose stricter limits than
the current SIP approved statewide 30 percent opacity limit.
Measurement of opacity from area sources other than roadways and parking areas shall be determined by Method 9, 40
CFR part 60, appendix A. Opacity determinations for roadways and parking areas shall be determined by taking 3 opacity
readings for each vehicle pass. The first reading will be taken at the point of maximum opacity. The second reading
will be taken 5 seconds later and the third reading will be taken another 5 seconds later. After 4 vehicle passes, the
12 readings will be averaged. See 35 IAC 212.109. 
 Illinois must resolve the emissions inventory issues raised in the preceding section and provide a modeled attainment
demonstration which reflects revisions to the emissions inventory. The measures determined to be necessary to demonstrate
attainment will be evaluated by USEPA to determine whether they meet the RACM/RACT requirement.



4. Attainment Demonstration


As noted, for its initial moderate PM nonattainment areas a state must submit a demonstration (including air quality
modeling) showing that the plan will provide for attainment as expeditiously as practicable but no later than December
31, 1994 (See section 189(a)(1)(B) of the Act). Alternatively, the State must show that attainment by December 31,
1994 is impracticable. In the General Preamble, USEPA indicated that the attainment demonstrations for the initial
moderate areas must follow existing modeling guidelines for PM or, if appropriate, may be developed consistent with
the supplemental attainment demonstration policy issued for initial moderate areas (see 57 FR 13539).
In the development of the three-area modeling analysis, IEPA followed a modeling protocol which had been reviewed
in 1990 by USEPA and found to be consistent with USEPA guidance. The following is a summary of the modeling details.
The Industrial Source Complex short and long term models (ISCST and ISCLT, respectively) were chosen for this analysis
for their ability to handle different source types at multiple locations. ISCST version 90346 was used to perform
the 24-hour PM analysis, and ISCLT version 90008 was used to predict annual PM concentrations. Based on land-use analyses,
IEPA used rural dispersion coefficients for the McCook and Granite City areas, and urban dispersion coefficients
for the Lake Calumet area. As recommended by USEPA guidance, IEPA placed receptors at a resolution of 100 meters at
fencelines and in areas where high impacts had been indicated.
For the Lake Calumet area, IEPA used 5 years of meteorological data from two stations operated by the Lake County (Indiana)
Attainment Task Force in Hammond and Whiting, IN. These sites are representative of the meteorological conditions
at Lake Calumet, since they are nearby and they account for the effects of Lake Michigan. If on-site meteorological
data is not available, USEPA requires the use of at least 5 years of quality-assured data from the nearest or most representative
meteorological site. This practice ensures that potential worst-case meteorological conditions will be identified
and considered in the modeling analysis. Five years of National Weather Service data from Midway Airport was used
for the McCook area, and five years of data from the St. Louis, Missouri airport was used for the Granite City area.
Illinois' emissions inventory included stack sources, process fugitive sources, and open fugitive dust sources.
Generally, Illinois modeled process fugitive sources as volume sources and open fugitive dust sources as area sources
in the ISCST and ISCLT models. Building downwash was considered for those sources affected by nearby building turbulence.
Roof monitors and coke ovens were modeled as series of volume sources. Nonbuoyant process fugitive emission sources
such as crushers, screens, and conveyors were treated as area sources. Open fugitive emissions caused by material
handling and vehicle traffic on both paved and unpaved roads were modeled as area sources. 
IEPA used a screening procedure to evaluate the air quality impacts of sources operating at load levels below maximum
design capacity. Some sources caused maximum impacts at loads less than full capacity. The short term analyses for
the final attainment demonstration employed stack parameters and emission rates which represented the load levels
which gave the greatest ambient impacts. The annual analyses used stack parameters and emission rates which represented
average operating conditions.
Background PM concentrations in the area were determined from local monitored data. Three monitors are located in
the McCook area, three are located in the Lake Calumet area, and five are located in the Granite City area. IEPA used
wind direction information to eliminate portions of the monitored data from the background calculations, in order
to avoid double-counting emissions due to sources explicitly modeled. Growth factors which were developed using
each county's projected increases in vehicular traffic were applied to the background concentrations. Daily background
concentrations were then added to the modeled 24-hour average concentrations to obtain the final predicted totals.
In the long term modeling, Illinois used a single annual background value. The average annual background concentrations
used were 34.08, 28.39, and 29.99 micrograms per cubic meter (&mu;g/m

3

) for the Lake Calumet, Granite City, and McCook nonattainment areas respectively. 
In the submitted modeled demonstrations, which use 5 years of meteorological data, a violation of the 24 hour NAAQS
is indicated when six exceedances of the 24 hour standard are predicted. The 24 hour PM standard is 150 &mu;g/m

3

. Each receptor's predicted sixth highest 24 hour value is, therefore, compared to the standard. The highest, sixth
highest predicted 24 hour PM concentration at any receptor in the McCook area was 145.6 micrograms per cubic meter
(&mu;g/m

3

), in the Lake Calumet area, 145.2 &mu;g/m

3

, and in the Granite City area, 147.8 &mu;g/m

3

. Thus, the modeling analysis predicts that the 24 hour NAAQS will be protected for all three areas. A modeled violation
of the annual PM standard is indicated when any receptor's 5 year arithmetic mean annual PM concentration exceeds
the annual PM standard of 50 &mu;g/m

3

. The highest arithmetic mean annual PM concentration predicted by the modeling for the McCook area was 49.9 &mu;g/m

3

, for the Lake Calumet area, 46.9 &mu;g/m

3

, and for the Granite City area, 49.0 &mu;g/m

3

. Therefore, the annual PM NAAQS will be protected in these areas.
Because of the length of time it may take to determine whether an area has attained the standards, USEPA recommends
that PM nonattainment area SIP submittals demonstrate maintenance of the PM NAAQS for at least 3 years beyond the applicable
attainment date. (See a August 20, 1991, memorandum from Fred H. Renner, Jr. to Regional Air Branch Chiefs titled ``Questions
and Answers for Particulate Matter, Sulfur Dioxide, and Lead'') While Illinois' submittal did take growth into account
in the modeling analysis, it did not adequately address maintenance of the NAAQS for PM in the nonattainment areas.

 The refined air quality modeling analysis supplied by IEPA in support of the Illinois PM plan indicates that the NAAQS
for PM will be protected under the proposed PM control strategies. As mentioned previously, Illinois must resolve
the issues pertaining to the emissions inventory and, where necessary, prepare a revised attainment demonstration
including a demonstration that the NAAQS will be maintained for 3 years beyond the attainment date. The control strategy
used to control PM emissions is summarized in the section of this notice titled ``RACM (including RACT)''. For a more
detailed description of the attainment demonstration and control strategy used, see the TSDs prepared in support
of this proposed rule.


5. PM Precursors


The control requirements which are applicable to major stationary sources of PM must also apply to major stationary
sources of PM precursors, unless USEPA determines such sources do not contribute significantly to PM levels which
exceed the NAAQS in that area (see section 189(e) of the Act). The control requirements that apply to major stationary
sources in PM nonattainment areas generally include the following: reasonably available control technology, which
applies in moderate PM nonattainment areas; best available control technology, which applies in serious PM nonattainment
areas; and control requirements under the applicable new source review provisions, such as the lowest achievable
emission rate. The General Preamble contains a lengthy discussion on control requirements for PM precursors in moderate
nonattainment areas and on the type of technical information USEPA will rely on in making any determinations under
section 189(e) (see 57 FR 1353913540 and 1354113542). 
 Weather stagnation is not characteristic of the three nonattainment areas. Reduction of precursor concentrations
would require reduction of indeterminately located sources well upwind of the nonattainment area. Control of precursors
in the nonattainment area would have little if any impact on particulate matter concentrations in the nonattainment
area. For this reason, it is appropriate to conclude that precursors do not contribute significantly to particulate
matter concentrations in the Lake Calumet, McCook, and Granite City nonattainment areas. Note that while USEPA is
making a general finding for this area, today's finding is based on the current character of the area including, for
example, the existing mix of sources in the area. It is possible, therefore, that future growth could change the significance
of precursors in the area. The USEPA intends to issue future guidance addressing such potential changes in the significance
of precursor emissions in an area.


6. Quantitative Milestones and Reasonable Further Progress (RFP)



The PM nonattainment area plan revisions demonstrating attainment must contain quantitative milestones, which
are to be achieved every 3 years, until the area is redesignated attainment. The plan must also demonstrate RFP, as
defined in section 171(1), toward attainment by December 31, 1994 (see section 189(c) of the Act). Reasonable further
progress is defined in section 171(1) as such annual incremental reductions in emissions of the relevant air pollutant
as are required by part D or may reasonably be required by the Administrator for the purpose of ensuring attainment
of the applicable NAAQS by the applicable date.
USEPA has indicated (see 57 FR 13539) that for the initial moderate PM nonattainment areas, the emissions reductions
progress made between the SIP submittal due date of November 15, 1991 and the attainment date of December 31, 1994,
(only 46 days beyond the November 15, 1994 milestone date) will satisfy the first milestone requirement. The de minimis
timing differential makes it administratively impracticable to require separate milestone and attainment demonstrations.
In implementing RFP for an initial moderate area, USEPA will review the attainment demonstration and control strategy
for the area and determine whether annual incremental reductions different from those provided in the SIP may reasonably
be required in order to ensure attainment of the PM NAAQS by December 31, 1994 (see section 171(1)). The control strategy
for the Lake Calumet, McCook, and Granite City nonattainment areas went into effect on May 11, 1993. At this time, it
is unknown if RFP has been achieved because a revised attainment demonstration is still pending. USEPA will make any
such determination in a separate action. 


7. Enforceability


All measures and other elements in the SIP must be enforceable both by the State and USEPA. See sections 172(c)(6),
110(a)(2)(A) and 57 FR 13556. The USEPA criteria addressing the enforceability of SIPs and SIP revisions were stated
in a September 23, 1987 memorandum (with attachments) from the Assistant Administrator for Air and Radiation, et.
al., entitled ``Review of State Implementation Plans and Revisions for Enforceability and Legal Sufficiency''
and with an attached memo with the same date and title which contained more detailed guidance from the Associate Enforcement
Counsel for Air Enforcement et. al. (see discussion at 57 FR 13541). The criteria include, for example, applicability
to sources, compliance date(s), compliance periods, test methods, recordkeeping requirements, and any exemptions
or variances. In addition to enforceable requirements, nonattainment area plan provisions must contain a program
that provides for enforcement of the control measures and other elements in the SIP (see section 110(a)(2)(C)). 
The particular control measures contained in the SIP are addressed above under the section headed ``RACM (including
RACT).'' These control measures apply to the types of activities identified in that discussion, including, for example,
grain loading limits, pound per ton limits, and lb/MMBTU limits for point sources and opacity limits for roadways
and storage piles. The SIP provides that these control measures apply to the areas defined in section 212.324(a)(1).
These areas match the Lake Calumet, McCook, and Granite City nonattainment areas.
The State of Illinois uses two approaches to regulate PM emissions, ``testing'' and ``observation''. Testing is
the common approach to control particulate matter from large process emission sources. In this approach the emission
limit is set as allowable concentration, e.g. grain/scf, or an allowable emission factor, e.g. lbs/ton throughput.
Compliance with the emission limit is evaluated by initial emissions testing using an appropriate method. For PM,
the appropriate test methods are Method 201 and Method 201A of 40 CFR part 51, appendix M or Method 5 of 40 CFR part 60,
appendix A. Method 202 of 40 CFR part 51, appendix M is used if condensibles is also to be tested. Besides emissions tests,
compliance is determined by a combination of techniques, including reviewing operating records, observation of
stack opacity, and monitoring of stack opacity. These techniques are used to assure that the equipment is being operated
in a manner that is consistent with that used during testing. If the manner of operation deviates significantly from
that used during testing, the equipment must be restored to the manner of operation used during testing or the equipment
must be tested again. There are recordkeeping and reporting requirements that are used to help verify proper operation
and maintenance of the control equipment.
The second approach to control of particulate matter emissions, relies solely on visual observation of the exhaust.
This ``observation'' approach is particularly relevant where existing or small sources are being considered. This
approach determines whether or not visible emissions from equipment have exceeded opacity limitations.
Upon review of Illinois' submittal, USEPA has identified several enforcement concerns. They are as follows:



a. On December 29, 1992, USEPA approved general opacity limitations for the State of Illinois. See 57 FR 61834. These
opacity limitations are found at subpart B under 35 IAC 212. Subpart B of 35 IAC 212 is a recodification of the former
Rule 202. These regulations impose a 30 percent opacity limit for most sources.
The coke oven regulations of the Illinois SIP exempt coke oven sources from all of Rule 202 of the State of Illinois Air
Pollution Control Regulations. This exemption in the state regulations was approved on September 3, 1981, (46 FR
44177) as Rule 203(d)(5)(B)(i) and is now codified as 35 IAC 212.443(a).
Currently, PM emissions from coke oven combustion stacks in Illinois are limited to 0.05 grains per dry standard cubic
foot (gr/dscf). USEPA conditionally approved this limit on September 3, 1981. Currently, coke oven combustion stacks
exist at LTV Steel, GCS, and Acme Steel. The LTV combustion stack is limited to a 0.03 gr/dscf by a Prevention of Significant
Deterioration (PSD) permit.
USEPA inspectors have observed emissions of greater than 60 percent opacity at the LTV Steel coke oven combustion
stack. As recent stack tests have confirmed, this stack is not in compliance with its mass limit while emitting at this
opacity. However, without the benefit of an opacity limit, enforcement was delayed for months until stack test results
were obtained, even after high opacity emissions were observed. An opacity limit on this stack will better assure
compliance with the grain loading limit.
To better assure compliance with the grain loading limit, the State needs to impose an opacity limit on the coke oven
combustion stacks that is reflective of their mass emission limit. 
b. USEPA considers the rules that apply to the electric arc furnace roof vents at American Steel Foundries to be unenforceable
because the stacks can not be tested for compliance. IEPA should develop an enforceable limit that is reflective of
the emissions which are in the modeled attainment demonstration.
c. Section 212.107, Measurement Methods for Visible Emissions, states that Method 22 should be used for ``detection
of visible emissions''. This could be misinterpreted as requiring use of Method 22 for sources subject to opacity
limits as well as sources subject to limits on detectability of visible emissions. USEPA recommends revising the
language of the rule to state that ``For both process emission sources and fugitive particulate matter sources, a
determination as to the presence or absence of visible emissions shall be in accordance with Method 22 ...''.
d. Measurement methods for opacity, visible emissions, and ``PM'' are in section 212.110, and in separate sections
212.107, 212.108, and 212.109. The measurement methods in these sections are not always consistent with each other.
USEPA recommends that the measurement methods in 212.107, 212.108, and 212.109 be integrated with section 212.110.
e. Several of the submitted rules contain language which exempts sources with no visible emissions from mass emissions
limits. It is USEPA's understanding that the State intends for these exemptions to apply to small, well-controlled
sources. However, the way the exemptions are worded, they could be misinterpreted to exclude many other sources from
mass emissions limits. The rules containing these exemptions need to be more clear about exactly what sources are
to be exempt, and when.


8. Contingency Measures


As provided in section 172(c)(9) of the Act, all moderate nonattainment area SIPs that demonstrate attainment must
include contingency measures. See generally 57 FR 1354313544. These measures were required to be submitted
by November 15, 1993 for the initial moderate nonattainment areas. On January 21, 1994, the USEPA made a finding that
Illinois had failed to submit the required PM contingency measures. If Illinois does not make a complete submission
of these contingency measures within 18 months of the findings letter, USEPA will be mandated to use its authority
under section 179(a) of the Act to impose at least one sanction identified in section 179(b) of the Act in the affected
nonattainment areas. Contingency measures should consist of other available measures that are not part of the area's
current control strategy. These measures must take effect without further action by the State or USEPA, upon a determination
by USEPA that the area has failed to make RFP or attain the PM NAAQS by the applicable statutory deadline. The USEPA will
take separate rulemaking action on the contingency plan for the Lake Calumet, McCook, and Granite City nonattainment
areas.


III. USEPA's Proposed Rulemaking Action


The USEPA proposes to grant conditional approval to the plan revision submitted to USEPA by the State of Illinois on
May 15, 1992, for the Lake Calumet, McCook, and Granite City PM nonattainment areas. Illinois' requested SIP revision
does not include a complete and accurate emissions inventory, which, in turn, leads to an unacceptable attainment
demonstration. However, the submitted regulations do require stricter limitations than the current applicable
SIP.
The conditional approval is based on the State's enforceable commitment to meet five requirements within one year
from the date of final conditional approval. The State submitted a letter on March 2, 1994, committing to meet these
requirements within one year of final conditional approval. The first requirement is for the State to adopt additional
enforceable control measures, if necessary, that will achieve attainment. The second requirement is for the State
to submit a complete and accurate emissions inventory (including corrected emissions estimates, as well as any new
control measures which may be needed) and an acceptable modeled attainment demonstration. The third requirement
is for the State to impose an opacity limit for coke oven combustion stacks which is reflective of their mass emission
limits. The fourth requirement is for the State to provide an appropriate regulation for the electric arc furnaces
at American Steel Foundries. The fifth requirement is for the State to correct the three other enforcement concerns
listed above as c-e under the heading ``Enforceability''. 
If the State ultimately fails to meet its commitment within one year of final conditional approval, then USEPA's action
for the State's requested SIP revision will automatically convert to a final limited approval/disapproval. The
limited approval would entail approval of the submitted regulations into the Illinois SIP for their strengthening
effect, and disapproval of the attainment demonstration and the emissions inventory. 


IV. Request for Public Comments


USEPA is requesting comments on all aspects of this proposed rule. As indicated at the outset of this notice, USEPA
will consider any comments received by June 24, 1994.


V. Processing Procedures


This action has been classified as a Table 2 action by the Regional Administrator under the procedures published in
the 

Federal Register

 on January 19, 1989 (54 FR 22142225). On January 6, 1989, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) waived Table
2 and Table 3 SIP revisions (54 FR 2222) from the requirements of section 3 of Executive Order 12991 for a period of 2 years.
The USEPA has submitted a request for a permanent waiver for Table 2 and 3 SIP revisions. The OMB has agreed to continue
the waiver until such time as it rules on USEPA's request. This request is still applicable under Executive Order 12866.
Nothing in this action should be constructed as permitting, allowing, or establishing a precedent for any future
request for revision to any SIP. Each request for revision to any SIP shall be considered separately in light of specific
technical, economic, and environmental factors and in relation to relevant statutory and regulatory requirements.


VI. Regulatory Flexibility Act


Under the Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 600 

et seq.

, USEPA must prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis assessing the impact of any proposed or final rule on small
entities. 5 U.S.C. 603 and 604. Alternatively, USEPA may certify that the rule will not have a significant economic
impact on a substantial number of small entities. Small entities include small businesses, small not-for-profit
enterprises, and government entities with jurisdiction over populations of less than 50,000.
SIP approvals under section 110 and subchapter I, part D of the Act do not create any new requirements, but simply approve
requirements that the State is already imposing. Therefore, because the Federal SIP-approval does not impose any
new requirements, I certify that it does not have a significant impact on small entities affected. Moreover, due to
the nature of the Federal-state relationship under the Act, preparation of a regulatory flexibility analysis would
constitute Federal inquiry into the economic reasonableness of state action. The Act forbids USEPA to base its actions
concerning SIPs on such grounds. 

Union Electric Co.

 v. 

U.S. E.P.A.

, 427 U.S. 246, 25666 (S.Ct. 1976); 42 U.S.C. 7410(a)(2). 


List of Subjects in 40 CFR Part 52


Environmental protection, Air pollution control, Intergovernmental relations, Particulate matter, Reporting
and recordkeeping requirements.





Authority:

 42 U.S.C. 74017671q.




Dated: May 12, 1994.
 


</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Michelle D. Jordan,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Regional Administrator.



</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9412769 Filed 52494; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 656050F
</BILLING>


