 

In addition, the Commission amended the rules governing the paging response channels to provide that four channels
will be available on an MTA basis and four on a BTA basis. The Commission stated that designating response channels
at the MTA level as well as at the BTA level will make it easier for operators of wider area local and regional systems
to upgrade and coordinate their paging operations.

5. 

Multiple licenses.

 PageMart requested that the limit on acquisition of multiple licenses be reconsidered, arguing that some licensees
could hold 300 kHz (three 50 kHz paired channels) and that other licensees would be restricted to significantly less
spectrum because each license is for a smaller channel. PageMart also requested that the Commission clarify that
existing paging spectrum held by licensees not be counted toward the limit and that existing paging licensees be limited
to two paging response channels per geographic area. In response, the Commission clarified that licensees are limited
to a total of three licenses, excluding the response channels reserved for the upgrade of exiting paging systems and
also excluding existing paging spectrum. Additionally, the Commission clarified application of the multiple ownership
limits by defining narrowband PCS licensees as persons or entities with an ownership interest of five or more percent
in an entity holding a narrowband PCS license. The Commission agreed with PageMart that the conditions for use of the
paging response channels required clarification and thus specified that an ``existing'' paging licensee means
a paging licensee authorized under parts 22 or 90 as of June 24, 1993, that the existing paging licensee must operate
at least one base station in the MTA or BTA for which it requests a response channel, and that the response channels may
be used only for mobile-to-base transmissions. The Commission limited existing paging licensees to two response
channels per geographic area, stating that this will allow an opportunity for existing paging licensees to provide
acknowledgement and messaging capability.

6. 

Construction requirement.

 Mtel requested that a population-based construction requirement be adopted as an alternative to the geographic
coverage standard, arguing that such a standard would emphasize service to the public. In related requests, PageMart
and PageNet asked that the method for counting base stations that serve less than 3000 km

2

 be clarified so that a licensee can be certain when it has satisfied its construction obligations. In response to these
petitions, the Commission amended the construction requirements as follows. Nationwide narrowband PCS licensees
shall construct base stations that provide coverage to a composite area of 750,000 square kilometers or serve 37.5
percent of the U.S. population within five years of initial license grant date; and, shall construct base stations
that provide coverage to a composite area of 1,500,000 square kilometers or serve 75 percent of the U.S. population
within ten years of initial license grant date. Regional narrowband PCS licensees shall construct base stations
that provide coverage to a composite area of 150,000 square kilometers or serve 37.5 percent of the population of the
service area within five years of initial license grant date; and, shall construct base stations that provide coverage
to a composite area of 300,000 square kilometers or serve 75 percent of the service area population within ten years
of initial license grant date. MTA narrowband PCS licensees shall construct base stations that provide coverage
to a composite area of 75,000 square kilometers or 25 percent of the geographic area, or serve 37.5 percent of the population
of the service area within five years of initial license grant date; and, shall construct base stations that provide
coverage to a composite area of 150,000 square kilometers or 50 percent of the geographic are, or serve 75 percent of
the population of the service area within ten years of initial license grant date. The Commission stated that these
new coverage requirements eliminate the need to specify a specific number of stations and eliminate any previous
ambiguity that may have occurred for base stations serving less than 3000 km

2

. The Commission also stated that by including alternative population coverage requirements, it can better ensure
that licensees provide new and better service to the public, that such service is implemented promptly, and that the
spectrum is efficiently utilized. The BTA construction requirement was not amended.


