 

The impact of the proposed school lunch rule on the pork market is also expected to be minimal under the first and second
scenarios. This is because much of the pork already in use in the school lunch program is lean pork such as ham. Total
use of pork in the school lunch program would increase 16 million pounds or remain the same in the first and second scenarios.
The school lunch program's current use of 280 million pounds represents a small fraction of the total U.S. market of
17.3 billion pounds. Hence, the 16 million pound increase would boost prices a minimal 0.2 percent. Farm revenues
would increase $11 million or 0.1 percent of their existing revenues. There are no government support programs directly
associated with the pork industry and hence no budget implications. 


Fruit, Vegetable, and Potato Market Impacts 


The impacts of the proposed rule on the fruit, vegetable, and potato markets would be small under the first and second
scenarios. Schools use these products in a variety of forms, including fresh, frozen, canned, and as components of
commercially processed mixtures. Total usage of fruits in the school lunch program would increase 718 million pounds
under the first scenario and over 1.1 billion pounds under the second. Both represent less than 2 percent of the 61.1
billion pound U.S. fruit market. Under scenario one, prices would increase 0.1 percent and farm revenues increase
1.2 percent or $124 million in a $10.2 billion market. Impacts under the second scenario are slightly larger, with
prices up 0.2 percent and revenues up $200 million. 
Use of vegetables in the program would increase 89 million pounds under the first scenario and 35 million pounds under
the second in a 71 billion pound U.S. market. Under the first and second scenarios, price increases would be negligible
and farm revenue gains would be $512 million or less than 0.1 percent of industry revenues. Use of potatoes in
the program would decline 298 million pounds under the first and second scenarios in response to fewer french fry offerings.
These reductions are expected to have a little or no impact on the 34 billion pound U.S. potato market. Reduced potato
usage would result in 0.1 percent decline in potato prices and a comparable $20 million reduction in farm revenues.
The School Nutrition Dietary Assessment Study found that potatoes are often fried or prepared with a significant
amount of added fat. The sample menus developed for the food cost analysis show that lower-fat potato dishes can be
readily used under nutrient standard menu planning. As with chicken in scenario two, a more pronounced shift towards
use of lower-fat potato preparation or other lower-fat items by schools could further moderate the impacts on the
potato market. 



