 

(i) Prior to further flight, perform a torque check of the nut in accordance with the service bulletin. If the torque
is outside of the range specified in the service bulletin, prior to further flight, replace the nut with a new nut having
part number NAS1805 and associated washer. 
(ii) Repeat the inspection for migration of bolts with nuts having part number BACN10JC at intervals not to exceed
2,100 flight hours. Repeat the inspection for migration of bolts with nuts having part number NAS1805 at intervals
not to exceed 3,200 flight hours. 
(2) If the inspection required by paragraph (a) of this AD indicates that the bolt has migrated, accomplish paragraph
(b)(2)(i) of this AD, and either paragraph (b)(2)(ii) or paragraph (b)(2)(iii), as applicable: 
(i) Prior to further flight, remove the nut and replace it with a new nut having part number NAS1805 and associated washer,
in accordance with the service bulletin. Thereafter, repeat the inspection for migration of these bolts at intervals
not to exceed 3,200 flight hours. 
(ii) Except as provided by paragraph (b)(2)(iii) of this AD: Prior to further flight, remove the bolt and visually
inspect it for damage, in accordance with Part V of the service bulletin; and visually inspect the bolt bushings for
damage, in accordance with Part III of the service bulletin. If the bolt is damaged, prior to further flight, replace
the bolt with a new bolt having the same part number. If the bushings are damaged, prior to further flight, replace the
bushings. 
(iii) The inspections of the bolt and bolt bushings required by paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this AD may be deferred for
a maximum of 3,200 flight hours, provided that all of the following apply: 
(A) The bolt is visually inspected for thread damage as described in Part IV of the service bulletin and no damage is
found; and 
(B) The nut threads are still fully engaged with the bolt; and 
(C) The migrated bolt has not contacted adjacent structure or systems; and 
(D) The bolt is repositioned back to clamp-up position, as described in Part IV of the service bulletin. 
(c) For airplanes equipped with a steel retention bracket installed in accordance with Boeing Service Bulletin 747712192
or its production equivalent, accomplish the following: 
(1) If the inspection required by paragraph (a) of this AD indicates that the bolt has not migrated, accomplish paragraphs
(c)(1)(i) and (c)(1)(ii) of this AD: 
(i) Prior to further flight, ensure that the washer on the nut side does not rotate freely. If the washer rotates freely,
prior to further flight, replace the nut with a new nut having part number NAS1805 and associated washer. 
(ii) Repeat the inspection for migration of bolts with nuts having part number BACN10JC at intervals not to exceed
3,200 flight hours. Repeat the inspection for migration of bolts with nuts having part number NAS1805 at intervals
not to exceed 6,000 flight hours. 
(2) If the inspection required by paragraph (a) of this AD indicates that the bolt has migrated, accomplish paragraph
(c)(2)(i) of this AD, and either paragraph (c)(2)(ii) or paragraph (c)(2)(iii), as applicable: 
(i) Prior to further flight, remove the nut and replace it with a new nut having part number NAS1805 and associated washer,
in accordance with the service bulletin. Thereafter, repeat the inspection for migration of these bolts at intervals
not to exceed 6,000 flight hours. 
(ii) Except as provided by paragraph (c)(2)(iii) of this AD: Prior to further flight, remove the bolt and visually
inspect it for damage, in accordance with Part V of the service bulletin; and visually inspect the bolt bushings for
damage, in accordance with Part III of the service bulletin. If the bolt is damaged, prior to further flight, replace
the bolt with a new bolt having the same part number. If the bushings are damaged, prior to further flight, replace the
bushings. 
(iii) The inspections of the bolt and bolt bushings required by paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this AD may be deferred for
a maximum of 3,200 flight hours, provided that all of the following apply: 
(A) The bolt is visually inspected for thread damage, as described in Part IV of the service bulletin, and no damage
is found; and 
(B) The nut threads are still fully engaged with the bolt; and 
(C) The migrated bolt has not contacted adjacent struture or systems; and 
(D) The bolt is repositioned back to clamp-up position, as described in Part IV of the service bulletin. 
(d) An alternative method of compliance or adjustment of the compliance time that provides an acceptable level of
safety may be used if approved by the Manager, Seattle Aircraft Certification Office (ACO). Operators shall submit
their requests through an appropriate FAA Principal Maintenance Inspector, who may add comments and then send it
to the Manager, Seattle ACO. 





Note:

 Information concerning the existence of approved alternative methods of compliance with this AD, if any, may be obtained
from the Seattle ACO. 



(e) Special flight permits may be issued in accordance with sections 21.197 and 21.199 of the Federal Aviation Regulations
(14 CFR 21.197 and 21.199) to operate the airplane to a location where the requirements of this AD can be accomplished.

(f) The actions shall be done in accordance with Boeing Alert Service Bulletin 74771A2269, dated April 14,
1994. This incorporation by reference was approved by the Director of the Federal Register in accordance with 5 U.S.C.
552(a) and 1 CFR Part 51. Copies may be obtained from Boeing Commercial Airplane Group, P.O. Box 3707, Seattle, Washington
981242207. Copies may be inspected at the FAA, Transport Airplane Directorate, 1601 Lind Avenue SW., Renton,
Washington; or at the Office of the Federal Register, 800 North Capitol Street NW., suite 700, Washington, DC. 
(g) This amendment becomes effective on May 31, 1994.

 

Issued in Renton, Washington, on May 6, 1994. 


<SIGNER>
S.R. Miller, 

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Manager, Transport Airplane Directorate, Aircraft Certification Service. 

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9411522 Filed 51394; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 491013P
</BILLING>


