 

Important Notice to Prospective Participants in U.S. Department of Education Contract and Grant Programs



Grants



Applicants for grants from the U.S. Department of Education (ED) have to compete for limited funds.

Deadlines assure all applicants that they will be treated fairly and equally, without last minute haste.

For these reasons, ED must set strict deadlines for grant applications. Prospective applicants can avoid disappointment
if they understand that failure to meet a deadline will mean that an applicant will be rejected without any consideration
whatever.

The rules, including the deadline, for applying for each grant are published, individually, in the 

Federal Register. 

A one-year subscription to the 

Federal Register

 may be obtained by sending $340.00 to: Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington,
DC 202029371. (Send check or money order only, no cash or stamps.)

The instructions in the 

Federal Register

 must be followed exactly. Do not accept any other advice you may receive. No ED employee is authorized to extend any
deadline published in the 

Federal Register

.

Questions regarding submission of applications may be addressed to: U.S. Department of Education, Application
Control Center, Washington, DC 202024725.



Contracts



Competitive procurement actions undertaken by ED are governed by the Federal Procurement Regulations and implementing
ED Procurement Regulations.

Generally, prospective competitive procurement actions are synopsized in the Commerce Business Daily (CBD). Prospective
offerors are therein advised of the nature of the procurement and where to apply for copies of the Request for Proposals
(RFP).

Offerors are advised to be guided solely by the contents of the CBD synopsis and the instructions contained in the RFP.
Questions regarding the submission of offers should be addressed to the Contracting Specialist identified on the
face page of the RFP.

Offers are judged in competition with others, and failure to conform with any substantive requirements of the RFP
will result in rejection of the offer without any consideration whatever.

Do not accept any advice you receive that is contrary to instructions contained in either the CBD synopsis or the RFP.
No ED employee is authorized to consider a proposal which is non-responsive to the RFP.

A subscription to the CBD is available for $208.00 per year via second class mailing or $261.00 per year via first class
mailing. Information included in the Federal Acquisition Regulations is contained in Title 48, Code of Federal Regulations,
Chapter 1 ($49.00). The foregoing publication may be obtained by sending your check or money order only, no cash or
stamps, to: Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 204029371.

In an effort to be certain this important information is widely disseminated, this notice is being included in all
ED mail to the public. You may, therefore, receive more than one notice. If you do, we apologize for any annoyance it
may cause you.




<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9415505 Filed 62494; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 400001P
</BILLING>


