 

D. Implement Data Base of Taxpayer Identification Numbers 


Amendments to the Federal Crop Insurance Act enacted in 1990 authorize FCIC to collect and use social security numbers
and employer identification numbers to administer its programs. These regulations were appropriately approved
and were published in the 

Federal Register

 in late 1992. OBRA 93 further directed FCIC to implement a database of these numbers for certain uses not later than
the 1995 crop year. 
FCIC implemented the database described above in January 1994, effective for the 1994 crop year. This database is
used to locate production history that is not reported by a person to assure that classifications assigned under the
nonstandard classification system (NCS_see paragraph E below) are used for both the individual who accumulated
the adverse history and any person having a significant beneficial interest in a crop produced by that person, and
for other related purposes. In particular, further efforts will be made to accumulate information about persons
involved in sales and servicing of crop insurance_agents, loss adjusters, and other insurance providers_so that
their contributions to achieving the target loss ratio can be measured. 
Implementing this database will make both modified-APH and the NCS more effective by permitting FCIC and reinsured
companies to assure that all appropriate experience and premium rating factors are used. Incremental improvement
in the loss ratio due to modified-APH and NCS is difficult to quantify. The database will enhance those programs as
well as permit FCIC to systematically measure the performance of insurance providers for the first time. 
FCIC will also use the social security numbers and employer identification numbers for the implementation of an Ineligible
File Tracking System. This system will be used to restrict (through an automated environment) producers who have
been declared ineligible to obtain benefits provided by the Federal crop insurance program. The FCIC expects to implement
the Ineligible File Tracking System beginning with the 1995 fiscal year. 


E. Expand the Nonstandard Classification System (NCS) 


FCIC instituted the NCS for the 1990 crop year because evidence indicated that a small percentage of insured persons
had losses in nearly every year. The losses paid to these persons far exceeded paid premiums. For various reasons,
the insured yields for these individuals exceeded their apparent capabilities, and the premium rates were not representative
of the risks posed by these persons. NCS was intended to reduce the insurance guarantee and increase the premium rate
for such individuals. Modified-APH eliminates the need to reduce insured yields because the insured yield will be
based solely on actual yields when a person is selected for NCS. However, NCS will continue to increase the premium
rates as appropriate for those individuals who persistently have losses. 
The Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug, and Related Agencies Appropriation Act for the 1994 fiscal year
prohibited FCIC from using any funds appropriated to insure crops in certain counties unless an NCS program had been
implemented in those counties. Counties were affected if the loss ratio, after applying the 1993 premium rates, was
greater than 1.10 more than 70 percent of the years that the crop had been insured in that county. Approximately 2,100
county crop programs were affected by this provision. 
For the 1994 crop year, NCS has been extended to 11 crops encompassing over 90 percent of the total value of insurance
in force. Additionally, all of the county crop programs affected by the Appropriations language have been included
under the NCS. Over 25,000 individuals (about 3.6 percent of all active policies for the 1993 crop year) were included
under this program. Not all of these persons had been insured during the base period. NCS also extends to persons who
participated in growing the crop in some way but who may not have been insured. These persons also are classified under
NCS so that the acreage cannot simply be insured under a different name to avoid the NCS classification. 
In 1993, FCIC commissioned a study of the NCS to determine its effectiveness. A draft report of that study indicates
that the NCS reduced the loss ratio by 5 to 10 points. This report is undergoing final preparation as this Blueprint
for Financial Soundness is finalized. 
FCIC will expand the NCS program for the 1995 crop year. All eligible crops will be included, although greater flexibility
in selections may be authorized whenever program factors that led to poor experience have been identified. NCS is
not suited to certain insured crops (e.g., Texas citrus trees) that are subject to infrequent losses of great severity.
The additional savings from NCS are likely to be small in terms of the total business because the crops that constitute
the majority of premiums and losses already are included. 


F. Institute Premium Rate Adjustments 


Premium rates are essential to the success of the crop insurance program. Rates that are too low will not produce adequate
income and will lead to persistent losses. High rates will, paradoxically, likely lead to the same outcome. Excessive
premium rates discourage participation by a broadly based cross-section of the farming community. Instead, persons
who are most likely to collect indemnities will buy, and it is not likely that rates can be increased as rapidly as the
relative risk of the pool of insured persons increases. 
FCIC has increased premium rates for all crops in a systematic fashion beginning with the 1991 crop year. Rates have
increased as much as 70 percent for some crops in some counties from the 1991 to the 1994 crop years. Decreases of up to
20 percent have been made for some crops in counties with histories of low losses. By an amendment to the Act in 1990,
Congress limited general premium rate increases to 20 percent annually. 
The above statistics indicate the amounts that FCIC has increased the base premium rates. The average premium rate
actually earned (actual premium paid divided by actual liability) may not have increased by the same magnitude for
various reasons. Most importantly, insured persons may choose a lower coverage level when the rate increases. By
doing so, they accept a lesser degree of protection but also pay a lower premium rate. 
FCIC proposes to continue premium rate increases as needed to help achieve the required loss ratio. The rate increases
made during 19911994 have done much to enhance the actuarial soundness of the program. However, the premium
rates for some crops and areas of the country remain below the levels needed to achieve the overall 1.10 loss ratio target.

The impact of premium rate adjustments has been evaluated by using data for the 20 years from 19731992. The effectiveness
of the adjustments was measured by applying the current 1993 premium rate levels to the historical period from 1973
and all subsequent years. The loss ratios were recalculated by using the revised premium amounts. 
This method does not include any change in sales that may occur due to a higher or lower cost of insurance. It assumes
the 20-year base period is adequate to measure actuarial performance, an assumption that may not be the most appropriate
definition of actuarial soundness. Events such as a 1993 Midwestern flood may or may not be appropriate to include
in the 20-year base period for a particular area of the country. 
In 1993, seven crops (barley, corn, cotton, grain sorghum, oats, soybeans, and wheat) constituted 75 percent of total
premiums. The loss ratio for 19801992 for these seven crops was 1.45, identical to the loss ratio for all insured
crops for this same period. Thus, changes in premium rates for these crops should be representative of the changes
that have been made for all crops in recent years. The premium rate changes for the seven crops through the 1994 crop
year are estimated to have been adequate to reduce the 19801992 loss ratio from 1.45 to 1.08. This aggregate
result meets the 1.10 standard required by OBRA 93, but only two of the seven crops individually meet this standard.
Within each of these crops, many parts of the country will meet the standard but others will not. Hence, additional
rate changes in 1995 and later years are appropriate. 
FCIC recognizes that premium rate increases are an important component of a viable crop insurance program. It is also
recognized that increasing premium rates to the levels suggested by the most recent 20 year experience may not be good
public policy. Extremely high premium rates will preclude realization of the social benefits and public policy goals
of the program because participation will be discouraged. If this happens, experience indicates that ad hoc disaster
assistance will be enacted. Such assistance is less likely to satisfy social objectives with regard to maintaining
rural communities and adequate supplies of food and fiber because it is uncertain for any particular year or region
of the country. Thus, a catastrophic adjustment process may be needed to temper the influence of a year such as 1993.
If the weather of 1993 truly is a 1 in 100 year event (or, as some have suggested, a 1 in 500 year event), its influence should
be tempered in terms of the premium rates charged to insured persons.

