 



Comment 3:

 The following comments were made by several commenters. They all address additional activities that the commenters
felt should be developed to protect right whales, or activities that should be prohibited, restricted or modified,
primarily in the SEUS, to protect the whales further. These comments are addressed together. 

a. Many commenters indicated that restrictions or modifications of shipping lanes and shipping practices need to
be made at the time of designation. The suggested modifications or changes included the seasonal relocation of shipping
lanes, a requirement that vessels entering or leaving ports adjacent to the right whale winter grounds use direct
routes (perpendicular to the shoreline at the port entrance) from December 1 through March 31, restriction of shipping
and vessel speeds to allow whales to avoid oncoming ships or allow ships to avoid hitting whales, and a requirement
of dedicated onboard observers to maintain watch so that vessel collisions with right whales are avoided when ships
are transiting through right whale wintering habitats during months when the whales occupy these habitats. 

b. Several commenters recommended the development of education programs for shipping and public interests. Others
suggested that NMFS provide to the shipping companies illustrated instructions (in many languages) on the importance
of protecting right whales in these waters, and on safe vessel operation in the winter calving areas. They further
suggested that these instructions be posted for the crews of all ships operating in U.S. waters, and that these safety
measures should be enforced. It was suggested that the U.S. Coast Guard should include whale safety in its small boating
course, and in required courses for commercial captains and boat operators. 

c. Several commenters suggested that NMFS should define right whale critical habitat boundaries on NOAA navigational
charts, and the notice of the designation and occurrence of whales need to be included seasonally in the Notice to Mariners
and other publications, alerting shipping interests to the potential presence of right whales in the area at certain
times. 

d. Several commenters recommended that NMFS ban dredging and seabed mining in the right whale calving grounds and
feeding grounds, and along the entire migratory route. Many comments supported restrictions on dredging, if necessary,
to protect right whales; gas and oil exploration and the dumping of contaminated waste within the calving areas described
by the critical habitat boundaries; dumping of contaminated dredge spoils and industrial waste; and the construction
of submerged or emergent structures within known right whale habitats. 

e. Several commenters suggested that the discharge of pollutants at the mouths of rivers that empty into the calving
grounds should be monitored for possible effects on the habitat. 



Response:

 Regarding comments 3a.3c., the Southeastern U.S. Right Whale Recovery Plan Implementation Team (see Comment
1) formed committees to examine many of the issues discussed in the comments. Committees that were formed cover the
following topics: Education/Awareness; Early Warning Surveys/Communication; Funding of Surveys; Research;
and Relocation of Ocean Disposal Sites. A second meeting of the Implementation Team occurred on December 14, 1993;
the following updates from each of the committees are summarized from that meeting. 

Education/Awareness Committee: The Canaveral Port Authority developed an endangered species pamphlet covering
whales, manatees and turtles, which is being distributed regionally. As a group, the Port Authorities developed
a series of posters describing the time right whales are in their waters, a phone number to contact if a whale is seen,
and mention of right whale habitat. This poster is being distributed by the harbor pilots when they board a vessel for
navigation. 

A standard brochure on right whales in the SEUS has been developed with input from the Georgia DNR, Florida DEP, New
England Aquarium and others. The brochure is designed for boaters (commercial and public), but is also to be given
to ship masters by harbor pilots. The Port Authorities, U.S. Coast Guard, U.S. Navy, Georgia DNR and Florida DEP can
use this brochure to increase public awareness and education. Financial support for this brochure comes from the
participating agencies. 

The Georgia DNR and U.S. Coast Guard developed a local Notice to Mariners about right whale calving grounds. This notice
is broadcast four times daily by the U.S. Coast Guard on VHF. Broadcasts ran from December 6, 1993, through March 31,
1994. A slightly longer version is published in the local Weekly Notice to Mariners. This notice may also be published
daily, along with the tides and weather, in regional newspapers. The Annual Notice to Mariners also has information
on this subject. 

Several press releases were issued beginning when the first right whales were sighted on December 4, 1993. A regional
press release was also issued describing the implementation team, members, persons to contact if a whale is seen and
other information on the need for protection of right whales in the SEUS. 

The University of Georgia is surveying local groups to ensure that there is no duplication in the development of educational
materials on right whales, and to provide a network to combine and coordinate efforts. 

The Savannah Area Chamber of Commerce suggested that treating a sighted right whale as though it were another ship
(slowing down, changing course and anchoring to avoid collisions with right whales) should be formalized for all
ports in the southeast (i.e., treating right whales as vessels under the nautical rules of the road). They further
stated that injury to, and interference with, right whales can best be avoided by continuing the education of ship's
captains, and through ongoing cooperation between the port, its pilots and the Georgia DNR. 

Early Warning and Communication Committee: An early warning network has been developed with aerial surveys at the
core of the network (see Comment 2). A communication flow chart has been developed to illustrate how information regarding
whale sightings should be channeled between the appropriate agencies/groups. This is currently considered the
best communication scheme for relaying right whale sightings from aircraft to land-based stations, and back to surface
vessels. This communication network is essential to the early warning system and alerts mariners to the presence
of right whales in the SEUS. Information disseminated by this system is updated daily as whales are located during
the aerial surveys. 


