 







<USDEPT>DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE</USDEPT>



<USBUREAU>Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service</USBUREAU>



<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 931162] </RINDOCK>


Availability of Determination of Nonregulated Status of Calgene, Inc., Genetically Engineered Cotton Lines 


<AGENCY>
AGENCY:

 Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, USDA.

 
</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION:

 Notice of determination.

 

</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY:

 The Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) is announcing the issuance of a determination that certain
trademarked cotton lines, designated BXN

TM

 cotton, do not present a plant pest risk and are therefore no longer regulated articles under its regulations. APHIS'
determination has been made in response to a petition received from Calgene, Inc., of Davis, CA, on July 15, 1993, seeking
a determination from APHIS that BXN

TM

 cotton does not present a plant pest risk and is therefore no longer a regulated article. The effect of this determination
is that cotton lines meeting the definition of BXN

TM

 cotton and that have been field tested under permit, will no longer be subject to regulation. This notice also announces
the availability of the determination that provides the basis for the ruling, as well as the availability of an environmental
assessment of this action.

 
</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
EFFECTIVE DATE:

 February 15, 1994.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES:

 The determination, the environmental assessment, the Calgene, Inc. submission, and written comments received
in response to our September 8, 1993, notice published in the 

Federal Register

 may be inspected at USDA, room 1141, South Building, 14th Street and Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC, between
8 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays. Persons wishing access to this room are requested to
call ahead on (202) 6902817.

 
</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:

 Dr. Michael Schechtman, Senior Microbiologist, Biotechnology, Biologics, and Environmental Protection, APHIS,
USDA, room 850 Federal Building, 6505 Belcrest Road, Hyattsville, MD 20782, (301) 4367601. For a copy of the
determination or the environmental assessment, please write or call Ms. Kay Peterson at this same address and telephone
number.

 
</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

 On September 8, 1993 (58 FR 4724947250, Docket No. 931161), the Animal and Plant Health Inspection
Service (APHIS) published a notice announcing receipt of a petition from Calgene, Inc. (Calgene) of Davis, CA, that
requested a determination on the regulatory status of BXN

TM

 cotton. This notice also indicated the role of the Food and Drug Administration and the United States Environmental
Protection Agency in the regulation of food products derived from BXN

TM

 cotton and the potential use of the herbicide bromoxynil on BXN

TM

 cotton, respectively. This notice further announced that the petition was available for public review and invited
written comments on whether BXN

TM

 cotton poses a plant pest risk, to be submitted on or before November 8, 1993. 


Comments 


APHIS received a total of 45 comments from State officials, universities, farmers associations and cooperative
extension services, environmental and consumer organizations, and business and professional associations. Among
these commenters, 34 were in favor of granting the petition, 9 were opposed, and 2 others addressed APHIS' decision
on the petition itself only parenthetically. APHIS has provided a complete discussion of the comments and any issues
raised by the commenters in the determination document, which is available upon request from the individual listed
under 

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT. 
BXN

TM

 cotton, as defined by its developer (Calgene, Inc., of Davis, CA), is any cotton cultivar or progeny of a cotton line
containing the BXN gene (a gene, derived from the soil microbe 

Klebsiella pneumoniae

 subsp. 

ozaenae

 that encodes the enzyme nitrilase, which can degrade the herbicide bromoxynil) with its associated regulatory sequences,
i.e., sequences that allow for expression of the gene's enzyme product. By definition, BXN

TM

 cotton may also contain: the 

kan

r

 marker gene (encoding the enzyme aminoglycoside 3'-phosphotransferase II, which confers resistance to the antibiotic
kanamycin) with its associated regulatory sequences; a DNA fragment containing the origin of replication of the
pRi plasmid from 

Agrobacterium rhizogenes

; TDNA left and right border sequences from an 

Agrobacterium tumefaciens

 Ti plasmid; a segment of DNA from transposon Tn

5

; a portion of a synthetic polylinker sequence from 

lacZ'

; and a segment of DNA containing the origin of replication of plasmid pBR322. Expression of the BXN

TM

 gene and the 

kan

r

 gene is directed by copies of the promoter from the 

35S

 gene from cauliflower mosaic virus and terminated using sequences derived from the 

tml 

gene from the octopine-type Ti plasmid pTiA6 from 

A. tumefaciens. 
BXN

TM

 cotton contains components from organisms that are known plant pathogens, i.e., the bacterium 

Agrobacterium tumefaciens

 and cauliflower mosaic virus. BXN

TM

 cotton has therefore been a regulated article under APHIS jurisdiction, and its field tests in 1989, 1990, 1991, 1992,
and 1993 have been in accordance with APHIS regulations at 7 CFR part 340. APHIS' determination that BXN

TM

 cotton that has been field tested under permit does not present a plant pest risk is based on an analysis of data provided
to APHIS by Calgene and other relevant published scientific data obtained by APHIS concerning the components of BXN

TM

 cotton and observable properties of the cotton lines themselves. From this review, we have determined that these
BXN

TM

 cotton lines: (1) Exhibit no plant pathogenic properties; (2) are no more likely to become a weed than their non-engineered
parental varieties; (3) are unlikely to increase the weediness potential for any other cultivated plant or native
wild species with which the organism can interbreed; (4) will not cause damage to processed agricultural commodities;
and (5) are unlikely to harm other organisms, such as bees and earthworms, that are beneficial to agriculture. In addition,
we have determined that there is a reasonable certainty that progeny BXN

TM

 cotton lines bred from these lines will not exhibit new plant pest properties, i.e., properties substantially different
from any observed for the BXN

TM

 cotton lines already field tested, or those observed for cotton in traditional breeding programs. However, APHIS
believes that it is prudent to require information to corroborate that new BXN

TM

 cotton lines, not derived from BXN

TM

 lines already field tested under permit, do not exhibit unexpected qualities. 
Calgene has provided information and data from field testing of some of the cotton lines fitting their definition
of BXN

TM

 cotton and intended to be representative of all those lines. Our determination, however, applies only to cotton lines
that fit Calgene's definition of BXN

TM

 cotton and that have been field tested under permit. The effect of this determination is that such cotton lines will
no longer be considered regulated articles under the APHIS regulations at 7 CFR part 340. Permits under those regulations
will no longer be required from APHIS for field testing, importation, or interstate movement of BXN

TM

 cotton lines that have been field tested under permit or their progeny. Normal agronomic practices involving these
BXN

TM

 cotton lines, e.g., cultivation, propagation, movement, and cross-breeding with other non-regulated cotton lines,
can now be conducted without an APHIS permit. (Importation of BXN

TM

 cotton (and nursery stock or seeds capable of propagation) is still, however, subject to the restrictions found in
the Foreign Quarantine Notices regulations at 7 CFR part 319.) Variety registration and/or seed certification for
individual cotton lines carrying the BXN

TM

 gene may involve future actions by the U.S. Plant Variety Protection Office and State Seed Certification officials.

The potential environmental impacts associated with this determination have been examined in accordance with regulations
and guidelines implementing the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321 

et seq

.; 40 CFR parts 15001508; 7 CFR part 1b; 44 FR 5038150384; and 44 FR 5127251274). An Environmental
Assessment (EA) was prepared and a Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI) was reached by APHIS for the determination
that BXN

TM

 cotton that has been field tested under permit is no longer a regulated article under its regulations at 7 CFR part 340.

 


Done in Washington, DC, this 15th day of February 1994. 


</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Lonnie J. King,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Acting Administrator, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service. 


</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 943886 Filed 21894; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 341034P
</BILLING>


