 

The Department's normal preference, based on its regulations, is to utilize third-country sales rather than constructed
value when there is a viable third country market. See 19 CFR 353.48(b). Respondents have urged departure from this
practice, citing 

Certain Fresh Cut Flowers from Colombia; Final Results of Antidumping Duty Administrative Review

 55 FR 20491 (May 17, 1990)(

Flowers

). The Department determined in 

Flowers

 that departure from our normal practice was warranted after an analysis of three unusual factors present in that case.
Respondents argue that the facts in this investigation present even more compelling reasons to reject third-country
sales than were present in 

Flowers.

 In determining whether the circumstances in this case are such that it should fall under the exception established
in 

Flowers,

 we have analyzed the information presented in light of the three factors set forth in 

Flowers:

 (1) Negative correlation of price and volume movements between markets; (2) peak to non-peak comparisons; and (3)
the perishability of the subject merchandise. 
As a threshold matter, we note that the record in this case is different from 

Flowers

 in that European markets play a relatively less important role in our analysis. In 

Flowers,

 the Department's analysis focused solely on a comparison of the U.S. market with European markets as the vast majority
of third country markets under consideration were in Europe. The Department did not evaluate conditions in other
markets. In this case, and the companion investigation in Ecuador, respondents reported significant sales to Argentina
and Canada, as well as Europe. Respondents in this case have submitted additional information for all the relevant
markets_Europe, Canada, and Argentina. However, it is not clear that the information submitted up to this point supports
respondents' assertion that sales in the third country markets should not be compared to U.S. sales in this case. 


Negative Correlation Factor 


In 

Flowers,

 the Department found a negative correlation between price and volume movements in the United States and European
markets. This negative correlation indicated that price differences between markets could either mask or exaggerate
dumping. The Department determined that the negative correlation was caused by a number of elements, including:
(1) The greater price and volume volatility of the U.S. market; (2) the sporadic, gift-giving nature of U.S. demand;
(3) respondents' lack of access to the European auctions (the main distribution point for flowers in Europe), and
(4) differing peak price periods. 
Respondents argue that, in this case, there is similar evidence of a negative correlation of price and volume movements
between the U.S. and third country markets. In support of their position, respondents have submitted several reports.
A 1994 report by Professor Tayama analyzes, among other things, the consumption patterns for roses in the United States,
Europe, Canada and Argentina, and compares seasonal and holiday purchasing patterns in the markets. Tayama asserts
that both Europe and Canada have mature and relatively stable markets because both markets are supply driven (

i.e.,

 in times of peak production as supply increases, prices go down). In contrast, Tayama claims that' the U.S. market
is demand driven_the majority of sales are made for Valentine's Day when demand increases and prices rise. With regard
to Argentina, Tayama states that roses are grown for home consumption and imports occur mainly during the winter months,
as in Europe. Moreover, Tayama asserts, Argentina has a different seasonal and holiday pattern from the United States.
No market, he states, has the extraordinary demand for roses that exists in the U.S. market on Valentine`s Day. 
Petitioners have countered Tayama's assertions with an August 10, 1994, submission which contains, among other
things, a report by 

Roses Inc.,

 an association of U.S. rose producers. The 

Roses Inc.

 report raises questions about the conclusions in the Tayama report, asserting that: 1) there is a global market for
roses which is driven by demand everywhere; and 2) key holiday periods are actually very similar between the United
States and Europe_specifically that the highest prices in both the United States and Europe occur in February. Thus,
we are not in a position to conclude that the Tayama report provides a sufficient basis to determine that comparison
of U.S. sales to third country sales is inappropriate. 
In support of the conclusions drawn in the Tayama report, respondents submitted the 1994 

Fresh Cut Roses: Issues in the Estimation of Dumping in the U.S. Market 

(Botero Report) which contains a statistical analysis of the United States, European, and Canadian markets and seeks
to demonstrate the lack of correlation between price movements in the third country and U.S. markets. The Botero Report
provides three types of statistical analyses which, according to respondents, support their contention that third
country prices should not be used due to the ``different equilibrium conditions'' of these markets as compared to
the U.S. market for roses. First, Botero analyzes price movements within the United States, Europe and Canada, from
which he concludes that different market forces are at work (

i.e.,

 price and quantity movements within Europe and Canada are negatively correlated and price and quantity movements
within the United States are positively correlated). Second, Botero analyzes price and quantity movements across
markets and concludes that there is no correlation between the U.S. market and either the European or Canadian markets.
Third, he estimates the price cycles for roses in the U.S., European and Canadian markets and concludes that ``the
seasonal patterns of the two markets [U.S. and European, U.S. and Canadian] are different and therefore monthly price
comparisons do not reflect price discrimination.'' Botero asserts that these test results demonstrate that prices
in these third country markets should not be compared to prices in the U.S. market to determine price discrimination.





