 

The rule proposed that for State agencies that serve migrants, a 
portion of the grant be designated for service to the migrant 
population. The designated amount would be based on prior year 
migrant participation reported by each State agency. By 
designating a target funding level, the migrant grant will not 
distort subsequent grant allocations, yet will establish service to 
this needy population as a priority. This is an approach similar 
to the one employed to target expenditures for breastfeeding 
promotion and support. 

The Department believes that State agencies must estimate and 
accommodate such changes according to the information available 
from State and local sources. Therefore, it was proposed that, for 
planning purposes, expenditure targets would be established for 
both food grants and nutrition services and administration grants 
to insure that 9/10 of one percent of the appropriation is 

made 
available 

for service to migrants. State agencies would be 
expected to plan for migrant participants as now required in their 
State Plan of Operation and give priority service to migrant 
participants that arrive from another State agency seeking WIC 
services. 

Most of the commenters supported this provision. However, two 
commenters thought the proposed change was unclear and implied 
additional reporting requirements. In addition, it was suggested 
that the methodology to be used be clarified. 

The Department is not imposing any additional reporting 
requirements regarding migrant participants. State agencies will 
continue to report migrant participation as in past years. For 
purposes of clarity, the Department has deleted the last sentence 
in section 246.16(c)(3)(iv) of the proposed regulation which 
erroneously implied that migrant funds would be deducted from the 
State agency's stability allocation. Since this was not the intent 
of the regulation, this language was removed for clarification. 
The remainder of section 246.16(c)(3)(iv), which designates a 
migrant service expenditure target, is adopted final as proposed. 



5. Section 246.16(c)(3)(ii) Allocation of residual funds.



Under the current rule, any funds remaining after stability grants 
are allocated are ``residual funds''. Residual funds are allocated 
under two components_``targeting'' and ``growth''. The Department 
proposed eliminating the targeting component and modifying the 
growth component as discussed below. 



``Targeting'' Component for Food Funds (Section 246.16(c)(3)(ii)(A)) 



As explained in detail in the preamble, the targeting component is 
no longer needed to encourage service to Priority I participants, 
and is a barrier to achieving funding equity among State agencies. 
Therefore, the Department proposed the elimination of the targeting 
component to simplify the formula, and ensure greater funding 
equity based on each State agency's eligible population. 

All of the commenters on this provision supported it, and the final 
rule retains the provision that would eliminate targeting as a 
consideration in funds allocation. However, five commenters stated 
that they would oppose the provision unless all States were 
guaranteed prior year funding levels plus full inflation if funds 
are available. In the event that funds are insufficient, the 
commenters wanted a prorata reduction for all States. These 
concerns were addressed above in the discussion of the stability 
allocation (Section 246.16(c)(3)(ii)). 



``Growth'' Component for Food Funds (Section 246.16(c)(3)(ii)(B)) 



Under the current formula, after targeting funds are allocated, the 
remaining half of residual funds are allocated for ``growth'' within 
State agencies that have less opportunity to serve their eligible 
population compared to other State agencies. Growth funds are 
allocated based primarily on a ``fair share'' concept similar to that 
discussed earlier. To determine fair share funding, FNS used a 
mathematical equation to create an estimate of each State's 
eligible WIC population. The estimate began with each State 
agency's number of income eligibles, currently extracted from 
decennial census data. The estimate is adjusted slightly to 
account for State agency variations in infant mortality and low 
birth weight rates (``health indicators''). Also, women, infants and 
children served by the Commodity Supplemental Food Program (CSFP) 
are subtracted from this estimate for those States in which CSFP 
operates. 

As explained below, the Department proposed retaining the ``growth'' 
component of the formula using only the estimate of income 
eligibles (with some adjustments) and deleting the use of health 
indicators. It was believed that this best defines each State 
agency's actual need for program funds and greatly simplifies the 
``fair share'' equation. Each component and revision of the 
eligibles database for the fair share allocation provided in 
Section 246.16(c)(3)(ii) is discussed below. 





