 

(a) An individual with responsibility for the operation of a 
project that receives Corporation assistance must not 
discriminate against a participant in, or member of the staff of, 
such project on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, 
age, or political affiliation of such participant or member, or 
on the basis of disability, if the participant or member is a 
qualified individual with a disability. 
(b) Any Corporation assistance constitutes Federal financial 
assistance for purposes of title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d et seq.), title IX of the Education 
Amendments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. 1681 et seq.), section 504 of the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), and the Age 
Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.), and 
constitutes Federal financial assistance to an education program 
or activity for purposes of the Education Amendments of 1972 (20 
U.S.C. 1681 et seq.). 
(c) An individual with responsibility for the operation of a 
project that receives Corporation assistance may not discriminate 
on the basis of religion against a participant in such project or 
a member of the staff of such project who is paid with Corporation funds. This 
provision does not apply to the employment (with Corporation 
assistance) of any staff member of a Corporation-supported 
project who was employed with the organization operating the 
project on the date the Corporation grant was awarded. 


2540.220 

Under what circumstances and subject to what 
conditions are participants in Corporation-assisted programs 
eligible for family and medical leave? 


(a) 

Participants in State, local, or private nonprofits 
programs. 

A participant in a State, local, or private nonprofit 
program receiving support from the Corporation is considered an 
eligible employee of the program's project sponsor under the 
Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 CFR part 825) if_ 
(1) The participant has served for at least 12 months and 
1,250 hours during the year preceding the start of the leave; and 
(2) The program's project sponsors engages in commerce or 
any industry or activity affecting commerce, and employs at least 
50 employees for each working day during 20 or more calendar 
workweeks in the current or preceding calendar year. 
(b) 

Participants in Federal programs.

 Participants in 
Federal programs operated by the Corporation or by another 
Federal agency will be considered Federal employees for the 
purposes of the Family and Medical Leave Act if the participants 
have completed 12 months of service and the project sponsor is 
an employing agency as defined in 5 U.S.C 6381 

et seq.

; such 
participants therefore will be eligible for the same family and 
medical leave benefits afforded to such Federal employees. 
(c) 

General terms and conditions. 

Participants that qualify 
as eligible employees under paragraphs (a) or (b) of this section 
are entitled to take up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave during a 12 
month period for any of the following reasons (in the cases of 
both paragraphs (c)(1) and (2) of this section the entitlement to leave expires 
12 months after the birth or placement of such child): (1) The birth of a child to a participant; 
(2) The placement of a child with a participant for adoption 
or foster care; 
(3) The serious illness of a participant's spouse, child or 
parent; or 
(4) A participant
s serious health condition that makes that 
participant unable to perform his or her essential service duties 
(a serious health condition is an illness or condition that 
requires either inpatient care or continuing treatment by a 
health care provider). 
(d) 

Intermittent leave or reduced service. 

The program, 
serving as the project sponsor, may allow a participant to take 
intermittent leave or reduce his or her service hours due to the 
birth of or placement of a child for adoption or foster care. 
The participant may also take leave to care for a seriously ill 
immediate family member or may take leave due to his or her own 
serious illness whenever it is medically necessary. 
(e) 

Alternate placement. 

If a participant requests 
intermittent leave or a reduced service hours due to a serious 
illness or a family member's sickness, and the need for leave is 
foreseeable based on planned medical treatment, the program, or 
project sponsor may temporarily transfer the participant to an 
alternative service position if the participant: (1) Is qualified for the position; and 
(2) Receives the same benefits such as stipend or living 
allowance and the position better accommodates the participants 
recurring periods of leave. 
(f) 

Certification of cause. 

A program, or project sponsor 
may require that the participant support a leave request with a 
certification from the health care provider of the participant or 
the participant's family member. If a program sponsor requests a 
certification, the participant must provide it in a timely 
manner. 
(g) 

Continuance of coverage. 

(1) If a State, local or private program provides for 
health insurance for the full-time participant, the sponsor must 
continue to provide comparable health coverage at the same level 
and conditions that coverage would have been provided for the 
duration of the participant's leave. 
(2) If the Federal program provides health insurance 
coverage for the full-time participant, the sponsor must also 
continue to provide the same health care coverage for the 
duration of the participant's leave. 
(h) 

Failure to return. 

If the participant fails to return 
to the program at the end of leave for any reason other than 
continuation, recurrence or onset of a serious health condition 
or other circumstances beyond his or her control, the program 
may recover the premium that he or she paid during any period of 
unpaid leave. 
(i) 

Applicability to term of service. 

Any absence, due to 
family and medical leave, will not be counted towards the 
participant's term of service. 


2540.230 

What grievance procedures must recipients of 
Corporation assistance establish? 


State and local applicants that receive assistance from the 
Corporation must establish and maintain a procedure for the 
filing and adjudication of grievances from participants, labor 
organizations, and other interested individuals concerning 
programs that receive assistance from the Corporation. A 
grievance procedure may include dispute resolution programs such 
as mediation, facilitation, assisted negotiation and neutral 
evaluation. If the grievance alleges fraud or criminal activity, 
it must immediately be brought to the attention of the 
Corporation's inspector general. 




