 

Location of ESD Valves on Pipelines



The Piper Alpha fire and the Arco ``B'' fire were greatly intensified by released gas from pipelines associated with
the platforms. In the United States, incoming pipelines are required to have emergency SDV's as a protective measure,
but they are often located onboard the platform to allow access for maintenance and testing.

Locating SDV's away from the process equipment, such as on the seafloor or on the riser close to the waterline, may provide
a greater level of protection for the platform but would at the same time reduce accessibility for repair and maintenance.
This issue has major safety and reliability implications; therefore, MMS published the advance notice of proposed
rulemaking in the 

Federal Register

 requesting more information on this subject.

Thirty responses to the questionnaire were received from the oil and gas industry, including major oil and gas production
companies, pipeline operators, and equipment manufacturers. The first 13 questions dealt with locating a pipeline
SDV on the seafloor or just above the splash zone. Approximately half of the respondents cited limited access to a valve,
particularly those located on the seafloor, for inspection and maintenance purposes as a major area of concern. Nearly
half of the commenters suggested that the reliability of subsea valves is unknown or nonexistent. Again, supporting
data was very limited. The remaining four questions dealt with pipeline pressure reduction during emergency situations.
The results of the questionnaire are discussed after this section.

For applications in the United States, the task group considered three distinct riser locations for the placement
of SDV's: On the platform, on the seafloor, on the vertical portion of the riser below the lowest production deck but
above the waterline. The advantages and disadvantages of each location are discussed below:

The first location considered was ``on the platform.'' Subpart J_Pipelines and Pipeline Rights-of-Way, 250.154(b)(2)
requires that,




Incoming pipelines boarding to a production platform shall be equipped with an automatic shutdown valve (SDV) immediately
upon boarding the platform ***




This regulation allows placement of the SDV on the deck where the riser enters the platform. ``Immediately upon boarding''
means near the edge of the platform. Accessibility for testing and maintenance is the greatest advantage to this location
since the valve is located within the platform structure. Also, since the valve is located in close proximity of the
production processing equipment, there is little or no hydrocarbon inventory between the valve and the process equipment
that needs to be vented in the event of an emergency. However, this location also presents the greatest potential safety
hazard. Since the valve is located near the process equipment, it is vulnerable to damage from explosions, extreme
heat from fires, and falling debris during emergency situations. The task group determined that the valve in this
location does not fulfill the intended purpose of an SDV in all situations since failure of the SDV or pressured portion
of the riser would likely result in the release of a significant portion of the pipeline inventory at the point of failure.
This vulnerability was demonstrated in the Piper Alpha disaster and the South Pass 60 fire.

Next, the task group considered locating SDV's on the seafloor a short distance from the platform. The safety advantage
of this location is obvious. The valve is isolated from the platform and is not vulnerable to explosions or fire that
may occur during an emergency situation. However, a major drawback of this location is inaccessibility for maintenance
and testing, especially in deep water. At this location, the valve would isolate the majority of the pipeline inventory
from the platform. However, there may be a significant hydrocarbon inventory in the riser between the valve on the
seafloor and the process equipment. This inventory must be safely vented when the pipeline is depressurized during
an emergency after the valve is closed.

Lastly, the task group considered locating SDV's on the vertical portion of risers below the lowest production deck
of the platform but above the waterline. This location offers several advantages. The valve is removed from and placed
below the hydrocarbon process areas within the platform, thereby isolating it from potential explosion and fire
damage during emergency situations. Also, it effectively isolates the entire inventory of the pipeline from the
platform since there is a minimal length of riser between the valve and the process equipment that must be vented during
emergency situations, and the valve is above the waterline and is accessible for maintenance and testing.

Considering the information gathered from the 

Federal Register

 Notice and additional information regarding subsea valve installations in the U.K. North Sea, the task group concluded
that locating such valves on risers or on the seafloor was technically feasible. Other aspects of the current regulation
were also reviewed. The task group considered the current regulation which requires SDV's to be installed on incoming
pipelines only. Based on the events that occurred on Piper Alpha, the task group determined that there is a significant
potential hazard from blackflow of pressured hydrocarbons from departing pipelines. Therefore, the task group
recommended requiring SDV's on all new pipelines entering and departing production platforms. This requirement
should also apply to sulphur operations since sulphur is also flammable and poses a significant threat to safety.
This requirement would cover bidirectional pipelines, crossing pipelines, fuel lines, and pipelines carrying
flammable or hazardous fluids. Crossing pipelines that enter onto platforms but do not take on production from those
platforms pose an environmental risk, if not a risk to human safety. Therefore, crossing pipelines should also be
required to have SDV's installed on the incoming and departing risers.



