 

(i) 

Financial reporting requirements

. LROs shall submit a financial status report to the Local Board which will forward it to the National Board within one
month after the jurisdiction's program ending date. 
The National Board shall provide the LRO, through the Local Board, with the necessary report forms well in advance
of report deadlines. 
(j) 

Closeout procedures

. (1) The following definitions shall apply to closeout 
procedures: 
``Close-out'' is the process by which the National Board determines that all applicable administrative actions
and all required work pertaining to the award have been completed. 
``Disallowed costs'' are those charges that the National Board determined to be unallowable in accordance with the
legislation, National Board requirements, applicable Federal cost principles, or other conditions contained
in the award. The applicable cost principles for Private Voluntary Organizations are contained in OMB Circular A122,
``Cost Principles Applicable for Non-Profit Agencies,'' and OMB Circular A110, ``Uniform Administrative
Requirements for Grants and Other Agreements with Institutions of Higher Education, Hospitals, and Other Non-Profit
Organizations.'' The applicable cost principles for Public Organizations are contained in OMB Circular A87,
``Cost Principles for State Agencies and Units 
of Local Governments.'' If unsure of where to find these circulars, check with your local Congressional Representative.

(k) 

Lobbying

. Public Law 101121, section 319, states that an LRO shall not use federally appropriated grant funds for lobbying
activities. This condition bars the use of Federal money for political activities, but does not in any way restrict
lobbying or political activities paid for with non-Federal funds. This condition prohibits the use of Federal grant
funds for the following activities: 
(1) Federal, State or local electioneering and support of such entities as campaign organizations and political
action committees; 
(2) Direct lobbying of the Congress and State legislatures to influence legislation; 
(3) Grassroots lobbying concerning either Federal or 
State legislation; 
(4) Lobbying of the executive branch in connection with decisions to sign or veto enrolled legislation; and, 
(5) Efforts to utilize State or local officials to lobby the Congressional or State Legislatures. 


Secton 2.2Organization, Roles, and Responsibilities 


(a) 

Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)

. 
FEMA will perform the following EFSP activities: 
(1) Constitute a National Board consisting of individuals affiliated with United Way of America; the Salvation Army;
the National Council of Churches of Christ in the USA; Catholic Charities, USA; the Council of Jewish Federations,
Inc.; the American Red Cross; and FEMA. 
(2) Chair the National Board, using parliamentary procedures and consensus by the National Board as the mode of operation.

(3) Provide policy guidance, management oversight, Federal coordination, and staff assistance to the National
Board. 
(4) Award the grant to the National Board. 
(5) Assist the Secretariat in implementing the National Board Program. 
(6) Report to Congress on the year's program activities through the Interagency Council on the Homeless Annual Report.

(7) Conduct audits of the program. 
(8) Initiate Federal collection procedures to collect funds due when the efforts of the National Board have not been
successful. 
(b) 

National Board

. The National Board will: 
(1) Select jurisdictions of highest need for food and shelter assistance and determine amount to be distributed to
each. 
(2) Notify national organizations interested in emergency food and shelter to publicize the availability of funds.

(3) Develop the operational manual for distributing funds and establish criteria for expenditure of funds. 
(4) In jurisdictions that received previous awards, notify the former Local Board chair that new funds are available.
In areas newly selected for funding, notify the local United Way, American Red Cross, Salvation Army, or local government
official. The National Board will notify qualifying jurisdictions of award eligibility within 60 days following
allocation by FEMA. 
(5) Provide copies of award notification materials to National Board member affiliates and other interested parties.

(6) Secure certification forms and board rosters from Local Boards that funds will be used in accordance with established
criteria. 
(7) Distribute funds to selected LROs. 
(8) Hear appeals and grant waivers. 




