 




<USBUREAU>Forest Service</USBUREAU>


<DOCTITLE>Angeles National Forest; Proposed Pacific Pipeline Project EIS/SEIR; Notice of Intent</DOCTITLE>




<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Forest Service, USDA.



</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Notice of Intent to prepare an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS).






</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) and the United States Forest Service, Angeles National Forest
(ANF) will direct the preparation of a joint Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) and a Subsequent Environmental
Impact Report (SEIR) referred to as an EIS/SEIR for the Pacific Pipeline Project proposed by Pacific Pipeline System,
Inc. (PPSI). Aspen Environmental Group, a third-party contractor, under the direction of the CPUC, as the lead California
State agency, and the USFS/ANF, as the lead Federal agency will prepare a draft and final EIS/SEIR to comply with the
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).



On October 10, 1991, PPSI filed an Application with the CPUC for authorization to issue capital stock and other indebtedness
to fund development of a proposed pipeline to transport offshore Santa Barbara crude oil to Los Angeles area refineries.
At the same time, PPSI submitted a Proponent's Environmental Assessment (PEA) pursuant to the provisions of CEQA.
The CPUC conducted comprehensive scoping meetings and solicited public and agency comments on the scope of the EIR.
The CPUC selected a third party contractor (Aspen Environmental Group) to independently prepare an Environmental
Impact Report (EIR) pursuant to their responsibility as a lead agency under CEQA.

The project, as proposed at that time, was a 171-mile long, 20-inch insulated pipeline with a capacity to transport
130,000 barrels per day (bpd) of crude oil. This originally proposed pipeline would have extended from Gaviota Marine
Terminal in Santa Barbara County to oil refinery destinations in the Los Angeles Basin. The pipeline would have traversed
across Santa Barbara and Ventura Counties, and enter Los Angeles County near Santa Clarita. For much of its length,
the proposed pipeline would have been buried in the Southern Pacific Transportation Company railroad right-of-way
(ROW). In Los Angeles County the pipeline would have continued southeasterly, mostly parallel to Interstate 5(I5)
to near Glendale and then south to Watts. At the Watts Junction the pipeline would have split into two pipelines, each
leading to a refinery destination. One pipeline would continue to the Chevron Refinery in El Segundo, and the other
would continue south to both Texaco's Wilmington refinery and the GATX oil distribution facility. This originally
proposed project also included five pump/pressure reduction stations along its route.

A comprehensive EIR was prepared for this originally proposed project. Five workshops and five public hearings were
conducted and significant public comments were received on the Draft EIR and incorporated into the Final document.
In addition to the comprehensive EIR, an Executive Summary was prepared and made available to the public in both English
and Spanish language versions. The Final EIR (FEIR) was Certified by the CPUC in 1993, indicating that in their view,
the EIR had adequately identified the potential impacts of the Proposed Project and contained the information required
for making their final decision on the project, which would be reached after conducting evidentiary hearings and
upon the receipt of staff recommendations. However, due to project changes announced by PPSI after certification,
evidentiary hearings were not held, nor was a decision made on the Proposed Project by the CPUC.

In December of 1993, PPSI filed an Amended Application with the CPUC. Later, in early 1994, PPSI also filed this Amended
Application with the ANF. This Amendment was based on an Agreement reached by major potential users of the Proposed
Pipeline (Santa Barbara offshore producers) and the All American Pipeline Company (AAPL). The producers agreed
that the only means of transporting their oil out of Santa Barbara County by pipeline will be through use of the existing
AAPL, which can transport all produced oil in this area to Kern County, and ultimately, to Texas, if requested by producers.
However, producers have informed agencies and the public that the preferred destination for the majority of their
heavy offshore production is the Los Angeles area refineries. Currently there are no existing pipelines with adequate
capacity to transfer crude oil from the Southern Kern County to the Los Angeles area.

Thus, PPSI proposed to modify their project to comply with recent agreements and respond to this demand.

The Amendment filed with the ANF differs from the original proposal in the following manner:






0

The origination point of the pipeline would be at an existing Texaco oil facility in Emidio, Kern County, an
area adjacent to the All American Pipeline, which would enable the transfer of Santa Barbara offshore crude oil from
the AAPL to the Pacific Pipeline.



0

From this origination point a proposed 20-inch pipeline segment will continue for 62 miles to Castaic Junction,
at which point, it would join the originally proposed project as applied for by PPSI. The 62-mile pipeline ROW would
be generally parallel to I5, and will traverse through the National Forest System land administered by the
ANF. This newly proposed 62 miles from Emidio to Castaic Junction would replace the 104 miles of previously proposed
pipeline from the Gaviota Marine Terminal to the Castaic Junction.



0

The replacement of the previously proposed Gaviota to Castaic Junction pipeline with the new 62-mile pipeline
would result in the following changes in ancillary facilities:




_five of the pump/pressure reduction stations required previously in Santa Barbara, Ventura, and Los Angles Counties
would be replaced by three new pump/pressure reduction stations in Kern and Los Angeles Counties

_the proposed Control Center for the pipeline would be located in Taylor Yard (Los Angeles) instead of Ventura County,
as originally proposed.






0

The Amendment also requires consideration of three additional refinery/terminal destinations in Los Angeles
County (retaining the previous three destinations). These three destinations are:




_Unocal Refinery in Carson

_Chemoil Terminal in Carson

_Ultramar Refinery in Wilmington.




These newly proposed destinations would require installations of an additional 3.3 miles of 16-inch pipeline that
was not considered in the FEIR. Considering these additional connecting lines, the total length of the proposed pipeline
would be approximately 132 miles (versus 171 miles for the originally Proposed Project).



The Amended Application also refers to a future scenario in which Mobil would obtain a permit and would produce up to
40,000 bpd of oil at their Santa Barbara Clearview Project. The Applicant suggests that the previously proposed pipeline
between Ellwood to Castaic Junction might be reconsidered for this potential scenario.

</SUMMARY>
