 

However, on outage days 5 and 6, the RHR and DHR systems will be available for decay heat removal; thus, the unit will
not be susceptible to either single failure with respect to core decay heat removal.
This proposal does not involve any changes to the secondary containment, secondary containment ventilation systems,
the standby gas treatment system or any other radiological release control systems. Therefore, the consequences
of a loss of decay heat removal event are not increased.
This evolution is being performed in the refueling mode of operation, outside the realm of FSAR [Final Safety Analysis
Report] assumed accidents, except for a refueling accident. Since this proposal does not involve changes to any fuel
handling mechanisms, the probability of a refueling accident is not increased. Furthermore, this proposal does
not involve any changes to the operation or maintenance of any safety-related component designed to prevent or mitigate
the consequences of previously analyzed events.
Therefore, based on this discussion, the proposed Technical Specifications change does not increase the probability
or consequences of any previously analyzed accident or transient.
2. Create the possibility of a new or different event from any previously analyzed.
This proposed change does not introduce any new modes of operation. All affected system; i.e., the RHR systems, DGs,
and the DHR system, will be operated within their design specifications. Although the nonsafety-related DHR is a
relatively new system, it was installed, successfully tested, and used for decay heat removal during the Spring 1994
Unit 2 outage. Therefore, no failure modes that have not been previously considered are introduced by this proposed
change.
3. Significantly reduce the margin of safety.
The proposed decay heat removal configuration, which will be in use during outage days 5 and 6, uses the DHR system as
the primary decay heat removal mechanism, with RHR loop A as a backup. Although the DHR system is not designed as a safety-related
system, it is conservatively designed with sufficient heat removal capacity and redundancy to provide full heat
removal capacity in a variety of conditions. In fact, testing during the Unit 2 Spring 1994 outage showed that even
early in the outage (approximately day 3) the DHR system is fully capable of handling the decay heat load of the reactor
and the spent fuel pool. Additionally, even though the DHR system takes a suction from, and discharges to, the spent
fuel pool, adequate natural circulation is firmly established between the pool and the reactor vessel such that adequate
decay heat removal is taking place for both the pool and the reactor. This was demonstrated via special test performed
during the Spring Unit 2 refueling outage. In addition, duplicates of major components are provided so that loss of
any one component does not result in loss of system function. Therefore, as far as decay heat removal capability is
concerned, the margin of safety is not reduced.
As discussed previously, if an LOSP occurs, failure of DG 1C will result in a total loss of RHR shutdown cooling capacity,
since RHR loop 1B will be out of service for LLRT. However, a loss of decay heat removal will not occur, since the DHR system
is in service and is supplied power for the Baxley, Georgia, substation. However, if the Baxley power supply should
fail, the DHR system has its own backup diesel that can be placed in service manually within 4-hour period. Therefore,
the margin of safety associated with an LOSP is not reduced as a result of this proposal.
Furthermore, the configuration of decay heat removal systems on days 5 and 6 in is compliance with the existing Unit
2 Specifications, which only require one RHR pump and one DG in Condition 5 (Specifications 3.9.12 and 3.8.1.2, respectively).
Thus, the margin of safety, with respect to the exiting Unit 2 Specifications, is not reduced.



The NRC staff has reviewed the licensee's analysis and, based on this review, it appears that the three standards of
10 CFR 50.92(c) are satisfied. Therefore, the NRC staff proposes to determine that the amendment request involves
no significant hazards consideration.
The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination. Any comments received within 30 days after
the date of publication of this notice will be considered in making any final determination.
Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendment until the expiration of the 30-day notice period. However,
should circumstances change during the notice period such that failure to act in a timely way would result, for example,
in derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission may issue the license amendment before the expiration of the
30-day notice period, provided that its final determination is that the amendment involves no significant hazards
consideration. The final determination will consider all public and State comments received. Should the Commission
take this action, it will publish in the 

Federal Register

, and notice of issuance and provide for opportunity for a hearing after issuance. The Commission expects that the
need to take this action will occur very infrequently.
Written comments may be submitted by mail to the Rules Review and Directives Branch, Division of Freedom of Information
and Publications Services, Office of Administration, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555,
and should cite the publication date and page number of this 

Federal Register

 notice. Written comments may also be delivered to Room 6D22, Two White Flint North, 11545 Rockville Pike, Rockville,
Maryland, from 7:30 a.m. to 4:15 p.m. Federal workdays. Copies of written comments received may be examined at the
NRC Public Document Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street, NW., Washington, DC 20555.

