 

3. Face Lift or any substantially similar product or service (a) can or will permanently remove facial wrinkles; or
(b) is as effective as, or more effective than, the prescription drug Tretinoin (currently marketed as Retin-A) in
the removal of facial wrinkles; and

4. Celltrex or any substantially similar product or service will promote the healing of third degree burns.

In connection with any other product or service, the Order prohibits the respondents from representing:

1. That the product or service: (a) Can or will stop, prevent, cure, relieve, reverse or reduce hair loss; (ii) can or
will promote the growth of hair where hair has already been lost; (iii) is as effective as, or more effective than, any
other product or service in the treatment of hair loss; (iv) is as effective as, or more effective than, any other product
or service in the treatment of facial wrinkles; or (v) will promote the healing of, or is otherwise an effective treatment
for burns;

2. That competent and reliable data show that the product or service is effective in stopping hair loss and promoting
hair growth; and

3. The efficacy of the product or service in the treatment of facial wrinkles,




unless the claim is true and, at the time of making the claim, it possesses and relies upon competent and reliable scientific
evidence that substantiates the claim.



The Order also prohibits the respondents from advertising, packaging, labeling, promoting, offering for sale,
selling, or distributing any product that is represented as promoting hair growth or preventing hair loss, unless
the product is the subject of an approved new drug application for such purpose under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
Act, 21 U.S.C. 301 

et seq.

The Order also prohibits the respondents from making any representation regarding the performance, benefits, efficacy
or safety of any food, drug, or device unless at the time of making such representation respondents possess and rely
upon competent and reliable scientific evidence that substantiates the representation. Similarly, the Order prohibits
the respondents from making any representation regarding the performance, benefits, efficacy or safety of any product
or service (other than any food, drug, or device), unless at the time of making such representation respondents possess
and rely upon competent and reliable evidence, which when appropriate must be competent and reliable scientific
evidence, that substantiates the representation.

Finally, the Order prohibits the respondents from:

1. Misrepresenting the past, present, or future profits, earnings, income, or sales of any person in any distribution,
sales or marketing plan; and

2. Representing that distributors earn or achieve any stated amount of profits, earnings, income, or sales in excess
of the average profits, earnings, income, or sales of all distributors unless in conjunction therewith the average
profits, earnings, income, or sales are clearly and conspicuously disclosed, and the percent of all distributors
who actually achieved such stated profits, earnings, income, or sales is clearly and conspicuously disclosed.

In addition to the Order's prohibitions, the Order requires the respondents to provide a copy of this notice to each
of their current and future officers, agents, representatives, employees, and distributors. The Order also requires
Nu Skin to discontinue dealing with any person who makes any of the representations for Nutriol, Face Lift, Celltrex,
or any substantially similar products or services, that are expressly prohibited by the Order. Nu Skin must also discontinue
dealing with any person who Nu Skin knows is engaged in any other acts or practices prohibited by the Order, unless the
person immediately ceases engaging in such acts or practices.

If you have any questions or would like a copy of the Order, you can contact us at [].



Very truly yours,




[Respondent's name]


