 

The nervous system is dependent on an extensive system of blood vessels and 
capillaries to deliver large quantities of oxygen and nutrients as well as to remove toxic waste 
products. Damage to the capillaries in the brain can lead to the swelling characteristic of 
encephalopathy. This can be seen following exposure to higher concentrations of lead. 
Other metals (e.g., cadmium, thallium, and mercury) and organotin (e.g., trimethyltin) cause 
rupturing of vessels that can also result in encephalopathy. 
One large aspect of function that may be affected by neurotoxicants is behavior, 
which is the product of various sensory, motor, and associative functions of the nervous 
system. Neurotoxic substances can adversely affect sensory or motor functions, disrupt 
learning and memory processes, or cause detrimental behavioral effects; however, the 
underlying mechanisms for these effects have yet to be determined. Although changes may 
be subtle, the assessment of behavior may serve as a robust means of monitoring the well-being of the organism (Tilson
and Cabe, 1978). 


2.5. Special Considerations 


2.5.1. Susceptible Populations 


Everyone is at a certain level of risk of being adversely affected by neurotoxic 
substances. Individuals of certain age groups, health states, and occupations, however, may 
be at a greater level of risk. Fetuses, children, the elderly, workers in occupations involving 
exposure to relatively high levels of toxic chemicals, and persons who abuse drugs are 
among those in high-risk groups. Neurotoxic substances may exacerbate existing 
neurological or psychiatric disorders in a population. Although controversial (Waddell, 
1993), recent evidence suggests that there may be a subpopulation of people who have 
become sensitive to chemicals and experience adverse reactions to low-level exposures to 
environmental chemicals (Bell, et al., 1992). Confounded in all of these groups is the role 
that nutrition plays in the response of the organism to exposure. Both general nutritional 
status and specific nutritional deficiencies (for example, protein, iron, and calcium) can 
significantly influence the response to a toxic substance. 
It is widely accepted that during development adverse effects can result from exposure 
to some chemicals at lower levels than would be necessary for the average adult (Suzuki, 
1980). The developing nervous system appears to be differentially sensitive to some kinds of 
damage (Cushner, 1981; Pearson and Dietrich, 1985; Annau and Eccles, 1986; Hill and 
Tennyson, 1986; Silbergeld, 1986). During the developmental period, the nervous system is 
actively growing and establishing intricate cellular networks. Both the blood-brain and 
blood-nerve barriers that will eventually protect much of the adult brain, spinal cord, and 
peripheral nerves are incomplete. The protective mechanisms by which the organism deals 
with toxic substances, such as the detoxification systems, are not fully developed. Exposure 
to chemicals during development can result in a range of effects. At the highest exposure, 
effects include death, gross structural abnormalities, or altered growth. Larger populations 
are generally exposed to more moderate levels resulting in more subtle functional 
impairments. The qualitative nature of some injuries during development may differ from 
those seen in the adult, such as changes in tissue volume, misplaced or misoriented neurons, 
or delays or acceleration of the appearance of functional or structural endpoints (Rodier, 
1986). In many cases, the results of early injuries may become evident only as the nervous 
system matures and ages (Rodier, 1990). There are several instances in which functional 
alterations have resulted from exposure during the period between conception and sexual 
maturity (Riley and Vorhees, 1986; Vorhees, 1987). 
Early exposure to relatively low levels of lead can result in reduced scores on tests of 
mental development (Bellinger et al., 1987; Needleman, 1990). Early gestational exposure 
to neurotoxicants such as cocaine can produce long-term neurobehavioral abnormalities 
(Anderson-Brown et al., 1990; Hutchings et al., 1989); heavy alcohol exposure produces 
craniofacial abnormalities and mental retardation (Jones and Smith, 1973), while moderate 
levels of alcohol consumption during gestation can delay motor development (Little et al., 
1989). 
With aging, the level of risk for a number of health-related factors increases; it has 
been hypothesized that the risk for toxic perturbations to the nervous system also increases 
with age (Weiss, 1990). It is generally believed that with increasing age comes a decreased 
ability of the nervous system to respond to adverse events or to compensate for either 
biological, physical, or toxic effects. At the tissue and cellular level, the aging process can 
result in nerve cell loss, formation of neurofibrillary tangles (abnormal accumulation of 
certain filamentous proteins) and neuritic plaques (abnormal clusters of proteins and other 
substances near synapses). As cells die, the complex neuronal circuitry of the brain becomes 
impaired. Neurotransmitter concentrations and the enzymes involved in their synthesis may 
be altered. Some axons can gradually lose their myelin sheath, resulting in a slowed 
conduction of nerve impulses along the axon. It has been postulated that with age, not only 
might the nervous system become more susceptible to new insults, but the effects of previous 
exposures also may become evident, with a diminished capacity for compensation (Weiss, 
1990). The increased incidence of multiple drug-taking in the elderly population might also 
lead to interactions, either drug/drug or drug/chemical, which can adversely affect the 
nervous system. Nutritionally, the aged experience increased incidences of both general 
undernutrition and deficits of specific nutrients such as iron or calcium, which might 
influence the response to toxic substances. 
In the geriatric population, the clinical manifestation of neurodegenerative disorders 
may have a contributing component of past exposures to environmental chemical agents. 
Calne et al. (1986) hypothesized that various agents contribute to Alzheimer's disease, 
Parkinson's disease, or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, motoneurone disease, or Lou 
Gehrig's disease) by depleting neuronal reserves to an extent that perturbations become 
observable in the context of the natural aging process. B-N-methylamino-L-alanine, from the 
seed of the false sago palm (

Cycas circinalis 

L.), has been reported to induce a form of 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Spencer et al., 1987). Alzheimer-type syndromes have been 
reported in individuals occupationally exposed to organic solvents or metal vapors (Freed and 
Kandel, 1988). Severe cognitive dysfunction has been noted in Alzheimer's disease and 
aluminum intoxication (Yokel et al., 1988). 




