 

The potential benefits of this rule change would be the cost savings realized by the operators of Stage 2 aircraft in
part 121 service that plan to retrofit these aircraft with noise suppression equipment or have not received an exemption
for those Stage 2 aircraft they plan to retire by the end of the decade. The proposal would afford these operators up
to an additional year in which to install the required DFDR equipment. Operators that were planning to retrofit their
aircraft with noise suppression equipment before May 1995 would derive the greatest cost savings because DFDR retrofit
could be accomplished at the same time that the aircraft was being retrofitted with noise suppression equipment.
Therefore, no additional non-routine downtime would be required for the upgraded DFDR retrofit.
The amount of the potential cost savings accruing to operators planning to retrofit their aircraft prior to the proposed
May 1995 deadline was estimated using industry data. Information provided to the FAA by ATA members indicates that
the installation of upgraded DFDR's could require from 2 to 5 days of downtime per airplane, depending on the type of
equipment. The major passenger carriers responding to the ATA survey estimated the costs of this downtime from $14,000
to $26,000 per day per airplane. The FAA forecasts that about 250 Stage 2 aircraft will be retrofitted with noise suppression
equipment over the next 11/2 years. Operators of these aircraft could therefore expect cost savings of between $10
million (based on 2 days of downtime per aircraft and an average cost of $20,000 per day) and $25 million (based on 5 days
of downtime per aircraft and a cost of $20,000 per unit) from this proposal. The FAA solicits comments from the industry
regarding the cost savings expected from the avoidance of additional downtime solely for the purpose of retrofitting
aircraft with upgraded DFDR's.
Operators planning to retrofit their Stage 2 airplanes with noise suppression equipment after May 1995 would not
receive as great a benefit in terms of reduced downtime, however, because the additional 1 year afforded by this proposal
may not be enough for them to avoid any non-routine downtime. Nevertheless, these operators would be able to benefit
from the opportunity to delay incurring installation costs for the upgraded DFDR equipment by up to one year, the value
of which is calculated in the following paragraph. Available FAA data indicates that about 490 Stage 2 aircraft would
fall in this category. The FAA solicits data from the industry regarding the amount of non-routine downtime that could
be avoided if the operators of these aircraft were afforded the proposed additional year to comply with the upgraded
DFDR requirements.
The FAA was able to estimate the opportunity cost of capital savings that operators could expect from being able to
delay incurring the expense of installing upgraded DFDR equipment by up to 1 year. Responses from a survey of its members
conducted by the ATA indicated that the installed cost of the equipment would range from $20,000 to $40,000. Given
the expected rate of return on capital of 7 percent that is mandated by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), the
FAA estimates that the opportunity cost savings expected to result from the proposal would amount to about $1.03 million,
using the midpoint of the expected range of equipment installation costs (.07 &times; $30,000 &times; 490 aircraft).
The FAA solicits comments from part 121 air carriers regarding the expected impact of the proposed regulatory relief
on their costs of compliance, including the number of airplanes to which this relief would apply. Information pertaining
to the scheduling of these retrofits would also be useful in calculating the cost savings.
A number of operators that plan to retire their Stage 2 aircraft over the next 5 years have not taken advantage of the
previously granted exemption from the upgraded DFDR requirement. Those operators of aircraft that plan to remove
from service some airplanes by the December 31, 1994 noise transition compliance deadline and that are not using the
exemption could also benefit from this proposal. Extension of the DFDR deadline would allow them to forego installing
upgraded DFDR equipment on some aircraft that would otherwise be retired within 7 months of the installation.
The proposed rule change would impose only a minimal cost on society in the form of a reduction in safety because of the
extremely low probability that one of the 740 airplanes potentially affected by this rule will have an accident (which
would not be prevented by the new 11-parameter DFDR) during the additional 1 year. Moreover, if there were an accident
involving these Stage 2 airplanes, the causes of such an accident would have to be determinable only with the additional
data provided by an upgraded DFDR. For a safety benefit to be realized, this information would have to be used in rulemaking
or some other agency action that would prevent a second future accident with a chain of causation closely resembling
that of the first accident. The resulting probability of these two hypothetical accidents actually occurring, assuming
the proposal goes into effect, is considerably less than the already remote possibility that one of the 740 affected
aircraft would have a serious accident over this time frame. The FAA calls for comments on the extent of the potential
reduction in safety that could result from this proposal.
The proposal would also require that each air carrier submit to the FAA documentation listing those Stage 2 aircraft
scheduled for retrofit as well as evidence that it has ordered a sufficient number of flight data recorders to meet
the May 26, 1995, compliance date for all aircraft on the list. The FAA has estimated that this paperwork information
requirement would cost each affected air carrier about $25. The total cost of this provision would therefore not appreciably
alter the overall balance between the costs and benefits of the proposed rule.





