 




<RINDOCK>[Docket No. 93N0352]</RINDOCK>



<DOCTITLE>Polychlorinated Dibenzo-

p

-dioxins and Polychlorinated Dibenzofurans in Bleached Food-Contact Paper Products; Response to Referral for
Action by the Environmental Protection Agency and Request for Comment</DOCTITLE>


<AGENCY>
AGENCY: 

Food and Drug Administration, HHS.


</AGENCY>
<ACTION>
ACTION: 

Notice.




</ACTION>
<SUMMARY>
SUMMARY: 

The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is issuing this notice in response to a notice of referral for action on the use
of bleached food-contact paper products contaminated with polychlorinated dibenzo-

p

-dioxins (PCDD's) and polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDF's) that was issued by the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA). FDA agrees with EPA's decision to refer this issue to FDA
because, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the act), FDA has authority to take appropriate action to
ensure that paper and paperboard intended for food-contact use are safe. This notice sets out the various options
that FDA is considering regarding the issue of PCDD and PCDF contamination of bleached food-contact paper products
and encourages interested persons to submit pertinent data and other comments on this issue. 


</SUMMARY>
<DATE>
DATES: 

Comments by June 13, 1994.


</DATE>
<ADDRESS>
ADDRESSES: 

Submit written comments to the Dockets Management Branch (HFA305), Food and Drug Administration, rm. 123,
12420 Parklawn Dr., Rockville, MD 20857.


</ADDRESS>
<FURTHER>
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

Edward J. Machuga, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFS216), Food and Drug Administration, 200
C St. SW., Washington, DC 20204, 2022549511.


</FURTHER>
<SUPPLEM>
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 


I. Background


PCDD's and PCDF's are formed in trace amounts as byproducts of certain chemical processes, such as bleaching of paper,
incineration, and manufacturing of certain chlorinated phenols. They are generally produced as a complex mixture
of related compounds or congeners. The PCDD's and PCDF's are classes of 75 and 135 congeners, respectively, the most
toxic of which is 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-

p

-dioxin (TCDD). TCDD has been shown to be a potent animal carcinogen, and EPA has classified it as a ``probable human
carcinogen.'' 
In order to assess the hazards of mixtures of PCDD's and PCDF's, scientists have agreed on the use of international
toxicity equivalency factors to express the comparative toxicity of these chemicals as fractions of the toxicity
of TCDD, the most toxic and most studied congener of the group (Ref. 1). This system expresses the amount of PCDD's and
PCDF's present in terms of TCDD toxic equivalents and estimates the risk for a mixture as if it were one chemical compound.
Under this system, 2,3,7,8-dibenzofuran (TCDF), the most potent of the PCDF's, has been assessed a TCDD toxic equivalency
of 0.1. 
Although the occurrence of low levels of PCDD's and PCDF's in the environment has been known for years, it has been only
recently that scientists' ability to identify and quantify them has greatly improved. Based on data obtained in studies
carried out in several countries, the average person is exposed to approximately 1.2 picograms (pg) (10

-12

 grams) of TCDD equivalents/kilogram (kg) body weight/day (Ref. 2). This low level background exposure is mostly
dietary, from foods such as meat, poultry, fish, dairy products, and eggs. 
In 1987, results of EPA's National Dioxin Study showed that fish located downstream from paper mills had higher than
expected levels of TCDD and TCDF. This finding prompted EPA and the American Paper Institute (API) to conduct a joint
study of five paper mills to discover the source of the TCDD and TCDF contamination. The results of this study: (1) Confirmed
the presence of parts per trillion (ppt) levels of TCDD and TCDF in pulp and sludge; (2) confirmed parts per quadrillion
(ppq) levels of these substances in wastewater from these mills; and (3) identified a particular chlorine bleaching
process as the source of the contaminants. Chlorine or chlorine derivatives are often used as the primary bleaching
agent in the process of making bleached paper products.
These results prompted FDA to begin its own investigation of TCDD and TCDF contamination of wood pulp and finished
paper products that may contact food and ultimately migrate into the packaged food. Because the bulk of the TCDD toxic
equivalents associated with PCDD and PCDF contamination of bleached food-contact paper products are attributable
to the presence of TCDD and TCDF, FDA's investigation has focused on the levels of these two chemicals in bleached food-contact
paper products. 
On April 24, 1987, FDA met with representatives of the National Council of the Paper Industry for Air and Stream Improvement
(NCASI) to discuss protocols for analyzing for residual TCDD and TCDF levels in bleached wood pulp and in various food-contact
paper products. Under these protocols, newly developed, highly sensitive analytical methods were used by individual
pulp mills to identify those specific processes that contributed to the formation of TCDD and TCDF so that industry
could identify manufacturing changes that could be made to reduce or eliminate such contaminants in the finished
paper products. FDA also asked industry representatives to conduct extraction studies to measure the extent of migration
of TCDD and TCDF from uncoated and coated paper and paperboard into food simulating solvents. 
In May of 1988, NCASI released a report entitled ``Assessment of the Risks Associated with Potential Exposure to Dioxin
Through Consumption of Coffee Brewed Using Bleached Paper Coffee Filters'' (Ref. 3). This study was conducted because
given the presence of residual dioxin contaminants in bleached paper coffee filters and the high temperature of the
water that is passed through the filters, there appeared to be a high potential for migration of such contaminants
into the brewed coffee. Analysis of 5 different bleached paper coffee filters found measurable levels of TCDD and
TCDF ranging from 2.2 to 6.6 ppt TCDD toxic equivalents in the paper. Migration studies indicated that 65 to 90 percent
of the TCDD equivalents present in the bleached paper coffee filters could migrate into the coffee, depending on brewing
conditions. 
In October of 1988, FDA received the results of a Canadian Government survey that detected TCDD and TCDF in milk packaged
in bleached paper cartons (Ref. 4). TCDD was found in five of eight samples of whole milk packaged in coated, bleached
paper milk cartons at concentrations ranging from 0.014 to 0.056 ppt with an average concentration of 0.038 ppt. TCDF
was found in all eight samples at concentrations ranging from 0.064 to 2.46 ppt (average concentration of 0.98 ppt).
Somewhat higher levels were found in cream packaged in coated, bleached paper milk cartons. Analyses of similar food
products packaged in plastic or glass containers showed at least tenfold lower levels of TCDD and TCDF, which were
most likely a result of background contamination. 
In the spring of 1989, FDA conducted a survey of milk packaged in bleached paper cartons from five U.S. manufacturers
(Ref. 5). TCDD was found in 4 of 15 samples of whole milk packaged and stored in one-half pint cartons at refrigerated
temperatures for 14 days. The TCDD concentrations, which ranged from 0.02 to 0.07 ppt, were obtained using an analytical
method that could determine amounts at or above 0.02 ppt. TCDF was detected in 7 of 15 samples at levels from 0.14 to 0.62
ppt. The detection limit for TCDF was 0.1 ppt. Because neither TCDD nor TCDF was detected in bulk or nonpackaged milk
collected at the same dairies before being packaged, the results confirm that these contaminants can migrate out
of the bleached paper carton and into the milk. 
Because of FDA's concern about the potential for exposure to TCDD and TCDF from other bleached paper food-contact
articles, FDA requested that the paper industry provide detailed information that could be used to determine what
other bleached paper articles should be the subject of detailed migration studies. Based on the results of the industry
survey, FDA also requested, in February 1989, that the paper industry develop migration data for those paper food-contact
articles posing the greatest potential for exposure to TCDD and TCDF. In response to this request, the paper industry
submitted the results of migration studies for the following paper articles: (1) Milk cartons (Ref. 6), (2) coffee
filters (Ref. 3), (3) half-and-half (cream) cartons (Ref. 7), (4) orange juice cartons (Ref. 8), (5) coffee cups (Ref.
9), (6) soup cups (Ref. 10), (7) dual-ovenable trays (Ref. 11), (8) plates (Ref. 12), and (9) microwave popcorn bags
(Ref. 13).
In 1990, FDA used data from these migration studies, to develop a quantitative risk assessment for bleached paper
food-contact articles containing TCDD and TCDF residues. The procedures that FDA used in this evaluation were similar
to the methods that the agency has used to examine the risk associated with the presence of minor amounts of carcinogenic
impurities in various food and color additives (see 49 FR 13018, April 2, 1984). This risk evaluation of carcinogenic
contaminants has two aspects: (1) Assessment of dietary exposure to the contaminants from the consumption of the
additive and (2) extrapolation of the risk observed in the animal bioassays to the conditions of probable human exposure.
In addition to the exposure data derived from the industry studies described above, FDA considered exposure from
four other bleached paper articles that were not subjected to migration testing (bakery cartons, ice cream cartons,
tea bags, and margarine wrappers). An exposure estimate for each of these articles was derived using an estimated
migration level based on an assumed residue of 17 ppt TCDD equivalents in the paper article (the average level of TCDD
equivalents found to be in paper pulp in a study of 104 paper mills carried out in 1988 and 1989) (Ref. 14). In its exposure
estimates, FDA also considered the types of food that come into contact with paper articles and the amounts of these
types of food that are ingested daily by consumers. Based on the results of the migration studies and migration estimates
as well as food consumption information, FDA estimated the daily intake of TCDD equivalents occurring as a result
of migration into food from bleached paper food-contact articles to be no greater than 0.15 pg/kg body weight/day
(Ref. 14).
In its 1990 risk assessment, the agency used data from a 
2-year chronic toxicity and oncogenicity study carried out by Kociba et al. (Ref. 15) on TCDD fed to rats to estimate
the upper-bound level of lifetime human risk from exposure to TCDD toxic equivalents resulting from the use of bleached
food-contact paper products. The results of the bioassay on TCDD showed that the material was carcinogenic for rats
under the conditions of the study. The test material caused significantly increased incidences of hepatocellular
carcinomas and adenomas as well as squamous cell carcinomas of the lung, hard palate, nasal turbinates, and tongue.
FDA's toxicologists further concluded that given the paucity of TCDD bioassay data, the Kociba et al. bioassay provided
the appropriate basis on which to calculate an estimate of the upper-bound level of lifetime carcinogenic risk from
exposure to TCDD toxic equivalents stemming from the use of bleached food-contact paper products.
The agency used a linear-at-low-dose extrapolation from the doses used in the Kociba et al. bioassay to the very low
levels of TCDD toxic equivalents encountered under actual conditions of use of bleached food-contact paper products.
This procedure is not likely to underestimate the actual risk from very low doses and may, in fact, exaggerate it because
the extrapolation models used are designed to estimate the maximum risk consistent with the data. Using a linear-at-low-dose
extrapolation method and the tumor incidence data based on the original classification of tumors found in the Kociba
et al. study, the FDA estimated a carcinogenic unit risk of 16 x 10

-6

 for an intake of 1 pg/kg body weight/day of TCDD toxic equivalents. Using this carcinogenic risk for TCDD and a daily
dietary exposure of 0.15 pg of TCDD equivalents/kg body weight/day (based on data obtained from 1988 to 1990), FDA's
1990 risk assessment estimated that the upper-bound limit of individual lifetime risk from TCDD toxic equivalents
that result from the use of bleached food-contact paper products at that time would be 2.5 x 10

-6

 or 2.5 in 1 million (Ref. 16). Because of the conservative assumptions used to obtain the exposure estimate, actual
lifetime-averaged individual exposure to TCDD toxic equivalents is expected to be substantially less than the estimated
daily intake, and therefore, the actual risk would be less than the calculated upper-bound limit of risk.
This risk was considered low by both FDA and EPA (December 26, 1990, 55 FR 53047). However, because the then current
levels of PCDD's and PCDF's (mostly TCDD and TCDF) in bleached white paper were capable of being reduced by the pulp
and paper industry through changes in manufacturing procedures, EPA considered the risk associated with PCDD's
and PCDF's in food-contact paper products to be ``unreasonable'' in accordance with section 9(a) of TSCA (55 FR 53047).

EPA has the authority to require the reduction of ``unreasonable'' risk associated with bleached paper products
under section 6(a) of TSCA, which states that EPA may prohibit or limit production of a chemical substance that presents
an ``unreasonable'' risk to human health or the environment. However, under section 9(a) of TSCA, if EPA determines
that the risk can be reduced by an action taken by another agency, it may refer such action to the other agency. 
In the notice published in the 

Federal Register

 of December 26, 1990, EPA announced that under section 9(a) of TSCA, it was referring action to FDA on the use of food-contact
paper products contaminated with PCDD's and PCDF's. Specifically, EPA has requested that FDA do the following: (1)
Assess the risk associated with PCDD and PCDF contaminated bleached food-contact paper products; (2) determine
if this risk may be prevented or reduced by action taken under its own authority, and (3) if so, initiate the appropriate
regulatory action.


II. FDA's Response to EPA's Referral for Action


FDA agrees with EPA's decision to refer the use of bleached food-contact paper products that may be contaminated with
PCDD's and PCDF's (mostly TCDD and TCDF) to FDA because under the act, FDA has the authority to take appropriate regulatory
action to ensure that bleached paper and paperboard intended for food-contact use are safe. At the time that FDA received
this referral, the agency considered whether immediate regulatory action was necessary to ensure the safe use of
bleached food-contact paper products. As stated above, FDA's risk assessment in 1990 of exposure to TCDD and TCDF,
resulting from the use of those types of bleached food-contact paper products that have the greatest potential for
migration of these substances into food, produced an estimated upper-bound worst-case lifetime risk of 2.5 in 1 million.
However, the estimated daily dietary intake used in this risk assessment was based on data obtained from 1988 to 1990.
By the time FDA received the referral, many of the paper mills that make bleached paper had made or were in the process
of making manufacturing changes to reduce or eliminate residual TCDD and TCDF levels in bleached paper intended for
use in contact with food. Therefore, rather than expressing the risk in terms of an average 70-year lifespan, FDA believed
that it was more appropriate to view the carcinogenic risk in terms of yearly exposure during the limited time needed
by the paper industry to complete the manufacturing changes necessary to reduce the levels of such contaminants in
paper products. 
An upper-bound worst-case lifetime risk of 2.5 in 1 million corresponds to less than 0.04 in 1 million for each year
of exposure. Based on this level of risk per year of exposure, FDA felt at the time that it received the referral that
the continued use of bleached paper and paperboard in contact with food was safe during the time needed by FDA to complete
its evaluation of TCDD and TCDF contamination of bleached food-contact paper products. FDA also felt at that time
that it should conduct a new lifetime risk assessment in light of the changes in the manufacturing of bleached food-contact
paper products that had occurred.
Given the cooperation that FDA had received from the paper industry, FDA decided that it was appropriate to explore
voluntary avenues for reducing exposure to PCDD's and PCDF's from the use of bleached paper and paperboard. At a meeting
held on November 16, 1990, API advised FDA that 100 percent of the U.S. manufacturers of bleached paper for food-contact
applications were participating in a voluntary program to reduce TCDD levels in all types of food-contact paper products
to 2 ppt or less. In a letter of March 7, 1991, API submitted data to FDA showing that all bleached paper milk cartons manufactured
since July 30, 1990, had residual TCDD levels of 2 ppt or less (Ref. 17). API also informed FDA that 93 percent of bleached
food-contact paper and paperboard met the 2 ppt or less TCDD standard as of December 31, 1991, and that 98 percent of
these products were expected to meet this standard by the end of 1992 (Ref. 18). 
The American Forest and Paper Association (AFPA), formed by the recent merger of API with other forest related associations,
has submitted to FDA the results of an industry-wide survey conducted during the first quarter of 1993 to determine
the degree of compliance with the voluntary specification of 2 ppt or less of residual TCDD in bleached food-contact
paper products (Ref. 19). These results show that all of the U.S. manufacturers responding to the survey have implemented
standard operating procedures that result in bleached food-contact paper products that meet the voluntary specification
of 2 ppt or less of TCDD. Out of 249 tests conducted on samples of either bleached pulp, paper, or paperboard, only 3 samples
had detectable levels of TCDD that were above 2 ppt (i.e., 2.1 ppt, 2.2 ppt, and 2.6 ppt). The levels of TCDD that were
found to be above 2 ppt in the survey are likely to be the result of normal variability associated with both the methodology
used to analyze for the TCDD and the manufacturing procedures used to produce the bleached paper products. Moreover,
although the paper industry's voluntary program specifically deals with residual levels of TCDD in bleached food-contact
paper products, industry data have shown that the manufacturing changes that have resulted in the significant reduction
of TCDD in such products also have resulted in a corresponding decrease in TCDF (Ref. 17). 
In 1992, FDA also conducted its own analysis of uncoated bleached paper destined for use in milk cartons (Ref. 20) to
confirm whether it meets the voluntary specification of 2 ppt or less of TCDD. These tests used analytical methodology
developed by FDA's Chicago District Laboratory (Ref. 21). FDA collected samples in late 1991 and early 1992 from five
U.S. manufacturers that produce over 90 percent of the domestic paper stock used for milk cartons. Paper stock from
two of the manufacturers contained very low levels of TCDD (1.4 and 1.5 ppt, respectively) and TCDF (4.0 and 4.7 ppt,
respectively). Residual levels of TCDD and TCDF could not be detected in the paper stock from the other three manufacturers
using an analytical method sensitive to 1 ppt for TCDD and 2 ppt for TCDF. These results support the paper industry's
claim that the bleached paper used to manufacture milk cartons is in compliance with a voluntary specification of
2 ppt for TCDD. 
FDA has also recently completed an analysis of milk samples contained in cartons manufactured using bleached paper
(Ref. 22). Fifteen milk samples were collected in late 1991 and early 1992 from dairies that use bleached paper from
the five major U.S. manufacturers. None of the samples contained detectable levels of TCDD and TCDF using analytical
methodologies with detection limits in the 2 to 10 ppq range. 
In addition, FDA has developed a new risk assessment to determine what the current upper-bound lifetime cancer risk
is from exposure to TCDD toxic equivalents resulting from the use of bleached paper and paperboard products meeting
the paper industry's voluntary specification of 2 ppt or less of TCDD. In the absence of migration data for bleached
paper products containing such low levels of TCDD (i.e., 2 ppt or less), FDA assumed that the percent migration of TCDD
from a specific type of food-contact article meeting the voluntary 2 ppt TCDD specification would be similar to the
percent migration observed in earlier studies (Ref. 14). Because the percent migration decreases as the level of
the migrant in the food-contact article decreases, this approach is not likely to underestimate migration levels.
Using the above assumption and assuming that all bleached food-contact paper products contain residual levels of
TCDD low enough to meet a 2 ppt TCDD specification, FDA estimates that the upper-bound daily dietary intake of TCDD
toxic equivalents is no greater than 1.8 pg/person/day (0.03 pg TCDD equivalents/kg body weight/day for a 60kg
person) (Ref. 23). FDA used this exposure estimate to determine the current upper-bound lifetime cancer risk from
TCDD toxic equivalents resulting from the use of bleached food-contact paper products assuming that virtually all
of such products meet a 2 ppt TCDD specification. 
The carcinogenic unit risk used by FDA in its 1990 risk assessment was based on tumor incidence data from the Kociba
et al. study (Ref. 15). Following FDA's 1990 risk assessment, however, a group of pathologists, called the Pathology
Working Group (PWG), reanalyzed the slides of the liver tumors observed in the 1978 Kociba rat bioassay using the National
Toxicological Program's 1986 classification system for liver tumors (Ref. 24). FDA has reviewed the results of this
reanalysis and agrees with the classification of the tumors made by PWG. Using the results of this revised reading
of the Kociba study slides, FDA estimates a carcinogenic unit risk of 9 x 10

-6

 for an intake of 1 pg TCDD equivalents/kg body weight/day. Using this carcinogenic unit risk and an upper-bound daily
dietary exposure estimate of 0.03 pg TCDD equivalents/kg body weight/day, FDA estimates that the upper-bound limit
of individual lifetime cancer risk from TCDD toxic equivalents would be 3 x 10

-7

 for the use of bleached food-contact paper products meeting a 2 ppt TCDD specification (Ref. 25). 
The agency obtained this 3 x 10

-7

 risk estimate by assuming that the lifetime cancer risk from TCDD would be equal in mammalian species, such as in man
and in rodents when the daily feeding doses are in proportion to body weight raised to the first power (i.e., equivalence
based on feeding dose/body weight/day). This approach is the one that FDA has traditionally used in extrapolating
results of rodent carcinogen bioassays to man. However, in the 

Federal Register

 of June 5, 1992 (57 FR 24152), EPA, FDA, and the Consumer Product Safety Commission published a draft report proposing
to establish a common default methodology for determining equivalence in carcinogenic unit risks between mammalian
species. If adopted, this unified default approach will be used in those cases where existing agent-specific data
are insufficient to make a case-by-case determination. Based on an analysis of empirical and theoretical aspects
of the cross-species dose-scaling question, the proposed unified default approach assumes that the lifetime cancer
risk from the intake of a carcinogenic substance is equal in different mammalian species when the daily feeding doses
are in proportion to body weight raised to the 3/4 power (i.e., equivalence based on feeding dose/body weight

3/4

/day).
Although this proposed unified default methodology has not been adopted by the three agencies, FDA has used it to calculate
a second estimate of the upper-bound lifetime cancer risk from TCDD exposure if all bleached food-contact paper products
meet the paper industry's voluntary specification of 2 ppt for residual levels of TCDD. Using a scaling factor based
on equivalence of pg/kg

3/4

/day to extrapolate the tumor incidence data obtained from the revised reading of the Kociba rodent bioassay slides
to man, FDA estimates a carcinogenic unit risk of 30 x 10

-6

 (pg TCDD equivalents/kg body weight/day)

-1

. Using this carcinogenic unit risk for TCDD and an upper-bound daily dietary exposure estimate of 0.03 pg TCDD equivalents/kg
body weight/day, FDA estimates that the upper-bound limit of individual lifetime risk from TCDD toxic equivalents
would be 9 x 10

-7

 for the use of bleached food-contact paper products meeting a 2 ppt TCDD specification (Ref. 25).
Both of the above upper-bound lifetime risk estimates (3 x 10

-7

 and 9 x 10

-7

), obtained using cross-species scaling factors based on equivalence of pg/kg/day and pg/kg

3/4

/day, respectively, would generally be viewed as very low. However, until the proposed unified default methodology
has been formally adopted, FDA will use the 3 x 10

-7

 risk as the best estimate of what the upper-bound lifetime risk from TCDD toxic equivalents would be when all bleached
food-contact paper products meet the paper industry's voluntary specification of 2 ppt for residual levels of TCDD.

On the basis of: (1) FDA's 1990 risk assessment which showed an upper-bound lifetime cancer risk of less than 0.04 in
1 million for each year of exposure based on residual levels of TCDD and TCDF in bleached food-contact paper products
manufactured between 1988 and 1990; (2) the significant progress made by the paper industry in reducing residual
TCDD and TCDF in bleached paper products (AFPA has submitted to FDA the results of an industry wide survey conducted
during the first quarter of 1993 showing that U.S. manufacturers have implemented standard operating procedures
that result in bleached food contact paper products that meet the voluntary specification for 2 ppt or less of TCDD);
and (3) FDA's new risk assessment that the upper-bound limit of individual lifetime risk from TCDD toxic equivalents
is 3 x 10

-7

 if all bleached food-contact paper products in fact meet the paper industry's voluntary specification of 2 ppt for
residual levels of TCDD, FDA tentatively concludes that the continued use of bleached paper and paperboard in contact
with food is safe during the time that has been, and will be, needed by FDA to complete its evaluation.
FDA will continue to monitor the paper industry's progress in reducing TCDD and TCDF contamination of bleached food-contact
paper products manufactured in the United States. The agency will also consider monitoring residual levels of TCDD
and TCDF in bleached food-contact paper and paperboard imported into this country as well as in the bleached paper
and paperboard packaging of imported foods. Information currently available to the agency shows that imported bleached
food-contact paper products comprise only 3 percent of such products used in the United States. 
 Data obtained in a recent human epidemiological study involving workers exposed to low levels of TCDD may also provide
an additional approach to assessing the carcinogenic risk to humans (Ref. 26). FDA plans to review these data and determine
if they are suitable for risk assessment purposes. If suitable, the carcinogenic potency for TCDD in humans obtained
using these data would provide an alternative to the current risk assessment approach which requires the extrapolation
from animal data. FDA will also consider any other data that become available while it completes its review.
The results of FDA's monitoring of the residual levels of TCDD and TCDF in bleached food-contact paper products together
with data and comments received in response to this notice will be used by FDA to determine if any regulatory action
is needed to ensure the safe use of such products. If FDA determines that regulatory action is necessary, one possible
course of action would be to amend the food additive regulations to establish a specification for maximum allowable
levels of residual TCDD and TCDF in food-contact paper products in accordance with section 409 of the act. Using this
approach, bleached paper that is intended for use in food-contact articles, and that is expected to contain TCDD and
TCDF that will migrate into food, would be regarded as a food additive as defined in section 201(s) of the act and be subject
to premarket approval under section 409 of the act (21 U.S.C. 348). A substance, such as bleached paper, that has not
been shown to cause cancer, but that contains a carcinogenic impurity such as TCDD, is evaluated under the general
safety clause of the statute using risk assessment procedures to determine whether there is a reasonable certainty
that no harm will result from its use (

Scott

 v. 

FDA

, 728 F.2d 322 (6th Cir. 1984)). The risk assessment procedures could be used by FDA to determine the residual level
of TCDD and TCDF in bleached food-contact paper at which there is reasonable certainty that no harm will result from
the use of the bleached paper. FDA would institute rulemaking to amend its food additive regulations to authorize
the food-contact use of bleached paper the contain such levels of TCDD and TCDF. 
A second course of action would be for FDA not to proceed with rulemaking and to take action against TCDD and TCDF in food-contact
paper products on a case-by-case basis. To clarify the levels that would be of concern to FDA, the agency could publish
an action level for residual TCDD and TCDF in bleached food-contact paper products. FDA relies on action levels to
provide guidance on the level of added poisonous or deleterious substances that may render food adulterated. The
agency has found action levels to be particularly useful in cases, such as the TCDD and TCDF contamination of bleached
paper products, where the technology and science associated with an issue continue to change. Although the act is
mute on the use of action levels, court decisions on this regulatory approach (

Community Nutrition Institute

 v. 

Young

, 818 F.2d 943,946 (D.C. Cir. 1987)) have supported their use by FDA as long as it is made clear that such levels are not
legally binding on either industry or the agency. 
FDA requests comments on other possible regulatory approaches that it could use to ensure that any residual amounts
of TCDD and TCDF in bleached food-contact paper products will be safe.


III. Request for Comments 


FDA invites public comment on all aspects of this notice concerning residual levels of TCDD and TCDF in bleached food-contact
paper products. The preamble to any proposal on this issue will include consideration of comments received in response
to this notice.
Interested persons may, on or before June 13, 1994, submit to the Dockets Management Branch (address above) written
comments regarding this notice. Trade secret and commercial confidential information should be submitted to the
contact person identified above. Trade secret and commercial confidential information will be protected from public
disclosure in accordance with 21 CFR part 20. Two copies of any comments are to be submitted, except that individuals
may submit one copy. Comments are to be identified with the docket number found in brackets in the heading of this document.
Received comments may be seen in the office above between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.


IV. References


The following references have been placed on display in the Dockets Management Branch (address above) and may be seen
by interested persons between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.


1. ``Pilot Study on International Information Exchange on Dioxins and Related Compounds,'' North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, report no. 178, December 1988.
2. ``Assessment of Health Risks in Infants Associated with Exposure to PCBs, PCDDs and PCDFs in Breast Milk,'' report
on a World Health Organization working group, pp. 17, 1988.
3. ``Assessment of the Risks Associated with Potential Exposure to Dioxin Through the Consumption of Coffee Brewed
Using Bleached Paper Coffee Filters,'' 

NCASI Technical Bulletin

, No. 546, 1988.
4. Letter from EPA to FDA, containing Canadian study of dioxin in packaged milk, September 27, 1988.
5. ``Survey of Dioxin-Furan in Milk Packaged in Paper Cartons,'' FDA FY 89 field assignment, August 1989.
6. ``NCASI Milk Carton Migration Study,'' first progress report, August 1989.
7. ``NCASI Milk Carton Migration Study of Half and Half,'' January 1990.
8. ``NCASI Orange Juice Carton Migration Study,'' interim report, December 1989.
9. ``NCASI Hot Beverage Paper Cup Coffee Exposure Scenario Migration Study,'' interim report, October 1989.
10. ``NCASI Hot Beverage Paper Cup Chicken Broth Exposure Scenario Migration Study,'' interim report, November
1989.
11. ``NCASI Dual Ovenable Tray Migration Study,'' interim report, November 1989.
12. ``NCASI Plates/Trays/Dishes Migration Study,'' interim report, November 1989.
13. Letter dated March 6, 1990, from NCASI, containing microwave popcorn bag migration study.
14. Memorandum dated June 13, 1990, from Food and Color Additives Review Section, ``Exposure to Dioxin Congeners
from Foods Contacting Bleached Paper Products.''
15. Kociba, R. J., et al., ``Results of a Two-Year Chronic Toxicity and Oncogenicity Study of 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-Dioxin
in Rats,'' 

Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology

, 46:279303, 1978.
16. Report of the Quantitative Risk Assessment Committee, ``Carcinogenic Risk Assessment for Dioxins and Furans
in Foods Contacting Bleached Paper Products,'' April 20, 1990.
17. Letter dated March 7, 1991, from the American Paper Institute, concerning TCDD levels in bleached paper and paperboard
as of December 31, 1990.
18. Letter dated April 17, 1992, from the American Paper Institute, concerning TCDD levels in bleached paper and paperboard
as of December 31, 1991.
19. Letter dated July 30, 1993, from the American Forest and Paper Association, concerning TCDD levels in bleached
pulp, paper and paperboard as of the First Quarter of 1993.
20. Memorandum dated November 2, 1992, from Methods Research Branch, ``TCDD and TCDF Residues in Bleached Paper Stock
used in Milk Cartons.''
21. ``The Determination of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-

p

-dioxin and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran in Paper Products,'' 

Laboratory Information Bulletin

, FDA's Chicago District Laboratory, May 1992.
22. Memorandum dated February 25, 1993, from Methods Research Branch, HFS336, ``TCDD and TCDF Residues in
Milk Packaged in Bleached Paper Cartons.''
23. Memorandum dated November 14, 1991, from Food and Color Additives Review Section, ``Exposure to Dioxin Congeners
from Foods Contacting Bleached Paper Products With Dioxin Levels Not Exceeding 2 ppt.''
24. ``2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-

p

-dioxin in Sprague-Dawley Rats,'' Pathco Inc., March 13, 1990.
25. Report of the Quantitative Risk Assessment Committee, ``Upper-Bound Lifetime Carcinogenic Risks From Exposure
to Dioxin Congeners From Foods Contacting Bleached Paper Products With Dioxin Levels Not Exceeding 2 ppt,'' January
27, 1993. 
26. Fingerhut, M., et al., ``Cancer Mortality in Workers Exposed to 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-

p

-dioxin,'' 

The New England Journal of Medicine

, vol. 324, pp. 212218, 1991.





Dated: February 2, 1994.

</SUPPLEM>
<SIGNER>
Michael R. Taylor,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Deputy Commissioner for Policy.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 948698 Filed 41194; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 416001F
</BILLING>

