 

The CHSP is a program with two components: A retrofit and renovation component which has not yet been implemented and
a supportive services component. RETROFITTING AND RENOVATION OF FACILITIES ARE NOT ELIGIBLE FOR FUNDING UNDER THIS
NOFA. 

Funds are available under the supportive services component for five-year, renewable, congregate services grants
for frail elderly persons, persons with disabilities, and temporarily disabled individuals living in eligible
housing for the elderly. The program serves as a means of preventing unnecessary institutionalization and encouraging
deinstitutionalization of those potentially eligible residents who do not need an institutionalized setting.
It also improves the capacity of management to assess the supportive service needs of eligible residents, and to either
ensure the coordination and delivery of supportive services from third party providers or provide the services directly
in order to meet the minimum needs of eligible residents. 

HUD and FmHA are interested in using the services funds in the most cost-efficient manner and with appropriate targeting.
Thus, a number of changes have been made from last year's program to increase efficiency, target the program more effectively
and attempt to make the limited funds available to more applicants. The major changes are to: 

(a) stress the service coordination/case management aspects of the program by making the service coordinator a clearly
mandated function, whether funded wholly or in part by CHSP, or funded by a third party; (The more coordinators that
are funded, the larger the number of projects whose residents will ultimately benefit from supportive services in
the community.) 

(b) target the available funds to meals and service coordination/case management and limit funds for additional
supportive services, by capping the amount of funds that an applicant may receive for other supportive services thus
allowing more potential grants; (Thus, an applicant may receive a maximum of $1,200/person/year in HUD funds for
supportive services other than case management/service coordination and the mandatory meals program.) 

(c) focus on projects nearly fully occupied this year. (Occupied projects more readily are able to plan programs for
existing needs and get them operational in the most effective manner and the shortest time. Thus, CHSP is offered this
year only to projects which are at least 85 percent occupied as of the date of the CHSP application to HUD.) 

Additionally, HUD and FmHA are clarifying the meals requirement. While the current requirement that each CHSP provide
at least one hot meal per day in a group setting for some or all of the participants who are assessed as needing such assistance
is not changed, additional meals can be available for frail elderly or non-elderly disabled participants who are
assessed with a need for them. Such additional meals can be either hot or cold and may be home delivered. 

The CHSP will ensure the long-term provision of supportive services in a manner which insures the program participant's
freedom of choice and which respects the dignity of the persons served. It will also provide readily available and
efficient services with emphasis on providing only those services minimally necessary to maintain independent
living, but maintaining a continuum of support for individual program participants over time. 



B. Allocation Amounts 



The Departments of Veterans Affairs and Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies Appropriations
Act, 1993 (P.L. 102389) appropriated $21,000,000 in FY 1993. Approximately $14,500,000 of these funds remained
after the FY 1993 competition and the refunding of the 53 existing grantees for an additional 24 months. Additionally,
the Departments of Veterans Affairs and Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies Appropriations
Act, 1994 (P.L. 103124) made available $25,000,000 for the CHSP, all of which is included in the NOFA. Together
with the carryover funds, $39,500,000 is available for new grants. In consultation with FmHA, the dollars are allocated
as follows: 




_Approximately 20 percent ($7,900,000) of the total funds are available to applicants with FmHA projects. 

_The remainder, approximately 80 percent ($31,600,000) is for applicants with HUD projects. 



1. HUD Projects 



Applicants for HUD projects may apply for grants from the available $31,600,000. The formula for the HUD allocation
is stated below: 

a. Compute the total number of section 8 New Construction/substantial rehabilitation elderly, section 202, section
221(d) elderly, section 236 elderly and PIH/IHA elderly units in each Region for the nation as a whole. 

b. Calculate the proportion of the national total represented by each Region's share. 

c. Divide the available dollars proportionally in accordance with the Regional share of the elderly housing inventory,
as follows: 




