 

Public Comments Solicited


The Service intends that any final decision on the proposed rule will accurately reflect the status of the species
and will be based on the best available scientific and commercial information. Therefore, comments and suggestions
concerning any aspect of this proposed rule are hereby solicited from the public, concerned governmental agencies,
the scientific community, industry, private interests, and other parties. Information is sought on the listing
criteria described in the Act:
(1) The present or threatened destruction, modification, or curtailment of this species' habitat or its range;
(2) Any overutilization for commercial, recreational, scientific, or educational purposes;
(3) Disease factors or natural predation that may threaten this species;
(4) Any inadequacies of existing regulatory mechanisms; and
(5) Other natural or manmade factors affecting this species' continued existence.
The Service is particularly interested in the following information:
(1) Information on habitat requirements, distribution of that habitat, and threats to that habitat, as well as documentation
of past or future habitat losses and threats to that habitat throughout the range of the goliath frog; and in particular
quantification of the loss of rainforest in the species' range, and information on the displacement or extirpation
of the species when rainforest along river habitat of the species is opened for cultivation.
(2) Information as to any known population estimates or surveys of this species;
(3) Further information on local utilization of this species;
(4) Any information on the reproductive biology of this species, especially as it may relate to its ability to sustain
harvest;
(5) Information as to the extent of commercial trade in this species, especially information on international trade
other than imports into the United States; and
(6) Information as to current ability to transport and maintain and reproduce this species in captivity.


Authority


The authority for this action is the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 U.S.C. 1531 

et seq

.).



Dated: October 14, 1994.


<SIGNER>
Mollie H. Beattie,

</SIGNER>
<SIGNJOB>
Director, Fish and Wildlife Service.

</SIGNJOB>
<FRFILING>
[FR Doc. 9426202 Filed 102494; 8:45 am]

</FRFILING>
<BILLING>
BILLING CODE 431055M
</BILLING>




